URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPST/2011/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:10:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v KREFT (No. 1) [2011] NSWPST 2 (4 November 2011)
PSYCHOLOGY TRIBUNAL
OF NEW SOUTH WALES
MATTER NUMBER: PSY 004/2010
PS0001018222
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 167
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW) No. 86a
REASONS FOR DECISION
(RE PARTICULARS AND COMPLAINTS
IN THE MATTER OF
STEPHEN FRANK KREFT
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
__________________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v Kreft (No. 1)
[2011] NSWPST
PARTIES: Health Care Complaints Commission (NSW)
(Complainant)
represented by Mr T Saunders of Counsel, instructed by
Ms P Hook, Solicitor - HCCC.
Stephen Kreft
(Respondent)
represented by Mr P Strickland of
Senior Counsel, instructed by Ms S Doherty, Solicitor of HWL Ebsworth Lawyers.
FILE NUMBER: 004/2010
CORAM: Ms Joanne Muller
(Chairperson)
Ms Kristin Young (Psychologist
Dr Megan Brock (Psychologist Member)
Greenaway (Lay Member)
DATES OF HEARING: 17, 18, 19 & 20 May, 15, 16, 17 & 18 August and
1 September 2011 (Phase 1).
DATE OF DECISION: 4 November 2011
The Tribunal finds unsatisfactory professional conduct with
respect to Particulars 1.1, 1.2, 1.3.1, 1.3.2, 1.4, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and
professional misconduct with respect to Particulars 1 - 4, and 5, 6 and 7
CATCHWORDS: registered
psychologist – unsatisfactory professional conduct – professional
misconduct – two female
clients – inappropriate conduct during
counselling sessions – failure to maintain professional boundaries –
inappropriate
personal relationship.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW) No. 86a (National Law – NSW) –
S 139B, S139E, schedule 5D
– clause 7.
CASES CITED:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
Health Care Complaint Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
Richter v Walton
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported);
Browne v Dunn
(1893) 6 R 67 (HL).
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Tribunal convened at the Health Professions Councils Authority’s Hearing
Room on 17, 18, 19 & 20 May, 15, 16, 17 &
18 August and 1 September 2011
to conduct an Inquiry into complaints made by Ms Karen Mobbs,
Director of Proceedings, Health Care Complaints Commission (HCCC), dated
November 2010 in relation to a registered psychologist, Stephen Kreft (the
Respondent). The Inquiry with respect to Particulars
of Complaint and the
Complaints continued over nine hearing days. An application for leave to have
the Inquiry proceed as a ‘two
phase’ process was granted part-way
through the Inquiry. The Tribunal intends proceeding with ‘phase
two’ in November
and December 2011. This document deals with ‘phase
Complaints allege unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional
misconduct in relation to the conduct of the Respondent
with one patient, Client
A, over the period 1 February 2008 to about 12 July 2008.
first four Particulars of the Complaints arose from a letter written to the
Psychologists Registration Board of New South Wales
(Board) by Client A.
Particulars 5, 6 and 7 of the Complaint relates to the Respondent’s
conduct with respect to Client B.
As at the Inquiry, the Respondent remains in a
relationship with Client B.
The Complaints
Complaint alleged that Mr Stephen Kreft, being a person registered as a
psychologist under the Act:
COMPLAINT ONE
Has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct within the meaning of section 139B of the National Law, in that the
psychologist
(i) demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the psychologist in the practice of psychology
is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level
of training or experience; and/or
(ii) engaged in improper or unethical conduct in the course of the practice or
purported practice of psychology.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
At all material times between about 1 February 2008 and about 12 July 2008
the psychologist was employed as the principal psychologist
at the NSW Anxiety
Disorders Treatment Centre.
Client A was under the care of the psychologist between about 1 February 2008
and about 12 July 2008.
psychologist failed to observe proper professional boundaries in relation to
Client A in that the psychologist engaged in inappropriate
discussions of a
personal nature with Client A in which:
commented on Client A's appearance in that:
complimented Client A about her appearance referring to her petite size, her
short height and thin build and likening her
to his girlfriend Client B;
1.1.2 Commented on Client A wearing Bonds underwear and said that his
girlfriend wore those.
1.2 He asked Client A to comment on his physical appearance; and/or
1.3 He disclosed details of his personal life
1.3.1 The number of sexual partners he has had, namely
that he had slept with eighty people; and/or
1.3.2 That his girlfriend, Client B, would have her girlfriends over and they
would sleep in the same bed together; and/or
1.3.3 That he had been in love five times; and/or
1.3.4 He thought about homosexuality when he was younger but was straight;
1.3.5 He and his girlfriend, Client B, had waited the appropriate amount of
time of two years before they entered into a personal
relationship; and/or
1.4 When discussing Client A's sexual relationship with an older man the
psychologist stated "You and I could do it over the desk"
or words to that
effect and then said that he was joking.
practitioner failed to follow or observe appropriate therapeutic practice and/or
failed to observe proper professional boundaries
in that during counselling
sessions on or about 10 and 22 April 2008 the psychologist made a request of
Client A for photographs
of her and obtained from the client a photograph of her
head and shoulders and a photograph of the client in her underwear which
was to be for a study or exercise whereby other people would rate Client A's
appearance.
practitioner failed to follow or observe appropriate therapeutic practice in
that he failed to record in Client A's clinical notes
the request or acceptance
of photographs or the exercises discussed with Client A on or about 10 April
2008 or 22 April 2008 referred
to in Particular 2 above.
psychologist failed to maintain the confidentiality of Client B in that he
disclosed to Client A that his girlfriend Client B,
who was known to Client A,
was a previous client and that he had "cured her".
At all material times between about 5 July 2006 and about 8 August 2006 the
psychologist, was employed as the principal psychologist
at the NSW Anxiety
Disorders Treatment Centre.
Client B was under the care of the psychologist between about 5 July 2006 and
Between August and December 2006 the psychologist sought and/or obtained
advice in relation to his feelings for Client B from senior
colleagues Dr Amanda
Gordon, Ms Cheryle Clothier, Dr Anthony Nicholas and Mr Robert Bust.
psychologist failed to observe proper professional boundaries in relation to
Client B in that:
5.1 The psychologist engaged in inappropriate
discussions of a personal nature with Client B in that on about 9 August 2006,
commencement of the counselling session with Client B, in response to the
client saying, "I am feeling attracted to you. I can't
get you out of my
thoughts. I don't want you to send me off to someone else", that psychologist
said "We have a problem now because
I have feelings for you as well" or words to
that effect; and/or
5.2 On about 10 August 2006, the psychologist allowed Client B to enter his
motor vehicle and travelled to and attended a cafe with
Client B; and/or
5.3 After 9 August 2006 the psychologist spoke with Client B by telephone in
relation to personal matters not concerning the therapeutic
relationship;
5.4 On about 1 September 2006 the psychologist kissed Client B.
after 11 December 2006 the psychologist entered into an inappropriate personal
and sexual relationship with Client B.
When after 11 December 2006 the psychologist entered into an inappropriate
personal and sexual relationship with Client B he did
so contrary to the advice
of senior colleagues including Dr Amanda
COMPLAINT TWO
Has been guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of section 139E
of the National Law, in that the psychologist has:
(i) demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the psychologist in the practice of psychology
is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level
of training or experience; and/or
(ii) engaged in improper or unethical conduct in the course of the practice or
purported practice of psychology.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
As per Complaint One.
Suppression Order
Tribunal made Orders, in accordance with Clause 7 of Schedule 5D of
, that the name and any details that tend to identify Client
A and Client B not be published. A schedule marked ‘Annexure B’
containing names suppressed will be attached only to the original Decision and
the copies that are forwarded to the parties. This
schedule should not be
reproduced if copies of the Decision are made for any purpose other than to
provide it to an appeals court.
The parties are directed to take care to ensure
that the schedule is not copied. If the transcript of the proceedings is legally
provided to any entity, the Registry must ensure that it is appropriately
de-identified in accordance with the annexed Schedule.
In making this Order the
Tribunal notes that details contained herein identify Client B as Mr
Kreft’s current partner and
such identification is not
suppressed.
following people gave evidence during this phase of the Inquiry: Client A,
Client B, Ms Cheryl Clothier, Dr Amanda Gordon, Dr
Anthony Nicholas, Mr Sam
Borenstein, Mr Robert Bust (by telephone), Dr Michael Diamond, Ms Susan Doherty,
Mr David McMahon, Dr Steven
Kelly (by telephone), and the Respondent.
Documentation
HCCC tendered documents which came into evidence as Volume 1, exhibits 1-21 and
Volume 2, exhibits 1-29 as itemised in annexure
‘A’ hereto. The
Respondent tendered documents which came into evidence as exhibits
Relevant Law
Standard of proof required
the standard of proof required to establish a complaint in this jurisdiction is
the civil standard, because of the seriousness
of the allegations and the
gravity of their consequences, the Tribunal must be ‘comfortably
satisfied’ that the particulars
of the Complaint have been established. In
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, Dixon J (as he then
was), at 362–363, said:
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood
of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences
flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the
answer to the question whether the issue has been proved
to the reasonable
satisfaction of the tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable
satisfaction’ should not be produced by
inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony, or indirect inferences ... This does not mean that some standard of
persuasion is fixed intermediate
between the satisfaction beyond reasonable
doubt required upon a criminal inquest and the reasonable satisfaction which in
issue may, not must, be based on a preponderance of probability. It
means that the nature of the issue necessarily affects the process
reasonable satisfaction is attained.
dual reasons for this. In
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
104 CLR 186
at 201-202, a case concerning a barrister, the High Court said:
Although it is sometimes referred to as the ‘penalty of
disbarment’ it must be emphasised that a disbarring order is in
punitive in character. When such an order is made, it is made, from the public
point of view, for the protection of those
who require protection, and from the
professional point of view, in order that abuse of privilege may not lead to
loss of privilege.
trust placed in psychologists is analogous to that placed in medical
practitioners because of the necessity for the client to
disclose highly
personal information to the psychologist in the course of treatment. In a
passage cited with approval in
Health Care Complaints Commission v
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
at 638, Priestley JA said in
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported):
The degree of trust which patients necessarily give to their
doctors may vary according to the condition which takes the patient to
doctor. Even in regard to the most commonplace medical matters, the trust a
patient places in a doctor is considerable. In
some cases, of which the present
seems to be an example, the patient’s trust cannot help but be almost
absolute. The doctor’s
power in regard to the patient in such cases is
also very great. I do not mean power in the abstract way but as a matter of
the extent of the power will vary according to the temperament of the
patient, but the doctor with some patients and for limited
periods, because of
the relationship in which they are temporarily placed, is in a position to do
whatever the doctor wants with
the body of the patient. This is one of the
reasons why doctors are subject to correspondingly great obligations and are
to maintain high standards; all this being very much in the public
Psychologists Registration Board (Board) published a Code of Conduct dated 1 May
1990. This was superseded by the Code of Ethical
Conduct dated 3 November 1997,
which in turn was superseded by the Code dated 1 November 2004 (which was
provided to all registered
psychologists in June 2005). It is this most recent
Code that applies to the conduct alleged in this matter. The Psychology Board
Australia (PBA) became the registration authority for psychologists on 1 July
2010. The PBA has adopted the Australian Psychological
Society Code of Ethics
(APS Code). The current APS Code is dated September 2007.
Background Material
Background of the
Respondent was born in 1964. He left home at around 17 years of age. His
‘complex history’ is detailed in the report
of Dr Michael Diamond
(R2), the Respondent’s treating psychiatrist. At the time he was treating
Client B the Respondent had
been in a 13 year relationship. At the time of the
Inquiry the Respondent had been living with Client B for a number of years.
Respondent studied at the University of Newcastle gaining a Bachelor of Science
Degree in 1989 and completing Honours in Psychology
in 1991. Whilst studying at
university, the Respondent also worked as a research assistant within various
Respondent spent eight years working as an adolescent counsellor/youth worker
with youth for the Newcastle Youth Service. He also
worked as a School
Counsellor. It is unclear as to whether he worked in this role part time from
2000 to 2002 or from 2000 to 2004
as he has recorded both options in documents
before the Tribunal. He was granted conditional registration as a psychologist
July 1994 but did not gain full registration until 2 November 1999 (full
registration requiring the completion of a minimum two-year
supervision plan).
Dr Diamond recorded details of the Respondent’s account of the supervision
he received whilst conditionally
registered in his report (see details below).
At the time of the Inquiry the Respondent was registered until 30 November 2011.
Tribunal notes that the Respondent provided a ‘Brief
Qualifications/employment Summary’ to the HCCC on 31 February
2009 (volume
2 - exhibit 16) and a ‘Professional Education/Employment Experience
Synopsis as exhibit R17. The Respondent has
been a full member of the
Australian Psychological Society (APS) since 1999. The Respondent became the
principal psychologist of
a private practice specialising in treatment of
anxiety and mood disorders in 2000. In 2001 the Respondent established the NSW
Disorders Treatment Centre. The Respondent provided records of his
post-graduate professional training. The Tribunal notes that
he has not recorded
undertaking any such training in 2002, 2007, 2009 and 2010.
Background to the Complaints
letter dated 9 August 2009 was forwarded by Client A to the Psychologists Board
of NSW (Board - as it then was). A copy of this
letter came in to the evidence
as volume 1 – exhibit 3.
letter detailed the reason why she had attended the Respondent for treatment and
included the following passage:
I had concerns about Mr Kreft’s conduct both during and
after treatment, and was encouraged by friends and family to voice these
concerns in a formal letter to the Board. Until recently, however, I did not
feel sure that my case was worthy of a hearing. While
in America, I saw Mr
Joseph Lacy – social work intern – and Dr J Anderson Thompson, Jr.
– psychiatrist –
weekly about new and existing mental health issues.
Both professionals, working for the University of Virginia, advised me to report
my case. My complaint, in brief, is as follows:
Kreft’s conduct was unprofessional, him overstepping the boundaries of the
Code of Professional Conduct on more than one
occasion; and
contributed to new ones.
relation to Client B the Board received information from Ms Clothier, a
registered psychologist who provided treatment to Client
B. Client B disclosed
to Ms Clothier details of her relationship with the Respondent. Ms Clothier then
provided information concerning
this matter to the Board.
Background of Client A
clinical notes kept by the Respondent with respect to Client A form volume 1
– exhibit 14. The notes record Client A was
referred by a medical
practitioner for
‘anxiety attacks ∀ ? panic disorder’
evidence records Client A was a young woman who was undertaking university
studies. She was married at around 18 years of age
and during the time she was
consulting the Respondent was also involved in a relationship on the internet
with an older man. Client
A attended 12 sessions with the Respondent before
travelling overseas for the purpose of undertaking one semester of study at
university. While overseas Client A received further therapy.
Background of Client B
B had sought psychological care from Ms Cheryl Clothier and Ms Judith Dyer
(another registered psychologist) in the second
half of 2005 and the first half
of 2006 prior to commencing treatment with the Respondent in July 2006. Client B
again sought assistance
from Ms Clothier in late August 2006 after the
Respondent had informed her that he had feelings for her.
the clinical records held by the Respondent (R17) it appears that Client B was
referred to the Respondent by a medical practitioner
on 19 June 2006. The
referral stated that Client B was 22 years of age and was suffering from OCD
(Obsessive Compulsive Disorder).
The Respondent has recorded that Client B
suffered from bulimia about two to three years ago and had suffered from
anorexia from
Year 9 to Year 11 (being a reference to the years she was at
school). He also recorded that she had a history of using the illicit
his clinical notes from the first consultation (on 5 July 2006) the Respondent
noted a diagnosis of OCD, GAD (Generalized Anxiety
Disorder) and perfectionism.
He also noted that she was
‘strong minded and opinionated’.
The records indicate that her family resided in Sydney and she lived locally
with her boyfriend. His notes record that Client B stated
that she was anxious
‘over-analyzing’.
He noted at that time her functioning was
‘good insight’
she was a third year psychology student with an
‘an outdated knowledge
of anxiety’.
Evidence of the Complainant
Evidence of Client A
her letter to the Board (volume 1 – exhibit 3) Client A stated that, at
the time she wrote the letter, she believed that
the Respondent ‘
have been working to have me no longer defined as a patient so that he could
pursue me for a friendship or other personal relationship.’
letter provides other details which form the basis of the Particulars 1 to 4 of
the Complaints. Some of those details are recorded
below under the Findings
regarding the relevant Particular. Client A also provided statements to the HCCC
(exhibits 4, 5 and 6).
A provided copies of two documents during the Inquiry. The first document was
produced on the first day of the Inquiry. This
document was described as a
‘public’ on-line journal. It consisted of entries made by Client A
and comments made by those
people who had access to this site. Another
‘part’ of the journal was provided by Client A part-way through the
This was described by Client A as a ‘private’ on-line
journal that was not available to be viewed by others. Parts of
these documents
came in to evidence (volume 1 – exhibit 21 and R12).
Clinical notes of Client A’s treatment overseas
A received treatment when she undertook a semester of study at an overseas
university. This occurred shortly after she ceased
treatment with the
Respondent. Clinical records from this treatment show Client A complaining of
her psychologist in Australia
‘often crossing professional boundaries
and making erotic comments and often too self-disclosing about his personal
(volume 1 – exhibit 15).
Photographs of Client A
A provided copies of two photographs she thought were the ones she had given to
the Respondent. The Respondent did not challenge
that evidence. Copies of these
photos form part of volume 1 – exhibit 5. One of the photos shows Client A
in very brief attire
(being underwear consisting of very brief bra and string
underpants) in a provocative pose with her hand uplifting one of her breasts.
The other photo is a close to camera shot of her face and upper body wearing a
brief strappy sundress.
Statement of Client A’s Friend
friend of Client A provided the HCCC with a statement dated 14 September 2009
(volume 1 – exhibit 6). He was not required
for cross-examination. The
statement records that as at 2009 he was a fourth year psychology student at
university.
stated that Client A had told him on a regular basis about the nature of the
therapy sessions she was undertaking with the Respondent.
He stated that Client
A told him that the Respondent had told her about the number of his sexual
partners during therapy. He also
records that she had also told him that the
Respondent was addressing her self-esteem issues by showing photos of her to
other professionals
or friends.
paragraph 5, Client A’s friend stated that Client A told him that during a
session the Respondent had told her about his
number of sexual partners.
A also told him of the type of jokes that they shared during therapy sessions.
He did not think that they were appropriate
for a health professional.
Evidence of Client B
B gave evidence before the Tribunal on days three and four of the Inquiry. She
had provided a statement to the HCCC dated 3
April 2009 (volume 2 - exhibit 12).
Client B also wrote a letter to the HCCC on 3 August 2009 which was forwarded
under a facsimile
cover sheet with the Respondent’s letterhead and signed
by the Respondent (volume 2 – exhibit 13).
evidence relevant to Client B comes from the clinical notes of Ms Cheryl
Clothier and Ms Judith Dyer (volume 2 – exhibit
4), the statement of Ms
Clothier (volume 2 – exhibit 4), the statement and clinical notes of Dr
Amanda Gordon, a letter from
Dr Gordon (volume 2 – exhibit 5, 6, & 7),
the statement and clinical notes of Mr Robert Bust ((volume 2 – exhibit
11) and the evidence of Dr Nicholas.
her statement dated 3 April 2009 Client B records that she was working full-time
at the Respondent’s practice and studying
psychology part-time. As at the
date of the Inquiry Client B was studying for a Masters of Information
Technology degree. At the
time of the Inquiry Client B had been living with the
Respondent for about four years.
B records in her statement that she moved to Newcastle in June 2005 and
commenced seeing Ms Cheryl Clothier. Originally, she
consulted Ms Clothier
‘anxiety and depression’.
At this time, Client B,
reports that she had commenced taking anti-depressant medication.
clinical notes of Client B indicate that she was referred to the Respondent
Enhanced Primary Care Plan
and was also under the care of a
psychiatrist (Dr John Miller).
B reports that at some point she stopped seeing Ms Clothier as she felt she
‘wasn’t getting any where
. At paragraph 5
Client B states:
I stopped seeing her because I wasn’t getting any where
. I didn’t feel like I was making any progress. I started
looking for somewhere that specialises in anxiety. I called and
left a message
for someone to call me back. I wanted to know if they had any experience in
dealing with eating disorders. Steven
called me back and told me a bit about
what he does. I thought great, somebody who knows what they are talking about.
remember when this was, I really can’t remember. I think it
may have been a few months after i stopped see (sic) Ms Clothier.
asked in her oral evidence what she meant by
‘wasn’t getting any
, Client B provided the following clarification
(T222.39-40):
I was still getting the same symptoms and anxiety that I had
when I began seeing her.
B reports that she had about four sessions of CBT therapy. In paragraph 7 Client
I had a list of things I wanted to talk about, but we
didn’t always get to talk about those things because he has like a
of how he does things so it wasn’t always important to talk
addressed the physiological symptoms of my anxiety. Like first he talks about
the physiological mechanisms behind the anxiety
and then he explains the
cognitive structures. As we went through the sessions I noticed things about
him that I liked, that I was
compatible with. Certain things he said I thought
that was nice and I appreciated it. That’s where the attraction came in,
the compatibility, I like the way he viewed things.
the last ‘professional’ session (being the sixth session as recorded
in the Respondent’s explanatory notes
dated May 2009 – volume 2
exhibit 17) Client B reports that she said to the Respondent words to the effect
I am feeling attracted to you. I can’t get you out of my
thoughts. I don’t want you to send me off to someone else.
B records that she was concerned that the Respondent would send her off to
someone else for therapy, she was concerned that
this may occur because she was
aware of the contents of the Code of Conduct.
B records that the Respondent replied as follows:
He paused and he said “We have a problem now because I
have feelings for you as well” or something similar.
It was like a minute before he said this. I smiled because that was what
I wanted to hear.
He said “I can’t see you anymore”.
I left after that. The next day I rang him and he told me he
couldn’t see me anymore. He told me I should go back and speak
He told me that he was going to have to cancel all my appointments.
Tribunal notes at this point that the Respondent wrote a letter dated 10 August
2006 to Client B’s referring GP reporting
that he had seen Client B for
five sessions and set out details of his plan to continue with treatment and to
refer her back to the
care of the GP on conclusion. The balance of the letter
deals with the Respondent’s concern regarding the revision of criteria
require the holding of a PhD) for psychologists to be accepted on to the list of
treating psychologists on the Better Outcomes
for Mental Health Program and his
subsequent omission from this list despite having lobbied to be reinstated to
next contact with the Respondent is described by Client B in her statement, at
paragraph 10, as follows:
I called him after I knew reception would be gone and I told him
I needed to come in and see him. I came in and saw him and he said
his car about to leave. He was talking to someone and I waited for them to
leave. When they left I got in the car and
I told him that I needed to speak to
him. We went to a cafe and had a talk because Stephen said he wanted to go
somewhere public.
B records in her statement that she went with the Respondent to see a
psychologist in a neighbouring regional centre. Other
evidence before the
Tribunal identifies this psychologist as Mr Robert Bust. The evidence of Mr Bust
is elsewhere in this document.
B states that at this time a lot of people told her ‘
it could have been
transference’
B records in her statement her attendance with Dr Amanda Gordon as follows:
I went to see Amanda Gordon who was the head of the APS. I went and saw her
first, Stephen came with me. I spoke with her
first and then she told me that
she wanted to speak to Stephen. I had spoken to her for an hour, then Stephen
came in and we spoke
with her together for another hour.
we left Amanda Gordon we thought it was OK to go on with our relationship. In
the first hour with her she said things to me
“I don’t think he necessarily gets
de-registered.”
“In the eyes of the code kissing was like having sex and since we
had already done that and no complaint had been put in we
were OK to have a
relationship.”
I can’t remember the exact words but it was something like that.
She also said that I could be quite seductive and that she
knew how I could have
seduced him (I was, I came on pretty strong).
came out of that thinking no one had put in a complaint, no one was deliberately
hurt, no manipulation had taken place and there
was no transference to do with
the actual consult. I really respected and admired him and we are both really
compatible in our sense
of humour, our morals and the way we see right or wrong.
We are really compatible in terms of our ethics, things like that.
to the advice provided by Mr Bust and Dr Gordon, Client B states:
one of the psychs (sic) told us that we couldn’t be in a relationship
together. We were always up front about it we didn’t
lie about it. The
first psych we saw in [omitted] I remember Stephen told him that he wanted it on
the record. But he didn’t
say that we couldn’t be in a relationship
and the Code of Conduct was pretty fuzzy about this, it wasn’t very
far as I know Stephen’s ex-girlfriend hadn’t put in a complaint;
none of the other psychs had put in a complaint because
it would only hurt
to the state of the relationship at this time Client B records:
At this stage we had kissed but we hadn’t had sex. He
also said to me that we had to wait two years and I told him that I can’t
wait two years, why should people wait two years to see each other. There had
been no physical contact in his office. There was
nothing inappropriate said
and he didn’t give me any impression that he liked me back.
B stated that she went to see another psychologist in Sydney to make sure there
was no transference. In her oral evidence she
could not recall the name of this
psychologist but did recall that she was female. Later in her evidence Client B
recalled that she
had seen this psychologist prior to consulting Dr Gordon. She
recalled the following information regarding the consultation
(T252.47-253.26):
Q. Do you remember what was discussed during the session with
this psychologist?
A. The issues around transference and in my questions regarding if there
was no manipulation or power differential or transference
why couldn't I be in a
relationship within two years?
Q. It was a lady was it? Is that correct?
Q. Do you remember what this lady told you about this issue?
Q. What did she tell you?
A. She said it would be better for me to not see either one of the
Q. Either one of the men being
[Client B’s previous boyfriend]
and Mr Kreft?
Q. Did you explore as to why she held that opinion, with her?
A. She believed I needed space and time to think it through.
Q. Was that the only reason she said that you should cease your
relationship with those two men?
A. That I recall, yes.
Q. Did you communicate her advice to Mr Kreft?
A. I don't remember.
B records that she returned (by way of self-referral) to the care of Ms
Clothier. The clinical notes of Ms Clothier record
that this occurred on 11
January 2007 (page 12 – volume 2- exhibit 4). Client B reports that Ms
Clothier had told her she made
and had told Client B that she was not required to take any further action
the relationship between Client B and the Respondent.
clinical notes of Ms Clothier record sessions with Client B thereafter.
B records the following in her statement at paragraphs 20 and 21:
remember she went to a meeting 12 months down the track and it was Trevor
Warring who told her that she had to put in a formal complaint
otherwise she
could be prosecuted. Trevor Warring was on the Board. I don’t know him,
but he knows Stephen. She had given
Trevor our names which I wasn’t happy
with because we don’t know whether Trevor gets on with Stephen or not. He
that she had already called them and she was told that she didn’t
have to go any further.
we got the formal letter of complaint I went in to see her again. This was when
she told me that she had to send in a letter.
At the time I thought that she
was talking about the first time she contacted the Board and then a few weeks
later we got the letter.
paragraph 22 Client B records her reaction to the complaint as follows:
By the time I got the letter Stephen and I had already moved in
together and we have a home together, two puppies and a whole life.
already nearly two years up. I called Cheryl and told her I was unhappy about
it and I asked her why she did it and I said
that wasn’t the patient the
most important thing. I was upset that she gave our names and I said to her
that she knew that
we had seen three other psychologists, one of who (sic) was
the head of the APS and the other had been his supervisor and none of
put in a complaint. She told me that she was just following orders. I am very
angry at the whole psychology thing; I don’t
think it is right.
B expressed the following view at paragraph 23:
and I are very much in love and we only had
a few sessions. I felt an attraction to him fairly on (sic) in the sessions and
to do with who he was, his beliefs about things so I wanted to tell him
is clear from the content of paragraph 24 of Client B’s statement (and
elsewhere) that the Respondent was in a relationship
with another person at the
time he formed the relationship with Client B. Client B also felt guilty about
having to tell her ‘partner’
Respondent. Client B was living with her partner as at 9 August 2006. In
questions arising Client
B stated that she did not move out of the residence she
shared with her ex-boyfriend (a property which his parents owned) until around
November 2006 (T324).
paragraph 25 Client B reports as follows:
I remember that when I spoke to Cheryl one time she warned about
it. I don’t really remember much about what was said at that
spoke to Cheryl about my ex-boyfriend. I had more of a therapeutic relationship
with her than with Stephen. With Stephen
it was more structured. With Cheryl I
would talk about little things that would annoy me. I would also tell her
things about things
with Stephen that annoyed me. Before I knew she had put in
the second complaint I told her about some of the hassles Stephen and
They were just normal relationship difficulties to do with him being a man and
me being a woman. I don’t think that
she could past (sic) the idea that I
had been Stephen’s patient, but the hassles weren’t about that. I
was also coming
down of (sic) medication, like different anti-depressants. I
was really irritable and I didn’t want to take it out on him,
why I wanted to see Cheryl. But when I found out about her going to the Board
again I didn’t trust her which
really disappointed me.
this point the Tribunal notes that during the first session Client B returned to
the care of Ms Clothier (some twelve months before
to the Board by Ms Clothier), Ms Clothier recorded the
following in her notes:
Stephen was freaking out about her seeing
[her previous
today – has been quite manipulative over the last few months
– threatened to kill himself, cries and begs her to stay
when she wants to
go home (stays 7 nights with him although has own place). Enjoys conversations
with him – he’s also
passionate and interested in her ideas, tells
her he loves her lots, etc.
Client B has tried to have time on her own but above behaviour increases
– doesn’t know what she wants – is she
in love with
previous partner]
? Looked at compartmentalising –
[her previous
(as she knew it) is over; has to deal with current Rx with Stephen
– can it work – how to get time out for self, etc.
B also wrote a letter to the HCCC dated 3 August 2009 (volume 2 – exhibit
13). Client B asks the HCCC to consider the
fact that the investigation would
never have eventuated had Ms Clothier not made the report to the Board. Client B
expressed the
view that in so doing Ms Clothier breached her confidentiality.
Criticism is also made by Client B for a senior member of the profession
whom Ms Clothier consulted prior to making the report to the Board. Client B
also lists concerns regarding the HCCC investigation
report and the peer review
report. Client B states that she has not had explained to her why the code
specifies a period of two years
regarding relationships with former clients.
her oral evidence Client B stated that she ceased taking antidepressants in
January 2011. In her statement she records that she
is of the view that her
anxiety was not as bad as it had been as she had been trying to be
for her previous partner and as she now had a
partner (i.e. the Respondent) who she could talk to
‘as a partner, not
as a therapist’
her oral evidence Client B states that she had initially consulted Ms Clothier
for anxiety, panic attacks, an eating disorder (namely
bulimia) and relationship
problems with her then boyfriend (in 2005), in particular her feelings of being
unappreciated.
B stated that from the first consultation she was ‘impressed’ by the
Respondent. She gave the following evidence
at T224.30-40:
Q. When you say you were "impressed" do you mean by
his - can you elaborate on what you mean by that?
A. I was impressed with his knowledge of the concerns that I was going to
Q. Were you impressed in any other fashion - with his physical
attributes, for example, or his looks?
A. The first time I had contact with Stephen was by phone when I made the
initial appointment and I was attracted to his voice.
I can't explain that. It
just was. I was also attracted to his intelligence because I did ask him
questions on the phone before
I made my initial appointment
B gave evidence that she presented the Respondent with the same
issues/conditions that she had presented to Ms Clothier.
giving evidence there were a number of matters that Client B could not recall.
She could not recall what year of her psychology
degree she was in nor could she
remember at what stage during the sixth consultation she declared her feelings
for the Respondent
B gave the following account of what occurred after she made her declaration to
the Respondent (T226.1-9):
Q. When you said that to Mr Kreft what did he say to
A. There was a pause and then he said, "Well, we have a problem because
I'm feeling that way too," it was along that lines (sic).
Q. How did that make you feel?
A. Pleased.
Mr Kreft do in relation to the session at that
A. That session ended then. I phoned my boyfriend to come and pick me
B stated in her oral evidence that she either rang the Respondent or went in to
his practice. When she went into his practice
this was the occasion on which she
got in to the Respondent’s car and they attended a coffee shop together.
B gave the following evidence regarding the conversation in the coffee shop
(T227.21-41):
Q. What was that?
A. I had feelings for him. I knew that he had feelings for me
and - but we weren't - weren't allowed because of the two
year period.
Q. So Mr Kreft mentioned the two-year thing?
Q. Now you were a psychology student at the time, did you understand what
he meant by the two-year thing?
Q. What did you understand that to mean?
A. I understood that to mean that you could not have a personal
relationship with a client within two years of there being a therapeutic
relationship.
Q. By your understanding what did "personal relationship" mean?
A. Anything outside of the therapeutic relationship.
Q. So anything?
A. No, but you couldn't have sex with them and you couldn't kiss them or
anything like that.
B gave evidence that she always initiated the contact between herself and the
Respondent thereafter. The Tribunal notes at
this stage that there is no
evidence that the Respondent actively or appropriately referred Client B on for
therapy with another
psychologist or refer her back to her GP. There is evidence
that he continued to provide her with support in the nature of psychological
care including assisting her to withdraw off anti-depressant medication.
B was not able to say when she received the Respondent’s mobile telephone
B recalled during her evidence attending Mr Robert Bust with the Respondent. She
gave the following evidence (T228.44-47):
Q. Do you recall what or, first of all, prior to going to see
Mr Bust had your relationship from the coffee shop developed
- your personal relationship?
B recalled the following discussion with Mr Bust (T229.1- 23):
Q. So do you recall what was discussed in your meeting with
Mr Robert Bust?
Q. Can you perhaps elaborate on your memory of what was discussed in that
A. I was questioning transference and questioning whether we could enter
into a relationship.
Q. Was Mr Kreft also questioning those sort of topics with
Q. He wasn't?
Q. He remained silent during the whole consultation?
A. No, he went there with the purpose of trying to get me to understand
that we couldn't enter into a relationship until two years
so - and that's essentially what that visit to Robert Bust
Q. So he was very clear on that too, saying that you could not have any
relationship for two years, prior to that consultation with
A. He was very clear on saying that the code stated we could not enter
into a relationship until two years.
B recalled that they had identified Mr Bust from the Yellow Pages but could not
recall whether it was her idea or the Respondent’s
idea to make the
appointment.
B gave the following evidence regarding the consultation with Mr Bust (T229.45
Q. So what is your recollection of what Mr Bust told you
during that session on 21 August 2006?
A. I don't have much recollection of what he told me.
Q. What is your recollection of what Mr Bust told Mr Kreft on
21 August 2006?
A. I don't have much recollection of what he told him.
Q. Why don't you have much recollection of what was discussed?
A. Because all I remember is knowing that my questions had not been
Q. What questions were they?
A. If there was no manipulation that had taken place and if there was no
transference that had occurred, can we enter into a relationship
two-year period is up.
Q. But Mr Kreft had he not already provided you with the answer to
that question by this stage?
Q. So you have absolutely no recollection of what Mr Bust told you
on 21 August 2006, is that the case?
Q. So it is possible that Mr Bust could have told you during that
session that you should not be in a personal relationship with
inside two years of seeing him?
to what occurred after the consultation with Mr Bust, Client B gave the
following evidence (T230.30-37):
Q. Do you recall any discussion with Mr Kreft about what
was said to you by Mr Bust in the session on 21 August 2006?
Q. What did Mr Kreft tell you?
A. I was arguing that it still hadn't been explained to me why there had
to be a two-year period if there was no manipulation that
had taken place and
that there was no transference issues that had taken place.
in her evidence Client B stated (T238.22-29):
Q. Did you discuss transference with Mr Robert
A. I believe I probably did.
Q. Do you have any specific recollection of whether you did?
A. I do not have a specific recollection.
Q. Did you discuss with Mr Robert Bust the code of conduct?
A. I don't remember.
to the circumstances of the first kiss between herself and the Respondent,
Client B gave the following evidence (T235.18-236.27):
Q. Now can you take me to your recollection of when you first
kissed Mr Kreft, when did that happen?
A. I don't have a clear recollection of that.
Q. Do you recall where it happened?
A. I believe it was the waiting room.
Q. In his waiting room?
A. At the office.
Q. Do you recall an approximate date when that happened?
Q. And can you just describe to the Tribunal the circumstances
surrounding the first kiss?
A. I don't have it.
Q. Did you turn up unannounced at Mr Kreft's office?
Q. Can you just describe what happened next for us? Can you describe to
the Tribunal when you turned up unannounced at Mr Kreft's
office what
happened next?
A. I sat in the waiting room and waited for him to finish with his
client. It was at this stage that he realised there was someone
in his waiting
room. I waited until that client had left. There was some discussion, which I
don't recall, and I went to kiss him.
His initial reaction was to push me away
and I proceeded to like kiss him and we kissed.
Q. Was there any discussion with Mr Kreft before the kiss?
A. There would've been but I don't remember.
Q. Any discussion after the kiss?
A. I don't remember.
Q. So what is your next recollection of physical contact you had with
Mr Kreft after the first kiss?
A. There would've been another kiss but I don't remember when it
Q. Did you start seeing Mr Kreft on a regular basis after the first
Q. So on an irregular basis did you see Mr Kreft?
A. I saw him at times but I don't remember when.
Q. I'm sorry could you just say again - I missed it?
A. There was minimal contact. I do not remember.
Q. By the stage of this first kiss had you - how would you
characterise your feelings for Mr Kreft?
A. I believed I was falling in love.
Q. As at the date you kissed - first kissed Mr Kreft were
you still seeing [Client B’s ex-boyfriend]?
A. Was I still in a relationship with [Client B’s
ex-boyfriend]?
Q. Were you still in a relationship - personal relationship
with [Client B’s ex-boyfriend]?
B confirmed that she had broken up with her boyfriend prior to first kissing the
Respondent.
to the decision to consult Dr Gordon, Client B gave the following evidence
(T237. 26-31):
Q. Whose idea was it to see Dr Gordon?
Q. What was the purpose of that consultation?
A. To discuss transference and to find out if me and Stephen were to
enter into a relationship would he necessarily be deregistered
evidence given by Client B regarding the consultation with Dr Gordon included
(T238.45 - 240.1 – emphasis added by Tribunal):
Q. Now at your instigation and your suggestion you went to see
Dr Amanda Gordon, is that correct?
Q. Mr Kreft came along with you?
Q. Why did he come along with you?
A. I asked him to.
Q. What was the purpose of the visit as explained to Mr Kreft by
A. I don't remember. What did I tell him we were going there
A. I don't remember.
Q. Do you recall if he came willingly or grudgingly?
A. He went to Sydney with me willingly. He did not want to enter the
consult with me.
Q. Do you recall that specifically?
Q. Did he explain why he didn't want to go into the consult with
A. I don't remember why he didn't want to go or specific recollections of
Q. So you saw Dr Amanda Gordon initially by yourself, is that
Q. How long was the consultation for initially?
A. I think an hour.
Q. Now why did you go to see this particular psychologist?
A. Because when I had googled psychologists I googled in "relationships"
and she came up as a relationship psychologist.
Q. So it was just purely random selection was it?
A. And she was the head of the APS.
Q. Is that probably more the reason why you saw her?
Q. It's not?
A. No, the main reason was because she dealt with relationship
Q. You found out she was the head of the APS through your own device or
through Mr Kreft?
A. Through my search. She was listed as a member of the APS.
Q. On the way there do you recall any discussion about this woman's
position in the APS with Mr Kreft?
Tribunal notes at this point the evidence of Client B contrasts with the
evidence of the Respondent in volume 2 – exhibit
19. At paragraph 1.10 the
Respondent states as follows:
now feeling more certain in my resolve not to engage
in a sexual relationship with her but realising that I was also feeling strong
feelings for her, suggested an appointment with the president of The APS in
Sydney Dr Amanda Gordon to see if there was any way that
the formation of a full
relationship could be sanctioned under the APS and NSW Registration Board codes
of conduct. An appointment
was made for 11-12-06 and attended by
alone. At the end of her consult Dr Gordon requested that
bring me in with her for a discussion. I did so. Dr Gordon discussed
with us issues of transference and counter-transference of
which we were already
fully cognisant and then stated that since we had already kissed once we should
engage in a full relationship
as we had already breached the code of
B gave evidence that she saw the Respondent writing a note in what she assumed
was his diary when they returned to the car
immediately after the consultation
with Dr Gordon. This was the first occasion on which the Tribunal became aware
that Client B had
witnessed or been aware of the Respondent’s note.
B described in her oral evidence further details of the consultation with Dr
Gordon as follows (T240.37–240.10):
Q. Now at your instigation and your suggestion you went to see
Dr Amanda Gordon, is that correct?
Q. Mr Kreft came along with you?
Q. Why did he come along with you?
A. I asked him to.
Q. What was the purpose of the visit as explained to Mr Kreft by
A. I don't remember. What did I tell him we were going there
A. I don't remember.
Q. Do you recall if he came willingly or grudgingly?
A. He went to Sydney with me willingly. He did not want to enter the
consult with me.
Q. Do you recall that specifically?
Q. Did he explain why he didn't want to go into the consult with
A. I don't remember why he didn't want to go or specific recollections of
Q. So you saw Dr Amanda Gordon initially by yourself, is that
Q. How long was the consultation for initially?
A. I think an hour.
Q. Now why did you go to see this particular psychologist?
A. Because when I had googled psychologists I googled in "relationships"
and she came up as a relationship psychologist.
Q. So it was just purely random selection was it?
A. And she was the head of the APS.
Q. Is that probably more the reason why you saw her?
Q. It's not?
A. No, the main reason was because she dealt with relationship
Q. You found out she was the head of the APS through your own device or
through Mr Kreft?
A. Through my search. She was listed as a member of the APS.
Q. On the way there do you recall any discussion about this woman's
position in the APS with Mr Kreft?
B gave the following evidence regarding the consultation with Dr Gordon
(T242.18-32):
Q. ... I'm asking for any recollection you have of what was
A. There was a comment by Amanda Gordon stating that she didn't believe
any manipulation had taken place. There was a discussion
around the fact that
we had kissed and therefore the code had been breached. There was discussion
around the fact that we hadn't
had sex yet but technically it was still a
breach. There was discussion around a female psychologist that she knew had
been deregistered
because they had slept with a client but they were happily
married and living together because I had asked whether it is possible
did have genuine feelings for Stephen and it wasn't just transference that had
occurred. I questioned why we weren't allowed
to enter into a relationship if
there had been no manipulation and no transference or power differentials
because I wanted to know
why we couldn't be in a relationship if none of that
had happened and I asked whether if we did enter into a relationship whether
would necessarily be deregistered for it.
B stated that she had not referred to the note made by the Respondent in his
diary at the time she made her statement as she
had not recalled at the time
that the Respondent had made that note (T251).
B confirmed that the sexual relationship with the Respondent commenced after the
consultation with Dr Gordon. Client B later
gave the following evidence
(T256.30-41):
Q. In your mind, as at 11 January 2007, you were free to
engage in a sexual relationship with Mr Kreft, is that your understanding
of what Dr Gordon said?
Q. Okay, so why not?
A. I had asked Dr Gordon would Stephen necessarily be deregistered
if we were to engage in a relationship. She said to us that if
no-one puts in a
complaint, then he won't necessarily get deregistered.
Q. Did that not crystallise in your mind as to how your relationship
could hence more progress?
A. I guess.
B gave the following evidence regarding her return to therapy with Ms Clothier
on 11 January 2007 (T263.28-254.1):
Q. So you went back and saw Cheryl on 11 January 2007. Do
you recall going back to see Cheryl?
Q. Why did you go back to see Cheryl?
A. Because I was upset.
Q. What were you upset about?
A. I was feeling confused.
Q. What were you confused about?
A. What I wanted to do.
Q. In relation to what?
A. Everything.
Q. Can you elaborate a bit more?
A. In relation to my ex and my relationship with Stephen.
Q. So is it fair to say you were very confused at that stage?
A. I was confused.
B was shown the clinical records made by Ms Clothier regarding her
consultations. Client B then gave the following evidence
regarding a section of
the clinical records of the consultations with Ms Clothier
(T255.36–256.16):
Q. Is there anything in there that you disagree with?
A. Threatened to kill himself.
Q. Are you saying that you did not tell Cheryl that?
A. Yeah I did tell her that.
Q. Are you sure about that?
Q. What about where it says that he is being quite manipulative?
Q. Do you agree that you told her that on that day?
Q. What did you mean by that?
A. I meant that I had been feeling manipulated.
A. Because I did not want Stephen to be upset.
Q. What do you mean by that? Upset about what?
A. Because I wasn't sure whether I wanted to be with him or not.
Q. By this stage, you had had your session with Dr Gordon though,
had you not?
shortly after this evidence Client B gave the following evidence
(T256.43–257.5):
Q. I just want to go back to this issue of how he was
manipulative. It says that over the last few months. Did you say that to
A. I don't recall saying that.
Q. Then could you just describe to this Tribunal how you say he was being
manipulative?
A. I felt manipulated by - I don't know if that was his
intention - and it was because at this stage he knew that I
was - believing
that I was still maybe in love with my ex and I wasn't
sure if I wanted to continue with the relationship. That made him upset and
felt emotionally a bit manipulated.
B gave the following evidence regarding her discussions of her feelings for her
ex-boyfriend during the consultations with
Ms Clothier (T258.22-35):
Q. On 17 January 2007 you sent an email to
Cheryl - you can have a look at it if you like, on
page 11 - effectively questioning why
you had not ended it with
Stephen and you were questioning whether or not you were weak and questioning
whether maybe it was because
you were still in love with [Client B’s
ex-boyfriend]. Do you agree generally with that sort of summation?
Q. As a general proposition, is it fair to say that right up till the end
of your consultations with Cheryl on 9 July of 2008, you
expressing confusion about what was happening with Stephen and [Client B’s
ex-boyfriend]? Would you agree with
that proposition?
A. I don't know.
Q. Perhaps if you just have a look at page 4, so this is notes of
the consultation on 24 June 2008. That is not your handwriting
Q. Down the bottom, towards the bottom of the page, about four lines up,
"Feels like - like love [Client B’s ex-boyfriend]
you say that to Cheryl on that particular date, do you have a
recollection?
A. No recollection.
Q. Is it possible that you said that?
A. It is possible.
B agreed that she had ended her therapy with Ms Clothier in July 2008. The
Tribunal notes that Ms Clothier wrote to the Board
on 31 May 2008. Client B gave
the following evidence (T259.6-7, 13-14, 19-21):
Q. Why did you finish your therapy relationship with
A. I didn't feel the need to go there anymore.
Q. Well why did you not need to see Cheryl anymore?
A. I don't believe I was getting anything from it.
Q. So when you say you were not getting anything anymore, can you just
elaborate what you mean by that?
A. I didn't feel like I was getting any therapeutic benefit.
B was asked about the evidence given in her statement at T259.24.40 as
Q. In your statement at paragraph 15, you said, "Not one of
the psychs told us that we couldn't be in a relationship together". Do
recall saying that in your statement?
Q. Do you stand by that?
Q. So which of the psychs that you saw told you that you could not be in
a relationship?
Q. Anyone else?
A. Not that I remember.
Q. So you do not remember what Mr Bust told you?
B gave the following summary of her relationship with the Respondent in answer
to questions from Mr Strickland as follows (T263.12-32
Q. Do you agree that from the evidence you have given and from
the information contained in Ms Clothier's emails and notes, is it
to summarise that the first period of your relationship with Mr Kreft was a
difficult one, had its significant ups and significant
downs, is that
Q. It was turbulent?
Q. You were ambivalent about it?
Q. You still had feelings for your ex-boyfriend?
Q. What about in the last couple of years? How has your relationship
with Mr Kreft been?
Q. Do you find him a supportive person?
Q. Since you have been living together, has he ever treated you as a
psychologist?
B gave the following evidence regarding her relationship with the Respondent
(T263.47-266.44):
Q. Now he is 20 years your senior, correct? And you live
in the Newcastle area?
Q. You have friends there?
Q. Do you socialise with your friends with Mr Kreft?
Q. How do your friends react with you going out with a man 20 years
your senior?
A. They're fine with it.
Q. How do you know that? What do they say or do that make you believe
that they are fine with that?
A. Because they're friendly and warm and they joke around.
Q. With you and Stephen?
Q. Does your family get on well with him?
Q. Do you have plans to marry?
Q. What are they? Do you intend to get married?
Q. Since you have known him, have you observed Stephen around other
Q. Have you observed him associate with other women?
Q. Have you ever seen him interact in any way in a sleazy, sexually
predatory manner?
Q. If I can go back in time and ask you about the consultations you had
with Mr Kreft. You had about six consultations with him?
Q. During any of those consultations did he engage in any inappropriate
behaviour with you?
Q. Did he say anything to you of a sexually inappropriate or suggestive
Q. Did you regard him to be an effective therapist for your problems at
Q. In paragraph 7 of your statement - I might just take
you to that if I could - it is behind tab 12. About the fifth or
down you say, "As we went through the sessions, I noticed things
thought that was nice and I appreciated it". Do you remember, in general terms,
the substance of the things that he said
that you thought were nice?
Q. What were they?
A. He spoke about how he believed that no-one was necessarily better than
anyone else and that the people who had - or diagnosed
with disorders,
they had learnt behaviour. There wasn't actually anything wrong with them and
they weren't necessarily broken.
He'd also mentioned - there was a
paperwork that we were referring to and the person who wrote it, he said
something along the lines
of, "He's just like you and me". So he sees everyone
the same way; no-one is better than anyone else.
Q. So the things he said that you thought were nice were said in a
therapeutic context, is that right?
Q. They weren't saying nice things about how you looked or anything like
Q. In any of the consultations, did you try to flirt with him, in any
Q. Did he engage with that?
Q. Now in paragraph 9 of your statement, you have referred to the
conversation which you have also given evidence about yesterday
which occurred
in the last consultation. Correct?
Q. Then you said after that when he said he could not see you, he told
you to go and speak to Cheryl. Do you see that?
Q. Your understanding from what he said to you, the substance of what he
said to you was that he was referring you back to Cheryl
Clothier, is that
Q. Then you did refer back to Cheryl Clothier, as you have given evidence
Q. You have been taken to a couple of things in the Cheryl Clothier
documents. I just wanted to take you to a couple more. If you
just go please
behind tab 4. Now go to page 5. I will give you time to read this
but could I ask you just to read that document
please, that page? Just read it
to yourself.
Q. Have you read that?
Q. Do you accept that's your email?
Q. What I wanted to draw your attention to was this passage. It is about
half-way down the email where it says, "Technically I didn't
cheat on him
although it was pretty similar". Do you see that bit?
Q. So I will just read you that line. "Technically I didn't cheat on him
although it was pretty similar and I lied a lot to both
men. I lied to protect
myself and also to protect Stephen's career". What did you mean when you said,
"I also lied to protect Stephen's
career". Who did you lie to?
[Patient B’s former partner]
Q. What was the lie?
A. Whether I'd had contact with Stephen.
Q. How was that lie to protect Stephen's career?
[Patient B’s former partner]
had assured me that
he wasn't going to put in a complaint and I wanted to make sure that that stayed
Q. You also lied to protect yourself, you say?
Q. How were you lying to protect yourself?
A. I think probably from emotional pain.
B gave the following evidence (T267.8-31):
Q. Have you lied at all in these proceedings?
Q. Have you lied in the statement you made to the HCCC?
Q. Can I also take you to tab 3 please. Go to paragraph 32. I
will just read you that paragraph. "Occasionally when we would bump
other" - that is you and Ms Clothier - "Patient B
would tell me that Stephen had bought her gifts; for example a Peugeot".
did you occasionally bump into Ms Clothier?
Q. Did you ever tell her that Stephen Kreft had bought you a
Q. Did Stephen ever buy you a Peugeot?
Q. Did Stephen ever buy you a car?
Q. Did you ever tell her that Stephen had bought you a car?
an interposed witness, Client B returned to the witness box after the lunch
adjournment and answered questions from the Tribunal.
She gave the following
evidence at T306.10-14:
Q. Patient B, could I just ask you, after you went to see
Dr Amanda Gordon, if you could remember, what was it that convinced you
continue the relationship with Mr Kreft without jeopardising his
registration and future career?
A. I didn't believe that anyone was going to put in a complaint.
B’s evidence continued (T306.23-307.7):
Q. A number of times you have mentioned transference in your
statement. I wonder could you tell me what you understand that term
A. I don't understand it very well. Something to deal with feelings
being projected onto the other person but my knowledge of it
is not that
Q. In your study of psychology which I think you did for 3 years, is
that right?
A. I don't know how long I did it for.
Q. Sorry, I did not hear that.
A. I don't know. It was part time, so I got through - it would
have been about 16 units of it but I'm not sure.
Q. 16 units of psychology?
A. I don't know. I think so.
Q. When you were doing that study of psychology and you were being taught
counter transference as
A. I don't remember, no.
Q. You do not remember. You do not know that term?
A. I do know that term.
Q. Do you have any understanding of what that term means?
A. Not really. Again - well the fact that it refers to the
psychologist I think as--
Q. To the psychologist--
A. The transference occurring on their side, but I'm not sure.
T 309.38-47 Client B gave the following evidence:
Q. What did you know about the status of that relationship at
that point in time, in that consultation where the feelings were made
A. I knew that he had a partner.
Q. Did you know whether or not they were living together?
A. I assumed that they were 'cause there was a conversation regarding
how - I had brought up a topic regarding my - the people
I was living with and they were very messy and he had self-disclosed that
his partner wasn't as tidy as him so he would sometimes
have to clean up after
her, so I assumed that yes, they were living together.
T311 Client B gave evidence that on either 9 or 10 August 2006 the Respondent
informed her that he could no longer see her as a
client and that all further
appointments were cancelled. Client B stated that the Respondent told her to
B gave the following evidence at T312.5-22:
Q. Did Mr Kreft offer you any alternatives to
Ms Clothier?
Q. Do you know whether or not Mr Kreft communicated with your
general practitioner with respect to your continued treatment at that
A. I don't know.
Q. Was it a GP who initially referred you to Mr Kreft?
Q. At any time, did you mention to your GP the issue that had arisen
where you had spoken of your feelings during the session? Did
you raise that
with your GP at any time?
Q. Did you raise with your GP the fact that you had returned to the care
of Ms Clothier?
T317 the Tribunal asked Client B if she was always truthful in her
communications with Ms Clothier, Client B did not answer that
question directly,
rather she stated she would have to look at particular pieces of communication.
not being able to recall many details of matters recorded in the clinical notes
of Ms Clothier, Client B gave the following
evidence about one particular entry
(T319.26 – 310.7):
Q. Can you think of any reason why it was that Ms Clothier
has an entry in her notes indicating that Stephen had threatened to kill
Q. Can you think of any reason why she might have had that in her notes
unless you told her?
A. I didn't tell her that but I have - I may know why she's
written it that way.
Q. Could you explain it please?
A. Yeah. I may have described to her that sometimes when Stephen has
been upset there has been the comment made that he feels so
upset that he
doesn't see the point in going on, or something along those lines. I don't
remember specifically.
Q. Can you see any reason why she might have written "cries and begs her
to stay when she wants to go home"? Is there any idea why
she might have
written that?
A. Well possibly because I told her that Stephen gets upset when we're
having discussions about my friends, about my ex and maybe
Q. So that at that time in January you were still experiencing feelings
for [Client B’s ex-boyfriend], is that the person you
are talking
Q. When was it that you stopped having feelings for [Client B’s
ex-boyfriend]?
Q. So you still maintain some feelings for [Client B’s
ex-boyfriend]?
T323 Client B gave evidence that the Respondent had informed her that he could
be de-registered if he entered into a sexual relationship
with her without
waiting two years prior to them entering into a sexual relationship.
T321.10-24 Client B gave the following evidence in answer to questions from the
Q. At any time. At any time after - well we will
take it back a step. At what stage did [Client B’s ex-boyfriend] become
aware that you were having some sort of relationship with Mr Kreft?
A. I don't know.
Q. Was [Client B’s ex-boyfriend] aware of it when you spoke to him
on New Year's Eve?
A. I don't know.
Q. Are you aware whether [Client B’s ex-boyfriend] knows of your
relationship with Mr Kreft today?
A. I don't know.
Q. Have you ever been concerned that if [Client B’s ex-boyfriend]
became aware of the relationship that he
is contrasted with the evidence she gave in answer to questions arising asked by
senior counsel for the Respondent at T325.25
Q. From the time you left [Client B’s ex-boyfriend]'s
parent's house, did you still talk to [Client B’s ex-boyfriend],
phone or face to face from time to time?
Q. Was that for a period of some months, or years, or weeks?
A. It would have been months or weeks but not years.
Q. When you were speaking with [Client B’s ex-boyfriend], did he
ask you about whether you were still seeing Mr Kreft or what
was happening
with Stephen?
Q. So you spoke about that?
A. I told him that I wasn't seeing Stephen.
Q. That wasn't true?
Q. You told him a lie?
Q. Did [Client B’s ex-boyfriend] know that Stephen was your
psychologist?
Is that because you told him?
Q. You told [Client B’s ex-boyfriend] that Stephen was your
psychologist whilst you were consulting with Mr Kreft?
Q. Did you fear that [Client B’s ex-boyfriend] was going to report
Mr Kreft to a board or to some authority?
Q. At any stage?
Q. Is that one of the reasons why you told [Client B’s
ex-boyfriend] that you were not seeing Mr Kreft when in fact you
Q. Now is it the case that after you began a relationship with
Mr Kreft, you began to develop ambivalent feelings about whether you
stay in the relationship with Mr Kreft?
Q. Is it the case that you were torn between whether to stay with
Mr Kreft, to go back to [Client B’s ex-boyfriend] or do something
altogether different?
Q. That caused you anxiety?
Q. That is one of the reasons you went back to Ms Clothier, to try
and discuss those things with her, is that correct?
T327 Client B gave evidence that she has purchased a home with the Respondent
and he provides her with some financial assistance.
She stated that the reason
why she remains in a relationship with the Respondent is not due to the
financial support but because
she loves the Respondent.
Evidence of Ms Cheryl Clothier
Clothier is a registered psychologist. She provided treatment to Client B both
before and after she received treatment from the
Respondent. She also had a
conversation with the Respondent and spoke to other relevant people regarding
the situation.
Clothier wrote to the Psychology Registration Board of New South Wales (as it
then was) on 31 May 2008 indicating her concern regarding
the Respondent’s
relationship with Client B. A copy of this letter and the supporting
documentation form volume 2 – exhibit
notes attached to the letter dated 31 May 2008 record that Client B had received
treatment from Ms Clothier and another psychologist
in 2005 and 2006, including
six sessions between 30 May 2006 and 21 June 2006. The notes record that late on
the evening of 27 August
2006 Client B rang her and said she was alone in a
hotel room. Ms Clothier records that Client B was crying and very distressed as
‘she didn’t know what to do’
. Client B informed her
that she had left her boyfriend and she did not feel that he
‘understands her’.
Client B informed Ms Clothier that she had
been seeing another psychologist for her anxiety issues and that
‘things’ had
happened between them. She felt that this psychologist
‘understand her’
and that she thought she was in love
Ms Clothier discussed the Code of Conduct with Client B. Client
B stated that she did not want to cause any trouble for the Respondent.
note records that Ms Clothier discussed the matter during supervision and then
saying the following to the
Respondent:
There is a serious matter I need to discuss with you. I got a
phone call from Client B last night. She disclosed information that
me. From what she has told me...I just need to tell you...Puts you at risk
professionally.
Clothier records another telephone conversation with the Respondent wherein he
advised he was planning on seeing John Shea, a psychologist
in Lennox Head for
supervision. During the conversation the Respondent informed Ms Clothier that he
had spoken to Client B regarding
the possibility of meeting up in four years (in
a public place). The Respondent tried to explain to Ms Clothier how the
relationship
had come about and how he had never felt love like he had for
Client B before this. He continued with comments about the poor quality
relationship with his then fiancée. Ms Clothier repeated her view that he
was breaching the Code of Ethics.
B made further contact with Ms Clothier in August 2006 by way of a text message
in which she expressed concern for her ex-boyfriend.
Clothier records the following as having occurred on 4 September 2006:
P/C from Tony Nicholas. “Stephen Kreft touched base a
couple of times” – doesn’t really think there is anything
it. Said I thought he should hear my side – he sounded exasperated. (I
felt I was causing trouble)
entry for 11 January 2007 records Client B had returned to Ms Clothier’s
care. Client B reported she had moved, returned
to university and was enjoying
working at David Jones. She also reported having difficulty sleeping, she felt
guilty from all the
lies and her bulimia had recommenced. Client B also
recounted an incident that had occurred when she was out with the Respondent
New Year’s Eve in a pub and was approached by a friend of her
ex-boyfriend. On New Year’s Day her ex-boyfriend had
visited her and she
told him that she still loved him. She told him again that she wanted him to
take her back. The note of Ms Clothier
then records the following quote from
Stephen was freaking about her seeing [Client B’s
ex-boyfriend] today – he has been quite manipulative over last few months
– threatening to kill himself, cries and begs her to stay when she wants
to go home (stays 7 nights a week with him although
she has her own place).
Enjoys conversations with him – he’s also passionate and interested
in her ideas, tells her
he loves her lots, etc”.
Has tried to have time on her own but above behaviour increases –
doesn’t know what she wants – is she in love with
ex-boyfriend?
Discussion focused on separating the two issues – ex-boyfriend (over
– grief & loss) & Stephen
(how to get time out for self so she can
think clearly).
Clothier’s note records that on 18 January 2007 Client B reported that her
doctor had increased her medication. Client B
also reported that she had
organised to have one night by herself but the Respondent had called her at 4am
and ‘came around’.
Clothier’s note for 2 February 2007 reads:
Has told Stephen not sure about Rx – feels essentially has
made up mind to end it. When alone has increased productivity &
motivation.
Good not to have to argue with Stephen all the time. Feelings decrease when
alone – doesn’t feel as mean,
upset, miserable – increase when
around Stephen.
Clothier’s note for 10 February 2007 reads:
Ex dropped off more stuff – fight – Stephen came
around to console her – “he gets her”. Says still
with [ex-boyfriend]. Still felt overwhelmed the next day.
Clothier’s note for 20 February 2007 reads:
Struggling with pressure from Stephen – when with him his
arguments make sense but afterwards worries about whether what it’s
she really wants.
Clothier’s note for 19 March 2007 reads:
Moving in with Stephen – still feels guilty about
[ex-boyfriend]. Increased stress, anxiety.
note records for the balance of 2007 that Ms Clothier had occasional contact
with Client B and they discussed the holidays that
the Respondent was taking her
on, the car he was going to buy her, that she was giving up university and that
the Respondent had
been helping her slowly come off her medication.
Clothier also provided a statement to the HCCC dated 14 July 2009. The statement
records that Client B had first consulted her
on 1 June 2005. The main issues
were her eating disorder, issues relating to her parents and issues relating to
her boyfriend at
the time. Ms Clothier records that Client B was quite an
anxious person and she was working on maladaptive behaviours. Client B was
student at the time.
balance of the statement then substantially recounts the details in the note
attached to her letter dated 31 May 2008. One additional
matter included in Ms
Clothier’s statement was a conversation she had with a senior member of
the profession regarding the
advice she had received from both the APS ethics
Assistance Line and someone at the Board. After this conversation Ms Clothier
to prepare the letter of complaint.
what is recorded in the notes of Dr Gordon to the effect that Client B had
informed her that her father was struggling financially
and was grateful for the
Respondent’s support at the time, Client B is recorded in Ms
Clothier’s clinical notes as having
said in June 2005 that her father was
an ‘arsehole’ and that she did not have any contact with him.
her oral evidence Ms Clothier confirmed that Client B reconnected with her on 27
Aug 2006. Ms Clothier described Client B as distressed,
quite hysterical and
upset (T478.13-15 – also see Ms Clothier’s file note volume 1
– exhibit 4 page 14). Client
B quite often said to Ms Clothier that the
Respondent was unhappy about her seeing Ms Clothier (T478.29).
Clothier gave evidence that Client B revealed to her that the Respondent had
‘quite manipulating’
towards her in the last few months
and threatened to kill himself (volume 1 – exhibit 3, paragraph 27). In
evidence Ms Clothier
‘even now I remember how she told me that
would happen and when it occurred’
(T531.45-46). Ms Clothier confirmed
in her oral evidence that Client B was distressed regarding spending nights at
the Respondent’s
residence and wanted some down time so arranged to have a
night by herself. Client B told M Clothier that the Respondent arrived
and he was very stressed, saying he might as well kill himself if they were
apart (T532.25-36).
Tribunal notes that Ms Clothier may be recalled in ‘Phase Two’ of
this Inquiry.
Evidence of Mr Robert Bust
Bust gave evidence by telephone on the second day of the Inquiry. At T131.4-38
Mr Bust gave the following evidence:
Q. Now you have said there again:
"I think he wanted to extricate himself from it as he knew it was a
problem and knew it was wrong."
Q. What was the basis for that thought?
A. To develop a relationship, a personal relationship with a client, when
the client is still the client of the counsellor, is a
violation of the ethical
code of psychologists and to develop that relationship further immediately after
the therapy having terminated,
was also a violation of the ethical code. The
ethical code at the time stated that there should be a waiting period of two
at least before any contemplation of a relationship. So if he was to
develop this relationship further at that time, it would be
a violation of the
psychologists' ethical code.
Q. During your consultation with Mr Kreft and with Patient B, was
that specifically discussed in those terms?
A. No, it wasn't specifically discussed in those terms but I could see
from the fact that he brought the young lady to see me and
that he was sort of
uncomfortable with the whole situation, that he knew that it was a violation of
the ethical code and he knew
that was a problem.
Q. Well, I just want to have a look at your notes perhaps at this
juncture and take you half-way down the page. You have said in
your notes at
entry C, do you see that particular entry?
Q. Can you perhaps read that out, just entry C?
A. It refers to the consequences if they acted on those feelings and
developed them into a personal relationship. The consequences
would namely be
for Stephen, the loss of his career or possible loss of his career, loss of
partner, and also of course it involved
the young lady, her part in a current
relationship. Further or later on about how they felt about hurting the other
partners if
they ended those relationships by pursuing one with
themselves.
At T133.13-35 Mr Bust gave the following evidence:
Q. The next entry or sorry, there's just one further question
in relation to that topic. You have written down what your professional
was but did you express your professional opinion in those terms to
Mr Kreft, ie stopping contact altogether?
A. No. The decision was reached at the end of the discussion. Don't
forget there was input on all sides, that it would be a two-year
break and that
was my professional opinion and it was also my private opinion and it wasn't
expressed in the interview.
Q. At the end of your notes it says, "Decided to discount", does that
stand for discontinue?
Q. Sorry, I am just looking at the bottom now of your annexure A,
the third-last line, "Decided to discount", does that mean discontinue?
A. Are we referring to my notes, are we?
Q. Yes, sorry, your notes, yes?
A. "Started to discontinue contact" and then two years possibly to see
how they felt and I said Stephen seems to be the main one
driving that decision.
Patient B at the time simply wanted to continue to see him and "seemed to be
less aware" or less concerned
discussions.
cross-examination Mr Bust gave the following evidence regarding his observations
du ring the consultation (T135.18.21 and T135.
Q. At any time during or after the consultation did you form an
opinion that Mr Kreft had come to see you in order to seek approval
continue the relationship with Patient B?
A. No. I got no such impression, not at all.
.............
Q. You say in your statement, paragraph 5, that Stephen was feeling
nauseous. Did he tell you the reasons why he was feeling nauseous?
A. Nausea and the other symptoms described in relation to his feeling of
attraction for the other person. And apparently a feeling
of attraction was
very strong and it was disturbing to him and affecting his appetite and causing
nausea and drowsiness and hyperventilation
and some of the anxiety might have
had an effect of the feeling towards the client that wasn't a good thing if it
developed further.
Q. Did you form any impression during or after the consultation that
Mr Kreft had a concern for Patient B's welfare?
A. I think definitely he was concerned about her welfare. It was part of
his concern about the whole situation that had developed.
Yes, I definitely had
that impression.
Q. In paragraph 6 you say you didn't get any impression there had
been any manipulation. Do you mean by that that you didn't get
any impression
that there had been a manipulation by Mr Kreft?
A. Just let me look. Yes, that refers to a manipulation by
Mr Kreft. It goes on to say that it was something that had just happened,
during the consultations.
Q. When you say that you didn't get any impression there had been any
manipulation by Mr Kreft, what do you exactly mean by that?
A. He hadn't done anything overtly or covertly to bring about this
situation. I didn't get that impression. My impression was that
occurred and now he was seeking to take action to do something about it. So
that's how it had come about, as I have said.
There was no manipulation. The
statement by the way was in answer to questions that were asked, so it was
probably prompted by
a question. If I had been writing a report I may not have
then made that statement.
Q. When you say you didn't believe there was any manipulation "to bring
situation"?
A. The situation of the feelings that existed between the two
Q. Now, you have given evidence about a decision being reached that
Mr Kreft and Patient B would wait for two years and then they
would meet to
ascertain their feelings?
Q. Is it the case that Mr Kreft drove that decision?
A. Yes, I definitely felt that he was the one showing enthusiasm for the
solution to the situation. Other statements were made in
that statement or in
my notes that indicated that the issues that were raised didn't seem to be of
such concern to Patient B or that
she was even aware of them. Her position was
quite simple, she just wanted to continue to see him.
Bust confirmed that he received a telephone message from the Respondent about
one week after the consultation on 21 August 2006
informing him that the
decision had been made to have no further contact for two years.
around this time the Tribunal notes that Client B is recorded as making contact
with Ms Clothier to discuss her ongoing relationship
with the Respondent and her
concern for her previous partner.
Evidence of Dr Anthony Nicholas
Nicholas is a registered psychologist. He was the supervisor for the
Respondent’s provisional registration. All newly registered
psychologists
must undergo a period (minimum of two years) of provisional registration and
achieve certain competencies prior to
being granted registration.
Nicholas provided a statement to the HCCC dated 1 May 2009 (volume 1 –
exhibit 8). In this statement Dr Nicholas states that
the Respondent calls him
his ‘mentor’. Volume 1 - exhibit 8 also contained a CV for Dr
Nicholas. Without providing details
it is sufficient to note that he is a senior
member of the profession, having been in practice since 1982.
Nicholas records that he saw the Respondent on three occasions during 2006, four
in 2007, one at the end of 2008 and on two occasions
in 2009 (prior to the date
of his statement).
statement contains the following at paragraphs 5 to 9:
Stephen first saw me in 2006 he told me of a former client, Client B, who had
very strong feelings towards him and he was feeling
the same. He felt extremely
vulnerable. He attempted not to allow the relationship to develop but this
didn’t work.
told me they had seen Amanda Gordon, President of the APS, and they had kissed
by that stage but had no other intimacy. Stephen
told me that Amanda had said
that since they had kissed it was already happening therefore there wasn’t
much point in stopping
it. I was surprised by that response in the sense that I
hadn’t thought of looking at the situation in terms of ‘it’s
already happened’. I have a great deal of respect for Amanda as I worked
with her years ago. Basically she appeared to be
looking at it as a fait
accompli, as the relationship was already developed.
do not disbelieve Stephen. He values our relationship. I respect Stephen for
what he attempted to do but I believe he was already
embroiled in the
relationship.
believe at this time Stephen was in a stable relationship and told his partner
to become further
involved with Client B then he gave her total commitment. At all times he
appeared very cognizant of the ethics
surrounding his position and was extremely
worried about it all. There was a process working where the intensity of the
they had made it difficult for him to remove himself from the
B did not appear to be a person who was brow-beaten into anything. During one
of my consultations with Stephen, Client B came
along. Stephen did not make her
attend, she wanted to come along. They were seated in separated seats she
initiated physical contact
with Stephen by leaning in close to him and putting
her hand on his knee. Stephen remained very neutral during the whole time.
don’t believe Client B to be a victim at all in this. I believe she was
totally besotted by him.
paragraphs 11, 12 and 13 of exhibit 8, Dr Nicholas stated:
professional view of this matter is that it shouldn’t have happened. The
guidelines are clear in these circumstances however
I believe Stephen tried to
create a temporal gap between when Client B was a client and the relationship
but he found it extremely
difficult. The fact that this was reported was a
surprise to both of them. I did not notify anyone of this situation as I felt
there was no predation and there were extreme circumstances. I understand that
these matters can lead to de-registration and I didn’t
feel this was
justified when everything was put into context. I believe Stephen knows it is
unethical and does not need to be told
this but this degree of punishment is
unnecessary.
don’t think any abuse is relevant in this relationship, as I don’t
think there has been any manipulative behaviour.
Stephen tried to work within
the ethics of the profession to separate her from being a client.
still refer clients to Stephen as I believe him to be an ethical and moral
person. He deals with anxiety issues very well. I have
never considered
Stephen as a predator nor manipulating clients to gain advantage.
Nicholas also wrote to the HCCC on 5 August 2009 (volume 2 – exhibit 9).
In this letter Dr Nicholas stated that he was not
the Respondent’s
supervisor and that he had ceased being his supervisor
‘many years
beforehand’.
He continued by stating that he was therefore not in a
position to ‘advise’ the Respondent and he did not purport to do
answering a number of questions that had been posed to him by the HCCC, Dr
Nicholas stated that he was not informed by the Respondent
during their meetings
that he had entered into a relationship with Client B other than a clinical
relationship. The Respondent did
tell him that he had ‘strong
feelings’ for her but no more. The letter continued, at point 2:
By the time the relationship had become physical, Mr Kreft told
me he had seen Dr Amanda Gordon expressly with regard to the relationship
the ethical issues it raised. I did not consider it appropriate to second guess
Dr Gordon’s input.
response to a question regarding the lack of detail in the notes kept by Dr
Nicholas of his meetings with the Respondent Dr Nicholas
replied, at point 4
(volume 2 – exhibit 9):
My meetings with Mr Kreft were not in the context of me being Mr
Kreft's supervisor. They were discussions between two psychologists
clinical and other professional issues arising in their practices. It was not
necessary for me to keep any notes whatsoever
of these meetings. To the extent
that the lack of detail implies some shortcoming in my professional conduct, I
reject that implication
his oral evidence before the Tribunal, Dr Nicholas stated that when the
Respondent consulted him on 4 September 2006 they discussed
the attraction of a
client to the Respondent, referring to this as dangerous territory. (T 288.47
– T 289.4; again at T 294.11-13).
Nicholas was asked by the Tribunal questions regarding his being the
Respondent’s supervisor. Dr Nicholas said he did not
see himself as the
Respondent’s professional supervisor. Dr Nicholas saw their relationship
as not a one-way thing, in fact
he considered it was peer supervision in which,
at times, the Respondent was supervising him. (T 293.18-19; T 293.29-32. Also
volume 2 – exhibit 9 at point 1).
asked in oral evidence as to why he did not notify the Psychology Registration
Board of New South Wales (as it them was) regarding
his knowledge of the
Respondent’s actions he replied by making reference to the response he had
provided to the HCCC in May
2009 (volume 2- exhibit 9) which is set out above
(T 297.25-31).
Nicholas was then asked about his acceptance of the Respondent’s version
of what Dr Gordon had advised about the relationship.
Dr Nicholas was somewhat
surprised at the Respondent’s version of the advice and thought he
probably would have said as much
to the Respondent (T 297.46 – T
Nicholas stated that if the Respondent had told him (and he had no recollection
of this having occurred) that he had disclosed
to a client that he had slept
with his girlfriend and another woman in the same bed on a particular occasion,
this would be a
‘matter of concern to anyone’
(T 294.40).
Evidence of Dr Amanda Gordon
Gordon provided a number of documents that came in to the evidence in this
matter. A statement dated 8 May 2009 formed volume 2
– exhibit 5. The
clinical notes Dr Gordon kept of a consultation with Client B held on 11
December 2006 formed volume 2 –
exhibit 6. Dr Gordon’s letter to the
Board dated 11 November 2008 formed volume 2 – exhibit 7. Dr Gordon also
evidence before the Tribunal.
statement of Dr Gordon records that Client B made an appointment (through Dr
Gordon’s secretary) for a consultation on 11
December 2006. During the
consultation Dr Gordon made notes, a copy of which are attached to her
statement. Dr Gordon recounts that
Client B told her that she had developed a
‘crush’ on a second psychologist. When Client B told the
psychologist he had
initially given her a ‘textbook answer’ then
indicated the feelings were mutual. Dr Gordon’s statement records
Client B and the Psychologist immediately stopped seeing each other as client
and therapist.
Gordon noted that Client B appeared to be very ambivalent about the
relationship, talking a lot about her ex-boyfriend and the
guilt that she felt.
Client B stated that the psychologist made her feel
‘worthy, alright
and loveable’
. At the end of the first hour of the consultation the
psychologist was invited in. At this stage Dr Gordon only knew his first name.
Dr Gordon states that she did not take notes during the dual consultation.
paragraphs 6 to 12 of her statement Dr Gordon wrote:
at no time advised Stephen to pursue the relationship, especially as Client B
had informed me in his absence that she has told Stephen
that the is still in
love with her [ex-boyfriend]. Client B was quite realistic about a whole range
of psychological issues that
were encouraging this unhealthy relationship,
although admitted that she feels worthy and loveable with Stephen, and she
craves that.
was very clear that Stephen’s behaviour was in breach of the NSW
Psychologists Registration Board Code of Conduct and that
he continued to be so.
I encouraged him to discontinue the relationship – and indeed to take
responsibility for doing that
– and support Client B in getting proper
therapy for her depression and in dealing with her unhealthy relationships and
acknowledged ambivalence towards Stephen. I advised Client B to resume her
antidepressant medication.
cannot believe that I would have softened the Code of Conduct at all as I
believe it very strongly. Specifically, I at no time
advised Stephen or Client
B to pursue this relationship, to take it to a ‘full relationship’
or to sleep together. I
advised them that the relationship was unacceptable and
likely to be bad for Client B. I cannot recall whether I was aware that
had or had not been intimate. From reading my notes I don’t believe I
knew whether they were sleeping together or not.
would never have said that by ending the relationship it would be bad for Client
B’s wellbeing. Especially as I have noted
that she was feeling ambivalent
towards him.
told me that he had a mentor, Dr Tony Nicholas, which was reassuring for me. It
made me less anxious about pursuing the matter
of considering reporting him to
the Board. The outcome of the session that I had with Stephen and Client B
together was that I advised
him to continue to consult his mentor / supervisor
in Newcastle, as he must show that he is aware of the issues of ethics
surrounding
his behaviour. I advised Client B to seek therapy from a senior
reputable person, either in Newcastle or in Sydney, and indeed she
that she may return to see me (which she did not).
have not had any contact with either party since then.
a Senior Psychologist in NSW, I regularly write Expert Reviews for the HCCC and
am fully conversant with the Code of Conduct.
Further, during my term as
President of the Australian Psychological Society (APS) (now finished), I was
very involved with the review
of the APS Code of Ethics, and have a very strong
view about the impact of boundary transgressions on the wellbeing of
contemporaneous clinical notes written by Dr Gordon regarding her session with
Client B record that Client B informed her that
she had had the same boyfriend
for the past two and a half years, and in fact had loved him since she was in
Year 7 at school. She
had moved to Sydney to finish her schooling and when she
returned she found he had moved to Newcastle. She pursued him and after
night they had
‘re-hooked up’
. She then had moved to
Newcastle to live with him and attend university.
provided a history of the use of the drug
her weight and of having suffered from bulimia and anorexia. She took it five or
six times a week for three years at a
cost of $200 per week. When she ceased the
she developed OCD as well as generalised
anxiety and depression. She stated that she was on Aropax and Effexor which
and that she relapsed when she decreased her
medication. The medication Avanza had been ‘terrible’ for her.
notes record that Client B had broken off her relationship with the boyfriend
she was living with three month earlier (i.e. around
September 2006). It had
then been a bit on and off where she had
‘stuffed around’
three times until she finally moved out. She stated that her ex-boyfriend would
still have had her back until she moved out and now
would only do so if she was
not seeing the psychologist. She stated that she had come into the relationship
with the psychologist
with so much
and she had
become quite dependent on him and felt
‘quite needy’
her anxiety related to the possibility of him leaving her.
Gordon recorded that Client B told her that she loves the psychologist and she
still loves her ex-boyfriend. The notes record that
Client B stated she was 22
years of age and that the psychologist was 42 years of age. She stated that they
did go a day without
talking but the relationship was very volatile. Client B
stated that apart from her immediate ex-boyfriend all other boyfriends had
older than her.
B stated to Dr Gordon that she was trying to be a
girlfriend’.
The notes also record that Client B told Dr Gordon that
the psychologist had intimacy issues but that he felt Client B had opened
up. Client B further informed Dr Gordon that the Respondent had been in a
relationship with someone else for the past 13 years
and they had been engaged
for the last two years. This relationship had now ended but the psychologist and
his ex-fiancée
(aged 32) were still friends and on talking terms.
B expressed guilt at having put her ex–boyfriend through a lot when he
supported her through her difficulties and now
she has left him.
B told Dr Gordon that her mother had met the psychologist and had encouraged the
relationship. Client B’s mother said
‘I don’t want you to lose
him’. Client B informed Dr Gordon that her parents’ relationship was
unstable and
she knew her mother was projecting a lot of her own wants and
needs. Dr Gordon records that Client B’s father was struggling
financially
and was grateful for the psychologist supporting her at this time.
notes record that Client B worked casually at David Jones but knew she could get
permanent work there and that Client B had a
girlfriend that wanted to move in
with her once her current lease was up. Client B informed Dr Gordon that the
psychologist had spoken
to his supervisor on a number of occasions and she was
concerned that he would lose his job.
substantive part of a letter to the Board dated 11 November 2008 written by Dr
Gordon stated:
I write with a brief response to the assertions made by Mr
Stephen Kreft in correspondence addressed to you, in which he alleges that
“believed that his actions were in breach of the stated code of conduct as
it was worded but appeared not be in breach of
its intent to protect the
client”, and that I further advised them to turn the relationship into a
full sexual one, as the
potential consequences for them would be the same as if
they had just kissed.
My response is that Mr Kreft (who consulted me anonymously) is speaking
nonsense. I at no time advised him to pursue the relationship,
especially as
Client B had informed me in his absence that she had told Stephen that she is
still in love with her [ex-boyfriend].
Client B was quite realistic about a
whole range of psychological issues that were encouraging this unhealthy
relationship, although
admitted that she feels worthy and loveable with Stephen,
and craves that.
The outcome of the session that I had with Stephen Kreft and Client B
together was that I advised him to continue to consult his mentor/supervisor
Newcastle, as he must show that he is aware of the issues of ethics surrounding
his behaviour. I advised Client B to seek therapy
from a senior reputable
person, either in Newcastle or in Sydney, and indeed she indicated that she may
I was very clear that Stephen’s behaviour was in breach of the Code
of Conduct and that he continued to be so. I encouraged
him to discontinue the
relationship – and indeed to take responsibility for doing that –
and support Client B in getting
proper therapy for her depression and in dealing
with her unhealthy relationships and her acknowledged ambivalence towards
I advised Client B to resume her antidepressant medication.
Specifically, I at no time advised Stephen or Client B to pursue this
relationship, to take it to a ‘full relationship’
or to sleep
together. I advised them that the relationship was unacceptable and likely to
be bad for Client B.
I have not had contact with either party since then.
Peer Review Report - Mr Sam Borenstein
Borenstein is a registered psychologist. He provided a report at the request of
the HCCC regarding matters raised in the Particulars
relating to Client A. A
copy of his report dated 17 November 2009 forms volume 1 – exhibit 18 and
a supplementary report dated
7 December 2009 forms volume 1 – exhibit 20.
The Tribunal accepts the opinions expressed by Mr Borenstein, noting he did not
have the advantage of hearing the large amount of oral evidence given in this
matter. Comments regarding aspects of the opinion relevant
to Particulars are
referred to in the Findings made later in this document.
Peer Review Report - Dr Gary Banks
the request of the HCCC, Dr Banks, a registered psychologist, prepared a report
dated 19 June 2009 dealing with the conduct of
the Respondent with respect to
Client B (volume 2 - exhibit 21).
opinions expressed by Dr Banks accord with the views of the Tribunal. The
Tribunal notes that Dr Banks did not have an opportunity
to frame his report on
the Particulars as they were ultimately put before the Tribunal.
Banks was not required for cross-examination. He did not attend the Inquiry to
give evidence and therefore the Tribunal did not
have the benefit of hearing Dr
Banks’ opinion on the evidence as it ultimately came before the Tribunal.
Given these considerations,
the Tribunal is still of the view that opinions
expressed by Dr Banks have a significant degree of application given the
of the Tribunal. Some of his comments may also have relevance to
‘Phase Two’ of this Inquiry.
page four of his report Dr Banks makes the following comment regarding the
2006 (being the day
after feelings were declared in the Respondent’s office):
It appears reasonable to conclude that from the day of 10.08.06,
Mr Kreft’s efforts to prevent the relationship developing at
level, appear less than impressive. I find his comment that ‘during the
course of the consultations a strong admiration
developed between Client B and I
but this was not spoken of and only realised at a later date...’ to be a
most concerning position
to express as a professional who provides therapy
services routinely as it is suggestive of a worrying degree of insightlessness
Banks also noted that the Respondent discussed the APS Code of Conduct with
Client B shortly after the incident on 9 August 2006.
By so doing the Respondent
demonstrated that he had a current sound understanding of his professional
obligations.
Banks notes the events of 9 and 10 August 2006 and stated that a reasonable
observer could easily reach a conclusion that the Respondent
relationship with Client B to extend beyond his then professional role. Dr Banks
From a differential diagnosis point of view, the possibility of
Client B demonstrating ‘borderline’ features – particularly
that of expressing a frantic sense of real or perceived abandonment by Mr Kreft
should have been contemplated and should have been
part of his thinking in
formulating a response to that situation. The time spent alone in his vehicle
with Client B travelling to
that venue was sufficient to create multiple
scenarios – all of which potentially adverse to the client, and/or
psychologist
and/or the travelling public at that time.
the end of page 5 of his report Dr Banks stated:
Mr Kreft’s action of declaring his personal feelings
within the therapeutic session was completely inappropriate. His response
employed when Client B elected to enter his vehicle without invitation was
similarly inappropriate. His subsequent actions of seeking
professional
supervision from Mr Bust was laudable and the advice he received was sound.
Regrettably it would appear he chose not
to follow it. From that point forward,
it would then appear he willingly encouraged the development of the
relationship.
Banks notes that it is not merely an expectation of a psychologist to refrain
from entering into sexual relationships with clients
but it is also stipulated
in the NSW Psychologists Registration Board – Code of Professional Conduct
(November 2004) –
the legislation supporting the existence and status of
such a document. The Board also chose to take this matter further by issuing
separate policy statement in 2001 (
‘Psychologists and sexual behaviour
in Professional relationships’
is also conduct contrary to the collegiate expectations as set out in the
Australian Psychological Society (APS) document –
Code of Ethics. At page
seven of his report he states:
There is little need for extensive argument here. In short, at
the highest levels of the profession, legislative (being the Psychologists
Registration Board), and collegiate (being the APS, our peer body); the standard
of practice could not be articulated more forcefully.
It is for all
psychologists to remain most vigilant about ensuring these boundaries are not
encroached upon – as individuals
and then collectively across all
practitioners.
The standard is that the psychologist
have a sexual
relationship. Not the wording of
‘it is suggested not’
not. It is an
absolute direction. There can be no exceptions. Psychologists hold a position
of enormous privilege and trust in
the community. We are directed to protect
the clients with whom we work, the most vulnerable, particularly children and
the community
at large. Engaging in a relationship that satisfies the
psychologist’s personal needs is a complete anathema to these principles.
The profession must treasure this position of trust and privilege, for without
it, the profession itself becomes meaningless.
Having considered Mr Kreft’s response to the HCCC, there is an
additional point to be considered. Mr Kreft makes a series of
points in his
defence, which include but are not limited to:
that a ‘strong admiration’ developed quickly within the first four
that Client B
was a third year psychology student and therefore had a knowledge of
transference and counter-transference issues (tab
presented her arguments intelligently (tab 2, pg6, para 1);
that Client B
‘resolved’ to make an appointment with the head of the APS to see if
an exception could be made to the Code
(tab 2, pg , para 2);
relationship continues to the present (tab 2, pg 11, para 2-3).
setting out the relevant sections of each of these documents Dr Banks makes the
following observations:
Hence let me briefly respond to the above points, thereby I hope
negating the need to respond point by point to his defence.
As mentioned
earlier, the idea that Mr Kreft developed feelings of ‘admiration’
for his client so very early in the process,
moreso points to an extremely
concerning degree of insightlessness on his part rather than should this issue
have any bearing on
whether the Code applies to him. It does. The number of
sessions conducted is irrelevant. The critical factor of relevance is
commencement of a relationship by a psychologist with a client a short time
after ceasing the provision of therapy services to
that particular
The degree of
the intellect of the client is irrelevant, as the responsibility is not theirs.
It is ours as Psychologists.
The idea that
Client B wanted to ‘lobby’ the head of the APS, while possibly
laudable in some sort of romantic way, is
still irrelevant. The responsibility
of Mr Kreft’s was clear. Further Mr Kreft was under no misapprehension
whatsoever about
his obligations under the Code.
that the relationship continues to the present is irrelevant.
Banks makes the following observation towards the end of his report:
Given the nature of the boundary transgressions and the failure
to maintain such boundaries despite a statutory requirement to do
so, to have
expressed a competent understanding of these requirements, to then seek review
with an independent psychologist, and
subsequently again with his long-term
supervisor but then to deliberately choose a path of action completely contrary
to this advice
invites my strongest condemnation.
Mr Kreft knowingly continued on this path of action fully mindful that his
actions were in violation of the Code. This path of action
has been pursued
despite the possible detriment to his fiancé (as at August 2006), and
their engagement, similarly it has
likely been to the detriment to Client
B’s then partner, but I would argue that these matters are largely
extraneous to the
HCCC and the Board’s consideration. Mr Kreft embarked
on this path of action mindful of the consequences.
Evidence – the Respondent
Reference - Dr Steven Kelly
Steven Kelly provided a reference for the Respondent. The reference is dated 5
May 2011 (exhibit R5). Despite the fact that this
evidence is relevant only to
‘Phase Two’ of the Inquiry his evidence was taken due to his
availability. The Tribunal
has not taken this evidence into consideration with
respect to the findings made herein; it is merely recorded in this document as
his evidence has already been taken. Dr Kelly may be recalled during
‘Phase Two’.
Kelly is a general practitioner. The reference notes that he was aware that it
would be used before the Psychologists Tribunal
in relation to a complaint made
complaint from a former
the written reference and the oral evidence of Dr Kelly confirm that he has
referred patients to the Respondent. He stated he
had referred 40 to 50 people
to the Respondent over the last 3 years (T272.19-21); he estimated he referred
roughly one female patient
to every four males referred as he found men
generally responded poorly to female therapists.
Kelly stated that knew the Respondent by virtue of the fact that he referred
patients to him. He confirmed he did not know the
Respondent personally and had
only met him once for about half an hour in a hairdressing salon. Dr Kelly gave
evidence that he considered
the Respondent had a good reputation professionally
and that he gives good service to his clients (T272.44-47). Dr Kelly stated in
his reference that the Respondent was at the top of his list of psychologists to
whom he would refer men that had anxiety issues.
He considered the Respondent to
be clinically effective and to be an extraordinary therapist.
Kelly gave evidence that the Respondent described the nature of the complaints
against him. This included details of unusual assessment
tools he was using such
as photographs and discussion of personal details from his own life. The
Respondent described this client
(Client A) to Dr Kelly as
‘hypersexual’
(T272.31-40).
Kelly gave evidence that the Respondent had telephoned him in April and telling
him an ‘incident’ had occurred which
he had discussed with his
supervisor. He was given advice by that person and came to recognise the
situation was ‘uneasy and
stated he tried to make sure things were done
professionally in future (T277.12-17).
his concludes ‘
From my knowledge of Stephen in his professional
capacity I find the complaint that has been made about him by his former
if true, to be entirely out of character’.
Letter from Respondent dated 21 August 2008
Respondent wrote to the HCCC on 21 August 2008 in response to its letter
detailing issues regarding Client B (volume 2- exhibit
19). The Respondent
stated that he apologized for the length of the letter but felt a
‘detailed account was essential to providing... an accurate reply to
the complaint’
. The letter goes on to state that essentially the
allegations were correct as he was currently in a relationship with Client B. He
described Client B as a former client who he had met in his professional role as
a psychologist two years prior. The letter then
sets out the
‘contextual information’.
account provided accords significantly with the evidence before the Tribunal. At
paragraph 1.10 the Respondent stated that the
reason why Dr Gordon was consulted
was Client B wanted to see if there was any way that the formation of a full
(i.e. sexual) relationship
could be sanctioned under the APS and NSW
Registration Board Codes of Conduct. The Tribunal notes this conflicts with the
given by Client B at T238 (as recorded with emphasis above). Further
details of the decision making process reported by the Respondent
to be involved
in the visit to Dr Gordon is set out on page 8 of volume 2 – exhibit 19.
The Respondent stated that his former
fiancée told him she thought there
should be an exception to the code for psychologists in his position (i.e. those
fallen in love with their patients). The Respondent also stated that
his peers were increasingly
‘expressing ambivalence to the
appropriateness’
of a black and white interpretation of the code.
Respondent stated that Dr Gordon’s advice was to the effect that since
they had already kissed once they should engage in
a full relationship as the
code had already been breached. At this point the Respondent felt sanctioned to
embark upon a full committed
relationship and subsequently the relationship
became sexual.
paragraph 1.12 the Respondent stated:
Client B continued to see Ms Clothier and I continued to consult
with Dr Nicholas in an ongoing fashion to resolve any issues that
arose during
the ensuing relationship.
paragraph 1.13 the Respondent states that he purchased a new home in December
2006 and Client B moved into that home in April 2007.
At this point the Tribunal
notes that Client B told Ms Clothier she was moving in with the Respondent in
March 2007.
letter provides details of each of the consultations with Client B. The
Respondent also details his contact with Dr Nicholas and
talks of these in terms
of consultations. Further, the Respondent refers to Dr Nicholas as his
supervisor.
page 10 of this letter the Respondent makes the following comments:
Client B and I were dismayed and perplexed at the recent
lodgement of a complaint to the HCCC by Ms Clothier after more than two years
had elapsed. Client B has informed me upon her subsequent discussions with Ms
Clothier that Ms Clothier stated feeling compelled
to lodge the complaint
because a colleague with whom she had recently discussed the matter (whilst at a
conference) indicated that
it was necessary for her to do so in order to meet
her own professional responsibility.
To my knowledge Ms Clothier was under no obligation to do so and was
misled by that advice. The complaint was, we believe, only made
at this late
time as a result of Ms Clothier’s recent aforementioned discussion with a
colleague and not because she felt that
Client B had been inappropriately
treated or coerced into a relationship by me or had her rights as a former
client abused in any
way but rather to ensure that she had fulfilled her own
professional responsibility. Furthermore, more senior psychologists than
Clothier with whom Client B and I had consulted had not deemed it necessary nor
themselves required to lodge a complaint at any
time over the course of events
despite Client B and I having made them fully aware of our actions.
In addition Client B and I have felt distressed that Miss Clothier made
this complaint without informing Client B that she was doing
so and that in
making the complaint offered in writing to produce Client B’s confidential
files without Client B’s permission
and without a subpoena to do so
(stating only that she had not seen Client B for six months as a rationale for
this breach of the
psychologists codes of conduct).
Letter from Respondent dated 31 (sic) February 2009
letter (volume 2- exhibit 16) enclosed a copy of the clinical file held by the
Respondent regarding Client B in addition to a
copy of his CV.
Letter from Respondent dated 2 August 2009
Respondent wrote to the HCCC on 2 August 2009 (volume 2 - exhibit 14). The
letter seeks to have the HCCC reconsider its current
conclusion regarding
proceeding with the complaint.
Respondent stated that he thought the current peer reviewer (Dr Banks) lacked
objectivity and the report demonstrated bias. He
asked the HCCC to specify any
Gordon. He also asked
for the name of the reviewer to be provided to him so he
could confirm or deny whether or not the reviewer knew him. At this point
Tribunal notes that it is the standard procedure of the HCCC not to reveal the
identity of the peer reviewer until such time
as the complaint is formally
balance of the letter details criticisms of the peer report, responses to the
HCCC Investigator’s report (which is not in
evidence before the Tribunal),
further details of his view as to the weight that should be given to Dr
Gordon’s recollection
of what was said during the second hour of the
consultation, and a lengthy concluding statement.
this point the Tribunal notes that, despite a high degree of criticism expressed
regarding Dr Gordon’s failure to keep notes
of the consultation when he
was present, the Respondent made no mention of a written note in his diary for
11 December 2006.
page 15 of the letter comments made by the Respondent indicate that he was of
the view that it was possible for there to be an
adjustment of the ‘two
year’ period in the code.
Respondent stated that he attended Mr Bust for two reasons. The first reason was
to have Mr Bust confirm the accuracy of his strict
interpretation of the Code to
Client B and
‘also to place the dilemma on official record so as to
strengthen my resolve to not engage in a relationship with [Client
Letter from Respondent dated 3 August 2009
letter (volume 2 - exhibit 13) was a facsimile cover sheet that attached a
letter from Client B.
Letter from Respondent dated 16 October 2009
Respondent wrote to the HCCC in response to a letter dated 7 September 2009
detailing Client A’s complaints. A copy of his
letter is found at volume 1
– exhibit 13. In this letter the Respondent provides a detailed account of
each of the twelve consultations
he had with Client A. When asked how he could
recall the level of detail provided given the content of his clinical notes the
stated that he was relying to some extent on his standard practices.
Some of the contents of this letter are reproduced under the
‘Evidence and Submissions with Respect to Each Particular’
Letter from Respondent’s solicitor dated 18 December 2009
letter (volume 1- exhibit 9) noted the receipt of peer review reports from the
HCCC and notes that the reviewer had access to
documents not provided to the
Respondent.
Letter from Respondent’s solicitor dated 1 February 2010
letter (volume 1- exhibit 8) noted the receipt of peer review reports from the
HCCC and notes that the reviewer had access to
documents not provided to the
Respondent.
First Response to Complaint from Respondent dated 5 May
Respondent provided a response to the Complaint dated 5 May 2011 (exhibit R1).
While the totality of the response has been considered
by the Tribunal some
details from this statement are recounted under the heading
and Submissions with Respect to Each Particular’
Second Response from Respondent dated 16 May 2011
Respondent provided an Amended Response to the Complaint dated 16 May 2011
(exhibit R6). While the totality of the response has
been considered, some
details from this statement are recounted under the heading
and Submissions with Respect to Each Particular’
Entry from Respondent’s diary for 11 December 2006
Respondent produced a copy of a page from his diary for 11 December 2006. This
document came in to evidence as exhibit R8. The
original of the document was not
produced. The Respondent gave evidence he could not locate the original page. A
transcript of this
entry is mentioned in correspondence from the
Respondent’s legal adviser but was not provided to the Tribunal.
entry is handwritten and records that Client B had a one hour consultation with
Dr Gordon and then he had joined the consultation
for a further hour. The entry
records Dr Gordon as having said that he had already engaged in sex by kissing
and when the Respondent
argued that a kiss was not sex, he records that Dr
Gordon stated that it was considered sex in accordance with the Code as the
was the same for him if a complaint was made and it was non-professional
Respondent’s note continues with his record of having asked Dr Gordon if
all contact between himself and Client B should
be ceased immediately (although
he was not sure that he could) and he records Dr Gordon as saying that he should
not do that as the
result would be worse for Client B and could do her great
harm. Dr Gordon is then recorded as saying that the issues would have to
worked through to make the relationship work. The note then records that Dr
Gordon wanted to make more appointments to ensure
and to sort out their relationship
. The note then records that Dr Gordon was keen to
know his last name followed by the comment
ended with a statement that he would talk to Dr Nicholas and to his (as in the
Respondent’s) younger brother. The
note includes an expletive term and the
Oral evidence of the Respondent
Respondent gave evidence before the Tribunal. He underwent cross-examination and
answered questions from the Tribunal. Much of
his evidence is summarized under
the relevant Particular below.
Report of Dr Diamond dated 1 May 2011
Diamond, Psychiatrist, provided a report dated 1 May 2011 (R2). The report
records that he commenced treating the Respondent in
August 2010. In April 2011
the Respondent’s solicitors asked Dr Diamond to provide a report.
3, 4 and 5 of this report set out the ‘Development and Personal
History’ and ‘Personality Functioning’
of the Respondent. Dr
Diamond comments that his early life and development are closely related to his
relevant psychological vulnerability.
Diamond comments on pages 3-4 of his report:
His focus at his more recent sessions has been upon the specific
behavior that has brought him before the Tribunal. It is therefore
currently a
priority that this behavior is addressed in the course of his therapeutic
emotional vulnerabilities and early
life experiences will, in the longer term, need to be properly explored and
addressed so that
he can better resolve some of the long term vulnerabilities
that are likely to be relevant affecting his long term prognosis.
to the supervision received by the Respondent prior to being granted full
registration, Dr Diamond reports (at page 6):
Although he received supervision in that role, the
sophistication of the supervision did not enable him to gain a deep or fully
insight into the complex interactions that occur in the therapy
setting. The nature of the work suited his personal needs to be
adept at problem-solving, compassionate, supportive and pleasant to the young
people with whom he worked. He was confident
in his capacity to maintain what
he considered to be appropriate boundaries and was very clearly aware of not
exploiting vulnerable
youth. On the other hand, the contact with his client
group at the time was probably relatively short term with a focus on crisis
intervention, support and problem-solving.
Tribunal allowed Dr Diamond’s evidence as a treating practitioner but not
as an ‘expert’ or ‘peer’
reviewer. While the experience
of Dr Diamond with respect to conduct matters relating to health (and other)
professional people is
not questioned, it is the fundamental position that, as a
psychiatrist, not a psychologist, he cannot be seen as a ‘peer’
the Respondent. Further as the treating practitioner, his evidence cannot be
without influence from the therapeutic interaction.
This was acknowledged by Dr
Diamond in his oral evidence. However, as Dr Diamond was asked to provide a
report including comments
more in the nature of a ‘peer’ or
‘expert’ report it is difficult to totally separate some of the
made in the report. For ease of reference, the Tribunal has presented
all of Dr Diamond’s evidence in this document although
a significant
portion of the report and oral evidence is only relevant to ‘phase
two’. The Tribunal notes that although
Dr Diamond gave evidence after the
Respondent’s application to have the Inquiry held in two phases was
granted, it was the
Respondent’s application to have Dr Diamond’s
evidence given in one session due to the cost and time involved in recalling
him. The Tribunal proceeded to take the entirety of Dr Diamond’s evidence
over the objections of the HCCC.
Diamond records in his report that the Respondent
‘has had no regular
clinical supervision that directly addresses the interaction between therapist
and patient in the course
of the therapeutic interaction’
report continues (page 6):
His peer review experience has focused more on the technical
aspects of the cognitive behavioural therapy. His ongoing personal continuing
education has focused on technical aspects of cognitive behavioural therapy and
refining his therapeutic expertise in that regard.
Diamond noted in his report that the Respondent had not undertaken any formal
training in clinical psychology. Dr Diamond’s
report continues (page
I am not expert on the detail of the extent of training of
psychologists who practise as clinicians are required to undergo but my
understanding is that Mr Kreft’s qualifications in the clinical domain are
limited overall especially in those areas that fall
outside of his area of
expertise involving cognitive behavioural therapy for primarily anxiety
disorders and sometimes for the management
of mood disorders.
Mr Kreft is increasingly aware of the extent of the deficiencies in his
understanding of psychodynamic theories, interpersonal interactions
therapists and patients, and in more complex areas that include
transference-based phenomena that occur commonly in the course
of therapeutic
interaction.
Mr Kreft is currently studying law. I understand that he is progressing
well with his studies. I make no comment about his choice
of subject but note
that he is drawn towards disciplines that have clear factual underpinnings. He
works best with clear protocols.
He is rules and procedure driven primarily.
He applies logic and rules effectively generally. He may do this to the
of forming more insightful and deeper understanding of the issues at
some point. I make this point because I believe it is relevant
to what has
occurred in the course of his clinical practice that has brought him before the
Further personality features of relevance relate to his apparent
confidence and self-assuredness. Whilst this appears to be prevalent
dealing with Mr Kreft, it is also clear that he is someone who is prone to
self-doubt and lack of confidence. He gains his
self-esteem from being expert
and knowledgeable in those areas where he has gained adequate training and
experience.
He overemphasises the value of those skills at times. He is prone to rely
on those skills in a narrow and limited fashion. He has
placed himself in
vulnerable situations in the clinical setting because he has attempted to rely
on a narrow skill base to deal with
the broad and complex set of clinical
problems that come into his world.
He practises in an environment where he is the senior clinician in the
practice and has not had access to more senior, more extensively
trained and
more experienced clinicians who could have pointed out to him those areas where
he may have become overconfident and
perhaps vulnerable in his attempts to try
and provide assistance to too broad a range of referred patients.
Dr Diamond is of the view that the Respondent has been extensively challenged by
life events and at times experienced a psychological
reaction to these events he
was not of the view that the Respondent had developed any
psychological or psychiatric disorder’
and found no history of
specific illness or of the diagnosis of any acute psychiatric disorder. Dr
Diamond makes the following observation
He has personality traits that describe his psychological
make-up. He is a perfectionist and his insecurities and self-consciousness
expressed as narcissistic to some extent. He does not however have features of
a personality disorder.
Diamond makes the following ‘Concluding comments’ in the first part
of his report (page 8):
From the above comments I hope that it places some of my
subsequent answers to your questions in the appropriate context. In essence,
view is that Mr Kreft has experienced significant and unusual life events in the
course of his development since childhood. These
life events have produced in
him significant strengths involving resilience, perseverance, focus and
determination to engage effectively
and productively in his life. They have
also created in him vulnerabilities where he is over-reliant on performing good
the service of others in order to create a sense of wellbeing and
gratification for himself. He is practically minded and functions
individual when he has clear data to refer to and can apply his developed
expertise in an effective and practical manner.
respect to the future treatment of the Respondent Dr Diamond makes the following
comment (page 9):
Some attempt at linking his own personal development and past
experiences with his current outlook was made earlier on in the treatment
process. This essential part to long term psychotherapeutic intervention is
likely to be addressed more deeply in the future once
the current pressing
issues of the Tribunal have been dealt with. The treatment process therefore,
in more recent times, has understandably
been more focused on the specific
matters contained in the complaint as alleged.
asked to comment upon the Respondent’s attitude towards the complaints and
his level of insight Dr Diamond noted that the
Respondent’s reaction had
‘to acknowledge his part in what is alleged about his
Dr Diamond’s report continues:
He has described what he believes has occurred in each instance.
He provides explanations about what he experienced at the relevant
times and how
he attempted to conduct himself in each instance. His attitude to the complaint
therefore is that he was involved
in each case and he tried to deal with what he
was faced with in a manner that was in keeping with his understanding of
professional
boundary matters at the time, the extent of his clinical skills and
experience that he could draw upon in each instance, and his
awareness of
discomfort and uncertainty when he felt he had to conduct himself outside of his
areas of competence, experience and
His attitude has been one of trying to make sense of what has occurred and
particularly to try to understand what he has done that
has precipitated the
complaints in each case. The circumstances of both complaints are quite
different in many of their features.
There are shared features to the
complaints as well in that they deal with his interactions with young women in
the course of his
clinical work.
In neither case has Mr Kreft blamed his patients for what has occurred.
He has not vilified either of his patients or presented himself
as a victim in
the respective circumstances.
Further comments about his attitude include the fact that I have found him
to be surprisingly resigned to subjecting himself to scrutiny
and criticism
whilst at the same time his approach to the questions that I asked of him is to
engage fully in that process and to
provide comprehensive responses to criticism
as has occurred in both the peer review documents in the respective
Diamond further comments (at page 9):
His attitude superficially is to appear as well informed and
self-assured. He is however not dogmatic and engages in debate about
of view. From one treatment session to the next, he has demonstrated
willingness to reflect on different opinion and criticism
when it has arisen.
He has addressed those issues and returned to the treatment sessions having
reflected on the material and demonstrated
the ability to incorporate deeper
understanding or new ideas into his understanding of what he did and how this
might influence his
practice in the future.
His attitude is consistent with his long term personality which is to
maintain an inquiring mind, to pursue knowledge and information
and to improve
his competence and skills. I have found him to be refreshingly open to a
process of remediation rather than to be
someone who has simply dug his heels in
and remained dogmatic or defensive about his position.
With regard to his insight in relation to the allegations in the
complaint, I can comment that Mr Kreft is in the process of gaining
comprehensive and deep appreciation of those principles that apply to
maintaining appropriate professional boundaries.
His starting point was one of
awareness of a Code of Conduct for his profession that focused more on the
content of the Code and
less on the principles that underlie the thinking behind
the formulation of the Code.
Mr Kreft has made significant insights into appreciating that not all
patients address cognitive behavioural therapy from the same
standpoint that he
assumes them to have. He understands that his knowledge and exposure to the
appreciation of psychodynamic principles
is deficient and undeveloped. He
appreciates that without better understanding of how these factors operate in
the interactions
between therapists and patients, there is strong potential for
misperceiving and misunderstanding the communications, both verbal
non-verbal, that are made by patients in the therapy setting. The
considerations form a significant part of the interaction
he has had in his
treatment to date. He is gaining useful practical understanding of how such
entities function as a matter of course
in the interactions that occur
therapeutically.
Diamond commented on the attitude and insight of the Respondent into each
complaint (meaning the complaint as it relates to each
of Client A and Client
B). The comments made by Dr Diamond regarding Client A are as follows (page
This complaint arises from contact with the complainant that occurred
between February and July 2008 where he saw Client A on about
a dozen occasions
at roughly a frequency of twice per month. The intensity of the interaction
therefore was less developed and at
the end of the period of treatment, the
patient appeared to go on to travel overseas, having left the therapy
environment in an apparently
amicable state.
I note the content of the complaint. With regard to Mr Kreft’s
attitude to this complaint, he seemed unaware of what had offended
complainant to the extent where a letter of complaint was issued a year after
their last therapy contact. In Mr Kreft’s
description of what occurred,
it was apparent to me that although he recognised that Client A presented
relationship and sexual problems
as part of the clinical picture very early on
their clinical contact, he did not sufficiently recognise the inappropriateness
his attempt at treating her.
Despite understanding that the problems she presented were outside of his
competence and treatment experience, he attempted to be
her. His attitude therefore to the complaint was one of feeling surprised and
even hurt that she had complained
It follows from the above comment that his insight into what occurred in
the clinical interaction with Client A was clearly deficient.
In the course of
his therapy with me, we have explored the inappropriateness of what he did. He
has gained a better understanding
of how his interactions could be perceived
quite differently from the way in which he intended them to be received. I will
this in greater detail in the answers that follow.
Diamond’s comments regarding Client B are as follows (page 11):
Client B became a patient on 5 July 2006. She was seen between 5 July and
9 August 2006 on six occasions. The frequency of appointments
indicates an
intensity to the therapeutic contact. The clinical contact was brief. At the
last contact, Client B made it known
to Mr Kreft that she had developed feelings
for him. Mr Kreft informed her that he too had developed feelings for her.
What occurred
subsequently is clearly described in the documents
The complaint arises from a notification of a third party.
Insofar as Mr Kreft’s attitude towards the complaint regarding
Client B is concerned, he has always accepted that he was unprepared
occurred and as unable to deal with events as they unfolded.
At no stage did he think it was inappropriate for him to be in a
relationship with Client B. His attitude to the conduct he displayed,
described during his contact with me, is consistent. He accepts that his peers
are critical of what transpired with him and Client
He was overwhelmed, flustered, unable to exercise his repertoire of coping
skills to deal with a situation like that, and was in need
of external
consultation and counsel. He was dealing with complicated psychological
dynamics with a patient who was intent on having
a relationship with him and
displayed persistence to the point of maintaining his engagement in a process
where they both sought
external counsel together to see how the Code of Conduct
was relevant in their case.
In what remained a misguided and naïve appreciation of what was
occurring, Mr Kreft concluded any treatment and stopped being
a therapist to
Their attendances at other psychologists for advice and discussion about
application of the Code of Conduct continued over a number
of months. From the
conclusion of the therapeutic contact in early August 2006 until the time when
their relationship was consummated
in December 2006, I understand that the
physical nature of the relationship was limited and inhibited.
In his sessions with me, Mr Kreft has expressed a consistent attitude that
accepts the inappropriateness of what he did at those times,
expressing an
attitude of wisdom and hindsight without having the clarity or understanding of
what was occurring with Client B at
The emphasis was on the required two year timeframe as stipulated in the
Code of Conduct without gaining a deeper understanding of
the profound
inappropriateness that exists when therapists have relationships with their
patients at any stage after a period of
Insight that Mr Kreft is gaining into this issue is as yet incomplete.
Much emphasis is placed upon the success subsequently of the
relationship with
Client B and their current happiness and sense of unity that exists despite the
trying times that face Mr Kreft
at present.
Diamond expressed the view that the issues of the Respondent’s underlying
psychological makeup are ones that are usually
dealt with in the course of
longer term psychodynamic psychotherapy. Dr Diamond stated that the Respondent
was ‘currently engaged
in the early phases of such therapy’. In his
oral evidence he confirmed that this process had been essentially put on hold
the stress of the Tribunal Inquiry had been the focus of therapy since the
commencement of the Inquiry.
Diamond makes the following comments regarding the treatment (page 13):
He is interested and receptive to gaining deeper psychological
understanding of his own functioning, which is very different from
practical and proactive methodology involved in his area of expertise consisting
of the delivery of cognitive behavioural
therapy techniques. He is engaging in
a different psychological construct, and to date has shown a capacity to form
appropriate
insights and to develop these insights sequentially as the
therapeutic process unfolds.
My view is that Mr Kreft would benefit from further treatment either from
me or from another suitably trained and skilled health professional
could deal with those long term issues stemming from his developmental and
family background that underlie many aspects
of his personality makeup. Whilst
many of those developmental issues have allowed him to express intrinsic skills
and abilities,
they have also left him with psychological vulnerabilities and
needs that render him vulnerable particularly in the conduct of his
as a psychologist.
The nature of the treatment would involve regular attendance at a
psychotherapist over a period of years rather than months. It is
difficult to
know exactly how long such therapy would take but, in my experience, two years
or more of therapy has proven to be very
treated over the years.
Diamond’s comments regarding his understanding of the Respondent’s
conduct with respect to Client B include the following:
In the case of Client B, my understanding is that Mr Kreft was
unprepared and inexperienced in dealing with an approach that was made
an attractive, intelligent and interesting young woman. He thought he knew how
to deal with this but clearly his response
was deficient in the first instance
when he admitted to her that he too had feelings for her.
His belief that he could manage such a situation on his own without
discussing it with a senior colleague or supervisor in the sessions
patient made her feelings known to him (he acknowledges that he found her
attractive from the outset) is a significant
deficiency that is apparent in
retrospect.
At the time Mr Kreft was relying on his limited experience in a position
of authority as a youth counsellor to contain such incidents.
He believed he
had dealt successfully with those incidents in the past. He never saw himself
as somebody who would be susceptible
to such an approach and felt that he was
emotionally immune from such overtures.
This was quite different from what occurred in this instance. He lost
composure and was unable to assert his position as a therapist
involved in a “partnership” with Client B from the outset whereby
they both addressed the “problem”
as a potential couple.
My understanding of what occurred in that case is one of seeing Mr Kreft
as being out of his depth, unaware of how overwhelmed he
actually was, and
lacking the experience, training and understanding to deal effectively with such
a situation. It appears that
he relied on what knowledge and understanding he
had at the time and focused specifically on the Code of Conduct for
Psychologists
and particularly on the two year timeframe that is included in the
He failed to understand that the issue was never about a two year period
of abstinence from engaging in any relationship, but instead
the key issue that
underpins that two year stipulation is about the inappropriateness of having any
personal relationship with a
patient or client when one works as a
Those with whom he shared his difficulty seemed to also focus on the two
year time period issue and to debate whether or not this
was applicable on the
basis that the patient felt that she was not being exploited or manipulated by
Mr Kreft. Whilst that might
be a significant point to be debated in a different
context, the issue for Mr Kreft was the inappropriateness of having a
relationship
with a patient at that time.
Mr Kreft’s conduct was not fully addressed by his colleagues when he
did discuss his conduct with them. They too focused on
whether or not a two
year period ought to be respected and became engaged in a debate about whether
or not the provisions of the
Code applied to Mr Kreft and Client B.
The account of Mr Kreft supports the view that there was a tacit
accommodation of the relationship by those with whom he consulted.
relationship became overt and was common knowledge to many practitioners in the
area. There was no approach by any senior figure
to say that this knowledge was
of concern to anyone. The emphasis seemed to be on the relief by all that the
relationship was flourishing
and that apparently no harm was done.
It appears that there was no appreciation by anyone of what this meant in
the broader context with regard to the image of the profession
in the public
domain. The broader issue of maintaining the integrity of the profession
together with an emphasis on public protection
appears to have been ignored. Mr
Kreft had no understanding or knowledge that these were significant issues
worthy of consideration.
Tribunal notes the evidence of Ms Clothier, Dr Nicholas, Dr Gordon and Mr Bust
is set out elsewhere in this document. The Tribunal
accepts their evidence that
they counselled the Respondent against continuing with the relationship with
Client B. This contrasts
somewhat with the information regarding their advice
that has been provided to Dr Diamond by the Respondent.
Diamond’s comments regarding his understanding of the Respondent’s
conduct with respect to Client A include the following:
In the case of Client A, the conduct of Mr Kreft was of a
different nature, in my view. The patient was a nineteen year old, married
woman. She was married to an older man. She was referred ostensibly because of
anxiety and possibly panic attacks. Very early
on in the clinical management,
problems in her relationship became the focus of their discussions.
Furthermore, specific issues
sexual practices were raised.
Mr Kreft identified that he was not especially skilled in the treatment of
relationship problems, nor was he expert in the management
of sexual disorders.
He made this known to his patient. He was intent on providing some form of
assistance and colluded with the
patient when she was reluctant to be referred
It was apparent that his normal strict cognitive behavioural therapy
protocol for the management of anxiety disorders and panic disorders
being applied in the treatment process. He failed to understand that the
treatment interaction had become sexualised. Whether
he promoted further
sexualisation of the interaction or whether he was titillated by what occurred
as a result of what his patient
volunteered, is not entirely clear to
What did occur however, is that there was further engagement in areas
consisting of concern about personal appearance, low self-esteem,
validation of the patient by men via her sexual activities, and descriptions of
her specific sexual behaviour which further
added to the sexualised nature of
the interaction that occurred between Mr Kreft and his patient.
Within that context was the novel attempt at providing a reality-based
validation of her attractiveness. This was not a validated
technique that was
part of Mr Kreft’s usual therapeutic repertoire. It was an attempt on his
part at trying to engage further
with his patient to provide a novel treatment
in a setting where he was neither experienced nor expert.
It is understandable that such conduct on his part is viewed negatively by
his peers. It is also understandable that from Mr Kreft’s
perspective, he
was attempting to remain engaged with a patient whose clinical needs were
outside of his areas of competence or clinical
experience.
All therapists at some stage will encounter individuals who present
problems that are outside of their repertoire of skills in some
way. Successful
therapy can occur with creative innovative techniques but therapists are
particularly vulnerable when dealing with
novel situations that involve
transgressing of the firm and clear boundaries that relate to the expression of
sexualised material
within the clinical setting.
Whether Mr Kreft’s conduct in the course of the management of Client
A amounts to seductive or predatory conduct on his part
or not, is not evident
The description from Mr Kreft about his motivation and effort to provide
treatment for Client A has been consistent throughout the
time I have seen him.
In the course of our contact, it is apparent to me how little understanding he
had of the extent of the sexualised
content to the clinical interaction that
occurred with Client A. I have no knowledge of whether Mr Kreft has engaged in
other similar
sexualised therapies with other patients. His account is that he
identified clearly that he was not skilled in conducting therapy
around those
issues but that he felt responsible for trying to assist Client A with the
problems that she raised during her treatment.
this point, the Tribunal notes there is no other evidence before it indicating
Client A’s husband was an ‘older man’.
respect to the question of whether or not the Respondent is likely to repeat
conduct in the nature of that alleged to have occurred
with Client A Dr
Diamond’s response included:
I am concerned that Mr Kreft did not recognise the scenario in
which he became complicit. In the course of his therapy with me, he
a clear understanding of those indicators that occurred early on in the
therapeutic contact with Client A that should
have warned him that he was
offering treatment for problems that were not within his clinical
repertoire.
He is gaining a much clearer understanding of how his wish to be helpful,
to appear to be knowledgeable and to express competence,
may at times occur in
areas outside of where his true abilities lie. He is also increasingly aware of
the limitations to his overall
abilities as a therapist and particularly in
those areas that deal with the underlying psychopathology of individuals, their
psychological
makeup and the psychodynamic issues that underlie behaviours. Mr
Kreft acknowledges freely that his training and experience is deficient
regard to having a deeper understanding of such issues.
On balance, my view is that Mr Kreft is now becoming increasingly aware of
some of his underlying psychological drives and needs.
He is also distressed
and shamed by being criticized and portrayed as a predatory therapist and feels
humiliated. He is however
accepting of the realities that are becoming apparent
to him. He recognises that he has had limited training and experience outside
relatively narrow range of psychological principles and treatments. My
understanding is that he is very proficient at those areas
where he is well
trained. It is the range of skills, however, that is limited.
Bearing in mind these factors as described above, my view is that Mr Kreft
is in a far more informed state now about how best he can
practice his
profession appropriately. He has engaged in a therapeutic process that is
assisting him to clearly understand his own
personal needs and drives, together
with acknowledging his areas of strengths professionally together with those
areas of vulnerability
and lack of skills.
With all of these parameters in mind, my view is that Mr Kreft is unlikely
to repeat the conduct that took place in his management
of Client A.
Diamond records that the Respondent currently practices psychology in the same
practice where these allegations occurred of which
he is the owner and principal
psychologist. In his oral evidence, Dr Diamond confirmed that the Respondent had
informed him that
no other complaints had been made about him since the incident
with Client A (i.e. since July 2008).
Diamond records that the Respondent informed him that he now recorded all
consultations with his computer camera. Dr Diamond makes
the following comments
regarding the reports the Respondent has made to him about the manner in which
he conducts his practice:
He has gone to some lengths to try to reflect on what he does
and to build in safeguards. His approach is sometimes mechanistic in
expresses beliefs that by limiting certain aspects of his practice or conduct
within the therapy setting that he can remove
any potential for harm or
complaint from his practice. Whilst the intent is laudable, the steps that he
proposes cannot be sufficient.
Practice in relative isolation and lack of clinical supervision and peer
review remain as relevant concerns.
Diamond expressed the view that the awareness and insight Mr Kreft is developing
in therapy will also provide him with an opportunity
to develop a deeper
understanding of human behaviour principles which he may apply to his clinical
practice with his patients. Dr
Diamond notes that the Respondent accepts that he
has a narrow range of skills and attempted to manage problems of greater
than his training would allow, although he was interested and
enthusiastic to improve his skills. Although the complaints were of
a different
nature they both involved a failure to maintain appropriate boundaries.
Diamond expressed the following view as to the likelihood of further
transgressions (at page 18) as follows:
It means that with his history of transgressions, as alleged,
one must appreciate that Mr Kreft could pose a danger to the public
continued to practise psychology in the manner and setting of his former
practice. The extent of that danger has, in my view,
diminished because he has
made some progress with deepening his understanding of the need to preserve the
appropriate boundaries.
He has gained greater understanding to date as to how
his difficulty to maintain appropriate clinical boundaries has caused offence,
as alleged, and in the case of Client A, he appreciates that the perceived
offence, despite his different view of it, can cause harm.
Although Mr Kreft could pose a danger to the public when he practises
psychology, I believe that this propensity has diminished and
continues to
diminish as he continues to take steps to improve his understanding and skills
as a therapist.
I do not believe that he poses a threat because of an intrinsic underlying
predatory personality. I do not believe that his motivations
are malicious or
dangerous to those around him and despite his shortcomings in the past, he is a
more cautious individual now than
he was at the time that he generated these
complaints.
Diamond’s concluding comments include the following (page 20):
Mr Kreft is a skilled practitioner within a narrow field. He is
trained to think rationally and logically. His practice involves
administering
protocols, carrying out logic-based interventions and requires his patients to
occupy a mindset where they share a
common objective and commitment to the
treatment and its proposed outcome.
In the practice of psychology, however, one is not always advantaged by
having patients who mirror the therapist’s skill base
and aspirations. To
practise safely and successfully, the therapist needs additional skills that
involve interpreting human behaviour
and understanding covert communications,
unconscious drives and non-verbal communications.
Despite intuition and life experience, practitioners often require
additional training to become competent in these areas so that
they can apply
their expertise in a more appropriate and safe manner. These comments are
germane to Mr Kreft and his predicament.
Evidence and Submissions with Respect to Each Particular
set out above, there are a large number of Particulars of Complaint in this
matter. It is convenient to deal with the evidence
and the submissions with
respect to each Particular seriatim. Particulars 1 to 4 inclusive relate to
Client A and Particulars 5 to
7 inclusive relate to Client B. All submissions,
including the amended Final Submissions in Reply received on behalf of the
on 7 October 2011 have been considered. However, due to the timing of
the receipt of the amended final Submission in Reply from the
Respondent they
have been considered in this written document, for the best part, in the
Findings section rather than this Evidence
and Submissions section. No inference
should be drawn from this arrangement as it significantly resulted from the time
constraints
consequential on a ‘two phase’ approach to the Inquiry.
Particular 1 of Complaint One
Particular 1.1
The psychologist failed to observe proper
professional boundaries in relation to Client A in that the psychologist engaged
in inappropriate
discussions of a personal nature with Client A in
1.1 He commented on Client A's appearance in that:
1.1.1 He complimented Client A about her appearance referring to her
petite size, her short height and thin build and likening her
to his girlfriend
Client B; and/or
1.1.2 Commented on Client A wearing Bonds underwear and said that his
girlfriend wore those.
HCCC Evidence/Submissions re Particular 1.1
A stated in her initial letter to the Board dated 9 September 2009 (volume 1
– exhibit 3) that the Respondent stated
that both she and Client B were
‘the perfect size’
in the context of talking of Client B
‘in a positive light, repeating that she was “absolutely
The letter contained the following details:
Mr Kreft often made remarks about my physical appearance. These
comments were not limited to discussion of my self-esteem issues,
involved personal compliments. He made special mention of my
“petite” size, my short height and thin build,
saying that I was
“the perfect size,” and likening me to his girlfriend, Client B.
Client B, aged only a few years old
than me, worked as his secretary some days,
while another woman in her early to mid-twenties worked other days. It was only
private sessions that Mr Kreft spoke of his personal life – and in
some detail. He said to me one day, after comparing my
physique to hers,
“I cured her, too.”
A’s evidence regarding 1.1.1 is set out in paragraph 14 of her statement
dated 3 November 2009 (volume 1 – exhibit
4) which reads as follows:
Some of the exercises I had to do were laying down on the ground
breathing; he’d watch my tummy to check it wasn’t chest
Running on the spot and breathing through a straw, spinning around to get used
to the symptoms of panic attacks. I found
this helpful to an extent but
I’d rather do it in private as he was watching. It was when I stood up
and fixed my clothes
that he would comment on my size, saying I was so small and
petite, “just like [Client B]”.
A’s evidence regarding 1.1.2 is set out in paragraph 12 of her statement
dated 3 November 2009 (volume 1 – exhibit
4) which reads as follows:
One time I came in and Stephen was bending down getting my file
out. My shirt was up and you could see my underwear sticking out.
around and was level with my crotch and commented on me wearing Bonds underwear
and said his girlfriend wears those.
I found it weird and
uncomfortable.
Respondent’s Evidence/Submissions re Particular 1.1
Respondent stated with respect to Particular 1.1.1 (page 7 – volume 1
– exhibit 13) that he had discussed Client A’s
appearance with her
during consultations. He continued:
These discussions and comments were made in an attempt to
challenge her misconceptions regarding her physical appearance. Challenging
beliefs is a standard CBT strategy.
I recall having a detailed discussion with Client A about her appearance
and the science of beauty. In the context of these discussions
I commented that
I also thought that I had a big nose however other people did not see it as an
issue. I asked Client A if she thought
my nose was too big and she said no, to
which I replied “and yet I do”. This was the only occasion on which
Client A to comment on my physical appearance.
At some point during the consultations I recall asking Client A to rate
her facial and overall attractiveness on a scale of 1 to 10.
Client A rated her
facial attractiveness as 2 out of 10 and overall appearance as 4 out of 10. I
believed these ratings to be adversely
skewed and indicative of a major factor
affecting her self esteem and subsequent behaviours/disorders.
I engaged in these discussions with Client A in an attempt to shift her
skewed beliefs about her physical undesirability and demonstrate
people’s perceptions of themselves were often less than that of others.
In no way were the discussions intended to be
perceived as flirting and Client A
gave no indication that she interpreted the discussions in any way other than
that which was intended.
All comments I made regarding Client A’s appearance were framed to
challenge her own maladaptive beliefs about her personal
appearance. I reject
and deny any suggestion that I was flirting with Client A.
Particulars 1.2 and 1.3
1.1 He asked Client A to comment on his physical appearance;
1.3 He disclosed details of his personal life
1.3.1 The number of sexual partners he has had, namely that he had slept
with eighty people; and/or
1.3.2 That his girlfriend, Client B, would have her girlfriends over and
they would sleep in the same bed together; and/or
1.3.3 That he had been in love five times; and/or
1.3.4 He thought about homosexuality when he was younger but was straight;
1.3.5 He and his girlfriend, Client B, had waited the appropriate amount
of time of two years before they entered into a personal
relationship.
HCCC Evidence/Submissions re Particulars 1.2 and 1.3
A stated in her initial letter to the Board dated 9 August 2009 (volume 1
– exhibit 3) that the Respondent had told her
how many sexual partners he
had had in the past.
A’s evidence regarding 1.3.2 is set out in paragraph 9 of her statement
dated 3 November 2009 (volume 1 – exhibit
4) which reads as follows:
Fairly early in the treatment Stephen would say things about
himself, like referring to his girlfriend, Client B, who worked there.
I enjoyed this as it was like talking to a real person. Then he said things
like she’d have her girlfriends over
and they’d sleep in the same
bed together. He’d bring this up because I had married very young and was
considering an
open relationship for a while and I had issues with only having
one relationship.
A’s evidence regarding 1.3.1, 1.3.2 and 1.3.4 is set out in paragraph 10
of her statement dated 3 November 2009 (volume
1 – exhibit 4) which reads
as follows:
In the same context, Stephen once said he had slept with 80
people in his life. He said he had thought about homosexuality when he
younger but was straight. He said he has been in love 5 times and talked a lot
relationship stuff he told me
these things, but I didn’t want to know.
A’s evidence regarding 1.3.5 is set out in paragraph 25 of her statement
dated 3 November 2009 (volume 1 – exhibit
4) which reads as follows:
Stephen said that they had waited the appropriate amount of time
for a doctor-patient relationship before he entered into a relationship
Client A (2yrs). The fact that he used the word “too” made me feel
like he was glossing over stuff that was still
going on and this linked me to
her. It made me feel like he was suggesting a relationship outside the
therapeutic one.
Respondent’s Evidence/Submissions re Particulars 1.2 and 1.3
from the comments recorded under Particular 1.1 on page 7 of his letter to the
HCCC dated 16 October 2009, the Respondent also
In conducting CBT it is my practice to use examples from
research literature, and my own personal and professional experiences as
to illustrate points when attempting to challenge their maladaptive beliefs.
These disclosures were always in a consultation
and were always appropriately
contextualised – in other words they flowed from the material I was
working on at the time with
Client A. I am disappointed Client A has, now,
sought to take these matters completely out of context and sought to infer
more sinister. I completely reject any suggestion any personal
disclosure was for any purpose other than therapeutic.
cross-examination the Respondent stated that he had no recollection of
discussing the issue of waiting ‘sometime’
before entering a
relationship with Client B stating that he went to great pains not to disclose
information regarding the origins
of his relationship with Client B unless it
was absolutely essential.
paragraph 153 of the submissions handed up by the Respondent on 1 September 2011
the denial of the Respondent of Particular 1.3.5
is noted and it is submitted
that the Respondent admits that it was possible that he disclosed to Client A
that Client B was his
girlfriend.
Particular 1.4
1.4 When discussing Client A's sexual relationship with an older man the
psychologist stated "You and I could do it over the desk"
or words to that
effect and then said that he was joking.
HCCC Evidence/Submissions re
Particular 1.4
A’s evidence regarding 1.4 is set out in paragraph 13 of her statement
dated 3 November 2009 (volume 1 – exhibit
4) which reads as follows:
Towards the end of my treatment we started chatting like
friends. Sometimes we’d be talking about sex and that I had an older
friend as part of my open relationship. Stephen was asking me questions about
it and he said something like “you and I could
do it over the desk”
then he said he was joking but I found it weird. I was laughing at the time but
simultaneously it was
cross-examination Client A stated that she was
‘absolutely
that she was not making the
rather she was just
‘saying that this is what I
A supported her interpretation of what the Respondent said to her on the basis
that the Respondent had stated shortly after
the comment that it was a
. It was Client A’s evidence that if his comment
did not have the intention that Client A interpreted then why would he need
make the comment regarding it being a ‘joke’.
Respondent’s Evidence/Submissions re Particular
Respondent noted that Client A made no mention of this conversation in her
initial statement to the Board (exhibit 3). Client
A’s evidence at the
Inquiry was that this incident occurred before the photographic incident
(detailed in Particular 2) and
referred to her evidence at T57.34 –
A gave evidence that she discussed sending nude photographs of herself to
‘Christopher’ (a man in America) and
that the discussion took place
in the context of her self-esteem issues.
was submitted that both the Respondent and Client A agreed that the context of
the statement set out in this Particular was a discussion
regarding Client
A’s internet exchanges with a sexual overtone with a man overseas. The
Respondent’s submission refers
to the answer provided by Client A at
T443.31 to the following effect:
[the Respondent]
said to you
‘It would be like saying to that man, we can do it over the
Yeah. Yeah.
was submitted on behalf of the Respondent that the difference between the two
versions was in the precise phraseology of the sentence
or in the interpretation
of that sentence. The Respondent was referring to the other person and Client A
doing something over the
desk and had no intention that the comments should
propose that he and Client A have sex over the desk whereas Client A stated that
it was a light-hearted suggestion that she and the Respondent could do it over
the desk (see paragraph 115 of the submissions handed
up by the Respondent on 1
September 2011).
Particular 2 of Complaint One
The practitioner failed to follow or observe appropriate therapeutic
practice and/or failed to observe proper professional boundaries
in that during
counselling sessions on or about 10 and 22 April 2008 the psychologist made a
request of Client A for photographs
of her and obtained from the client a
photograph of her head and shoulders and a photograph of the client in her
underwear which
he said was to be for a study or exercise whereby other people
would rate Client A's appearance.
HCCC Evidence/Submissions re
Particular 2 (and in part Particular 3)
A included details of this matter in her initial letter to the Board dated 9
August 2009 as follows:
Mr Kreft was aware that I was engaged in an online relationship
with a long-term male friend in New York, to whom I sent nude photographs.
believe Mr Kreft also took advantage of this information, eventually leading me
to show him the photographs. He told me that
he had been working on his own
study about self-esteem, and that he had been successful with several other
patients before me. He
said that I would need to provide him with photos of
myself that I thought showed me in my best light, both close-ups and full-body
shots. When I told him I only had the nude photographs for full-body shots, he
moved across the room to sit by me on the couch,
and told me to pick one anyway.
I scanned my pictures, turning my computer screen from him – I had my
laptop with me, as I
was on my way to class later that day – and then, at
one point, allowed him to look over my shoulder. I picked the least sexual
all the photographs, a black-and-white shot of me in lingerie. He originally
asked for a photograph of me in swimwear, but said
lingerie would be okay. Even
though I was posing seductively, he said he would tell people that I was in my
He loaded this and a handful of other images onto his USB flash drive, and
said the study would be completed over the coming weeks.
He did not ask me to
sign any paperwork regarding the study, and he did not brief me on the ethics
regarding doctor-patient confidentiality
and so on. I felt uneasy after the
session, thinking about the images in his possession, wondering how he had
induced me to share
them with him.
A few weeks later, I questioned Mr Kreft about the study, and he fumbled,
as though he had forgotten it. Suddenly, he came up with
results, saying that
he’s shown my photographs to friends and colleagues, and asked them to
rate my attractiveness on a ten-point
scale, with zero being highly
unattractive, five being average attractiveness, and 10 being highly attractive;
he said I scored well,
with mostly sevens, eights, and nines. I felt that Mr
Kreft was attempting to sweep my self-esteem issues away so that we could
more on his speciality, anxiety, and so that he would have less to do to
“cure” me and thus end our professional
relationship.
A’s evidence regarding Particular 2 is set out in various paragraphs of
her statement dated 3 November 2009 (volume 1
– exhibit 4). Client A
stated that she was informed that the Respondent had previously undertaken this
exercise with people
who had self-esteem issues and that he would show them to
‘friends and colleagues and ask them to rate me’
A’s evidence regarding the obtaining of the photos from her laptop is set
out in paragraphs 20 and 21 of her statement
dated 3 November 2009 (volume 1
– exhibit 4) which read as follows:
next session I didn’t specifically bring in the laptop to give him photos,
I had it with me as I had a class afterwards.
The photo issue came up again and
so I got my laptop out and started looking through some photos for some suitable
ones. I was
scrolling through a bunch of photos and he grabbed his USB and came
over and sat next to me on the couch. He was saying we needed
a full body shot.
I said that the only ones I had were the nudes and I was looking through them.
He moved over to me and was sitting
on my left and was looking over my left
shoulder. He would point out some photos suggesting them. I had the folder of
open and was going through some quite explicit photos and he kept
looking over my shoulder at them. He said, maybe something in
I specifically remember him saying this as I would have used the term
‘swimmers’. I didn’t have
any of me at the beach and I tried
turning the computer screen away from him as I was looking through the nude
one point I was in my regular folder with the non-nude photos and he was asking
me to make the thumbnail pictures bigger. The
same with the nude folder; I
briefly showed him a few but would quickly hide them. I ended up giving him one
in bra and knickers.
He said “I’ll just say it’s
swimwear”. I can’t recall how many I gave him (I think about 5) but
specifically remember two photos. Only one of these was in lingerie. He put
these on his USB and said the study would be completed
over the coming
HCCC made submissions regarding this Particular at pages 10 – 12 of the
submission handed up on 1 September 2011.
of the submission deals with evidence regarding details not directly relevant to
the substance of the Particular, rather it goes
to the circumstances surrounding
the Particular.
A did not recall the Respondent taking any photos of her. She recalled having
her computer with her when the Respondent wanted
photos of her to use in an
exercise. She recalled the Respondent looking at thumbnail of a
‘nude’ photo on her computer
screen and asking for it to be
enlarged. She recounted the Respondent moving to a position where he could see
the computer screen
as she was searching for photos that met the criteria set by
the Respondent and of saying
‘oops you weren’t supposed to see
at some stage.
A accepted she loaded the photos chosen by the Respondent onto a USB.
Tribunal notes that late in her evidence Client A clarified that when she used
the term ‘nude’ with respect to photos
she did not mean naked but
really meant
‘erotic, lingerie-ish’
HCCC submission noted that the Respondent initially admitted this Particular but
denied it constituted unsatisfactory professional
conduct (5 May 2011) and in
his second response (16 May 2011) maintained the admission of the facts and
commented that he failed
to follow appropriate therapeutic guidelines and/or
failed to observe proper professional boundaries.
HCCC submissions noted that the Respondent gave evidence that he did not look at
the two photos that were loaded onto his USB
at the time and a few days later
when he looked at them he was shocked and deleted them. He completed the
exercise without photos
by asking his receptionists (including Client B) to rate
Client A’s appearance. It was submitted that asking the receptionists
rate Client A’s appearance was highly inappropriate.
HCCC submission also noted that under cross-examination the Respondent initially
denied seeing the photos before the end of the
consultation but later said that
his memory on this point was vague. He stated that it had not occurred to him to
include in his
statement (R1) that he had deleted the photos.
under cross-examination the Respondent stated that it was more than a week
before he viewed the photos then a few days before
he deleted the photos. It was
submitted that this conflicts with the written statement made by the Respondent
(exhibit 12 –
page 7) when he stated that the photos were destroyed at the
completion of the exercise.
Respondent accepted under cross-examination that he had lied to Client A about
the study when he saw her at the next
consultation.
Respondent was also questioned about his statement that
‘neither was a
revealing photo but not my choice of photos for the exercise’
12 – paragraph 7/page 5) in light of his oral evidence. The Respondent
stated that he had been
‘assured by
weren’t revealing’.
HCCC submissions also referred to Dr Diamond’s comment that the exercise
‘not a validated technique’
not being within the standard CBT guidelines.
HCCC submitted that Client A gave credible, believable and cogent evidence
regarding the process by which the photos were sourced
whereas in direct
contrast the Respondent’s evidence was highly inconsistent with his
statement dated 16 October 2009 (exhibit
Respondent’s Evidence/Submissions re Particulars 2 and
pages 4 and 5 of his letter dated 16 October 2009 to the HCCC (volume 1 –
exhibit 13) the Respondent stated:
In conducting CBT it is my practice to make use of behavioural
experiments which are designed to challenge and effectively change
maladaptive
beliefs. When designing behavioural experiments I would attempt to try and get
the patient to come up with ways that
their perception can be challenged. I
suggested to Client A that we could perform an objective appearance rating
experiment. That
would involve photographs of her face and one of her from head
to toe and inserting the pictures into a collage of photographs of
people’s faces and bodies.
Despite Client A’s comment this photograph exercise was not research
but rather an exercise designed to challenge Client A’s
negative beliefs
disseminated or published – they formed
part of Client A’s treatment
and were to be provided to her. Client A was well aware of this at that
Client A agreed to and supported the exercise and I took a photograph of
her face and one of her from head to toe for the purpose
of the experiment. She
was fully clothed when these photos were taken. However, Client A was unhappy
with the photographs I took
and stated she would bring in some of her own which
could be used.
At the start of the following consultation on 22 April 2008, I asked
Client A if she had brought in photographs for the objective
rating experiment.
Client A stated that she had not but indicated that she had a lot of photographs
on her computer. I asked Client
A to select two photographs, one being a close
up of her face and the other a shot from head to toe.
After looking through the photographs on her computer, Client A picked a
photograph of her face and I went over to look at the photograph.
started to scroll quickly through her photographs and said “Oh, woops you
weren’t supposed to see that one.”
As Client A had been quickly
scrolling through the photographs I did not see the photograph she was referring
I then went back and sat in my chair and asked her to find another
suitable head to toe photograph. Client A indicated that there
were none of her
in normal clothing and asked if I could use a photograph of her in swimwear or
lingerie for the experiment. I responded
that I did not think that was
appropriate, however client A responded that they were good photographs and not
Client A scrawled (sic) through her photographs and selected a head to toe
photograph and turned her computer screen to show me.
I did not get up from my
chair to look at the photograph and told Client A that we would use the
photographs she had selected. Client
A turned her computer screen around and I
handed her a USB drive to transfer the two photographs to, for the purpose of
them and adding to a collage of photographs. The two photographs
selected were of Client A’s face and the other of her wearing
suit. Neither was a revealing photo but not my choice of photos for the
Respondent’s submissions handed up on 1 September 2011 deal with
Particulars 2 and 3 in paragraphs 118 to 148. The length
of the submissions with
respect to Particular 2 is indicative of the factual dispute between Client A
and the Respondent regarding
the exact manner in which the photograph incident
Particular 3 of Complaint One
The Respondent failed to follow or observe appropriate therapeutic
practice in that he failed to record in Client A's clinical notes
the request or
acceptance of photographs or the exercises discussed with Client A on or about
10 April 2008 or 22 April 2008 referred
to in Particular 2 above.
Evidence/Submissions re Particular 3
A’s evidence on this point includes her comment at paragraph 19 of her
statement dated 3 November 2009 (volume 1 –
exhibit 4). Client A states
that the Respondent did not give her any paperwork relating to the
‘study’ he proposed to
do with the ‘photos’ of her. The
clinical notes produced by the Respondent contained no reference to the photos
‘study’. Client A was not clear one way or another as to
whether or not the Respondent had taken his own photos of her.
In her oral
evidence Client A confirmed that she recalled the Respondent suggested one photo
be a full body shot that could be in
. She stated
this was not a term she would use.
the HCCC submission handed up on 1 September 2011 it is noted that the
Respondent agreed with this Particular. Mr Borenstein’s
strong criticism
evidence in chief the Respondent stated that he only took notes as an
aide-memoire and that in relation to the ‘survey’
there were no
actual results to record. During cross-examination the Respondent denied that
his failure to take notes was deliberate
but understood that it was a clear
breach of the code of conduct.
HCCC submitted that all of the responses to the Particulars of Complaint should
be considered in the light of the fact that he
kept no notes of these
conversations and that these exchanges were of no apparent significance to him
until after he received notification
of the complaints some 12 months later.
Respondent’s Evidence/Submissions re Particular 3
is dealt with under the heading Respondent’s Evidence/Submissions re
Particular 2.
Particular 4 of Complaint One
The Respondent failed to maintain the confidentiality of Client B in that
he disclosed to Client A that his girlfriend Client B, who
was known to Client
A, was a previous client and that he had "cured her".
HCCC Evidence/Submissions re Particular 4
A’s evidence of this matter in her initial letter to the Board dated 9
August 2009 is set out under Particular 1.1.1.
above. There is further evidence
at paragraph 24 of her statement dated 3 November 2009 (volume 1 – exhibit
4) which reads
as follows:
He was saying things about us being friends, that I didn’t
need to come in and pay for the chats. He didn’t specifically
suggest any
future meetings but gave the general impression that we could be friends after
my treatment finished. He may not have
meant it but it freaked me out a bit as
he had told me about his girlfriend Client B who had been a previous patient.
He said, “I
cured her too”. I felt this comment to be
in her oral evidence Client A was asked about how she came to know that the
Receptionist (Client B) was the Respondent’s
girlfriend (commencing around
T 91). As the transcript is de-identified so that the name and abridged name of
Client B are not reproduced,
some of the meaning of the evidence is lost. In
essence, it was the evidence of Client A that she came to know that the
Receptionist
was the Respondent’s girlfriend/partner (being the person to
whom the Respondent compared Client A etc) from her conversations
Respondent.
cross-examination (around T 423) Client A gave firm evidence that the Respondent
told her that Client B was a former client.
She was able to remember this as she
thought it was
‘so far out’.
exhibit 21, being the on-line document produced by Client A the following entry
appears for 24 March 2009 at 14:58:
Yeah, hopefully I’m not the first, though maybe the thing
some designated period, though, before getting together, so maybe not.
HCCC submissions referred to the Respondent’s evidence around T634 and
HCCC submission was to the effect of – ‘how else Client A could have
known Client B was a previous patient?’
- if not through the Respondent,
as there was no other logical/plausible explanation. The HCCC submitted that the
evidence of Client
A should be accepted as there was no other logical
explanation. The HCCC submit that such a disclosure would be consistent with
admitted inappropriate disclosures.
Respondent’s Evidence/Submissions re Particular 4
Respondent makes submissions regarding Particular 4 (and Particular 1.3.5) in
paragraphs 149 to 153.
Respondent’s submissions noted the statement of Client A (exhibit 4)
where-in she stated that the Respondent had said to
‘I cured her
, being a reference to Client B. Client A then went on in the
statement to say that the Respondent said that they had waited the appropriate
amount of time for a ‘doctor-patient’ relationship before entering
into a relationship. In her oral evidence Client A
confirmed this statement and
added that she was not sure whether the two year aspect was correct.
Respondent also made reference in submissions (at paragraph 150) to the evidence
of Client A that she was sure that the Respondent
had told her about Client B as
she would not have expected partners to be in such a close working environment.
Later in her evidence
she stated that another reason she remembered this
information was that she considered it to be so
paragraph 152 the Respondent makes the following submission:
In cross-examination, [Client A] said she remembered that Kreft
told her that [Client B] was a former client because “it’s
out” (T423.40). However, note A’s electronic diary entry at 5 July
2008 (Exhibit 21 page 157) which refers to
the fact that Kreft has a girlfriend
called [Client B] who is two to four years older than [Client A] and that she
was in a “sugar
daddy” arrangement. There is no mention in that
posting [Client B] was Kreft’s client. When this was pointed out to
[Client A], she said that fact was not relevant to the posting, and she did not
record every matter (T423-424).
paragraph 153 of the submissions handed up by the Respondent on 1 September 2011
the denial of the Respondent of Particular 4 is
noted and submits that the
Respondent admits that it was possible that he disclosed to Client A that Client
B was his girlfriend.
the Submissions in Reply provided by the Respondent on 7 October 2011 the
Respondent takes issue with paragraph 83 of the HCCC
submissions stating that no
such submission had been made on behalf of the Respondent (i.e. a failure of
Client A to record a complaint
in her on-line document must equate to the
disputed recollections being either untrue or manufactured memories as a result
later therapy).
Submissions in Reply provided by the Respondent on 7 October 2011 restated the
submission made in paragraph 168 of the Submissions
of the Respondent handed up
on 1 September 2011 regarding it being indisputable that the actual complaint
only emerged after Client
A received counselling overseas.
paragraph 73 the Submissions in Reply provided by the Respondent on 7 October
2011 next address a submission made on behalf of
the HCCC that the apologies of
the Respondent seem
‘to be disingenuous with the challenges to
[Client A’s]
. The Submissions in Reply provided by
the Respondent on 7 October 2011 continue by stating that such a submission is
incorrect and
inappropriate and that the Respondent:
‘never resiled directly or indirectly from the apologies
that he made in the amended response and in his oral evidence. Dr
Diamond’s evidence concerning the respondent’s remorse is
unchallenged’.
content of paragraphs 75 to 77 of the Submissions in Reply provided by the
Respondent on 7 October 2011 is dealt with under Findings.
Particulars 5, 6 and 7 of Complaint One
Particular 5 of Complaint One
The psychologist failed to observe proper professional boundaries in
relation to Client B in that:
5.1 The psychologist engaged in inappropriate discussions of a personal
nature with Client B in that on about 9 August 2006, at the
commencement of the
counselling session with Client B, in response to the client saying "I am
feeling attracted to you. I can't get
you out of my thoughts. I don't want you
to send me off to someone else", that psychologist said "We have a problem now
have feelings for you as well" or words to that effect; and/or
5.2 On about 10 August 2006, the psychologist allowed Client B to enter
his motor vehicle and travelled to and attended a cafe with
5.3 After 9 August 2006 the psychologist spoke with Client B by telephone
in relation to personal matters not concerning the therapeutic
relationship;
5.4 On about 1 September 2006 the psychologist kissed Client B.
Particular 6 of Complaint One
Sometime after 11 December 2006 the psychologist entered into an
inappropriate personal and sexual relationship with Client B.
Particular 7 of Complaint One
When after 11 December 2006 the psychologist entered into an inappropriate
personal and sexual relationship with Client B he did so
contrary to the advice
of senior colleagues including Dr Amanda Gordon.
Tribunal notes that the Respondent admitted professional misconduct with respect
to the Particulars which relate to Client B (Particulars
5, 6 and 7) save that
with respect to Particular 7 the Respondent does not admit that he entered the
relationship contrary to Dr
Amanda Gordon’s advice).
HCCC Evidence/Submissions re Particular 5, 6 and
HCCC made submissions regarding the evidence of Dr Gary Banks, Client B, Dr
Amanda Gordon and the Respondent (including the entry
in his diary for 11
December 2006) at paragraphs 108 – 167. These paragraphs read as follows
(footnotes integrated into body
of Dr Gary Banks
Gary Banks provided an uncontested expert report at Exhibit 2, Volume 2 tab 21.
In the report, Dr Banks in summary said the following:
relation to the appropriateness of the actions taken by the Respondent to
prevent this personal relationship occurring, he said
the Respondent’s
conduct falls significantly below the standard and would invite his strong
relation to the Respondent entering into a personal/sexual relationship with a
former client, Client B, within 2 years of a therapeutic
relationship, he said
the Respondent’s conduct was significantly below the standard and would
invite his strongest criticism.
relation to the assumption that the Respondent’s version of events
regarding the meeting with Dr Gordon are true, he said
in relation to the
Respondent’s conduct post the event were still that the Respondent’s
conduct was significantly below
the standard and invited his strongest
relation to the assumption that the Dr Gordon’s version of events
regarding the meeting with Dr Gordon are true, he said
in relation to the
Respondent’s conduct post the event were still that the Respondent’s
conduct was significantly below
the standard and invited his strongest
B’s Evidence
Statement dated
April 2009 at Exhibit 2, Vol 2 tab 12
Examination in
chief (T222-242 and T250-262)
Examination (T262-268)
Questions by the
Tribunal (T306-324)
Further Cross
examination by Respondent (T324-327)
Re-examination
following submissions are made in relation to Client B’s evidence. Client
B is in an ongoing relationship with the Respondent.
They have lived together
for 4 years and are intending to get married. The Tribunal observed her evidence
in full and will make its
own assessment, however it is submitted that Client B
was a “difficult witness” for the Complainant (T232/34) who was
giving favourable evidence to the Respondent. Client B gave non-responsive and
clipped answers to the Complainant and Tribunal questions,
yet during cross
examination by the Respondent, her memory and recollection of detail was in
stark contrast.
is documentary evidence within the material where Client B states that she had
lied to save Stephen’s career
” (see her email
at Exhibit 2, Volume 2, Tab
4, Page 5).
B gave the following evidence in relation to this email (T266/24).
"Technically
I didn't cheat on him although it was pretty similar and I lied a lot to both
men. I lied to protect myself and also
to protect Stephen's career". What did
you mean when you said, "I also lied to protect Stephen's career". Who did you
B’s ex-boyfriend]?
was the lie?
I'd had contact with Stephen.
was that lie to protect Stephen's career?
[Client B’s ex-boyfriend] had assured me that he wasn't going to put in a
complaint and I wanted to make sure that that
stayed that way.
also lied to protect yourself, you say?
were you lying to protect yourself?
think probably from emotional pain.
MR STRICKLAND
you lied at all in these proceedings?
Q. Have you lied in the statement you made to the HCCC?
B in her statements to the Complainant and also during parts of her evidence it
is submitted, portrayed herself somewhat as
the main pursuer of the relationship
with the Respondent, for example by instigating and suggesting the consultation
with Dr Gordon
December 2006 (T238/45), however
documentary evidence in Cheryl Clothier’s contemporaneous notes of her
consultation with her
January 2007 (1 month
later) illustrate a different picture around this period. Tab 4 page 12 states
Stephen has been freaking out about her seeing [Client B’s
ex-boyfriend] today – has been quite manipulative
over the last few
– threatened to kill himself, cries and begs her to stay when
she wants to go home
asked about this, Client B said she denied telling Ms Clothier that, although
she agreed that she did tell her that he had been
manipulative
” – although she later said that she didn’t
recall saying “
over the last few months
” (T255/27 –
Q. I just want to go back to this issue of how he was
manipulative. It says that over the last few months. Did you say that to
A. I don't recall saying that.
Q. Then could you just describe to this Tribunal how you say he was being
manipulative?
A. I felt manipulated by - I don't know if that was his
intention - and it was because at this stage he knew that I
was - believing
that I was still maybe in love with my ex and I wasn't
sure if I wanted to continue with the relationship. That made him upset and
felt emotionally a bit manipulated.
Q. Were you still in love with your ex at that stage?
don't know.
CHAIRPERSON: The answer is you don't know whether you were
still in love, thank you.
MR SAUNDERS:
Q. So were you confused at the time?
B was later questioned further about this entry of Cheryl Clothier by the
Tribunal at T316/13 and said at T319/22:
Q. You said that you
did not find that Ms Clothier assisted you very much in that first phase.
Why was it that you returned to her
A. I don't know.
Q. Can you think of any reason why it was that Ms Clothier has an
entry in her notes indicating that Stephen had threatened to kill
Q. Can you think of any reason why she might have had that in her notes
unless you told her?
A. I didn't tell her that but I have - I may know why she's
written it that way.
Q. Could you explain it please?
A. Yeah. I may have described to her that sometimes when Stephen has
been upset there has been the comment made that he feels so
upset that he
doesn't see the point in going on, or something along those lines. I don't
remember specifically.
is submitted that these exchanges illustrate at the least, a level of care
afforded to the Respondent by Client B in her answers.
relation to the diary note (Exhibit R8), Client A gave evidence which had
limited scope. In
effect, she said she saw him write the note on
December 2006, although she said that she
can’t read his handwriting (T240/34). Client B also stated that she did
to his diary note when she wrote her statement (which was on
April 2009) because she hadn’t remembered at
the time (T251/4). This evidence was not known previously to the
Complainant.
is submitted that Client B is somewhat of a victim in this matter and has been
manipulated by the Respondent to give evidence which
accords with his in
relation to the meeting with Dr Gordon on 11
2006. There is evidence of manipulation in the evidence around this date (see
Cheryl Clothier’s contemporaneous note
of her consultation with Client B
on 11 January 2007 at Volume 2 Tab 4 page 12) and the admissions made by Client
B to manipulation
by the Respondent (T255/27 – T257/5) and the concessions
made by the Respondent (T 677/15-T678/16), although he denied outright
was manipulative prior to 11
December 2006
Alternatively,
Client B has recalled simply what she wanted to hear, rather than what she
actually heard.
of Dr Amanda Gordon
Statement dated
8 May 2009 at Exhibit 2 Volume 2 Tab 5 with the contemporaneous meeting notes at
Tab 6 and a letter to the NSW Psychologists
Registration Board dated
November 2008 at Tab 7
Evidence in
Chief: T186-190
examination: T190-217
Re-examination:
Gordon was taken line by line to Exhibit R8 and gave evidence that she
didn’t take notes when the Respondent was present
because at the time, the
conversation was “
colleague to colleague
” (T187/35). Dr
Gordon said she did not recall saying anything along the lines that “sex
and kissing are the same”
(T188/32-42). Dr Gordon was also very adamant
at no time did I suggest to him that it would be harmful for
Client B if he ended the relationship or they ended the relationship,
notes show clearly that she was ambivalent about that relationship and still
felt she was in love with her ex-boyfriend
” (T189/24). This was a
major difference between the Respondent and Dr Gordon. It is submitted that it
is absurd to suggest
that Dr Gordon would have said this or anything like this.
It also challenges the credibility of the claim that this meeting was
instigation of Client B.
Gordon in cross examination agreed she didn’t believe Client B was in
imminent risk of harm, however she clarified this,
I have to be clear
that Mr Kreft was transgressing
the code of ethics and that his behaviour
could be harmful to Client B, but he told me he was going to pursue that matter
Nicholas. Perhaps I was negligent in not pursuing that with
Mr Nicholas. I don't believe that you should take my action of not
Mr Nicholas as being reflective of my belief at that time. I believed what
he did was harmful to the client because she
was his client and he was the
psychologist.
” (T202/22)
Gordon recalls being told they had kissed in the car (T208/33 and 212/43) but
she repeatedly rejected the suggestion that she had
said that “
kissed in the eyes of the code was the same as having sex
” (T212/36,
T213/19). This was the other main area of dispute between the Respondent’s
evidence and Dr Gordon. Again,
it is submitted that it is absurd to suggest that
Dr Gordon would have said this.
Gordon accepted that she would have said that you have already breached the code
by kissing her (T214/18). Dr Gordon has no recollection
of being told that they
had not had sex yet (T214/25). This accords with the evidence of Client B
Gordon was subjected to lengthy cross examination on whether she made the offer
to see them jointly post this session or not. The
implication being that she
consented to their ongoing relationship. It is submitted this line of
questioning was confusing as she
answered questions not understanding what was
the thrust of the underlying suggestion (T215/40):
That offer - and that is further consultations with them
A. Certainly I made the offer to Client B on her own at the end of the
first consultation before Stephen came in. I don't recall
whether I made the
offer to them jointly. Certainly it was to Client B and it was in fact Client B
who said she may ring me for
a consultation. The offer - Stephen was
in fact agreeing to go and see his mentor, Tony Nicholas, in Newcastle so there
indication that he would be returning.
Gordon later said when pressed on this, she didn’t deny there was an offer
for them to come back together (T216/2), it was
contemplated, however in
re-examination Dr Gordon clarified this answer again having being taken to
paragraph 10 of her statement,
restating the above evidence, in that the offer
was that they should arrange for Client B to see her or another person and the
to see his mentor-supervisor (219/17).
on this point, the Respondent in cross examination agreed he had no recollection
of him being offered subsequent joint sessions
with Dr Gordon and he certainly
never pursued them (T779/11 – 779/22).
relation to the evidence of Dr Gordon, the following submissions are made:
Tribunal would be comfortably satisfied that the account of Dr Gordon in
relation to her meeting with Client B and then with the
Respondent is
account of Dr Gordon should be preferred over that of the Respondent and Client
B, as one would seriously question the logic of
why would she say what she is
alleged to have said in circumstances where:
not know Client B and the Respondent
could possibly impugn her professional reputation with wrong advice
was very conscious of APS Code of Ethics provisions – Dr Gordon was the
President as at 11
December 2006 of the APS
the account of Client B and the Respondent in relation to saying sex and kissing
in the eyes of the code are the same and that
it was better for the Respondent
to stay with Client B rather than leave her in the circumstances.
is accepted that the Tribunal would find that Dr Gordon’s notes of the
meeting with Mr Kreft at the end of the consultation
were deficient, however,
this was such an unusual approach for advice, this consultation would
undoubtedly have remained a clear
recollection to her.
of the Respondent:
Evidence in
chief (T633 – 680)
Examination (T680-783)
Questions by the
Tribunal (T783 – 825)
Further Cross
Examination (T825)
Re-examination
(T825 – 827)
Respondent gave evidence in relation to particulars 5.1 – 6 at T663-672
and the Tribunal would be comfortably satisfied
that these particulars have been
admitted and proved and that these admitted facts warrant a finding of
professional misconduct,
which has also been admitted in the Respondent’s
amended response to the complaint at Exhibit R6.
only disputed area in relation to the complaint against Client B was particular
7, and specifically the account of the meeting
with Client B, the Respondent and
Dr Gordon on 11
December 2006 and the associated
diary entry at Exhibit R8.
Respondent gave evidence that he had made this diary entry at R8, immediately
after the meeting with Dr Gordon (T673/33). He said
that the purpose of writing
the diary entry was “
I didn’t feel secure. I felt uneasy and I
thought it was very important to write what had happened
.” (T674/25).
Diary Entry – R8
cross examination of the Respondent, questions were asked that challenged the
authenticity of the diary entry and the date
it was made.
Respondent vehemently challenged this line of questioning through his Counsel,
stating they were never put on notice to this and
that they had no way of
knowing this as Client B had never been challenged on this in accordance with
the rule in
Brown v Dunne.
It is submitted that this entire line of
objection by the Respondent was incorrect.
contextualize this objection, the following passages are referred to. At the
commencement of Client B’s evidence the following
exchange transpired (my
underlining added): T219/39 onwards:
MR SAUNDERS:
We have Client B present and, Madam Chair, I have flagged an issue I have with
my friend in relation to this witness
and I can probably couch it as this:
Obviously calling this witness in the commission's case presents a bit of a
forensic problem
for the commission. This witness is in an ongoing relationship
with Mr Kreft and they continue to live together and in some respects
witness could be characterised as unfavourable. Now by that I mean that's a term
of art under the Evidence Act which of course
is section 38 which does not
apply in the jurisdiction however certainly on the narrow issue of what
transpired with Dr Gordon is
an area which I would make application that I
should have some latitude in asking questions about
It is an issue I
did flag with my friend and my understanding of his position is that I should
not be permitted to do that.
I just wanted to raise that at the outset for
this particular passage of evidence.
CHAIRPERSON: Mr Strickland.
MR STRICKLAND: Madam Chair, it is a matter of how it falls out. I
mean my learned friend has said a couple of times this is an inquisitorial
process. The notion of an unfavourable witness is classic adversarial process;
in other words, the HCCC is a party, they are proposing
that certain things have
happened and anyone that challenges that is an unfavourable
witness - that is adversarial. It is a classic
concept of an
adversarial process yet my learned friend has said it is inquisitorial and if it
is inquisitorial or if the HCCC's
position is we just want to adduce the
relevant evidence then why is it the HCCC's position that a patient is an
unfavourable in
that they are saying a version of the truth that doesn't fit
their own theory of the case. In my submission, if it is - if their
role is inquisitorial that is inconsistent with that but I am not going to
thwart it. I will make objection as I see fit in the
course of the evidence but
that is what I wanted to say so far.
CHAIRPERSON: And can I just deal with the objections as they are made,
Mr Saunders, is there any need - should we not wait and see
occurs when the witness is asked a question?
MR SAUNDERS: That is certainly an appropriate course of action to
take. I am content with that.
the purpose of these submissions, it is accepted that the Complainant did not
challenge directly that the authenticity of the
diary entry (T766/43) however
questions about her knowledge of its contents were asked (see above at paragraph
cross examination of the Respondent the following question was asked and
objected to:
Q. Do you accept, Mr Kreft, that from an
objective point of view the authenticity of this diary entry is
suspicious?
MR STRICKLAND: I object.
The following exchange then occurred at T761/16 (my underlining added):
Mr Saunders: Well, Madam Chair, I was in chief in that witness and that
rule would apply in relation to perhaps that witness. We
will be making
submissions in relation to Client B that she was an unfavourable witness and
someone who has in documentary evidence
admits that in certain circumstances she
would lie to save his career.
Now, I did raise with my friend at the outset
of that evidence that that witness was potentially unfavourable and I'd be
cross-examine certain aspects of her evidence and he objected to that
course of action. That may well have happened off the transcript,
I haven't had a close check of the transcript to which we've
just been taken to. That's my recollection in relation to that material
If that witness is here today I would seek leave to ask her questions upon
that narrow issue if a ruling's going to be made against
me pressing the line of
this questioning. If that witness is here today I can put that to her. There's
no prejudice to this witness.
Those are my submissions.
MR STRICKLAND: Madam Chair, I want to indicate that there was no
conversation off transcript which is inconsistent with what is recorded
transcript.
line of questioning was eventually allowed after the Respondent’s Counsel
further submitted that this line of questioning
caused unfairness to the
Respondent (T762/7).
Respondent then gave evidence that the original diary entry was lost, it having
not been produced under a subpoena (T763/13) and
further for the first time gave
evidence that he made this diary entry known to his solicitor at the time Mr
Patrick Campion (prior
to the time of making his second statement to the
Complainant on 2
August 2009) (T763/40) and later
after it was allegedly lost, with Kerry Chambers (T764/30).
Respondent was then taken to Volume 2 Exhibit 2 Tab
first paragraph
where he had used the words “
they requested in writing from me
permission to confirm my recollections
” and he was challenged that he
had not referred to his diary note, the implication being it was not in
existence at the time.
further objection was then made. The essence of that was the Respondent, by
virtue of a failure to have cross examined Client B
on this issue, had no notice
that authenticity of the diary was an issue in this matter. The transcript (my
underlining added) states
at T766/27:
Mr Strickland: Now we are
having a series of questions being asked of this witness which does appear to
challenge the authenticity
of the diary
We have no notice of
. I accept it's cross-examination but given that Client B's evidence is
that she was present when the diary note was made, the failure
to cross-examine
as I have submitted before, caused an unfairness to Mr Kreft
and that unfairness specifically is that we have not been on notice of
of inquiry. We could not have been on notice of this line of inquiry given the
failure to put those matters to Client
and we are not in a position to
meet what appears to be the allegation that he's fabricated this diary
it was then proposed by the Complainant that Client B be recalled and the
following exchange occurred at T768/14:
MR STRICKLAND: It
doesn't overcome it because we haven't been ready to meet the matter. If it had
been asked in May then we could
have met it now, so it doesn't overcome
then at T768/30:
CHAIRPERSON: Well, I am inclined to accept
Mr Saunders on the basis that I would anticipate that the Respondent should
be on notice
that this was a live issue, being the only issue that's really
alive with respect to the particulars that relate to Client B, as
Mr Saunders has submitted.
MR STRICKLAND: Madam Chair, that comment, in my submission,
just cannot be right. What is in issue is the conversation and I accept
that's always been an issue, what was said.
CHAIRPERSON: With Dr Gordon?
MR STRICKLAND: With Dr Gordon. There's no question about that
and questions about what was the conversation and whether his recollection
accurate, whether this file note is accurate, is undoubtedly a matter on notice
but how can it possibly be said we were on notice that it was fabricated when
nothing was put to Client B. In my submission, that
is just a comment that is
not open for you to find.
was then regrettably submitted this claim of no notice was
“nonsense” – a remark which was later withdrawn, however
essence of that comment is maintained, in that the Respondent was fully aware of
this being a live issue.
reason for this is three fold:
summons was issued on Mr Kreft to produce the original diary entry;
line of questioning with Dr Gordon took her through this diary entry line by
line and in effect challenged it as a truthful and
accurate account;
importantly, the following exchange occurred on 19
May 2011, when the diary was sought to be tendered (it having been only first
brought to the attention of the complainant the evening
prior) see T183/31
MR STRICKLAND: I have no problem
with that and can I indicate there is a diary note of
Mr Kreft - I mean I would normally tender
it in the Respondent's
evidence and perhaps it ought to have been tendered before but I wish to tender
that as relevant to Ms Gordon's
evidence but after the five minute
adjournment I will indicate that I will, if I could in the course of evidence
tender that document
or at least MFI it - either way.
MR SAUNDERS: I'm probably content for it to be MFI’d at that
MR STRICKLAND: I'm happy to do that.
MR SAUNDERS: However can I just indicate we have asked for the
original of the diary?
MR STRICKLAND: I will make sure of that - if it is
available I will certainly make sure it is.
MR SAUNDERS: Thank you.
MR STRICKLAND: I'm sorry, the original of the diary isn't produced
and Mr Kreft will be asked in due course and he gives evidence
We don't have the original. All we are given is the original whited out copy
and there will be evidence about that.
We are given - my instructing
solicitor has given or my friend's instructing solicitor the best evidence that
we have of a diary
note and there is nothing else to produce and I will MFI that
after the five-minute break.
CHAIRPERSON: Right. I think we will come back at - there is no
difficulty with the course, Mr Saunders?
MR SAUNDERS: No. MFI no problem.
the 5 minute break the following occurred at T184/25-35 (my underlining
MR SAUNDERS: Madam Chair, thank you for that
me. I have reverted on my position in relation to what Mr Strickland
proposes to tender as far as this diary note. I don't object
to the tender
I do reserve obviously on challenging its authenticity and the date
it was made, those type of aspects
but this is the best copy we have
at present of that diary entry.
CHAIRPERSON: Thank you.
MR STRICKLAND: I tender this document and I would undertake that
when Mr Kreft gives evidence I will lead evidence in relation to
is submitted this was very clear notice to the Respondent on
May 2011, of the Complainant’s challenge to
this diary entry. It is submitted that there cannot be a finding that there has
been any procedural unfairness to the Respondent as a result of the failure to
cross examine Client B on this narrow point.
Browne v Dunn
requires that unless notice has been clearly given,
it is necessary to put an opponent’s witness in cross
examination the nature of the case upon which it is proposed to rely in
contradiction of his/her evidence, especially where the case relies upon
inferences to be drawn from other evidence in the proceedings’
underlying principle is one of fairness (
Allied Pastoral Holdings Pty Ltd v
1 NSWLR 1, 16).
reliance is placed on the principle as stated in the High Court case of MWJ v R
that stated as follows:
“Reliance on the rule in Browne v
Dunn can be both misplaced and overstated. If the evidence in the case has not
been completed,
a party genuinely taken by surprise by reason of a failure on
the part of the other to put a relevant matter in cross-examination,
always, especially in ordinary civil litigation, mitigate or cure any
difficulties so arising by seeking or offering the
recall of the witness to
enable the matter to be put. In criminal cases, in many jurisdictions, the
salutary practice of excusing
witnesses temporarily only, and on the
understanding that they must make themselves available to be recalled if
necessary at any
time before a verdict is given, is adopted. There may be some
circumstances in which it could be unfair to permit the recalling of
but in general, subject to the obligation of the prosecution not to split its
case, and to present or make available all
of the relevant evidence to an
accused, the course that we have suggested is one that should be able to be
adopted on most occasions
without injustice” (
[2005] HCA 74
40, per Gummow, Kirby and Callinan JJ)
Complainant subsequently sought leave to recall Client B on this narrow issue to
cure any claimed “procedural unfairness”.
This attempt, it is
submitted, was in effect resisted by the Respondent through his Counsel on
several occasions. Further attempts
were made to have Client B called on her
mobile to come and give evidence. Client B ultimately refused, having spoken
the Respondent.
response to the cross examination on this diary, the Respondent called his
solicitors, Ms Susan Doherty and Ms Kerrie Chambers,
who in effect gave evidence
that the diary entry had been raised with them when they were first instructed
by the Respondent.
the first time, the evidence of these solicitors was made known to the
Complainant when it was called on 1
September 2011.
The need to call these solicitors could have easily been dispensed with, if this
evidence had of been served previously
on the Complainant. The Complainant now
accepts that Exhibit R8 was in existence when the Respondent first approached
his current
legal team. Despite this concession, it is submitted that the
Complainant sought a legitimate line of questioning in cross examination
Respondent with the information it had available to it in relation to Exhibit R8
at the time.
Respondent himself agreed that the authenticity of the diary was questionable to
an observer (T762/32).
it is still submitted that this diary entry is still a misrepresentation of the
meeting with Dr Gordon and was written at
some stage by the Respondent post the
meeting to support his false account of that meeting, and it is still open to
the Tribunal
to find that it was either a fabrication or at least written as a
self serving document by the Respondent, at some undetermined stage
Respondent did not serve this diary entry on the Complainant until the evening
of the second day of this hearing on 18
(T759/12 and T758/19). It was tendered with the caveat that the Complainant
would be able to challenge its authenticity
and the date it was made
first time the Respondent sent this diary entry to his legal team was on
April 2011 (T830/41) and then it appears to have
been overlooked (T832/30). The Respondent produced an email after his evidence
and in the evidence of Ms Dougherty (Exhibit R21 at T831/18), in which
the mention of submitting evidence just jogged my memory again
regarding the diary note I recorded after the Gordon meeting. So I
got straight
up and dug it out of my disheveled box of complaint materials
remains a question mark as to why the copy of this very important document was
not produced prior to 7
April 2011 to his legal
advisers, particularly if as is apparent from that email entry and the
Respondent’s evidence, that
he was always in possession of the copy and
not the original entry. It is submitted that this in itself raises suspicion as
authenticity of this document.
Respondent first gave evidence of the original being lost under cross
examination. In what it is submitted was a poor explanation,
he said that he had
photocopied it with an intention to white out entries on the copy and then lost
it (T763/14 and T764/28).
Respondent was also taken to his letter to the Complainant on
August 2009 at Exhibit 2, Volume 2, Tab 14 page 8,
where during cross examination he claimed he had already discussed his diary
with his legal advisor Mr Patrick Campion after he knew that Dr
Gordon’s account of their meeting was at odds with his (T763/30).
letter he used the word “recollection” when referring to the meeting
with Dr Gordon (T765/35 and T776/32). The
Respondent then said that despite
having discussed the diary note with Mr Campion previously, he doesn’t
believe he referred
to it when writing his letter to the Complainant on 22
August 2009. This accords with the diary entry of Ms Dougherty read at (T829/4).
There is no reference in that letter to any diary entry.
is submitted that either the Respondent deliberately omitted this or it was not
in existence at the time of writing that letter
August 2009. The evidence of his solicitor Ms Chambers is only that he told them
he had made a note of the meeting in a telephone
conversation as early as
July 2009 (T834/35). He also told them it was
“lost” as at that date. However, importantly his evidence in cross
examination
was that it was the original that was lost, not the copy.
Complainant accepts in light of this evidence of Ms Chambers and Ms Dougherty
(which it had no notice prior to the cross examination
of the Respondent,
despite its conditional acceptance of the tender of Exhibit R8), that the
Respondent as at 13 July 2009, discussed
the existence of this diary note with a
Solicitor called Mr Ben Hall (T835/3).
it is submitted the unusual explanation for its loss, the self serving manner in
which it is written (T777/4 and T778/24),
including with an expletive to himself
ie. “shit” and another unusual comment for a diary entry ie.
(see R8 and T777/33), and the very late production of the
copy of the diary entry to the Tribunal and Complainant on the evening
second day of the hearing (T759/12 and T758/19), all point to this document
being a fabrication in some form or another.
it is noted that the Respondent at Exhibit 2, Volume 2 Tab 14 page 4 was highly
critical of Dr Gordon failing to record notes
of his meeting with her, yet he
admits he made no mention during these critiques of his claimed contemporaneous
diary entry that
he had made (T759/28).
summary, it is submitted that the diary entry, whenever it was made, was written
with another audience in mind, misrepresented
the content of what Dr Gordon
advised them, and was a completely self serving document. Its accuracy and
authenticity is highly questionable.
It is submitted that the Tribunal should
place little weight or reliance on it as an accurate record of the meeting with
Respondent’s Evidence/Submissions re
Particular 5
169 to 178 of the submission handed up on 1 September 2011 on behalf of the
Respondent relate to Particular 5.
respect to Particular 5.1 the Respondent’s submissions note that Client B
when the Respondent told her that he
reciprocated her feelings. The Respondent’s submissions refer to his
evidence that he
found Client B to be a high functioning and stable person who
was taking two medications for her OCD. Further he did not flirt with
anything inappropriate or suggestive towards Client B during the consultations.
It is not disputed that Client B found the
Respondent to be an effective
submissions then referred to the evidence that the Respondent informed Client B
that he could not continue with therapy once the
declarations had been made. The
Respondent accepted that the disclosure of his feelings was inappropriate,
improper and unethical.
It was a boundary violation to disclose information of
this nature.
respect to Particular 5.2 the submissions then recount the meeting that occurred
on the day following the disclosure, including
discussions of the Code of
Conduct and transference, as well as Client B’s view that the two year
period was arbitrary. The
Respondent accepted that it was inappropriate to allow
Client B to remain in his car and to travel to a café when there were
other options open to him.
respect to Particular 5.3 the Respondent accepted that Client B telephoned him
regarding personal matters.
respect to Particular 5.4 the Respondent and Client B gave similar evidence
regarding a kiss in the Respondent’s rooms.
The Respondent submitted that
immediately thereafter he knew this was an inappropriate, improper and unethical
thing to do. He submitted
‘he was very much attracted to Client
Respondent’s Evidence/Submissions re Particular 6
179 to 181 of the submission handed up on 1 September 2011 on behalf of the
Respondent relate to Particular 6.
Respondent’s submissions recount evidence regarding the turbulent nature
of the initial phases of the relationship between
the Respondent and Client B.
The Respondent agrees that he put pressure on Client B post 11 December 2006
(the consultation with
Dr Gordon) to continue with the relationship. He
submitted that there were times when Client B indicated to the Respondent that
did not want to be with him and that he reacted badly to that. He submitted
that he reacted by saying words to the effect
‘I just don’t see
any point in being here’
indicating that he saw no meaning to his life
submissions note that Client B moved in with the Respondent in April 2007 and
that they are still together. He has never treated
her as her psychologist
during this time. They socialise together, have a good relationship and her
family gets on well with him.
They plan to marry.
Respondent’s Evidence/Submissions re
Particular 7
182 to 196 of the submission handed up on 1 September 2011 on behalf of the
Respondent relate to Particular 7. Paragraph
182 states:
Kreft admits this particular except he does not admit that he
did so contrary to the advice of Dr Amanda Gordon.
183 to 186 relate to the Respondent’s contact with Mr Bust.
paragraph 187 the Respondent submitted that he accepted that whatever advice he
was given by professional colleagues the Board
Code of Ethics was crystal clear
that entering into a relationship with Client B at the time he did was
prohibited. He further accepted
that he did not need the advice of colleagues
to tell him that and that he entered the relationship contrary to the advice of
Bust and Dr Nicholas. The Respondent then submitted that the conclusion
therefore was that the factual dispute between the parties
was of little moment.
188 to 196 of the submission deal with Dr Gordon’s advice. It was noted
that Dr Gordon had made an offer for further
consultations and it was possible
that they would have returned together, still in a relationship. The ultimate
submission is that
there is a conflict in the evidence with respect to whether
Dr Gordon said that they should continue with the relationship on the
the relationship had already commenced and it would be bad for Client B’s
wellbeing to terminate the relationship.
It was submitted:
There was a reasonable possibility that she
[Dr Gordon]
gave mixed messages to
[the Respondent]
particular the offer of joint consultations. It is also a reasonable possibility
[the Respondent]
interpreted what Gordon said
in a way that suited their own intention at the time.
General submissions of the Respondent and Submissions in Reply
Respondent submitted that the Respondent accepted that he should not have
disclosed his feelings to Client B during her therapy.
He should not have
allowed her to contact him after termination of therapy and he failed to accept
professional advice to terminate
submitted that he sought to circumvent the Code of Ethics in order to pursue a
relationship
with Client B because of his strong feelings for her.
Respondent provided a final version of the Submissions in Reply on 7 October
2011. Most aspects of these submissions are covered
under Evidence and
Submissions section relating to the various Particulars above or Findings below.
The submissions regarding ‘General
matters’ relevant to the decision
in ‘Phase One’ are also dealt with elsewhere in this document.
to the submissions regarding particularisation of the Complaint, the Tribunal is
of the view that the National Law does not create
any new obligations or
requirements over and above that which existed under the previous legislation.
Further, the Tribunal decided
the particularisation provided was appropriate. It
is important that issues are not so narrowly defined that the statutory
of this Tribunal to inquire into matters is not unduly curtailed.
Tribunal’s Findings – General Comments re Matters Submitted
as Relevant
Respondent made submissions (in the written outline handed up on 1 September
2011) at paragraphs 154 to 168.
submission referred to the evidence of Client A as to the reason she ended her
clinical relationship with the Respondent. Client
A stated that it was primarily
due to her continuing her studies on exchange overseas but the sessions had also
been wrapping up.
It was Client A’s evidence that it was open for her to
A’s evidence was that she felt
towards the
Respondent –
‘without conflict’
’. She completed this evidence with the sentence
I was still fairly confused about his behaviour’.
Respondent’s submissions detailed Client A’s complaint that the
Respondent had borrowed a book from her and did not
return it. The book
‘Doors of Perception’
by Aldus Huxley was a first edition.
Client A claimed that the Respondent told her the dog had eaten it and that he
had scoured the
internet looking to buy a replacement copy but he had not found
any. Client A gave evidence that when she searched the internet she
replacement copies within about two seconds. It was submitted that Client A was
obviously annoyed with the Respondent as she
believed he had lied to her. The
submissions also referred to evidence that Client A had previously had
difficulties with other health
professionals (a dentist and a person taking a
pap smear). Client A wrote critical comments in her on-line document and one of
friends had written in response
‘Your psychologist is the biggest
arse ever’.
Respondent’s submission notes complaints made to the overseas therapist by
Client A (paragraph 157 of the 1 September submissions).
submission also notes that a few months after leaving the care of the Respondent
Client A wrote in her on-line document that she
was receiving treatment from an
and continues ‘
he’s far more
competent than the manipulative jerk that was my psychologist back
submission continues at paragraphs 159 – 162 as follows:
18 January 2009 A posted an entry that the Zoloft had taken its toll. She
stated “I think once I’m through with the
jerk psychologist before I
came here, I’ll find someone who knows what they’re talking about,
and who, more importantly,
doesn’t make comments about what brand of
underwear I’ve got on.”
(Exhibit 21 page 445)
23 March 2009 A posted her draft complaint to the Psychologists Registration
Board. A was apparently still obsessed about Kreft’s
“stealing” her copy of Doors of Perception.
During an online discussion at 570 she describes that she wanted to
rant about this theft in the letter because “he is a complete
She describes “I sort of want to walk into his office after mailing it
with a copy in my hand for him to read
so I can see his reaction. That would
satisfy my most primitive urge and the rest would soon follow”.
only lodged a complaint after she was “encouraged by friends and family to
voice these concerns in a formal letter to the
Page 565.8)
posting it she then received comments including suggestions about changing the
wording of the complaint. It is clear that A
has workshopped her complaint with
other unnamed people. That is consistent with her use of the journal.
Respondent’s submissions then referred to an article that came in to
evidence through Dr Diamond (although it was not an
article that Dr Diamond had
selected, rather it had been provided to him).
Respondent’s submissions regarding the use that should be made of this
article is set out in paragraphs 163 to 168.
HCCC made submissions regarding the ‘Diaries’ produced by Client A
during the Inquiry. The Tribunal notes these documents
were also referred to as
a journal or an on-line journal. The HCCC note that Client A was cross-examined
on the topic of the journals
for 212 pages of a total of 260 pages of recorded
transcript of cross-examination. The journal came in two parts. The first part
produced was referred to as the ‘public’ document and the next part
to be produced was the ‘private’ journal.
Client A gave evidence as
to the access that was available to each part of the document. Essentially the
document existed as an on-line
document (i.e. the document was stored on the
internet rather than on the memory of any personal electronic device).
HCCC submission notes that the Respondent asserts that due to Client A not
contemporaneously recording complaints against the
Respondent this must equate
to these recollections either being untrue or being manufactured memories which
materialised while she
was undergoing therapy at the overseas University (see
paragraph 16 of HCCC submissions handed up on 1 September 2011).
HCCC submissions continue (paragraphs 17 – 24) with reference to the
article tendered through Dr Diamond, the apology of
the Respondent being viewed
in the context of the cross-examination of Client A, a submission that the
inappropriate comment only
became significant to Client A after she has
reflected on the matter either independently or with the therapist in the United
Tribunal has now had an opportunity to peruse a hard copy of the electronic
document produced by Client A during the Inquiry.
The parties took the Tribunal
to various entries considered relevant to their respective cases. The Tribunal
is of the view that
the document is not properly described as a
‘diary’ or a ‘day journal’ in the traditional sense i.e.
used to record appointments and/or occurrences and personal thoughts
or views on all daily events. The electronic document has provision
for the name
of a song to be part of the heading for an entry. Client A’s evidence is
that this, in essence, allows for a reader
to understand the mood for the entry.
There is a facility to allow comments to be written in response to an entry
either by a limited
group of ‘friends’ or more widely. There is the
capacity to keep an entry totally private to the author. Some entries
clearly seeking comment while others appear to be a download of stream of
consciousness writings of Client A. The work reads
as a creative writing
is the first occasion that a document of this nature has come before a
Psychology Tribunal. The Tribunal is of the view that
it would be unsafe to
regard this document as the equivalent of the traditional diary or
contemporaneous day journal.
Tribunal also accepts that Client A did not have a clear understanding of all of
the ways that her treatment with the Respondent
was inappropriate until she had
had the opportunity of discussing the treatment with the therapist overseas and
afforded her time
to reflect. The records indicate that there was a significant
degree of turmoil in her life at the time she was consulting the Respondent
shortly thereafter she left to study overseas for a semester.
to the submissions regarding the memory of Client A and how this could be
influenced by actions such as the posting of the draft
letter of complaint for
comment, the same criticism can be made of the Respondent’s evidence.
Further, the article provided
in the Respondent’s evidence was published
in 2001. Much work has been done in the area of memory since that time. Further,
it is but one article in the vast area of memory research. This Tribunal has
taken into consideration the submissions made by the
Respondent with respect to
the evidence of Client A. The same type of submissions could no doubt be made in
most matters litigated
before courts and tribunals on a daily basis.
all of these circumstances the Tribunal is of the view that it cannot draw any
particular general inference from the omission or
inclusion of events from the
on-line document. Each entry or issue must be considered individually in the
circumstances of the evidence
before the Tribunal.
Tribunal notes that the Respondent admitted all of Particulars 5, 6 and 7 save
for acting contrary to the advice of Dr Gordon.
Tribunal notes that the clinical record made by Dr Gordon regarding her
consultation with Client B do not record anything by way
of ethical advice.
There are no notes regarding the dual consultation.
is common ground between other evidence before the Tribunal and the evidence of
Dr Gordon regarding Client B’s relationship
with her ex-boyfriend, her
treatment from psychologists, and her history, including drug taking history.
clinical records of Dr Gordon would support a finding that a substantial
personal relationship had been established between Client
B and the Respondent
(about which Client B was ambivalent) at the time of the consultation.
key area in which the evidence of the Respondent diverges from Dr Gordon’s
is that the Respondent claims that Dr Gordon
stated that as they had already
kissed then it would be best to go on with the relationship as it would be more
harmful to Client
Tribunal notes that the clinical records made by Dr Gordon record that Client B
stated she was ambivalent about her relationship
with the Respondent. The
Tribunal also notes Dr Gordon’s statement regarding her familiarity with
the relevant ethical obligations
surrounding boundaries. The Tribunal also notes
Client B’s evidence with respect to this matter.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Dr Gordon that she did not advise the
Respondent to continue to develop the relationship with
Client B. Even if the
Tribunal was wrong with respect to this factual finding, Particular 7 clearly
refers to the advice of other
psychologists which is not in dispute in this
Tribunal is also of the view that Client B did not give evidence in a careful
manner before the Tribunal. This can be seen from
extracts of her evidence
reproduced above where initially she provides a reluctant answer which is
significantly added to on further
questioning. Other examples of less than
forthcoming approach to giving evidence can be found around T312 – 315
where the Tribunal
is asking questions regarding a comment recorded as being
made by Client B to Dr Gordon regarding her father’s financial
circumstances.
Tribunal’s Findings re Particular 1 of Complaint
Particular 1.1
respect to Particular 1.1.1, the Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client A with
respect to what she says the Respondent said
to her. The Tribunal notes the
Respondent accepted that he had conversations with Client A on these matters but
he had not intended
for them to be compliments. The Respondent puts them in the
different context of asking Client A to rate herself to Client B so as
challenge Client A’s negative self-image.
without regard to the specific presentation of Client A, comments of this nature
are open to be interpreted as compliments. When
regard is made to Client
A’s presentation and the comparison being made to the a person to be known
as either the Respondent’s
receptionist or the Respondent’s current
girlfriend (Client B) then such an interpretation becomes highly likely. The
notes the admission made by the Respondent in paragraph 5(a) of exhibit
R6. The Tribunal accepts the submissions made by the HCCC
at paragraph 14 of the
submissions handed up on 1 September 2011. This Particular is established to the
Tribunal’s reasonable
satisfaction.
is not mere error of judgment on the part of the Respondent as submitted by the
Respondent on 1 September 2011. Even if it was
accepted that the comments were
made in a therapeutic context the conduct is a breach of professional boundaries
that demonstrates
that the knowledge, skill and judgment possessed and care
exercised in practice of psychology by the Respondent was significantly
the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level of
training and experience. The conduct was also
improper conduct in the course of
the practice of psychology. A finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct is
respect to Particular 1.1.2 the Tribunal accepts the evidence of Patient A as to
the comments made by the Respondent. The Tribunal
notes that the Respondent did
not initially recall this conversation but ultimately he recalled a conversation
along the same lines
as Client A. The Tribunal makes no criticism of the
Respondent for his evidence with respect to this Particular and is not of the
view that the evidence
‘has been manufactured’
(see paragraph
29 and 30 of Respondent’s submissions 7 October 2011).
The Tribunal
accepts the submissions made by the HCCC at page 4 of submissions handed up on 1
September 2011. The Tribunal is reasonably
satisfied that this Particular is
established.
Tribunal notes the submission made by the Respondent at paragraph 74 of the
submissions handed up on 1 September 2011. With respect
to the submission in
paragraph 75 the Tribunal does not accept that this comment was no more than a
‘error of judgment’.
This is another example of the
Respondent failing to observe proper professional boundaries by engaging in
inappropriate discussions
of a personal nature. The Tribunal is of the view that
this conduct demonstrates that the knowledge, skill and judgment possessed
care exercised in practice of psychology by the Respondent was below the
standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an
equivalent level of
training and experience. Particular 1.1.2 would not in itself constitute
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Tribunal finds Particular 1.1 established as unsatisfactory professional
Particular 1.2
respect to Particular 1.2, the Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client A with
respect to what she says the Respondent said to
her. The Tribunal notes the
Respondent accepts his comments were outside proper professional boundaries. He
admitted he had asked
Client A to comment on his physical appearance. He
accepted that it was inappropriate because there was a blurring of the
boundaries.
The Respondent submitted at paragraph 81 of the submissions handed
up on 1 September 2011 that the comments were made in a therapeutic
This submission was amplified in the Submissions in Reply from the Respondent
dated 7 October 2011.
not expressed in these terms in the Respondent’s submissions, the mere
fact that a comment is made in a consultation
room does not render the context
therapeutic. While there may be scope for comments being
‘therapeutic’ in the context
of the treatment to one client but not
to another, the context of the present case is such that any invitation by the
to Client A to comment on his appearance is inappropriate.
Self-disclosure
should be used sparingly in a therapeutic relationship. The amount varies
depending upon variables such as the nature
of the disclosure and the
presentation of the client. In the context of this particular matter disclosure
of this nature were not
appropriate and were open to interpretation. With
respect to the submission made in paragraph 34 of the Submissions in Reply from
the Respondent dated 7 October 2011 the Tribunal does not accept as inferred
from the submission, that a finding that the comment
was made for anything other
than a therapeutic purpose is required before unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct
can be established. The Tribunal certainly
does not have to find a sexual purpose was intended before making such a
finding. What
is required is a finding to reasonable satisfaction that the
conduct occurred and that the conduct breached proper professional boundaries.
The context in which the comment was made does not necessarily have to be sexual
to attract strong criticism. Consistent with the
evidence of Mr Borenstein it is
the context of the comment that must be considered before attributing the degree
of criticism (see
paragraph 33 of the Submissions in Reply from the Respondent
dated 7 October 2011).
Tribunal does not accept that is was a result of the Respondent
‘clumsily’ (see paragraph 81 of Respondent’s
submissions)
trying to make his point with Client A. This is not a mere error of judgment on
the part of the Respondent as submitted
by the Respondent on 1 September 2011.
The maintenance of appropriate boundaries is integral to the practice of all
health professions
but particularly so in the practice of psychology. The
Tribunal accepts the submissions made by the HCCC at page 5 of the submissions
handed up on 1 September 2011.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the Respondent asked Client A to comment
on his appearance. The Tribunal is of the view
that the conduct demonstrates
that the knowledge, skill and judgment possessed and care exercised in the
practice of psychology by
the Respondent was significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level of training and
experience. The conduct was also improper conduct in the course of the practice
of psychology.
Tribunal therefore finds Particular 1.2 established as unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Particular 1.3
respect to Particular 1.3.1, the Tribunal notes that the Respondent accepts the
evidence of Client A with respect to the fact
that he did make discloses of his
sexual partners but denies he informed her that the number was 80. The
Respondent’s evidence
is that the number of partners disclosed to Client A
was ten. The Tribunal accepts the submission made on page 6 of the submissions
handed up by the HCCC on 1 September 2011. Client A was cross-examined on the
discrepancy in the number and was unshaken in her evidence
that the Respondent
told her he had had 80 partners as it was
‘such a weird huge
. Client A was adamant that the number disclosed to her was 80,
her evidence on this number was clear and firm. The Tribunal has considered
paragraphs 35 to 39 of the Submissions in Reply from the Respondent dated 7
October 2011. The same type of submission could equally
apply to the
Respondent’s memory, or indeed to the memory of any witness.
Tribunal notes the earlier submission of the Respondent that the Tribunal should
not be satisfied as to which version is factually
correct given the absence of a
contemporaneous record by either party. Tribunals, and in fact all decision
making bodies, are frequently
called upon to resolve factual disputes of this
nature without the benefit of contemporaneous records. The mere fact that there
no contemporaneous record does not, in the Tribunal’s view, prevent per
se the reaching of comfortable satisfaction as to one
version or the other.
Tribunal notes the submission made on behalf of the Respondent at paragraph 91
of the submissions handed up on 1 September 2011
that the comment was made in a
therapeutic context and for a therapeutic purpose (paragraph 93). The Tribunal
relies upon comments
made above regarding the relevance of the therapeutic
context in this matter. The Tribunal notes the submission made in paragraph
of the submissions handed up on 1 September 2011 on behalf of the Respondent
that such a disclosure was
‘totally inappropriate’
‘boundary violation and was completely unnecessary’
Respondent submitted that the disclosure was used to attempt to challenge
client’s maladaptive beliefs (paragraph 93). In
this case the conduct of
the Respondent was a naïve and foolish attempt to normalise behaviour and
to seek credibility with
balance the Tribunal prefers the evidence of Client A to the Respondent that the
number of sexual partners disclosed by the Respondent
was 80. The level of
criticism of the Respondent would not change had the Tribunal preferred the
evidence of the Respondent on this
matter. Even if the number disclosed had been
ten the Tribunal would be of the same view of the conduct. It is the making of a
of this nature that is the essence of the deficit in the
Respondent’s practice. Particular 1.3.1 is established to the
reasonable satisfaction.
Tribunal is of the view that the conduct demonstrates that the knowledge, skill
and judgment possessed and care exercised in the
practice of psychology by the
Respondent was significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
psychologist of an equivalent
level of training and experience. The conduct was
also improper conduct in the course of the practice of psychology. The Tribunal
makes a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct with respect to
Particular 1.3.1.
respect to Particular 1.3.2, the Tribunal notes that initially the Respondent
did not recall making a disclosure of this nature
to Client A. In his second
response to the Complaint (exhibit R6) the Respondent admitted that it was more
likely than not that he
disclosed this had occurred on one occasion (because it
had in fact occurred on one occasion). Ultimately they was no disagreement
between the Respondent and Client A as to the disclosure or its context. The
Tribunal finds this Particular established to its reasonable
satisfaction.
Tribunal notes at paragraph 96 of the submissions handed up on 1 September 2011
on behalf of the Respondent he accepted that the
disclosure was totally
inappropriate. The Tribunal accepts the submissions handed up on 1 September
2011 by the HCCC (at page 7)
regarding this Particular. The Tribunal
specifically accepts the views expressed by Mr Sam Borenstein. Further, the
Tribunal accepts
that Mr Borenstein’s opinion was that criticism at the
worst end of the spectrum should be reserved for conduct that is characterised
as predatory. It does not follow however that when a comment is made for a
therapeutic purpose that moderate or strong criticism
of the conduct cannot be
Tribunal is of the view that this conduct demonstrates that the knowledge, skill
and judgment possessed and care exercised in
the practice of psychology by the
Respondent was significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
psychologist of an equivalent
level of training and experience. The conduct was
also improper conduct in the course of the practice of psychology. The Tribunal
makes a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct with respect to
Particular 1.3.2.
respect to Particular 1.3.3, the Tribunal notes the admission of the Respondent
that he did disclose to Client A that he had
been in love five times. It was the
Respondent’s evidence that the disclosure was inappropriate because his
concept of love
was of no relevance to Client A. The Tribunal is reasonably
satisfied that this Particular is established.
Tribunal accepts the submissions made by the Respondent and the HCCC on 1
September 2011 (at page 7). The Tribunal accepts the
opinion expressed by Mr
Borenstein. Although the Respondent does not specifically submit that this
comment was made for a therapeutic
purpose it is a situation where the Tribunal
is of the view that there is no therapeutic basis for a disclosure of this
the context of the sessions between Client A and the Respondent.
Tribunal is of the view that this conduct demonstrates that the knowledge, skill
and judgment possessed and care exercised in
the practice of psychology by the
Respondent was below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an
equivalent level
of training and experience.
respect to Particular 1.3.4, the Tribunal notes the denial of the Respondent to
the Particular. The Respondent does recall conversations
with Client A regarding
homosexuality and bisexuality (paragraph 101 of submissions handed up on 1
September 2011). The Respondent
submitted that the Tribunal should not be
comfortably satisfied that the disclosure was made as there was no
contemporaneous note
made regarding the disclosure. The Tribunal’s view
submissions made regarding this Particular by the HCCC at page 8 of the
submissions handed up on 1 September 2011 (save for the last
sentence thereof)
and prefers the evidence of Client A to that of the Respondent. The Tribunal is
reasonably satisfied that this
Particular is established.
Tribunal is of the view that the conduct demonstrates that the knowledge, skill
and judgment possessed and care exercised in the
practice of psychology by the
Respondent was below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an
equivalent level of training
and experience. The conduct was also not
appropriate conduct in the therapeutic setting.
respect to Particular 1.3.5, the Tribunal accepts the submissions of the HCCC
regarding this Particular made at pages 8 and 9
of the submissions handed up on
1 September 2011. The Tribunal notes the Respondent admitted in exhibit R6 that
he compared Client
A physically to his girlfriend. As to the submission made at
paragraph 47 of the Submissions in Reply from the Respondent dated 7
2011 the Tribunal notes that Client A knew the name of the Respondent’s
girlfriend by this stage. From the evidence
of Client A the fact that his
girlfriend had previously been his client did not take on significance until she
was receiving therapy
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client A as to what the Respondent said to her
in this regard. Further, it is the overwhelming
inference that allows
comfortable satisfaction that the Respondent informed Client A of the two year
‘limitation’ period.
The Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that this
Particular is established.
Tribunal is of the view that the conduct demonstrates that the knowledge, skill
and judgment possessed and care exercised in the
practice of psychology by the
Respondent was below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an
equivalent level of training
and experience.
Tribunal notes that the Respondent accepts that there is evidence that would
allow the Tribunal to make findings with respect
to Particulars 1.3.1 to 1.3.3
would inclusively amount to unsatisfactory professional conduct in that the
disclosures taken together
demonstrate that the judgment and care exercised by
the Respondent fell significantly below the relevant standard. The Respondent
denies these disclosure amount to professional misconduct on the basis that they
were all made in a therapeutic context and that
they were not so significant as
to warrant deregistration or suspension.
set out above, the Tribunal has found that Particulars 1.3.1 and 1.3.2 each
standing alone amount to unsatisfactory professional
conduct. The Tribunal has
found that the conduct in Particulars 1.3.3, 1.3.4, and 1.3.5 each to be below
the standard reasonably
expected. Taking all of the elements (Sub-Particulars)
of Particular 1.3 into account, the Tribunal is of the view that the conduct
the Respondent amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct at a very high
level. This would be the Tribunal’s view even
without regard to
Particulars 1.3.4 and 1.3.5 which were denied by the Respondent.
Particular 1.4
respect to Particular 1.4 the Tribunal notes the Respondent made submissions
regarding this Particular at paragraphs 107 to 117
of the submissions handed up
on 1 September 2011. The HCCC makes submissions regarding this Particular at
pages 9 and 10 of the submissions
handed up on 1 September 2011. Paragraphs 49
and 50 of the Submissions in Reply from the Respondent dated 7 October 2011
this Particular.
Tribunal notes that Client A did not mention this matter in her initial letter
to the Board but did include it in her statement
to the HCCC. The Tribunal also
notes that initially the Respondent denied making ‘any such’ comment
then later acknowledged
that he did say those words in the context of supplying
an opinion to Client A as to how her internet interaction with a man (who
another country at the time of the communication) would be interpreted. As
submitted at paragraph 49 of the Submissions in
Reply from the Respondent dated
7 October 2011 the Respondent gave evidence that this recollection had evolved
over time and he accepted
that the contents of Client A’s statement may
have improved his memory of events.
A was subjected to significant cross-examination on this matter. Although she
accepted that she took the comment as a
adamant that the comment was meant to convey that she and the Respondent
‘could do it over the desk’
Respondent’s submissions about the lack of an entry in Client A’s
electronic ‘journal’ has been dealt
with above. In any case there is
no great dispute about the words that were spoken, just the intended meaning.
Tribunal is of the view that this comment is open to the interpretation made by
Client A. The likelihood that the statement would
be interpreted as put forward
by the Respondent is decreased given the fact that the man he says he was
referring to was located
in another country and the context of a number of other
inappropriate comments.
balance, the Tribunal accepts the well tested evidence of Client A as to her
interpretation of the words spoken by the Respondent,
noting that she took the
comment to be a joke after the Respondent commented to that effect and that she
felt very uncomfortable
that Particular 1.4 is established.
Tribunal is of the view that this conduct demonstrates that the knowledge, skill
and judgment possessed and care exercised in
the practice of psychology by the
Respondent was significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
psychologist of an equivalent
level of training and experience. A finding of
unsatisfactory professional conduct is made by the Tribunal.
Tribunal’s Findings re Particular 2 of Complaint
Tribunal notes there is significant dispute regarding the exact details of the
photo exercise. There are however areas which are
not disputed. Both the
Respondent and Client A gave evidence that the Respondent requested photos of
Client A for the purpose of
some ‘exercise’ with the aim of having
an independent ‘rating’ of the ‘attractiveness’ of
A. During a therapy session two photos were provided to the Respondent by
way of being transferred onto a USB. The Respondent was
aware that Client A had
‘nude’ photos of herself on her computer and she had sent some of
these to a man in America with
the intention of being sexually provocative as
part of an on-line relationship. At the very least the Respondent was aware that
was possible that the photos Client A would place onto the USB would be a
‘nude’ photo as, on his evidence, he asked
her if the photo was
revealing. The Respondent stated he clarified this by asking her
‘You’re not cold or anything, you know what I mean?’
further evidence the Respondent clarified that what he meant by this comment was
to ask whether her nipples appeared erect in the
Submissions in Reply from the Respondent dated 7 October 2011 point to some
‘key factual issues in dispute’
(paragraph 51). The Tribunal
has confined itself to considerations of the Particular as set out in the
Complaint document rather
than looking further afield to areas that may have
been in dispute in the evidence unless relevant to the Particular. In any case,
even if the Tribunal accepted the evidence of the Respondent in totality the
evidence is that he was aware that it was possible that
the photos placed onto
his USB would be photos of a sexual nature. The Respondent gave evidence that
Client A provided him with reassurance
that there was nothing revealing in the
photos she provided to him. It was therefore contemplated by the Respondent that
a possibility so highly contemplated that he was prompted to asked the
question noted two paragraphs above.
Respondent gave inconsistent evidence regarding exactly when he viewed the
photos provided by Client A. The Submissions in Reply
from the Respondent dated
7 October 2011 deal with this matter at paragraphs 57 and 58. The photographs
tendered as volume 1 –
exhibit 5 were not objected to by the Respondent.
Client A was not questioned as to whether she was certain these were the photos
that were placed onto the Respondent’s USB and the Respondent did not give
evidence about the photos. There was no serious
issue raised regarding the
identification of the photos during the Inquiry. The Respondent’s
submission regarding this matter
therefore does not sit with the
Tribunal’s understanding of the evidence. Ultimately, it is of little
moment as to exactly
what the nature of the exact photos that were provided to
the Respondent. The Respondent admitted the factual matters raised in this
Particular (see paragraph 4(n) of R1 and paragraph 6 of exhibit R6). What is
telling about the photos was that the Respondent was
concerned that at least one
of the photos revealed Client A’s nipples in an erect state.
issue raised by the Respondent in the Submissions in Reply from the Respondent
dated 7 October 2011 relating to Particular
2 is set out in paragraphs 59 to 66.
The issue raised relates to evidence taken about where the Respondent was in the
treatment room
when the photos were viewed and when they were placed onto the
USB. It is not necessary for the Tribunal to deal with this matter
in detail as
this issue is not determinative of the factual finding of this Particular.
Respondent by his own admission then falsely informed Client A that he had
completed the study. He undertook the study in an inappropriate
manner, not that
his initial exercise was to be an appropriate exercise ab initio in the
circumstances of this matter. Asking his
reception staff (including a person
known by Client A to be his girlfriend) to rate the appearance of a client is
well outside appropriate
professional boundaries.
Tribunal notes the Respondent conceded that the exercise was
‘completely ill conceived. Inappropriate’
‘it was far too open to be misinterpreted and it essentially mirrored
what she was already doing on the internet’.
The submissions of the
Respondent further note that the Respondent accepts that he did not have the
expertise or skill to deal with
Client A’s sexual problems or the range of
problems with which she presented (paragraph 144).
Tribunal has not had regard to any submission made or inferred to have been made
by the HCCC that the Respondent was keen to view
nude or erotic pictures of
Client A (see paragraph 54 Submissions in Reply from the Respondent dated 7
October 2011). Further, the
submission as to the significance of the Respondent
taking his own photos of Client A (which he states were rejected by her) is of
no moment given that it was the obtaining of the photos from Client A that is
the subject of the Particular. At this point the Tribunal
notes that it would be
hardly surprising for a client with the type of self-image problems Client A
presented with to reject photos
of herself.
Tribunal notes the submission made at paragraph 56 of the Submissions in Reply
from the Respondent dated 7 October 2011. The Tribunal
has dealt with the issue
of the use of the ‘journal’ above. The Tribunal viewed Client
A’s evidence in the context
that she did not come to realise the
inappropriate aspects of the therapy provided by the Respondent until she was
receiving counselling
Tribunal accepts the HCCC submissions and in particular accepts that the photo
rating exercise was distastefully executed, was
a boundary violation and was
highly inappropriate given the context of the sexualised nature of Client
A’s presenting concerns.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the Respondent failed to follow or observe
appropriate proper professional boundaries in
that during counselling sessions
on or about 10 and 22 April 2008 the psychologist made a request of Client A for
photographs of
her and obtained from the client a photo of her head and
shoulders and a photograph of the client in her underwear which he said
be for a study or exercise whereby other people would rate Client A’s
appearance.
Tribunal is of the view that this conduct demonstrates that the knowledge, skill
and judgment possessed and care exercised in
the practice of psychology by the
Respondent was significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
psychologist of an equivalent
level of training and experience. The Tribunal
therefore makes a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct with respect to
Tribunal’s Findings re Particular 3 of Complaint
Tribunal notes that the Respondent admitted that he failed to record the
obtaining of the photos or the photographic exercise.
He denied that this was a
deliberate omission (paragraph 145 of the submissions handed up on 1 September
2011). The Respondent stated
that he only used his notes as an aide-memoire and
did not believe he would need to write anything down to
. The Tribunal also notes that the Respondent stated that this
practice conformed with his training wherein he was told that the less
down the better because if the file was stolen or misplaced or subpoenaed it
would protect the client.
Tribunal is of the view that a practitioner of an equivalent level of training
and experience should appreciate the appropriate
standards of record keeping.
While the Tribunal accepts that there will be a range of views as to the detail
required in clinical
notes there would be little argument that the type of
exercise embarked upon by the Respondent required documenting in Client
clinical notes. Clinical notes not only serve as a record of the
therapy provided so that another practitioner can appropriately
take over care,
but it also serves to allow the practitioner to give an account of the progress
of the therapy and to record any
matters that may provide a source of
professional difficulty to the practitioner in the future. The taking of photos
from Client
A in the circumstances of this matter was a high risk exercise, and
as such required careful documentation. For instance, if the
Respondent had
undertaken the task of record keeping he may have reflected upon its
inappropriate nature prior to it progressing
to the debacle that eventuated.
Tribunal is of the view that this conduct demonstrates that the knowledge, skill
and judgment possessed and care exercised in
the practice of psychology by the
Respondent was significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
psychologist of an equivalent
level of training and experience. The Tribunal
makes a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct with respect to
Tribunal’s Findings re Particular 4 of Complaint
Respondent’s ultimate evidence was that he may have told Client A that
Client B was his girlfriend. Client A’s evidence
is to the effect that the
matter came up in the conversations during therapy sessions on a number of
occasions. Client A’s
evidence was not successfully challenged under
cross-examination in this regard, although her oral evidence was less clear than
statements she had provided earlier in time.
to the submission made around paragraph 71 to 74 of the Submissions in Reply
provided by the Respondent on 7 October 2011 the Tribunal
notes that the
Respondent’s Submissions in Reply provided by the Respondent on 7 October
2011 do make reference to the on-line
document of Client A at paragraphs 25, 43,
47, 50, 56 in various ways. As to the matter of resiling from apologies and
indications
of remorse these are matters that are more appropriately left for
to the contents of paragraphs 75 to 77 of the Submissions in Reply provided by
the Respondent on 7 October 2011 the issue of the
on-line document produced by
Client A is dealt with above. While the manner in which this document came into
evidence was not ideal,
the Respondent was afforded the opportunity of an
adjournment with the further opportunity to make application for any further
adjournments
that may have been required to address this material. While it is
the Respondent’s view that the HCCC resisted the production
document asserting it was irrelevant to the proceedings, the Tribunal notes that
at the time the assertions were made the
officers of the HCCC had not actually
viewed the document and appear to have acted upon the advice of Client A.
to the specific submission that courts have generally recognised that
contemporaneous recollections are more reliable and less
likely to be
contaminated by suggestion or bias than recollections made some time after the
event the Tribunal concurs. However,
as detailed elsewhere, the document is not
viewed by the Tribunal as a contemporaneous record in the usual sense. The
document is
not in the nature of a diary, day book or traditional journal. The
circumstances of this matter are further complicated by Client
realisation that a number of the occurrences to which she had only experienced
vague unease or had brushed off at the time
took on significance when seen as a
whole during later counselling with the overseas therapist. It is the nature of
a therapeutic
relationship that the trust placed by a client in the practitioner
is usually high and the practitioner accorded a degree of power.
This impacts
upon the client’s perception of the practitioner’s behaviour. Hence
in matters in protective jurisdictions
it is not uncommon for shifts in
perception or later realisations to occur after the event as a result of
reflection or the perspective
obtained from discussing the matter with others
(including other health practitioners).
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the Respondent failed to maintain the
confidentiality of Client B in that he disclosed
to Client A that his girlfriend
Client B, who was known to Client A, was a previous client and that he had
‘cured her’.
The Tribunal therefore finds this Particular is
established.
Tribunal is of the view that this conduct demonstrates that the knowledge, skill
and judgment possessed and care exercised in
the practice of psychology by the
Respondent was significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
psychologist of an equivalent
level of training and experience. The Tribunal
makes a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct with respect to
Tribunal’s Findings re Particulars 5, 6 and 7 of Complaint
Tribunal accepts the admissions of the Respondent with respect to Particulars 5,
submissions of HCCC at found at paragraphs 168 – 175:
general, it is submitted that the Respondent failed to ensure that Client
B’s welfare was put before his own needs.
psychiatric issues and conditions from which she suffered made her particularly
vulnerable (in particularly her Obsessive Compulsive
compelling evidence from the contemporaneous records of Cheryl Clothier (Volume
2 Tab 4) and the concessions made by Client B
(T255/27 – T257/5), and to a
lesser extent the Respondent (T 677/15-T678/16), are illustrative of the most
likely scenario
that he was far from the passive “victim” of an
overwhelming romantic passion, but was in fact actively manipulative
development of the relationship. Other examples found in the evidence are of the
Respondent offering Client B to move in with
him around the
March 2007 (Volume 2 Tab 4 page 7), to work for
him around the 24
June 2008 (Volume 2 Tab 4 page 4),
and to offer security to assist buying a car (Volume 2 Tab 17 page 54). If this
is found to be
a fact, it is an aggravating feature of the professional
misconduct.
is submitted that the Tribunal would be comfortably satisfied that each of the
admitted particulars constitutes professional misconduct,
either individually or
in combination. The admitted particulars are significantly below the standard
expected of a registered psychologist
in practice and invited either strong
criticism or the strongest criticism from Dr Gary Banks (see paragraph
actions of the Respondent were highly inappropriate and highly unethical. They
were in direct breach of the APS Code of Ethics
and NSW Psychologists
Registration Board Code of Professional Conduct, which both prohibit
psychologists from having any sexual relationships
with clients for a minimum of
2 years following cessation of treatment (see Tab 23 and 25 of Volume
the Respondent is found to be have misled the Tribunal in relation to the
account of his meeting with Dr Gordon, then this it is
submitted this would be
an aggravating factor of his admitted professional misconduct.
the Tribunal accepts that the diary entry accurately recorded what was in Mr
Kreft’s mind after the meeting, it is alternatively
submitted that the
Tribunal should not accept the accuracy of that account, and make a finding that
the Respondent has recorded what
he wanted to hear rather than what he actually
heard in that meeting, and that particular 7 would still be proved.
the Tribunal completely rejects the account given by Dr Gordon, then it is
submitted that this particular still amounts to professional
misconduct as the
Respondent has still received advice from senior colleagues, Dr Tony Nicholas,
Mr Robert Bust and on his own admission
in cross examination, Ms Cheryl
Clothier, that the relationship was inappropriate and must end
Respondent made the following submission in paragraph 170 (footnotes integrated
into text):
Kreft gave evidence that B presented as being “quite
high–functioning, stable affect – by that, I mean emotionally
presented as stable – very inquiring, very focused on relevant techniques
to assist her with her anxiety”.
His clinical notes
record that B was using 40 mgs of Aropax and Effexor which he understood she was
taking for obsessive compulsive
(659-666 The Transcript at 659
line 47 incorrectly states “excessive” when it should be
“obsessive”)
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that Particulars 5, 6 and 7 are established.
The Tribunal is of the view that this conduct demonstrates
that the knowledge,
skill and judgment possessed and care exercised in the practice of psychology by
the Respondent was significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a
psychologist of an equivalent level of training and experience.
Tribunal makes a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct with respect to
each of Particulars 5, 6 and 7.
Findings in relation to Complaint
Particulars 1 to 4
HCCC submitted that the cumulative effect of the admitted Particulars, the
apologies made by the Respondent (see paragraphs 19,
23 and 29 of second
response) and any further Particulars the Tribunal should find proved that
professional misconduct should be
established (with respect to the Particulars
relating to Client A) by the Tribunal noting that the Respondent has admitted to
unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Tribunal has made findings of unsatisfactory professional conduct with respect
to Particulars 1.1, 1.2, 1.3.1, 1.3.2, 1.4, 2,
3 and 4. The Tribunal has also
found Particulars 1.3.3, 1.3.4 and 1.3.5 to be below the expected standard.
paragraph 65 of the Submissions in Reply from the Respondent dated 7 October
2011 it was submitted that the Respondent did not
accept that either Particular
2 and/or Particular 3 constituted professional misconduct. The Respondent relies
upon the purpose of
the photographic exercise (Particular 2) being undertaken
for a therapeutic purpose and was not sexual or predatory purpose. The
repeats the view that conduct does not have to be sexual or predatory to amount
to professional misconduct.
Respondent also submitted that it cannot be inferred from the failure to record
the exercise in the clinical notes that the Respondent
knew that it was being
undertaken for an inappropriate purpose because the Respondent’s clinical
notes for Client A were generally
inadequate. Further, it was submitted that
there was no evidence to suggest that his notes were only inadequate in relation
A. The Respondent’s submission noted that it was put to the
Respondent that he failed to record the exercise because he knew
inappropriate exercise. The submission record that the Respondent denied this
was a deliberate omission rather he had
failed to record those matters
in his clinical notes because he used his notes purely as an aid memoir and he
did not believe he would
need to write anything down to jog his memory about
what he was doing. He gave evidence about his training in relation to the
of clinical notes and that he was told the less he wrote down the better
because if a file was stolen or misplaced or subpoenaed
it would protect the
Tribunal is of the view that failure to keep any notes, let alone adequate notes
on an exercise such as this, within the context
of the therapy being provided to
Client A, is, as stated above, unsatisfactory professional conduct. There is
nothing compelling
in the submission made with respect to Particulars 2 and 3 in
the Submissions in Reply from the Respondent dated 7 October 2011 that
influence against a finding as to whether professional misconduct should be
Tribunal is of the view that this conduct is of such a sufficiently serious
nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the
Respondent’s
registration. A finding of professional misconduct is made by the Tribunal. This
would be the finding of the Tribunal
even if Particulars 1.3.3, 1.3.4, 1.3.5 and
1.4 and 4 were not considered established.
Particulars 5, 6 and 7
oral submissions the HCCC noted that the Respondent had already admitted
professional misconduct in relation to the Particulars
relating to Client B.
HCCC noted that the only issue in dispute related to the advice provided by Dr
Amanda Gordon. The HCCC submitted that it would
be very unlikely that Dr Gordon
would risk her professional reputation by providing such advice and that the
entry in the Respondent’s
diary should be viewed as contrived. The HCCC
note that the diary entry was not raised by the Respondent until after he became
of the Complaint. There was evidence before the Tribunal that his legal
advisers had not advised him against making reference to
the entry. The HCCC
submitted that in accordance with the rule in
Browne v Dunn
it would be a
matter of what weight should be put to the diary entry.
respect to Particulars 5, 6 and 7 which relate to Client B the Submissions in
Reply provided by the Respondent on 7 October 2011
(at paragraph 78) address
matters the HCCC submitted were aggravating features of the professional
misconduct (offering for Client
B to move in with him in March 2007, to work for
him in June 2008, offer of security to purchase a car) on the basis that it was
‘simplistic view of the relationship between the respondent and
Tribunal notes that aggravating features are an issue appropriately dealt with
in Phase Two of the Inquiry.
Submissions in Reply provided by the Respondent on 7 October 2011 at paragraph
79 restate the Respondent’s position is that
his actions relation to
Client B were completely inappropriate and that he had made a number of serious
mistakes. Paragraphs 80 and
80. The reality of their relationship is that B and the
respondent fell in love with one another whilst they were both in relationships
with other people. The evidence is overwhelming that B felt a very strong
attraction towards the respondent. That is evidence from
B’s own evidence,
and the evidence of Dr Nicholas, who said that B’s attraction to the
respondent was clearly very, very
81. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the intense relationship went through
different phases. The initial phase was B pursing the respondent
notwithstanding
his (inadequate) attempts to prevent her contacting him. This does not mean the
respondent portrayed himself as a
‘victim’ of her advances. That was
simply a fact of the relationship.
noting that the relationship between Client B and the Respondent did appear to
go through different phases the Submissions in
Reply provided by the Respondent
on 7 October 2011 accept that a point after the relationship became sexual that
Client B had second
thoughts about the wisdom of her relationship with the
Respondent given her feelings for her previous boyfriend and that these emotions
were captured in the evidence of Ms Clothier. It was further accepted by the
Respondent that at this time he was manipulative
‘in that he wished to
pursue a relationship with B when she was, at times, ambivalent.’
again the Tribunal notes that this is a factor that is properly considered in
submission made at Paragraph 83 of the Submissions in Reply provided by the
Respondent on 7 October 2011 is relevant to Phase
84 and 85 of the Submissions in Reply provided by the Respondent on 7 October
2011 deal with the issue of the inferred
submission of the HCCC re Client
B’s lie to her former boyfriend regarding aspects of her relationship with
the Respondent
and the question of whether she lied/was dishonest in her
evidence before the Tribunal. The Respondent’s submissions correctly
that this matter was not put to Client B during Phase One and there is therefore
no reliance on a submission of this nature,
inferred or otherwise relevant to
87 to 101 of the Submissions in Reply provided by the Respondent on 7 October
2011 deal with the issue of the entry in
the Respondent’s diary (exhibit
R8). These submissions fall away given the Tribunal not making any finding of
the nature outlined
by the Respondent.
the admission made by the Respondent of professional misconduct the Tribunal is
reasonably satisfied that these Particular
are established and makes a finding
of professional misconduct with respect to each of Particulars 5, 6 and 7.
Summary of Findings in relation to the Complaints
At this point the Tribunal notes that four findings of professional
misconduct have been made for the reasons set out above.
The Tribunal reserves on the matter of protective orders and costs until
after the completion of ‘Phase Two’.
Publication
A copy of this document should be forwarded to the Respondent, his legal
advisers, the HCCC, the Psychology Council of New South Wales.
The Psychology
Board of Australia and otherwise as the Council and Board sees fit.
Dated: 2011
___________________
Joanne Muller
___________________
Kristin Young
___________________
Megan Brock
___________________
Noel Greenaway
Annexure A - Index of Exhibited Documents
Annexure B - Schedule of Names
IN THE PSYCHOLOGISTS TRIBUNAL OF NEW SOUTH
CONSTITUTED UNDER THE HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW)
HCCC v STEPHEN KREFT
TO THE DOCUMENTS OF
THE HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION
VOLUME 1 (CLIENT A)
Formal Documents
Complaint dated 3 November 2010
Certificate of Registration
Initiating Documents
Letter from Client A to the Psychologists Registration Board dated 9 August
Statements and Correspondence
(a) Statement of Client A dated 14 September 2009, signed 3 November 2009
(b) Statement of Client A dated 17 May 2011
Email between Client A and the HCCC dated 20 October 2009 attaching
photographs
(a) Statement of Client A’s friend dated 14 September 2009
(b) Statement of Client A’s friend dated 16 May 2011
Emails between Client A’s husband and the HCCC between 15 September
and 12 October 2009
Letter from HWL Ebsworth to the HCCC dated 1 February 2010
Letter from HWL Ebsworth to the HCCC dated 18 December 2009
Letter from the HCCC to HWL Ebsworth dated 18 December 2009
Letter from the HCCC to HWL Ebsworth dated 15 December 2009 (s. 40)
Letter from HWL Ebsworth to the HCCC enclosing response from Stephen Kreft
dated 16 October 2009
Letter from the HCCC to Stephen Kreft dated 7 September 2009
Clinical records of Stephen Kreft concerning Client A
Clinical Records
Clinical Records concerning Client A provided by Counselling &
Psychological Services University of Virginia, Charlottesville,
Letter of request from the HCCC to Counselling & Psychological Services
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, USA
Expert Review
Letter from the HCCC to Sam Borenstein dated 9 November 2009
Report of Sam Borensterin dated 17 November 2009
Curriculum vitae
of Sam Borenstein
Email from the HCCC to Sam Borenstein requesting supplementary report dated
7 December 2009
Supplementary Report of Sam Borenstein dated 7 December 2009
Bundle of pages selected from the journal of Client A (11-170)
VOLUME 2 (CLIENT B)
Formal Documents
Complaint dated 3 November 2010
Initiating Documents
Letter from Cheryl Clothier to the Psychologists Registration Board dated
31 May 2008
Statements and Correspondence
Statement of Cheryl Clothier dated 14 July 2009
Clinical notes of Cheryl Clothier concerning Client B
Statement of Dr Amanda Gordon dated 8 May 2009, with attachment
Attachment A: clinical notes of Dr Amanda Gordon dated 11 December 2006
concerning Client B
Letter from Dr Amanda Gordon to the Psychologists Registration Board dated
11 November 2008
Statement of Dr Anthony Nicholas dated 1 May 2009
(a) Annexure A: Curriculum vitae of Dr Nicholas
(b) Annexure B: Clinical records of Dr Nicholas concerning Stephen Kreft
Letter from Dr Nicholas to the HCCC dated 5 August 2009
Letter from the HCCC to Dr Nicholas dated 10 July 2009
Statement of Robert Bust dated 1 May 2009
(a) Annexure A: Clinical records of Mr Bust concerning Client B and Stephen
Statement of Client B dated 3 April 2009
Letter from Client B to the HCCC dated 3 August 2009, faxed under cover
sheet by Stephen Kreft
Letter from Stephen Kreft to the HCCC dated 2 August 2009 (s. 40)
Letter from the HCCC to Stephen Kreft dated 1 July 2009
Letter from Stephen Kreft to the HCCC dated 31 February (sic) 2009,
(a) Curriculum vitae
of Stephen Kreft
Clinical records of Stephen Kreft concerning Client B
Letter from the HCCC to Stephen Kreft dated 16 March 2009
Letter from Stephen Kreft to the Psychologists Registration Board dated 21
August 2008
Expert Reports
Letter from the HCCC to Dr Gary Banks dated 8 May 2009
Expert Review Report of Dr Gary Banks dated 19 June 2009
Curriculum vitae
of Dr Gary Banks
Codes of Ethical Conduct
NSW Psychologists Registration Board
Code of Professional Conduct
November 2004
Psychologists Registration Board of NSW Policy Statement:
Psychologists
and Sexual Behaviour in Professional Relationships
Australian Psychological Society
Code of Ethics
2003 Australian Psychological Society
Code of Ethics
One page from Respondent’s 2006 Diary (21, 22 and 23 August)
Email correspondence regarding Respondent’s diary entry for 11
December 2006 and the entry from the Respondent’s diary
for 11 December
Affidavit of Chris Kokotas (IP department HCCC)
DOCUMENTS FILED BY THE RESPONDENT
Response to complaint by Stephen Kreft dated 5 May 2011
Report of Dr Michael Diamond dated 1 May 2011
Reference of Leigh Budden dated 27 April 2011
Reference of Client B’s father
Reference of Dr Steven Kelly
Amended Response to Complaint by Stephen Kreft dated 16 May 2011
Extract from on-line journal of Client A
One page from Appointment Diary of Respondent
Bundle of correspondence between HWL Ebsworth and the HCCC
Summons addressed to Patient A
Photo of Respondent’s consulting room
Extracts from the public on-line journal of Client A
Four extracts from Client A’s private on-line journal
Bundle of correspondence between HCCC and HWL Ebsworth (previously MFI
Bundle of file notes and emails of HCCC re Client A (previously MFI –
CV of Respondent
APS Code of Professional Conduct 1994
APS Code of Ethics 2005
Part of File Note re Respondent from solicitors file
Email correspondence regarding diary entry 11 December 2006
Further email correspondence re diary entry 11 December 2006
Email correspondence between the parties regarding records of Client
A’s treatment overseas
Affidavit of Karina Louise Wyndham dated 17 August 2011 regarding
correspondence between the parties.
Letter of instruction to Dr Diamond dated 6 April 2011 from solicitors for
Respondent.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.61 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter