URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMT/2013/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Platt [2013] NSWMT 14 (9 August 2013)
Medical Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Platt
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWMT 14
Hearing Date(s):
22 and 23/07/2013
Decision Date:
09 August 2013
Levy SC DCJ
Dr M Higgins
See paragraphs [85] - [88] for orders.
Catchwords:
MEDICAL PRACTITIONER - unsatisfactory professional conduct - professional
misconduct - practice of inappropriate prescription of restricted
Schedule 8 and
Schedule 4D drugs without required authority - inadequate recordkeeping -
imposition of protective orders and practice
Legislation Cited:
Health Practitioner Regulation (New South Wales) 2010 (Pt 4 and Sch 2)
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) No 86a, Div 8 Pt 8, s 3A,
s 125 - s 127, s 139B, s 139E, s 149A, s 149B, s 149C,
s 150, s 150D, s 163, cl
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
Cases Cited:
Director-General, Department of Ageing, Disability and Home Care v Lambert
[2009] NSWCA 102
; (2009) NSWLR 523
HCCC v Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
HCCC v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
[2012] NSWCA 80
King v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 353
Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
NSW Bar Association v Meakes
Prakash v HCCC
[2006] NSWCA 153
Texts Cited:
Royal Australian College of General Practitioners Standards for General
Practices (4th Ed)
Principal judgment
Health Care Complaints Commission (Complainant)
Dr Cathryn Carmel Platt
(Respondent)
Representation
Ms R Graycar (Complainant)
Mr M Lynch (Respondent)
- Solicitors:
Health Care Complaints Commission (Complainant)
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR
Table of Contents
The proceedings
Non-publication order
The complaints
Background and registration history
Events leading to the proceedings
[13] - [24]
Dr Platt's responses to the complaints
[25] - [34]
Concessions by Dr Platt
[35] - [36]
Findings based on concessions by Dr Platt
[37] - [38]
Dr O'Brien's opinions on Dr Platt's fitness to practise
[39] - [50]
Relevant principles
[51] - [56]
Considerations for protective orders
[57] - [84]
Preliminary
[58] - [64]
Censure of misconduct and deterrence
[65] - [72]
Psychological counselling
[73] - [75]
Withdrawal of Sch 8 and Sch 4D prescribing
[76] - [80]
Professional supervision
Medical records audit
Review of practice orders and conditions
Costs of these proceedings
Protective orders
Practice Conditions
Medical Records Audit
Review of conditions of practice
The proceedings
Tribunal has been convened to inquire into two inter-related complaints by the
Health Care Complaints Commission ["HCCC"] concerning
Dr Cathryn Carmel Platt, a
general practitioner practising in Coffs Harbour, NSW. The complaints allege
unsatisfactory professional
conduct and professional misconduct. These
allegations relate to prescriptions of narcotic and benzodiazepine drugs issued
Platt to 12 of her patients between May 2005 and December 2010. The
allegations also relate to the adequacy of Dr Platt's medical
records for those
patients in that period. The proceedings are governed by the
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
National Law
Non-publication order
documents tendered in these proceedings, the 12 patients were referred to by the
de-identifying alphabetical letter codes "A" to
"L". At the commencement of the
hearing on 22 July 2013, an order was made pursuant to cl 7 Sch 5D of the
National Law (NSW)
prohibiting the publication or disclosure of the
names, addresses, or any other evidence and information that might tend to or
to the identification of those patients.
The complaints
form of complaint was filed by the HCCC on 1 June 2012. This followed a series
of events triggered by a letter of complaint dated
28 October 2010 from police
at Coffs Harbour to the HCCC, raising concerns about the appropriateness of a
number of prescriptions
for Schedule 4D and Schedule 8 drugs of addiction
written by Dr Platt for her patients.
concerns arose because the police had become aware of the illicit street sale of
prescription drugs in the Coffs Harbour area,
some of which had been traced to
prescriptions issued by Dr Platt. Those concerns led to an investigation by what
was then known
as the Pharmaceutical Services Branch of the Department of Health
["PSB"]. The functions of which are now carried out by the Pharmaceutical
Services Unit ["PSU"] of the Ministry of Health.
first complaint alleges that Dr Platt engaged in unsatisfactory professional
conduct within the meaning of s 139B of the
National Law (NSW)
the inappropriate prescription of Schedule 4D and Schedule 8 drugs of addiction
to drug dependent persons, without the
required authority, and outside accepted
therapeutic guidelines, in circumstances of inadequate
recordkeeping.
second complaint alleges that Dr Platt engaged in professional misconduct within
the meaning of s 139E of the
National Law (NSW)
in that, on an acceptance
of the factual basis of the first complaint, the circumstances of the alleged
conduct are of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify consideration of the
suspension or cancellation of Dr Platt's registration pursuant to the
National Law (NSW)
Platt's patient clinical and prescription records upon which the complaints are
based are voluminous. The relevant ranges of dates
and the prescription
quantities are summarised as follows:
Number of prescriptions
Class of Drugs
07.01.2010 - 28.06.2010
Narcotics & Benzodiazepines
03.06.2009 - 18.06.2010
Narcotics & Benzodiazepines
17.05.2009 - 29.06.2010
Narcotics & Benzodiazepines
21.06.2007 - 09.12.2010
Narcotics & Benzodiazepines
04.06.2009 - 07.06.2010
Narcotics & Benzodiazepines
01.06.2009 - 24.06.2010
Narcotics & Benzodiazepines
18.06.2009 - 04.02.2010
Narcotics & Benzodiazepines
03.06.2008 - 26.06.2010
Narcotics & Benzodiazepines
13.06.2005 - 20.12.2010
Narcotics & Benzodiazepines
02.06.2009 - 23.06.2010
Narcotics & Benzodiazepines
01.06.2009 - 26.06.2010
Narcotics & Benzodiazepines
01.06.2009 - 26.06.2010
Narcotics & Benzodiazepines
Total Prescriptions
Background and registration history
Platt is presently aged 62 years. She was first granted general registration as
a medical practitioner in NSW on 7 May 1977. Until
the advent of the present
complaints, apart from the events described in the following paragraph, there
was no other relevant disciplinary
11 February 1982, when Dr Platt worked as a general practitioner in Auburn in
western Sydney, the PSB had occasion to speak to
her about her prescriptions of
drugs to addicts. This led to her being counselled about her prescribing
obligations under
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
her evidence in these proceedings, Dr Platt described that episode as a
frightening experience. At the time, the PSB pharmacist
who had counselled her
noted that Dr Platt had stated she would try not to allow such conduct on her
part to recur. From that time
until the advent of the present complaints, there
had been no further recorded concerns over Dr Platt's prescribing
Platt's registration has continued under successive regulatory legislation until
the present time. However, as a result of the
subject matter of these
proceedings, Dr Platt's practice became the subject of conditions imposed by the
Medical Council of NSW ["the
Council"] in the period leading up to the hearing
of the present complaints.
1 December 2011, and until 31 January 2012, Dr Platt's practice became subject
to the following conditions:
(1) Not to prescribe any Schedule 8 drug of addiction and/or any Schedule 4D
drug or Schedule 4D derivative, other than where such
prescription is necessary
for the treatment of patients resident in a residential care facility or nursing
care patient. The practitioner is to attend the
offices of the NSW Pharmaceutical Services for the purposes of making a partial
relinquishment
of her Schedule 8 and Schedule 4D drug
authorities.
(2) Within one (1) month from the date of the imposition of these conditions the
practitioner is to complete a distance learning
program offered by the NSW
Pharmaceutical Services to ensure that she has a proper knowledge of prescribing
practices and requirements
relating to Schedule 8 drugs and Schedule 4D drugs.
Upon completion of the distance learning program the practitioner is to contact
Pharmaceutical Services to arrange an appointment to sit a knowledge test
relevant to such program. The practitioner is to provide
documentary evidence to
the Medical Council of NSW that she has satisfied the Chief Pharmacist (or the
Chief Pharmacist's nominee)
of Pharmaceutical Services that she has completed
the program and the knowledge test satisfactorily.
31 January 2012, and until the present time, Dr Platt's practice conditions were
altered to delete condition (2) referred to in
paragraph [11]
Events leading to the proceedings
the police at Coffs Harbour had provided the HCCC with copies of Dr Platt's
prescribing records and the related dispensing records,
the HCCC formed the
preliminary view that Dr Platt had been inappropriately prescribing Schedule 8
and Schedule 4D drugs to drug
dependent persons in excessive
10 December 2010, the HCCC informed Dr Platt that her treatment of the
identified 12 patients was being investigated. In that correspondence,
was requested to provide her records in relation to those
27 June 2011, the HCCC engaged an independent reviewer, Dr Margaret Gibbons, a
general practitioner, to provide an opinion on Dr
Platt's prescribing practices
and records in respect of the above 12 patients.
18 August 2011, Dr Gibbons provided a comprehensively detailed review report
which identified the relevant guidelines and policies.
Those guidelines and
policies related to responsible prescribing in respect of drug seeking patients,
the rational use of opioids
for chronic or recurrent non-malignant pain, pain
management guidelines, benzodiazepines guidelines, general practice standards
and the legislative and administrative provisions requiring authority
to prescribe drugs of addiction.
report of Dr Gibbons also set out in detail the standards of practice required
of a general practitioner when prescribing narcotic
analgesics and
benzodiazepines.
her review, Dr Gibbons identified specific and strong criticisms of Dr Platt's
treatment and prescribing practices in respect of
the of the 12 patients. She
also raised criticisms of the adequacy of Dr Platt's clinical records in respect
of those patients. Dr
Gibbons expressed her summary and general comments in the
following terms:
Summary and General Comments
The management of drug addicted and drug dependent patients is always complex
as they have often had difficult lives, have poor relationship
skills, have
other physical or mental illnesses and may be under a great deal of pressure to
obtain drugs (doctors need to be aware
that narcotics have a significant 'street
value' far in excess of what the patient pays in the pharmacy). Such patients
to deception to obtain the drugs they want. Requests for narcotics,
benzodiazepines and amphetamines should always be thoroughly
reviewed. Such
patients can suffer serious health problems from the ongoing prescription of
these drugs. They (sic) patient may be
very resistant to changing to lower doses
or alternative treatments, yet do well with encouragement and support. Criticism
service is best viewed with suspicion and the complaints checked. It
is prudent (and legally necessary) to obtain a PSB Authority.
Such consultations
are always long.
The patterns of prescribing demonstrated by these patients indicates Dr Platt
did not recognize (sic) the potential for addiction
to narcotics and
benzodiazepines in patients with chronic pain, or took measures to recognise and
minimize it. The risk of iatrogenic
opioid addiction for chronic musculoskeletal
pain is high. The notes are very scanty and the bulk of the notes are
intra-office messages
relaying the patients' requests and the subsequent writing
of script(s). Dr Platt has prescribed large doses of narcotics and
benzodiazepines,
generally above therapeutic standards, over long periods of
time. Dr Platt did not apply for PSB Authority for any of these patients
(except perhaps with 1 exception) clearly had narcotic dependence problems. Six
patients were on an OTP in the time period
under review, and Dr Platt had
records of this for at least 4. Following the legal requirements helps to ensure
patient safety and
to avoid diversion.
The notes do not give therapeutic reasons for this prescribing. There are no
records of assessment, regular review or monitoring of
symptoms, pain relief
achieved, physical examination, counselling or patient education. With few
exceptions there are no overall
management plans, with the use of alternative
therapies. Different patients respond differently to narcotics: some develop
fairly early and keep wanting higher and higher doses while others can
be stabilized for a prolonged period of time. Alternative
therapies can decrease
the dose of narcotics needed. Step-wise progression ensures the minimum
necessary doses are prescribed.
Most of these prescriptions have been written for the small quantities
available without a PBS Authority, thus avoiding the need for
review by another
practitioner. This encourages the patient to return frequently but that is only
necessary when doses are being
changed, for ongoing counselling and
encouragement, or if the physical condition has changed. Patients in general are
better served
by longer more comprehensive consultations (eg at monthly
intervals) than frequent brief script-writing ones."
Gibbons also expressed a concern that many scripts were apparently written by Dr
Platt at the request of patients without evidence
of the patients having been
seen by her.
21 October 2011, the HCCC informed Dr Platt that it had completed its
investigation and as a result, it had formed the view that
her prescribing
practices in respect of the 12 patients were significantly below what was
reasonably expected of a practitioner of
an equivalent level of training and
experience in the following 5 particular respects:
Inappropriate
prescription of Schedule 8 drugs to 12 patients without first obtaining an
appropriate PSB authority when she knew or
ought to have known that those
patients were drug dependent;
Prescribing
Schedule 8 drugs to 11 patients without complying with the PSB prescribing
guidelines;
Inappropriately
prescribing Schedule 8 drugs to 12 patients without a documented clinical
reason, without appropriate review or monitoring,
and without attempting to
treat the patients with other modalities, and at the request of the
Inappropriately
prescribing Schedule 4D drugs to 12 patients at doses that did not accord with
prevailing therapeutic guidelines;
Not keeping
appropriate clinical records for the 12 patients concerned.
25 November 2011, and in response to an invitation to comment on these matters,
Dr Platt advised the HCCC as follows:
"Thank you for the opportunity to provide a response to the complaint against
me. In that regard I note the criticisms raised against
me in that report.
Upon reflection, I concede that a number of criticisms leveled (sic) at my
prescribing practices to the patients, the subject of the
complaint, are
I appreciate that this matter is likely to proceed to a disciplinary hearing
and in those circumstances I will provide a comprehensive
response to the
complaint once that complaint is fully particularised."
30 November 2011, following information provided to the Council by the HCCC
concerning Dr Platt's prescribing practices, and out
of concern about those
practices, the Council convened a hearing under s 150 of the
National Law
to determine whether it was appropriate to take any regulatory or
disciplinary action against Dr Platt. Following, and as a result
of the s 150
hearing, conditions were imposed on Dr Platt's practice as already identified at
paragraph [11] above.
other outcome of the s 150 hearing was that the subject matter of that hearing
was referred to the HCCC for further investigation
pursuant to s 150D of the
National Law
. This led to the filing of the present
complaints.
1 June 2012, the HCCC filed the present extensively particularised complaints
set out in a series of 45 paragraphs, and in the
numerous related
sub-paragraphs. The full text of the terms of that complaint is annexed to these
reasons in the form of an
Dr Platt's responses to the particularised complaints
the course of the ensuing 9 months, Dr Platt worked her way through the comments
in the report of Dr Gibbons and her own copies
of the 12 patient records to
prepare her responses to the particularised complaints. The delay in providing a
written response to
the complaint was in part due to an element of avoidance on
the part of Dr Platt. Ultimately, after an initial reaction of anger
and denial,
Dr Platt came to realise the complaints had substance.
her consequential statement of responses dated 1 March 2013, and as foreshadowed
by her letter to the HCCC dated 25 November 2011,
Dr Platt admitted that the
allegations of unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct
were true, and she expressed
her shame that this was so.
Platt explained that the underlying circumstances which had based the complaints
had arisen because she had felt sorry for the
12 patients, and noted that they
had experienced chaotic and difficult lives. She acknowledged that she had
misguidedly believed
that by issuing the prescriptions she did, that she was
somehow helping those patients to cope, but she now realises she had been
prolonging their drug dependence in a way that could jeopardise them and could
cause them harm.
Platt also acknowledged that her system for supervision and monitoring of her
patients, and her practise of having issued them
with repeat prescriptions for
narcotics and benzodiazepines, was naïve, wrong, inadequate, represented
poor management, and
was one that unnecessarily exposed patients to risks from
repeated prescriptions of these drugs.
Platt also recognised that she had failed in her duties to those 12 patients,
and that she had exposed them to the risk of overdose
and aberrant behaviour,
and in doing so, she had done them a disservice by prescribing Schedule 8 and
Schedule 4D drugs for them
too easily, without adequate review, and without
seeking other methods for treating their presenting problems.
Platt claimed that she had not properly understood the need to obtain
appropriate authorities to prescribe drugs of addiction to
persons who were drug
dependent. She explained that she considered the 12 patients to be chronic pain
patients, which she believed
had distinguished them from being classified as
being drug dependent persons. The Tribunal considers that view to have been
Significantly,
Dr Platt also acknowledged that her patient records were "
the terms of the following extract, Dr Platt expressed her contrition for the
shortcomings in her practice:
"14. This complaint has alerted me to the fact that I have been doing the
wrong thing in relation to prescribing drugs of addiction
and my management
generally. Once I looked carefully at the records involving these twelve
patients I felt ashamed of what I had
done to these patients by maintaining
their dependence on benzodiazepines and narcotics. I am devastated by the
realisation that
I was prescribing narcotics to my patients unlawfully and
without proper authority. I should have been applying for authorities to
prescribe these medications. I knew I had to apply for authorities for Methadone
however I did not know I had to do it for Morphine
and OxyContin. I know that at
one stage some of the patients were drug dependant but I thought that after
years of stability they
would be considered as chronic pain patients. When I
have applied for authorities for chronic pain patients, Pharmaceutical Services
have told me that I did not need authorities.
15. Up to the time I received the complaint I had always thought of myself as
law abiding. I know it is no excuse to say I did not
fully understand the laws.
I have since studied them and will continue to do so. In the last 14 months I
have had to question many
things about myself and whether I am fit to be a
doctor. I have felt ashamed, overwhelmed and devastated. I was embarrassed to
family, friends, and patients about the complaint and my conduct. I am also
grateful that the complaint has happened because it has
stopped me from doing
what I was doing and putting some of my patients at risk. It has also made me
critically evaluate everything
I do. Fortunately my colleagues have been very
supportive and have pointed out to me the positive things I do in the treatment
my patients.
16. Since receiving the complaint I have been to seminars on pain management
and the last one I attended in October 2012 (Pain management
Master Class -A
Practical Approach to Chronic Pain Management) taught me some very good tools
for assessing patients before they
commence on narcotics. This can predict their
risk of dependence and aberrant behaviours.
17. Attitudes to pain management have changed over the years. The emphasis
now has changed to treat the pain so that the patient can
resume the function
that they want in their life. This means you can get away with smaller doses and
the patient does not have the
expectation of no pain. There is now an opioid
trial so if aberrant behaviours arise, medications can be weaned down. They also
up for the first time the concept of an opioid withdrawal trial. That is
when a patient has been stabilised for a certain time then
can slowly reduce the
dose and sometimes wean them off.
18. I am now aware of the recommendations and guidelines for prescribing
benzodiazepines.
19. I have learnt to be aware of drug seeking behaviour such as complaints of
pain that I cannot verify, running out of medication
early, stolen prescriptions
etc, in patients on narcotic medication. Everyone should be weaned off
benzodiazepines if possible."
the suggestion of her solicitors, Dr Platt saw a psychologist but terminated the
therapeutic relationship as she thought the process
was circular and
unproductive. In the course of her evidence at the Tribunal hearing she
acknowledged that such termination was probably
avoidant behaviour on her
the referral of her own general practitioner, Dr Platt saw Dr Elizabeth O'Brien,
a consultant psychiatrist. Due to distance difficulties,
she has seen Dr O'Brien
on only 4 occasions in Sydney. Dr O'Brien's report dated 1 July 2013 was
tendered. Dr O'Brien also gave oral
evidence at the hearing.
Concessions by Dr Platt
her concessions to the Tribunal, Dr Platt admitted that she had engaged in
unsatisfactory professional conduct as well as professional
misconduct, as
particularised. After reviewing the 13 volumes of material that was tendered by
the parties, the Tribunal was comfortably
satisfied that the admissions
concerning unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct made
by Dr Platt were appropriate
in light of the content of that material.
the light of those concessions by Dr Platt, apart from the need to state the
formal findings of the Tribunal, it is no longer necessary
to canvass the detail
of her records or the detail of her management of the 12 patients who are the
subject of the present proceedings:
Exhibit "A", Volumes 2 to
Findings based on concessions by Dr Platt
view of Dr Platt's admissions, which were properly made on the evidence, the
Tribunal finds that Dr Platt engaged in unsatisfactory
professional conduct as
well as professional misconduct within the respective meanings of s 139B and s
139E of the
National Law (NSW)
. The Tribunal is satisfied that the
conduct of Dr Platt under review, which was not an isolated event but a course
of conduct over
a considerable period of time, is of a sufficiently serious
character to justify consideration of the suspension or cancellation
practising rights.
the consent of the parties, the Tribunal proceeded to hear explanatory factual
evidence from Dr Platt, including the tender of
mitigatory evidence, in order to
determine the appropriate protective orders without the need for a separate
hearing, which would
otherwise have been necessary if the stated concessions had
not been made:
King v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA
Dr O'Brien's opinions on Dr Platt's fitness to practise
O'Brien was first consulted by Dr Platt in November 2012. There were 3
professional consultations followed by a fourth consultation
on 29 April 2013
for the purposes of an interview in order to enable the preparation of Dr
O'Brien's report dated 1 July 2013.
O'Brien undertook a forensic evaluation of the level of Dr Platt's insight and
understanding into the problems which had led to
the complaints. At the initial
interview, Dr O'Brien noted Dr Platt demonstrated a degree of denial of the
seriousness of the complaint,
and an incomprehension as to how the situation of
the complaint had occurred. In Dr O'Brien's assessment, Dr Platt had exhibited
limited insight into her predicament and how it had arisen. She noted that Dr
Platt had expressed considerable doubt as to the indication
or usefulness of a
psychological or psychiatric assessment in her situation.
O'Brien ascribed this attitude to Dr Platt's background sense of self and
personality in circumstances where she felt she had selflessly
commitment and contribution to her community, and had worked extremely hard in
those areas as part of her commitment to
the wellbeing of others, at times to
the detriment of her own interests, and at the expense of keeping proper medical
O'Brien observed that over the course of her consultations, Dr Platt slowly
began to recognise the validity of the complaints raised
against her. Dr O'Brien
considered that in her practice, Dr Platt had blurred some important practice
principles that needed to be
observed. This had occurred because of an
over-emphasis on her part to attending to the needs of others without due regard
to a critical
and reflective stance about her own attitudes, practices and
outcomes. Dr O'Brien summed up the aetiology of the resultant problem
"Dr Platt's overinvestment in her idealised view of herself as a caring and
committed practitioner, working excessively long hours
and without due regard to
her own welfare, without critical evaluation of the impact of her style of
treatment on her patients, led
to a very significant discrepancy between her
perceived description of herself as a caring and committed general practitioner
the actual practice whereby her patients were potentially at risk because of
her poor level of scrutiny of her own prescribing habits,
their psychological
and physical needs, and her lack of attention to recommended practice."
Dr O'Brien last reviewed Dr Platt on 26 April 2013, Dr Platt had acknowledged
that she had only slowly come to the realisation
that she had been placing
others at risk of harm rather than helping them. By that stage Dr Platt had
expressed an acknowledgment
to Dr O'Brien of the need to be mindful of the
earlier shortcomings in her approach to practising medicine. This related to
concerning prescribing practices and recordkeeping
Gibbon's review report was provided to Dr O'Brien after her consultations with
Dr Platt. Dr O'Brien saw no inconsistencies between
the matters raised in the
review by Dr Gibbons and Dr Platt's account of those matters in consultation. In
summing up the result
of her successive interviews with Dr Platt, Dr O'Brien
concluded as follows:
"As noted above, Dr Gibbons' report was provided to me after my consultations
with Dr Platt. However, there is nothing in the particulars
or Dr Gibbons'
response (sic for report), that is inconsistent in this regard. In my opinion,
it is clear that Dr Platt had fallen
into a style of practice, that was driven
predominantly by her own personal sense of providing the best for her patients,
a balancing reference to the best standards of practice including
comprehensive assessment, risk assessment, and best practice in
terms of dealing
with the particular medications that her patients were reliant upon, narcotics,
opioids and benzodiazepines. What
is more difficult to ascertain from a review
of the particulars and from Dr Gibbons' report, is a perspective of how this
element of practice was only one element of Dr Platt's overall
medical practice, which is reflected in the comments from her referring
practitioner and colleague.
Taken at face value, the particulars and Dr Gibbons' report are a damning
indictment of a doctor's inability to best assess and manage
patients, in the
area of narcotic and benzodiazepine prescription. That the patients' wellbeing
was poorly advanced by Dr Platt,
and that she may have endangered her patients'
wellbeing is not contestable in my view. However, in my opinion, Dr Platt's
was not one of callous disregard for the wellbeing of her patients,
not driven by monetary incentive, not contributed to by her own
reliance on
addictive medication, nor by severe personality dysfunction. Rather, Dr Platt's
practice is symptomatic of a "workaholic
doctor" by virtue of endlessly
endeavouring to provide for the needs of patients, as perceived by her,
neglecting to put limits on
herself, as on her patients, and failing in the
particular regard of "knowing your own limitations".
The circumstances where Dr Platt has faced the Medical Council restrictions
on her practice and is now facing prosecution by the Health
Care Complaints
Commission, has dramatically and effectively illustrated to her the need to
re-evaluate her approach to her practice
of medicine. The benefits of
undertaking the various courses that Dr Platt has completed combined within the
process of preparation
for the Tribunal, has occasioned her a very thorough
opportunity to reconsider her own practice. It has led to the the (sic) profound
and painful realisation for Dr Platt that her practices were in fact
antithetical in many cases to the wellbeing of her patients:
this has given Dr
Platt this chance to review, reconsider and change her own personal stance, and
her professional practice."
O'Brien concluded that Dr Platt had, over time, demonstrated a significant shift
in her understanding, acceptance and insight into
the causes of the poor
practice which brought her to disciplinary attention. In her report, Dr O'Brien
also concluded that Dr Platt's
significant shift in stance towards the needs of
her patients, together with Dr Platt having become more able to reflect and
her practice and methods, meant that she would not represent an ongoing
threat to the wellbeing of patients in her care.
O'Brien ultimately concluded:
"Finally, in my opinion, Dr Platt, while flawed for many years in her
approach to her medical practice, has developed an insight into
those flaws and
a capacity to amend and alter her practice such that she will better deliver to
her patients the standards of care
required of a competent and effective
Tribunal was concerned to have some oral evidence from Dr O'Brien, particularly
as she had not been provided with a history of
the events of 1982, and the
related counselling on prescribing practices at that time. Dr O'Brien was asked
to consider those events
and Dr Platt's description of those events when she had
been confronted with the details, as having been a frightening occasion which
resulted in an attitude of intended compliance that had fallen by the wayside
due to neglect over time.
O'Brien did not have the opportunity of further exploring those events with Dr
Platt before giving evidence, but said that in terms
of the opinions she had
expressed, the additional item of history reflected the degree of denial and
very poor insight, and initial
unwillingness to accept her faults that she had
displayed at her initial interview with Dr O'Brien.
O'Brien considered that in light of the historical events and in view of Dr
Platt's decision to terminate the therapeutic relationship
that she had with a
psychologist, she thought it would be beneficial for Dr Platt to engage in such
a therapeutic relationship to
assist her to understand the events, the impact
that her own personality style had in contributing to the genesis of the events,
and to assist Dr Platt to process and implement the result of the present
proceedings. Dr O'Brien considered those undertakings would
best be achieved by
fortnightly, or at least monthly consultations with a psychologist for a minimum
period of 12 months.
O'Brien also suggested that there be professional peer supervision of Dr Platt.
Dr O'Brien clarified her opinion on Dr Platt's
insight into her previously
flawed practice, as it related to her current fitness to practise, by saying
that a framework of ongoing
scrutiny of Dr Platt's practice was advisable for a
period of time, to ensure that Dr Platt's insight remained adequate for her to
practise safely.
Relevant principles
paramount or overriding consideration for the exercise of the jurisdiction of
the Tribunal is the function of protection of the
public: s 3A of the
National Law (NSW)
relevant considerations include the need to maintain high professional standards
and to deter others from engaging in similar
HCCC v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
NSW Bar Association v Meakes
, at [114].
consideration of the deterrence, which can be both specific to the practitioner
or general to the profession at large, in the
context of the specialised
constituted, also has the more positive
effect of encouraging other
practitioners to recognise the importance of complying with professional
standards and to avoid the risks
associated with failure to do so:
[2006] NSWCA 153
unavoidable concomitant of making orders aimed at protecting the public is that
sometimes the protective orders demanded by the
circumstances may be
incidentally punitive in effect, although that is not the purpose of the orders
[2012] NSWCA 80
, at [20], [31], following
Director-General, Department of Ageing, Disability and Home Care v
[2009] NSWCA 102
; (2009) NSWLR 523, at [83].
cases where permanent unfitness to practise has not been demonstrated, and
censure of the practitioner is otherwise required by
the circumstances of
serious demonstrated fault in the impugned conduct, suspension rather than
removal of practising rights is the
more appropriate protective order:
Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
, at [26] to
Tribunal was referred to a number of decisions of differently constituted
medical tribunals and appellate courts involving protective
orders made in cases
of the inappropriate prescription of drugs. It is unnecessary to cite the
details of those decisions here other
than to state that there can be no defined
tariffs for protective orders. The protective orders in each of those cases were
necessarily
dependent upon and mandated by the particular circumstances of those
cases rather than operating as precedents for other cases that
, at [30], citing
HCCC v Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
Considerations for protective orders
identifying the specific protective orders and conditions we propose to make, it
is necessary to make some preliminary observations.
Preliminary
it is undoubted that Dr Platt has undergone a salutary, embarrassing, and
probably scarifying experience in having to address
and concede the present
complaints, and any protective orders will be burdensome for her, in approaching
the framing of appropriate
protective orders, the Tribunal is primarily
concerned with the paramount consideration of the protection of the public: s 3A
National Law (NSW)
. In this regard, the Tribunal is of the view
that the structured protective orders it proposes to make must remain in place
period of time in order to provide the Council, as the responsible
regulatory authority, with a degree of confidence that Dr Platt
will be able to
practise safely.
incidental inconvenience to the practitioner, or possible perception of a
burdensome or punitive effect of necessary protective
orders, is a secondary
consideration, and is in any event necessary to achieve the protective purposes
the Tribunal has in mind:
, at [20], [31].
was in effect submitted on Dr Platt's behalf that in light of her salutary
experience, and since she has now upgraded her knowledge
of clinical standards
and guidelines on matters that were previously identified as shortcomings in her
practice, the scope for imposition
of protective orders has become somewhat
diminished.
the scope for harm to be occasioned to patients in the course of medical
practice, and given the concomitant need to ensure
the protection of the public,
the Tribunal does not accept that submission. In the paragraphs that follow we
outline our reasons
for the imposition of the individual components of the
protective orders and conditions that we propose to make.
approaching the framing of protective orders the Tribunal has had regard to the
extensive written testimonial evidence provided
on behalf of Dr Platt: Exhibit
"1", Tab [4]. There is no suggestion that Dr Platt acted with mal-intent, or
that she was motived
by factors such as financial gain in respect of the conduct
which is the subject of the proceedings. We accept the testimonial evidence,
evidence of Dr Platt and the assessment of Dr O'Brien to the effect that Dr
Platt had only good intentions towards the patients
in question, and is an
otherwise committed practitioner.
Tribunal has also taken into account Dr Platt's efforts to upgrade her skills
and to comply with the conditions that the Council
imposed upon her practice
since these matters came to light. We have also taken into account Dr Platt's
genuine expressions of shame,
embarrassment at having jeopardised the wellbeing
of her patients, and her genuine statements of remorse at having done so. It is
also to her considerable credit that she has made extensive beneficial
contributions of her time and support to communal activities
in the area in
which she practices, without expectation of financial reward.
those matters do not operate to cancel out the significant breaches of the
required standards of practice. The Tribunal considers
that protective orders,
including those with a deterrent effect, are nonetheless required in this case
having regard to the serious
lapses that amounted to professional
misconduct.
Censure of misconduct and deterrence
this case, the Tribunal is of the view that there is a strong need for censure
of the conceded misconduct for the purpose of deterrence
of repetition of the
conduct on the part of the practitioner or emulation of such conduct by other
practitioners. In our view this
mandates protective orders that incorporate both
general and specific deterrence, on an application of the principles and the
authorities
identified at paragraphs [51] to [56] of these reasons.
the array of available censure mechanisms under the
National Law (NSW)
the Tribunal has considered the appropriateness of a reprimand under s 149A, a
fine under s 149B, suspension or cancellation of
registration from practise
under s 149C.
cancellation of the practitioner's registration is not called for in this case,
the Tribunal considers that at the very least,
the conceded misconduct calls for
a reprimand. In this case, the Tribunal is of the view that a fine would appear
to be unduly punitive,
especially since there was no evidence of turpitude or
intention to achieve personal gain on the part of Dr Platt, and it is more
appropriate that in the public interest, other combinations of protective orders
should be made; s 149B(2)(b). This leaves for consideration
the question of a
possible suspension.
Tribunal is of the firm view that a period of suspension is called for in this
instance. The subject matter of the complaints
arose because Dr Platt was very
busy in her practice, and she did not allow herself sufficient time or space to
reflect upon her
standard of practise. In that regard she failed to recognise
that her practise in respect of the matters complained of was significantly
below the required standard, as has been identified in the opinion of the peer
reviewer, and which she has now conceded. Furthermore,
Dr Platt's insight into
these problems was only achieved slowly over time in the few months in which she
faced an imminent Tribunal
hearing, against a history of denial and avoidant
behaviours on her part.
those circumstances, the Tribunal considers that a relatively short period of
suspension will afford Dr Platt the undistracted
opportunity to take remedial
steps along the lines of implementing the other proposed protective orders that
will enable consolidation
of the personal gains she has made thus far in order
to equip her to safely resume practice.
Tribunal is of the view that a suspension from practice for a period of 3 months
is required in this case as an appropriate censure
of Dr Platt's conduct. This
is intended to serve as a strong deterrent indication, both specifically to her
and to other practitioners
generally, that the misconduct the subject of these
proceedings cannot be condoned.
suspension is intended to be protective of the public and is not intended to be
punitive, although it is acknowledged that an
inevitable punitive effect will be
to deprive Dr Platt from earning an income for the period of the suspension. It
is for that reason
that the Tribunal has selected a shorter period of suspension
limited to 3 months rather than the upper range of 6 months that was
in the submissions made on behalf of the HCCC.
effect of the proposed order will be that the commencement of the period of
suspension will be delayed for a period of 4 weeks
to enable Dr Platt to make
proper interim arrangements to cover the needs of her patients during the period
when she will be necessarily
absent from her practice.
Psychological counselling
Tribunal has had the advantage of hearing the views of Dr O'Brien who has seen
Dr Platt over the course of a number of professional
consultations. Dr O'Brien
has canvassed the subject matter of the complaints with Dr Platt and has also
considered the circumstances
of Dr Platt's earlier decision to terminate her
therapeutic contact with a psychologist. Dr O'Brien supports the need for Dr
to resume seeing a psychologist and the Tribunal takes a similar view
given the delayed insight, denial and avoidance issues outlined
in the evidence
of Dr O'Brien and summarised at paragraphs [39] to [50] above.
her evidence, Dr Platt indicated that she would resume seeing a psychologist.
The Tribunal considers that this issue should be
a condition of registration for
a specified period to consolidate the insights Dr Platt has gained thus far. The
expectation is that
Dr Platt will make prompt arrangements in that regard and
commence seeing a psychologist during the period of her suspension. The
Psychologist whom she consults should be provided with a copy of Dr O'Brien's
report, a copy of the transcript of Dr O'Brien's oral
evidence to the Tribunal,
and a copy of these reasons for decision. Dr Platt should not be at liberty to
terminate the therapeutic
relationship with the psychologist without the consent
of the Council.
Tribunal is of the view that the pattern of consultations with the psychologist
should initially be fortnightly, and then monthly,
along the lines of the
recommendation by Dr O'Brien, with the provision for feedback to the Council,
and subject to the further direction
of the Council.
Withdrawal of authority to prescribe Schedule 8 and Schedule 4D
present, Dr Platt's practice conditions preclude her from access to and
prescription of Schedule 8 and Schedule 4D drugs except
for her palliative care
and nursing home patients. The rationale for Dr Platt retaining those limited
prescribing rights was that
there were limited numbers of practitioners in her
area willing to undertake the management of those patients.
Tribunal has remaining concerns over the degree of integration of Dr Platt's
insight into the demonstrated shortcomings in her
prescribing practices of
Schedule 8 and Schedule 4D drugs. Such prescribing rights have caused
significant difficulty for Dr Platt
in the past. The evidence given in these
proceedings, in which Dr Platt's insights concerning iatrogenic drug dependency
issues were
explored, indicates that her delayed insights on such matters are
still evolving and should undergo further consolidation. This is
also the effect
of the opinion of Dr O'Brien.
those circumstances, the Tribunal considers that Dr Platt's right to prescribe
Schedule 8 and Schedule 4D drugs should be withdrawn
completely pending any
further determination by the Council and following a further period of
consolidation of her knowledge and
understanding on such
coming to this conclusion, the Tribunal has been mindful of the likely
inconvenience to Dr Platt's palliative care and nursing
in need of such drugs. However, the evidence is that there are now increased
facilities for palliative care
in the area where Dr Platt practises and the
numbers of the patients likely to be affected has now reduced. Overarching those
considerations
is the view of the Tribunal that the proposed order withdrawing
prescribing rights for these classes of drugs is nevertheless justified
public interest.
order proposed by the Tribunal will not preclude Dr Platt from applying to the
Council for such rights to be again granted to
her after the nominated period of
time has elapsed and if she is able to satisfy the Council on matters of her own
insights and matters
of patient safety.
Professional supervision
Dr O'Brien has expressed the view that Dr Platt has achieved a level of insight
into her prescribing misconduct such as to
make her safe to practice, her
resumption of practice should initially be within a supervisory framework. For
that reason, the Tribunal
is of the view that Dr Platt's future practise must be
the subject of professional peer supervision by a peer practitioner outside
her own practice. When she resumes practise following the nominated period of
suspension, Dr Platt should have Level 3 peer supervision
along the lines
provided by the Council's Guidelines for Supervision Policy (Policy PCH 7.4).
Our orders will reflect that requirement,
which is intended to be educative, not
punitive. Submissions made on behalf of Dr Platt have conceded the need for this
be implemented. Such supervision would assist Dr Platt with
appropriate medical recordkeeping, and with referral of those of her
who may require Schedule 8 or Schedule 4D medications, as well as consolidating
her knowledge of alternative strategies
for managing such
Medical records audit
the shortcomings identified in the review by Dr Gibbons concerning Dr Platt's
medical records, and given the importance of proper
maintenance of such records,
the Tribunal is of the view that Dr Platt's records should be audited over time
to assess her compliance
with the Health Practitioner Regulation (New South
Wales) 2010 (Pt 4 and Sch 2) and the Royal Australian College of General
Practitioners
Standards for General Practices (4th Ed) especially Standard 1.7
concerning the content of patient health records. Our order will
reflect this
view as the Tribunal felt the practice accreditation process was sufficiently
detailed to assure such compliance. Submissions
made on behalf of Dr Platt have
in effect conceded the need for this measure.
Review of protective orders and practice conditions
Tribunal recognises the onerous nature of the conditions it proposes to impose
on Dr Platt's practice, as well as recognising
that Dr Platt has over time
demonstrated gains in insight of the required standards. It is therefore
proposed that after a period
of 18 months, Dr Platt should have the right to
apply to the Council for variations in any ongoing restrictions to her practice
at that time, if she feels the need to do so.
Costs of these proceedings
the complaints in these proceedings have been sustained, it follows in
accordance with Sch 5D, cl 13, and in accordance with accepted
authority and
practice, that Dr Platt should be ordered to pay the costs of the HCCC to
indemnify it for the costs it has incurred
in bringing these proceedings in the
public interest.
Protective orders
Tribunal makes the following orders:
(1) The Practitioner is reprimanded;
(2) The Practitioner is suspended from practising medicine for a period of 3
months effective from Monday, 9 September 2013 and is
precluded from
recommencement of such practice until Monday 9 December
(3) The Practitioner is to be subject to conditions on her registration as set
out in paragraph [86] below under the heading
(4) The Practitioner must submit her practice to medical records audit as set
out in paragraph [87] below under the heading
Medical Records
(5) The Practitioner shall not make an application for variation in any of the
Practice Conditions
to the PSU or to the Council before the
expiry of 18 months from the date of these reasons;
(6) The Practitioner is to pay the complainant's costs in the
proceedings.
Practice Conditions
practice conditions referred to in sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph [85] above are
as follows:
(1) The Practitioner is not to possess, prescribe, supply administer or dispense
Schedule 4 Appendix D drugs in any circumstances.
Her Schedule 4 Appendix D drug
authority is to remain withdrawn by the Pharmaceutical Services Unit, NSW
Ministry of Health ["PSU"]
formerly known as Pharmaceutical Services Branch,
Department of Health (NSW);
(2) The Practitioner is not to possess, prescribe, supply, administer or
dispense Schedule 8 drugs of addiction in any circumstances.
Her Schedule 8 drug
authority is to remain withdrawn by the PSU;
(3) Any future change to the Practitioner's Schedule 8 and Schedule 4D drug
prescribing authority status must be in accordance with
the Council protocol.
This includes consultation with the Council prior to the making of any
application for variation to the PSU.
(4) If practising in general practice, the Practitioner is to work only in an
accredited group practice. (Group is defined as 2 or
more medical practitioners
excluding Dr Platt. An accredited practice is defined as one that is currently
certified by an appropriate
General practice accrediting certifier as complying
with the current (4th Ed) RACGP Standards of Accreditation);
(5) If practising in general practice other than in her own practice, the
Practitioner is to notify the owner/s and principal of
the practice, and any
other practitioner (including future practitioners) who may be working on site
with her of these conditions
and to forward to the Council, within 7 days, a
copy of these Conditions signed by each one of those
practitioners;
(6) Any subsequent change in the Practitioner's Schedule 8 and/or Schedule 4D
prescribing status must be in accordance with the Council's
protocol. Prior to
the submission of any variation application to the PSU, pursuant to s 163(1)(a)
National Law (NSW)
, the Practitioner must seek and obtain approval
of the Council to the lifting of conditions (1), (2) and (3) above, and to the
re-instatement
of any withdrawn prescribing authority;
(7) The Practitioner is to authorise and consent to any exchange of information
between the Council and Medicare Australia and/or
the Pharmaceutical Services
for the purpose of monitoring compliance with these
conditions;
(8) The Practitioner is to attend a Council approved psychologist for the
purpose of counselling sessions for a minimum period of
12 months from the date
of the first consultation. All expenses associated with the counselling as set
out in this condition are
to be met by the Practitioner. To facilitate this
condition the Practitioner is to:
(a) Nominate a psychologist for Council approval within 21 days of this
(b) Meet with the psychologist within one fortnight of being advised by the
Council that her nominated psychologist has been approved,
and to thereafter
meet fortnightly or monthly as determined by the psychologist, but to meet at
least once a month, unless the Council
directs otherwise;
(c) Provide the psychologist with a copy of the report of Dr O'Brien dated 1
July 2013, a copy of the transcript of evidence of Dr
O'Brien and a copy of this
Tribunal's Reasons for Decision dated 9 August 2013;
(d) Authorise the psychologist to provide the Council with a report of the
Practitioner's progress in the approved format on a 3
(e) Authorise the psychologist to notify the Council immediately if there are
any concerns or issues in relation to the Practitioner's
compliance with any
condition or if the counselling relationship ceases
prematurely.
(9) The Practitioner is to nominate a supervisor within the next 28 days to be
approved by the Council, to monitor and review her
clinical practice and
compliance with conditions in accordance with
Level 3 Supervision
contained in the Council's Guidelines for Supervision (Policy PCH 7.4). The
supervisor is to be an approved RACGP supervisor recognised
by AHPRA as having
specialist registration within general practice. The supervisor is to be
provided with a copy of the Council's
Policy for Supervision, and a copy of this
decision. The Practitioner is to be responsible for all costs associated with
the supervision
arrangement. The Practitioner is to ensure
(a) She has shown and discussed this Decision with the
supervisor.
(b) She and the supervisor meet on an initially fortnightly basis for 3 months
for at least two hours on each occasion, and then
monthly, the first meeting to
occur within two weeks of being advised by the Council that her nominated
supervisor has been approved.
(c) At the first meeting she and the supervisor are to develop a written plan,
identifying the practice issues to be addressed and
the ways in which to address
deficiencies. Progress of compliance with this plan is to be regularly reviewed
at these meetings.
(d) The meetings with the supervisor should comprise a mixture of direct
observation of her practice in addition to discussion of
a mixture of
self-selected and randomly selected cases.
(e) At each meeting they address issues as set out in the decision of the
Medical Tribunal dated 9 August 2013 and case reviews,
medical record reviews,
workload, pathology result reviews, clinical outcomes, patient follow up
communication skills, overall patient
care and management, appropriate
prescribing practices.
(f) At each meeting, the supervisor completes a record of matters discussed at
the meeting in a format prescribed or approved by
(g) At each meeting the Practitioner is to maintain a log of the patients
observed/reviewed and the issues discussed.
(h) The supervisor forwards to the Council, initially on a monthly basis for the
first 6 months and then subsequently every 3 months
a Supervision Report in a
format prescribed or approved by the Council.
(i) The supervisor is authorised to inform the Council immediately if there is
any concern in relation to the practitioner's compliance
with the supervision
requirements, compliance with other conditions of registration, clinical
performance, health or if the supervisor
relationship
(j) In the event that the approved supervisor is no longer willing or able to
provide the supervision required, details of a replacement
supervisor are
forwarded for approval by the Council within 21 days of the cessation of the
original supervisory relationship;
(10) The Practitioner is to obtain Council approval prior to changing the nature
or place of her practice;
Medical Records Audit
Medical Records Audit referred to in sub-paragraph (4) of paragraph [85] above
is as follows:
(1) The Practitioner is to submit to an audit at her premises, of a random
selection of her medical records by a person or persons
nominated by the Council
to assess her compliance with the relevant provisions of the Health Practitioner
Regulation (New South Wales)
2010 (Pt 4 and Sch 2) and the RACGP's Standards for
General Practices (4th Ed), in particular Standard 1.7 'Content of Patient
Records' with particular attention to her assessment of patients,
treatment plans and prescribing of medication.
(2) The audit is to occur within 6 (six) months from the date of this decision
and subsequently at 12 (twelve) monthly intervals,
or as required by the
Council. The Practitioner is to authorise the Auditor/s to provide the Council
with a report on their findings.
The Practitioner is to meet all costs
associated with the audit/s and any subsequent reports. The Practitioner is not
to seek a variation
in this condition until there have been 2 such
Review of conditions of practice
review of practice conditions referred to in sub-paragraph (5) of paragraph [85]
above are subject to the following provisions:
(1) These conditions may be altered, varied or removed by the Council and the
Council is the appropriate review body for the purposes
of Div 8 Pt 8 of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
(2) Should the Practitioner seek to change or remove any of the conditions
imposed as a result of this Tribunal's orders when her
principal place of
practice is anywhere in Australia other than in New South Wales, sections 125 to
127 inclusive of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
apply, so that a review of these conditions can be conducted by the Medical
Board of Australia.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (227 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter