URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCA/2025/245.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:46:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
EFG v Secretary, Department of Communities and Justice [2025] NSWCA 245 (17 November 2025)
Court of Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
EFG v Secretary, Department of Communities and Justice
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCA 245
Hearing Date(s):
5 November 2025
Date of Orders:
17 November 2025
Decision Date:
17 November 2025
Bell CJ at [1]
Mitchelmore JA at [2]
Kirk JA at [49]
1. Appeal dismissed.
2. The appellant is to pay the second
respondent’s costs of the appeal.
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW – appeal from judicial review decision –
legal unreasonableness –certificate under
Costs in Criminal Cases Act 1967
(NSW) – determination of costs that should be paid by Secretary of
Department – whether Secretary bound to award “costs
incurred” – application of Attorney General’s payment rates
for solicitors and counsel – standard
of legal unreasonableness –
advertence to policy considerations – statutory purpose – no error
in reasoning of
primary judge
Legislation Cited:
Costs in Criminal Cases Act 1967
Suitor’s Fund
Act 1951 (NSW), s 6
Cases Cited:
Carr v Western Australia
(2007) 232 CLR 138
[2007] HCA 47
Re Minister
for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte Applicant S20/2002
(2003) 198 ALR 59
Minister for Home Affairs v DUA16
(2020) 271 CLR
[2020] HCA 46
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
(2018) 264 CLR 541
[2018] HCA 30
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v
(2013) 249 CLR 332
[2013] HCA 18
Patton v Mareangareu (2021) 66 VR 577;
[2021] VSCA 295
Plaintiff M64/2015 v Minister for Immigration and Border
(2015) 258 CLR 173
[2015] HCA 50
R v Anderson; Ex parte Ipec-Air
(1965) 113 CLR 177
[1965] HCA 27
Sharp v Wakefield
[1891] UKLawRpAC 8
Principal judgment
EFG (Appellant)
Secretary, Department of Communities and Justice (First
respondent)
State of New South Wales (Second respondent)
Representation:
T Molomby SC (Appellant)
P Herzfeld SC and D Birch (Second
respondent)
Solicitors:
Giles George (Appellant)
Crown Solicitor
for NSW (First and second respondents)
File Number(s):
2025/00124203
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Supreme Court
[2025] NSWSC 164
Date of Decision:
10 March 2025
File Number(s):
2024/00396267
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(Rule 36.11)
that unless the Court otherwise orders, a judgment or order is taken to be
entered when it is recorded in the Court's computerised
court record system.
Setting aside and variation of judgments or orders is dealt with by
Rules 36.15
. Parties should in particular note the time limit of
fourteen days in
Rule 36.16.]
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
The appellant was acquitted following a trial on indictment in the District
Court for three counts of sexual intercourse without consent
and one count of
attempted sexual intercourse. He applied to the trial judge for a certificate
Costs in Criminal Cases Act 1967
(NSW) (Costs Act) in relation
to his costs, and a certificate was granted.
By s 4 of the Costs Act, a person to whom a certificate has been granted
may apply to the first respondent (Secretary) for payment
from the Consolidated
Fund of the costs incurred in the proceedings to which the certificate relates.
Section 4(2) provides that
the Secretary may, if of the opinion that the making
of a payment to an applicant is justified, determine the amount of costs that
should be paid to the applicant, not exceeding the maximum amount referred to in
s 4(3). Relevantly for present purposes, the maximum
amount in s 4(3)
is the amount that, in the Secretary’s opinion, would reasonably have been
incurred by the applicant in the
proceedings.
The appellant applied to the Secretary for payment of his costs pursuant to
the certificate in the amount of $515,423.66. In determining
the amount of costs
to be paid, the Secretary assessed the maximum amount of costs as $419,976.07.
The Secretary then moderated that
amount using the Attorney General’s
payment rates for solicitors and counsel (the AG’s rates), resulting in a
final figure
of $188,172.20.
The appellant sought judicial review of the Secretary’s decision,
contending that the second step in the Secretary’s process
rendered the
decision legally unreasonable. The primary judge dismissed that application. His
Honour construed s 4(2) of the Costs
Act as expressly envisaging payments
that were less than the maximum amount of reasonably incurred costs, with no
express or implied
constraint upon the Secretary adopting a scale which he or
she, acting reasonably, considers appropriate. Determining an amount less
the maximum amount was not, in his Honour’s opinion, inconsistent with the
statutory purpose of the Costs Act, which is
directed towards providing an
element of indemnification and not a complete indemnity. To the extent that the
appellant contended
that the Secretary had unreasonably departed from a past
practice of assessing rates in accordance with principles in civil cost
assessments, the evidential basis for that contention was weak and the Secretary
was not, in any event, bound by past practice.
On appeal, the appellant contended that the primary judge did not adequately
identify the purpose of the Costs Act (ground 1), misconstrued
s 4 (ground 2),
and failed to determine the legal standard of unreasonableness and find that the
Secretary’s decision fell
short of that standard (grounds 3 and 4).
The Court held
(Mitchelmore JA, Bell CJ and Kirk JA agreeing)
dismissing the appeal with costs:
(1) As to grounds 1 and 2, there was no error in the primary
judge’s description of the Costs Act as concerned with partial,
than complete, indemnity. That description is consistent with the conferral of
the power to determine the amount of costs
to be paid subject to a cap, and with
the additional statutory purpose of appropriate expenditure and maintenance of
public funds.
Although the Act may be broadly described as beneficial, that does
not compel a construction of its provisions otherwise unsupported
by the text
and context: [
Carr v Western Australia
(2007) 232 CLR 138
[2007] HCA 47
(2) As to grounds 3 and 4, his Honour’s reasoning
process did not disregard the requirement to act reasonably. Rather, his
Honour’s approach was orthodox and proceeded from his construction of
s 4(2) and his assessment of the standard of reasonableness
]. There is no
freestanding requirement to exercise discretionary functions in accordance with
the requirements of “reason and
justice”. A decision made in the
exercise of a statutory power is unreasonable in a legal sense when it lacks an
evident and
plausible justification: [
]. None of the matters relied upon by the appellant to
impugn the Secretary’s determination below or on appeal rendered it
unreasonable
in the relevant sense: [
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v Li
(2013) 249 CLR 332
[2013] HCA 18
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
(2018) 264 CLR 541
[2018] HCA 30
Minister for Home Affairs v DUA16
(2020) 271 CLR 550
[2020] HCA 46
: I agree with Mitchelmore JA.
MITCHELMORE
: This is an appeal from a decision of Basten AJ dismissing the
appellant’s challenge to the validity of a decision of the first
respondent (Secretary) that an amount of $188,172.20 be paid by way of costs
pursuant to a certificate granted under the
Costs in Criminal Cases Act 1967
(NSW) (Costs Act):
EFG v Secretary, Department of Communities and
[2025] NSWSC 164.
the court below, the appellant contended that the Secretary’s decision as
to the amount of costs was legally unreasonable
on a number of bases, each of
which the primary judge rejected. On appeal, the appellant alleged that his
Honour erred in the following
(1) His Honour failed to “identify adequately” the purpose of the
Costs Act (ground 1).
(2) His Honour misconstrued s 4 of the Costs Act (ground 2).
(3) His Honour failed to determine the legal standard of reasonableness in
relation to the Secretary’s reliance upon the Attorney
payment rates for solicitors and counsel engaged by Government departments and
agencies (the AG’s rates) (ground
(4) His Honour failed to hold that the Secretary’s discretion was
exercised “in a manner that fell short of the necessary
legal standard of
reasonableness”.
was the case in the court below, the appeal ultimately turns on the proper
construction of s 4 of the Costs Act. For the following
reasons, the
primary judge’s construction was correct, as was his Honour’s
conclusion that the Secretary’s decision
was not legally unreasonable in
any of the respects that the appellant maintains on the appeal. The appeal must
be dismissed.
only the second respondent, the State of New South Wales, took an active role in
the appeal (the Secretary filed a submitting appearance),
references below to
“the respondent” are to the second
respondent.
Factual background to the Secretary’s
was no dispute about the background leading to the Secretary’s decision,
and it suffices for present purposes to refer
to the primary judge’s
summary at [2]-[6].
2019, the appellant was charged with three counts of sexual intercourse without
consent and one count of attempted sexual intercourse
without consent. The
appellant entered pleas of not guilty. In May 2022, following a trial in the
District Court, the appellant
was acquitted: at [2].
his acquittal, the appellant applied for a certificate under the Costs Act. He
relied on fifteen matters to satisfy the
statutory precondition, in
s 3(1)(a), that if the prosecution had been in possession of the relevant
evidence before instituting
the proceedings, it would not have been reasonable
to institute them: at [3]. On 6 July 2022, the trial judge directed that a
certificate
under the Costs Act be granted: at [3]. His Honour accepted that the
matters on which the appellant relied, in combination, satisfied
the criterion
in s 3(1)(a). His Honour was also satisfied that for the purposes of
s 3(1)(b), there were no acts or omissions of
the appellant that
contributed to the institution or continuation of the proceedings: at [3].
9 October 2023, the appellant’s solicitors applied for payment of costs
pursuant to the certificate, seeking an amount of
$515,423.66. Section 4 of the
Costs Act provides:
4 Payment of costs
(1) A person to whom a certificate has been granted under this
Act may apply to the Director-General for payment from the Consolidated
costs incurred in the proceedings to which the certificate relates. The
application is to be accompanied by a copy of the
certificate.
(2) The Director-General may, if of the opinion that, in the
circumstances of the case, the making of a payment to the applicant
justified, determine the amount of costs that should be paid to the applicant,
not exceeding the maximum amount referred to in
subsection (3).
(3) The maximum amount is the amount that, in the opinion of
the Director-General, would reasonably have been incurred for costs
applicant in the proceedings, reduced by any amounts that, in the opinion of the
Director-General, the applicant—
(a) has received or is entitled to receive, or
(b) would, if the applicant had exhausted all relevant rights
of action and other legal remedies available to the applicant, be
entitled to
independently of this Act, because of the applicant’s having incurred
those costs.
(4) The Director-General may refuse an application under this
section if of the opinion that, in the circumstances of the case,
the making of
a payment to the applicant is not justified or (without limitation) if costs are
otherwise recoverable.
25 June 2024, the Secretary determined that the amount to be paid was
$188,172.20. The Secretary notified the appellant of that
decision in a letter
to his solicitors dated 26 June 2024. Following receipt of
correspondence from the appellant’s solicitors
disputing aspects of the
decision, the Secretary sent a further letter, dated 14 August 2024,
which provided additional reasons for
the determination. In the court below, the
parties agreed that both letters constituted the reasons for the
Secretary’s decision:
the primary judge summarised at [5], in determining the amount to be paid, the
Secretary adopted a two-stage process:
“The first step was an assessment of the ‘maximum amount’
incurred, being those costs which were determined to
have been ‘reasonably
incurred’ in the proceedings the subject of the certificate. The removal
of items which were found
not to satisfy that test resulted in a figure of
$419,976.07. The second step involved the assessment of amounts to be allowed
those items in accordance with the Attorney General’s payment rates
for solicitors and counsel, as in force at the relevant
times. Those are the
rates generally applied to lawyers in private practice acting for government
officers and agencies.”
his Honour observed at [9], there was no challenge in the court below in
relation to the first step in the Secretary’s process.
appellant’s contention that the Secretary’s decision was legally
unreasonable rested on the second step.
The application for
judicial review and the decision of the primary judge
appellant advanced seven particulars in support of the contention that the
Secretary’s decision was unreasonable.
The primary judge observed
at [14] that three of the seven particulars focused solely on the
Secretary’s application of the
AG’s rates (particulars (c), (d) and
(e)). Relatedly, particular (g) alleged that the decision was
“contrary to the practice
of the Department over many years from the
commencement of the [Costs Act], which was to pay such costs on a party and
party basis”.
As his Honour said at [15], that particular implied that the
change from that policy to adopting the AG’s rates was capricious
Honour further observed that two of the particulars appeared to allege errors of
law, respectively contending that in making the
decision the Secretary failed to
comply with the purpose of the Costs Act (particular (a)) and reduced the amount
to be paid to significantly
less than the amount already determined to be
reasonable costs (particular (b)). The remaining particular alleged, in
an error of fact, namely that the Secretary took the view that senior
counsel appeared in the trial with a junior, when senior counsel
appeared alone
(particular (f)). The appellant did not pursue this particular on the
the centrality of s 4(2) of the Costs Act, his Honour considered that when read
with s 4(3), s 4(2) incorporates three discretionary
elements (or
“evaluative judgments”) (at [12]), the second and third of which I
have reordered to reflect their practical
(1) The first involves the Secretary forming an opinion as to whether the making
of a payment “is justified”: at [11].
(2) The second involves determining the cap, being “the maximum amount
referred to in subsection (3)”. The primary judge
placed this element
third but recognised that it is an antecedent exercise to the operative
determination because it sets a limit
on the amount which should be paid: at
(3) The third involves determining “the amount of costs that should be
paid”, subject to the cap: at [12].
Secretary determined, in the appellant’s favour, that a payment was
justified (the first element), and the appellant did
not take issue with the
Secretary’s determination of the maximum amount (the third element). The
appellant’s complaint
of unreasonableness was directed to the second
discretionary element. The appellant took issue with the Secretary applying the
rates and the ultimate decision to award less than the maximum
primary judge concluded that in its terms, s 4(2) of the Costs Act
“envisages payments which do not reach the maximum amount
of reasonably
incurred costs”: at [41]. His Honour later observed that the subsection
empowered the Secretary to pay a lesser
amount than that identified as the
maximum amount by reference to s 4(3), and s 4 did not expressly
constrain how that lesser amount
was to be determined: at [54]. His Honour
accepted that s 4 impliedly required that the amount to be paid should be
determined by
reference to the circumstances of the individual case: at [55].
However, his Honour did not consider it was possible to imply a requirement
the costs be subject to the kind of assessment made in civil cases, for example
in accordance with the terms of legislation
governing the legal profession: at
primary judge could discern “no constraint expressed in the Costs Act
which precludes the Secretary from adopting any scale
which he or she, acting
reasonably, considers appropriate”, including the AG’s rates: at
[41]. There was a published
policy that indicated that the Secretary’s
approach to s 4(2) would involve applying those very rates, although his
considered that even if that were not the case there would be no reason
why the Secretary could not apply them: at [41]. The policy
document, which was
in evidence before the primary judge, stated:
“This document sets out the Department of Communities & Justice
)’s policy and procedures for assessing applications under the
Costs in Criminal Cases Act 1967
The purpose of the Act is to compensate defendants who have been acquitted or
discharged, in certain circumstances. A court may grant
a certificate under the
Act to a defendant who has been acquitted or discharged at any time during a
trial, or if the defendant successfully
appeals against a conviction.
The Assessment Process
Applications under the Act are assessed by DCJ Legal.
An assessment comprises the following steps:
1. Determination as to whether payment is justified in the circumstances of the
2. If payment is justified, determination as to the costs that have reasonably
been incurred; and
3. Moderation of the reasonably incurred costs, in accordance with the Attorney
)’s rates applicable at the time relating to the
proceedings for Legal Representation and departmental guidelines (where
applicable),
to determine the amount for payment.”
Department drew the policy document to the appellant’s attention at the
outset of the Secretary’s assessment process.
Both in his submissions and
in the letter sent after receiving the Secretary’s determination, the
appellant strongly objected
to the AG’s rates. As his Honour noted at
[35], the Secretary’s letter of 14 August 2024, which formed part of the
“In determining the payment amount under section 4(2) of the Act, regard
was given to the Department of Community & Justice’s
applying the Attorney General’s agreed rates to applications under the
In accordance with this policy, the costs considered to have been reasonably
incurred were moderated in accordance with the relevant
Attorney General’s
agreed rate ... where the charge exceeded these rates.”
light of the above matters, in so far as the appellant alleged that the
AG’s rates were an irrelevant consideration (particular
(c)), his Honour
rejected this allegation, describing it as misconceived: at [40], [60].
to particular (d), by which the appellant contended that in applying the
AG’s rates the Secretary failed to take into account
features of the
proceedings that required particular expertise, his Honour considered that
applying fixed rates could not of itself
have given rise to that problem, as it
was “precisely the approach adopted by solicitor and counsel in specifying
rates which they would charge”: at [61]. Addressing the substance
of the complaint, his Honour stated:
“[61] ... In effect, the complaint was that they were entitled to charge
more. So they were; but unless the plaintiff was entitled
to be indemnified for
whatever his lawyers charged, that fact does not demonstrate that the
Secretary’s decision was unreasonable.
[62] Nor is it correct to say that the Secretary did not consider the level of
expertise required. As appears to have been the thrust
of particular (f), the
Secretary determined that the matter did not warrant a payment based on rates
charged by senior counsel. Thus,
when the Secretary did take account of the
level of expertise required, that too was said to be an error. The
straightforward point
is that the level of expertise involved was not an
irrelevant consideration, but a matter which the Secretary was permitted to take
into account, and did so, as considered appropriate. Those decisions cannot be
challenged as unlawful. Particular (d) must be rejected.”
Honour also rejected the allegation that the decision was unreasonable because
adopting the AG’s rates resulted in costs
in a criminal proceeding being
paid at a much lower rate than costs in a civil proceeding (particular (e)).
Apart from the fact that
the AG’s rates were also to be applied in civil
matters in assessing costs for a certificate granted under s 6 of the
Suitor’s Fund Act 1951
(NSW), his Honour saw nothing in the Costs
Act that required the Secretary to adopt a level of hourly and daily rates which
be adopted in conducting a party and party assessment of costs in a civil
proceeding: at [43]. His Honour stated that implying such
a requirement
“would be inconsistent with the express language envisaging a power to
determine a lesser amount than the ‘reasonably
incurred costs’,
which, on one view, might require such an assessment”: at [43]; and see
also [63]-[64].
the appellant’s reliance on a past practice by which costs were assessed
on principles adopted in assessing party
and party costs in civil matters to
establish unreasonableness (particular (g)) rested on a limited evidential
basis: at [50]. In
any event, there were more fundamental problems:
“[50] Putting to one side the flimsy evidential basis for the content of a
practice in earlier times, the submission must fail
because there can be no
unlawfulness in simply varying an administrative practice applying one set of
rates to apply another, where
both are permissible. The contention that any
unexplained change in practice must be ‘arbitrary’ is fundamentally
Even adopting long-since discarded terminology, the plaintiff can
have had no ‘legitimate expectation’ that his application
assessed in accordance with a particular policy or practice, when the policy and
practices as presently applied were publicly
[51] Nor was senior counsel for the plaintiff able to identify any case in which
such a general proposition as that proposed by him
had been accepted. Indeed,
administrative law principles set themselves against reliance on practices or
policies to fetter administrative
decision-making. This was not a case where a
promise had been made to the plaintiff, but not fulfilled. And even if there had
such a promise, the general rule is that no equivalent to estoppel by
representation can narrow the scope of a statutory discretion.
[53] Even if the rates currently adopted in the Attorney General’s
guideline were lower than those adopted in the past, by
comparison with other
measures of identifying reasonably incurred legal costs in relation to private
practice (a fact not established
by the evidence), that would not demonstrate
that the rates applied were legally unreasonable. The fact that the rates are
on a daily basis by the many lawyers in private practice who do
State Government work precludes acceptance of such
a conclusion.”
Honour further observed in this context at [57] that a reference to party and
party costs was no more than an analogy, and was
inapposite:
“The government bears the costs of meeting a certificate under the Costs
Act because of the public interest in reimbursing
a person found not guilty of
criminal charges for at least part of the costs incurred in defending the
charges. The government is
not in the same position as an opposing party in
civil proceedings. Nor is there a clear analogy with solicitor and client costs:
the government is not in a contractual relationship with the plaintiff.”
followed from the above reasons that his Honour rejected particular (b), which
contended that the decision was unreasonable in
awarding any other amount than
that determined as the “reasonable costs incurred” (being the
maximum amount as assessed
under s 4(3)): at [58]. His Honour also concluded
that the statutory purpose of the Costs Act did not assist the appellant
(particular
(a) alleged that the Secretary failed to comply with that purpose).
The assumption that underpinned the appellant’s argument
as to purpose was
that the Costs Act was intended to indemnify the holder of a certificate for the
reasonable costs incurred in the
proceedings to which the certificate applied.
Although his Honour accepted that the purpose of the Act was “to provide
of indemnity in the circumstances in which a certificate is
provided”, it was “no part of the statutory scheme to provide
indemnity”. Nor was it the purpose of s 4 to provide a full indemnity
for costs “reasonably incurred”. If
that had been the intention,
“the power would have been conferred in terms which did not distinguish
between determination
of the ‘maximum amount’, being the costs
reasonably incurred, and the amount which might be provided at the discretion
the Secretary”: at [65].
The appeal from the decision of
the primary judge
appellant accepted that s 4(2) of the Costs Act confers a discretion on the
Secretary to determine the amount of costs to be paid
pursuant to a certificate.
However, he submitted that once the Secretary determined the “maximum
costs” by reference
to the costs reasonably incurred, there was no
apparent reason why that amount should not be awarded in the ordinary course.
appellant submitted in writing that the discretion in s 4(2) as to the
amount of costs to be paid accommodated a situation in
which the costs actually
incurred were less than the reasonable costs. In oral submissions, senior
counsel for the appellant submitted
that the discretion was limited to
exceptional circumstances that undermined paying the maximum amount to which
s 4(3) refers, such
as where facts come to light subsequent to the grant of
the certificate that impugn the applicant’s innocence.
appellant further submitted that reducing the amount of costs reasonably
incurred by reference to the AG’s rates was unreasonable.
Those rates
were intended primarily for use between the State and its legal representatives
and were not “a good fit”
in terms of assessing costs in criminal
cases under the Costs Act, and created “a massive difference” in the
of costs paid by the State as between civil and criminal cases. The
Secretary’s routine (inflexible) reliance on the AG’s
rates produced
results that were contrary to the purpose of the Costs Act and was arbitrary,
capricious and irrational. By contrast,
the past practice by which costs were
assessed on a party and party basis was “necessarily in accordance with
the legal standard
of reasonableness”. The reason for departing from that
practice was unknown and, by implication, was also arbitrary and capricious.
both the written and oral submissions, the appellant described the
Secretary’s approach, in exercising the discretion in
s 4(2) of the
Costs Act and adopting the AG’s rates, as contrary to “the rules of
reason and justice”. It is the
case that in
Minister for Immigration
and Citizenship v Li
(2013) 249 CLR 332
[2013] HCA 18
”) at [24], French CJ referred to Kitto J’s
observation, in
R v Anderson; Ex parte Ipec-Air Pty Ltd
[1965] HCA 27
(1965) 113 CLR
[1965] HCA 27
, that a discretion conferred by statute has to be
exercised according to the rules of reason and justice. However, the context is
important. Kitto J referred to the exercise of a discretion according to the
rules of reason and justice in contradistinction to
a discretion that was
exercised according to “private opinion”. His Honour went on to say
that a discretion must be exercised
“according to law, and not humour, and
within those limits within which an honest man, competent to discharge the
his office, ought to confine himself”. The “rules of
reason and justice”, the precise content of which Kitto J
elaborate upon, do not constitute a standard that is independent of legal
unreasonableness, against which the exercise of
a statutory discretion is to be
the joint judgment in
explained, a decision made in the exercise of a
statutory power is unreasonable in a legal sense when it lacks an evident and
justification: at [76]. The legal standard of reasonableness is
“the standard indicated by the true construction of the statute”:
[67]. Whether the requirements of legal reasonableness have been satisfied
entails “a close focus upon the particular circumstances
of exercise of
the statutory power: the conclusion is drawn ‘from the facts and from the
matters falling for consideration
in the exercise of the statutory
Minister for Home Affairs v DUA16
(2020) 271 CLR
[2020] HCA 46
requirement of reasonableness “is not a vehicle for challenging a decision
on the basis that the decision-maker ... has
made an evaluative judgment with
which a court disagrees even though that judgment is rationally open to the
decision-maker”:
at [30] (French CJ). Where, as in this case, an
exercise of power by an administrative decision-maker is legitimately informed
considerations of policy, there is a practical difficulty in a court being
satisfied that the test of unreasonableness is met. In
Gageler J identified this practical difficulty as one of two important
constraints on the judicial determination of unreasonableness.
constraint his Honour identified was the stringency of the test. As Kiefel CJ
observed in
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
264 CLR 541
[2018] HCA 30
, the test of unreasonableness is necessarily
stringent “because the courts will not lightly interfere with the exercise
a statutory power involving an area of
discretion”.
Construction of s 4(2) of the Costs Act
and reliance on purpose (grounds 1 and 2)
is convenient to consider grounds 1 and 2 of the notice of appeal together,
given that the appellant relies on statutory purpose
(the subject of ground 1)
primarily as an aid to determining the scope of the discretion in s 4(2)
(the subject of ground 2).
4(2) of the Costs Act confers a discretion on the Secretary to “determine
the amount of costs that should be paid ...
not exceeding the maximum amount
referred to in subsection (3)”. As the primary judge stated at [13], the
conferral of the
power to award costs subject to a cap tells against a
construction of s 4(2) as permitting the Secretary “
make the payment that, in the opinion of the Secretary, ‘would reasonably
have been incurred for costs’” (original
emphasis). The
appellant’s criticism, in writing, that the legislative contemplation of
an award below the maximum amount says
nothing of the circumstances in which
those lesser payments may be made was precisely the point his Honour was making.
The subsection
leaves consideration of those circumstances to the Secretary in
determining the amount of costs that should be paid.
appellant accepted at the hearing that in its terms, s 4(2) of the Costs
Act confers an unlimited discretion to award an amount
less than the maximum
amount. However, he sought to confine the operation of the discretion to
exceptional circumstances that undermined
the payment of the maximum amount (as
outlined in [
the respondent submitted, if the legislature had intended the discretion to be
so limited, s 4(2) could readily have been drafted
in that way.
appellant submitted that the limitation on the discretion that he advanced was
consistent with the purpose of the Costs Act, which
he identified as rectifying
the injustice caused to innocent persons who were wrongly accused and acquitted
and had incurred legal
costs in defending themselves.
In writing, the
appellant reiterated arguments he made below about the extrinsic materials, an
exercise that the primary judge found
was unproductive, not least because the
current form of s 4 was quite different from the form in which it was
originally enacted:
at [45]-[46].
oral submissions, senior counsel emphasised that the grant of a certificate
under the Costs Act was subject to stringent requirements
which were reflected
in the form of the certificate (see ss 2-3). With that being the case, he
submitted that it was impossible to
imagine that paying less than all of the
costs reasonably incurred would be justified “in a normal case”
where a certificate
is granted. Only partially rectifying the injustice would
be “outside the range of possible acceptable outcomes which are
in respect of the facts and law”, and thus inconsistent with the statutory
indemnification, being the statutory purpose for which the appellant contends,
is inconsistent with the imposition in s 4
of a cap on the maximum amount
of costs that may be recovered pursuant to a certificate. Save for the
circumstances in which a person’s
actual costs are less than the cap,
being the costs determined to have been reasonably incurred, recovery pursuant
to a certificate
will be partial by reason of the cap. That is why the primary
judge described the purpose of the Costs Act as providing an
of indemnity in the circumstances in which a certificate
is provided, but not full indemnity: at [65]. The appellant’s
that his Honour’s description of the statutory purpose in this
regard was incomplete or inadequate must be rejected.
the respondent submitted, the primary judge’s description of the purpose
of the Costs Act was consistent with at least one
additional statutory
objective, being the appropriate expenditure and maintenance of limited public
funds. Apart from the statutory
cap on the amount of costs payable, that
purpose is evident in the conferral of the power in s 4 on the Secretary of
the Department,
a senior public official with oversight of public funds and a
member of the Executive, rather than a member of the Court or a costs
Gleeson CJ explained in
Carr v Western Australia
(2007) 232 CLR 138
[2007] HCA 47
that the general rule in favour of construing a provision
so as to promote the purpose or object of an Act “may be of little
assistance where a statutory provision strikes a balance between competing
interests, and the problem of interpretation is that there
is uncertainty as to
how far the provision goes in seeking to achieve the underlying purpose or
object of the Act”.
the face of the above reasons, the appellant’s characterisation of the
Costs Act as beneficial legislation does not assist.
That legislation may be
broadly described as beneficial does not compel a construction of its provisions
that is otherwise unsupported
as a matter of text and context. As the Victorian
Court of Appeal observed in
Patton v Mareangareu
(2021) 66 VR 577;
, in certain cases describing legislation as having a beneficial
purpose may “not only distract attention from the text, but
offer little
guidance as to its meaning”. The present is such a case.
would dismiss grounds 1 and 2 of the notice of appeal.
on the AG’s rates (grounds 3 and 4)
appellant submitted that in considering the constraints on the exercise of the
discretion in s 4(2), the primary judge did not
consider the requirement to act
“reasonably”. Instead, he submitted, the judgment proceeded on an
assumption that because
the Costs Act contemplated an award less than the amount
of costs reasonably incurred, the Secretary need not act reasonably in
the discretion to determine the amount of the award.
submissions misunderstood his Honour’s path of reasoning. Far from making
any assumption of the nature for which the
appellant contended, the primary
judge’s approach to the allegation of legal unreasonableness was orthodox.
His Honour:
(1) recognised, as a matter of construction, that s 4(2) of the Costs Act
accommodated the Secretary applying a scale of fees when
determining the amount
of costs that should be paid, for the reasons set out at [
(2) concluded that the Secretary’s selection of the AG’s rates fell
“within the range of possible, acceptable outcomes
which are defensible in
respect of the facts and law” (
at [105] (Gageler J)), noting
that those rates were applied on a daily basis by the many lawyers in private
practice doing State government
work (see [
relation to the first aspect of this reasoning, the appellant’s complaints
rested on a construction of s 4(2) that I have
rejected in ground 2. In
relation to the second aspect of his Honour’s reasoning, the
Secretary’s application of a policy
was not of itself legally
unreasonable. As French CJ, Bell, Kiefel, and Gordon JJ stated in
Plaintiff M64/2015 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
(2015) 258 CLR 173
[2015] HCA 50
“Policy guidelines like the priorities policy promote values of
consistency and rationality in decision-making, and the principle
administrative decision-makers should treat like cases alike. In particular,
policies or guidelines may help to promote consistency
in ‘high volume
decision-making’, such as the determination of applications for Subclass
202 visas. Thus in
Re Drake and Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
, Brennan J, as President of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, said
that ‘[n]ot only is it lawful for the Minister to form
a guiding policy;
its promulgation is desirable’ because the adoption of a guiding policy
serves, among other things, to assure
the integrity of administrative
decision-making by ‘diminishing the importance of individual
predilection’ and ‘the
inconsistencies which might otherwise appear
in a series of decisions’.”
taking issue with the application of the AG’s rates in particular, the
appellant submitted that those rates were ordinarily
applied in very different
circumstances, were not designed for the Costs Act, and were inconsistent with
the concept of costs reasonably
incurred to which s 4(3) of the Costs Act
refers. Those submissions called to mind the following observations of
Gleeson CJ in
Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex
parte Applicant S20/2002
[2003] HCA 30
(2003) 198 ALR 59
“As was pointed out in
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
Affairs v Eshetu
, to describe reasoning as illogical, or unreasonable, or
irrational, may merely be an emphatic way of expressing disagreement with
it is suggested that there is a legal consequence, it may be necessary to be
more precise as to the nature and quality of
the error attributed to the
decision-maker, and to identify the legal principle or statutory provision that
attracts the suggested
consequence.”
it is that applying the AG’s rates resulted in the Secretary determining
an amount for payment that was well below the
amount of costs reasonably
incurred that the Secretary relied on for the purposes of s 4(3). That
difference does not render the
decision unreasonable in the requisite sense. As
the respondent submitted, it does not follow from a determination that $X is
for a given purpose that any amount other than $X is legally
unreasonable.
was also no substance in the appellant’s reliance on what he contended was
formerly the practice of determining costs
under the Costs Act, in the manner of
assessing party and party costs in civil cases. Apart from the
“flimsy” state of
the evidence as to this practice (as the primary
judge described it), there could be no unreasonableness in the present case on
basis of the change in policy (assuming such a change for present purposes).
The appellant was on notice of the policy that would
apply in his case.
was there any basis for the appellant’s contention that the decision was
unreasonable because that policy was inflexibly
applied. The correspondence
between the Department and the appellant’s solicitors indicated that the
policy was drawn to the
appellant’s solicitors’ attention at the
outset of the process, along with other documents, and the solicitors were
to make submissions. The solicitors took up that opportunity in
submissions dated 30 November 2023, in which they strongly objected
policy being applied. The solicitors reiterated this objection in their letter
of 8 July 2024, after receiving notification
of the Secretary’s
determination. The responsive letter of 14 August 2024, which formed part of the
reasons, noted that in
some assessments, the Secretary applied a higher rate
than the AG’s rates, such that the policy is not inflexibly applied.
the present was not such a case did not render the decision
unreasonable.
propose the following orders:
(1) Appeal dismissed.
(2) The appellant is to pay the second respondent’s costs of the appeal.
: I agree with Mitchelmore JA.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (317 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter