URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCCA/2025/177.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW) v Davies [2025] NSWCCA 177 (7 November 2025)
Court of Criminal Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW) v Davies
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCCA 177
Hearing Date(s):
22 October 2025
Date of Orders:
07 November 2025
Decision Date:
7 November 2025
Stern JA at [1]
Chen J at [2]
Rigg J at [126]
(1) Appeal allowed.
(2) Set aside the decision dated 12 June
2025 granting the respondent a certificate under
Costs in Criminal
Cases Act 1967
(NSW) and, in lieu thereof, order that the respondent’s
application for a certificate under
Costs in Criminal Cases Act 1967
(NSW) be dismissed.
(3) Dismiss the application for a certificate
Suitors’ Fund Act 1951
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE — costs —
Costs in Criminal Cases Act 1967
(NSW) — appeal against the trial judge’s decision to award a costs
certificate after finding that it was not reasonable
to institute proceedings
against the respondent — whether if the prosecution had evidence of all of
the relevant facts immediately
before the proceedings were instituted it would
not have been reasonable to institute the proceedings — whether the
complainant
was unreliable — whether complaint witnesses gave evidence
that was inconsistent with the complainant’s account —
whether the
trial judge fell into error within the meaning of House v The King —
whether a certificate should be awarded pursuant
Suitors’ Fund Act
(NSW) even if the appeal was successful
Legislation Cited:
Costs in Criminal Cases Act 1967
Crimes Act 1900
Appeal Act 1912
Evidence Act 1995
Suitors’ Fund Act 1951
Cases Cited:
Allerton v DPP
(1991) 24 NSWLR 550
Davies v Director of Public
Prosecutions
[2025] NSWDC 212
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW) v RDT (No
[2019] NSWCCA 66
; (2019) 344 FLR 192
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
v Rokomaqisa
[2025] NSWCCA 112
Higgins v The Queen (No 2)
[2022] NSWCCA
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40
Mordaunt v DPP
(2007) 171 A Crim R 510
[2018] NSWCCA 205
[2019] NSWCCA 290
Zhao v The King
[2024] NSWCCA 229
Principal judgment
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW) (Applicant)
Carwyn Davies
(Respondent)
Representation:
H Roberts SC / A Bonnor (Applicant)
J Stratton SC / N
Carroll (Respondent)
Solicitors:
Solicitor for Public Prosecutions
(Applicant)
George Sten & Co (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2023/00240760
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
District Court of New South Wales at Penrith
Davies v Director of Public Prosecutions
[2025] NSWDC 212
Date of Decision:
12 June 2025
Judge Everson SC
File Number(s):
2023/00240760
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
On 1 May 2025, following a trial in the District Court of New South Wales at
Penrith, a jury found Carwyn Davies (‘the respondent’)
not guilty of
having sexual intercourse without the complainant’s consent, contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
Following his acquittal, the respondent applied to the trial judge, his
Honour Judge Everson SC, for a certificate under
Costs in Criminal
Cases Act 1967
(NSW) to enable him to recover costs he had expended in
defending the charge. The respondent argued that he should be granted a
certificate
because it was not reasonable for the prosecution to institute
proceedings against him given what he submitted was the established
unreliability of the complainant.
On 12 June 2025, the trial judge granted the respondent a certificate,
holding that the respondent had discharged the onus on him
to demonstrate that
the prosecution instituted against him was not reasonable. In so concluding, the
trial judge found there were
significant weaknesses in the Crown case in two
respects – first, there were “glaring differences” between
the complainant claimed she told other witnesses and what those witnesses
stated they had been told by the complainant and, secondly,
“contrasting aftermath account” said to be evident upon a comparison
between the complainant’s evidence in
chief and her evidence when
cross-examined.
The Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW) sought to appeal, pursuant to
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
(NSW), against the trial
judge’s decision to award a costs certificate, arguing that the trial
judge erred in his assessment
of the complaint evidence and that his
Honour’s decision was unreasonable or plainly unjust.
The Court (per Chen J, Stern JA and Rigg J agreeing)
, allowing the
appeal and setting aside the trial judge’s decision to award a costs
certificate, held that:
(1) The trial judge erred in finding that the complainant’s
mother’s evidence was inconsistent with the complainant’s
(Chen J at [
JA agreeing at [
Rigg J agreeing at [
]). The trial judge thus fell into error by mistaking
the facts (Chen J at [
], Stern JA agreeing at [
] and Rigg J agreeing at
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40
(2) In relation to Ms Azzopardi’s evidence, while there were
differences between her account and the complainant’s, the
trial judge
also erred in finding that her evidence was inconsistent with the
complainant’s (Chen J at [
], Stern JA agreeing at [
], Rigg J agreeing at
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40
(3) In relation to Mr Gietzmann and Mr Antonello’s evidence, there was
room for legitimate differences of opinion about the
proper characterisation of
their evidence such that it was not the case that the trial judge erred in his
assessment and findings
(Chen J at [
], Stern JA agreeing at [
(4) In redetermining the application, while the case raised issues about the
credibility and reliability of the complainant and other
witnesses supporting
her account, the difference in the accounts were questions to be decided by the
jury (Chen J at [
], Stern JA agreeing at [
]). Any questions
concerning the complainant’s subsequent conduct after the alleged assault,
even those which may be construed
as inconsistent with the alleged assault, were
also questions to be determined by the jury. It would not have been unreasonable
the prosecution to institute the proceedings even if possessed of evidence
of all the relevant facts relied upon by the respondent
(Chen J at [
], Stern JA agreeing
Higgins v The Queen (No 2)
[2022] NSWCCA 82
; Mordaunt v
[2007] NSWCA 121
(2007) 171 A Crim R 510
Zhao v The King
[2024] NSWCCA 229
Per Rigg J, in relation to the “contrasting aftermath account”,
the significance of this evidence was the way in which
the complainant herself
endeavoured to portray her circumstances and relations with the respondent after
the alleged offence, but
it was not so profound so as to render it not
reasonable to institute proceedings (Rigg J at [
(5) Given the respondent provided no submissions regarding why the Court
should exercise its discretion in
Suitors’ Fund Act 1951
(NSW) to award a certificate in the event the Director’s appeal was
successful, the application should be refused (Chen J at
], Stern JA agreeing
] and Rigg J at
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW) v RDT (No 2)
[2019] NSWCCA 66
(2019) 344 FLR 192, cited.
: I agree with Chen J.
: By indictment dated 11 July 2024, Carwyn Davies (‘the
respondent’) was charged with a single offence that, on 3 April
Yellow Rock, NSW, he had sexual intercourse without the consent of the
complainant, contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW). He entered a
plea of not guilty to that charge.
respondent was tried before his Honour Judge Everson SC (‘the trial
judge’) and a jury in the District Court at Penrith.
The trial commenced
on 28 April 2025. On 1 May 2025, the jury returned a verdict of not guilty.
his acquittal, the respondent applied to the trial judge for a certificate under
Costs in Criminal Cases Act 1967
(NSW) (‘the Costs
Act’) to permit him to recover his costs incurred in defending the charge.
The respondent’s basic
argument, in support of issue of that certificate,
was that the prosecution of him was not reasonable – in particular, given
what was submitted to be “the established unreliability of the
complainant”.
12 June 2025, his Honour granted the respondent a certificate, finding that the
respondent had discharged the onus on him to prove
that it was not reasonable
for the Crown to institute proceedings against him:
Davies v Director of
Public Prosecutions
[2025] NSWDC 212
(the ‘costs judgment’). The
references to the paragraph numbers in that judgment are expressed as CJ at [1]
Notice of Appeal filed on 26 June 2025, the Director of Public Prosecutions
(‘the Director’) appeals against the decision
to award the
certificate, raising two grounds:
(1) that “[t]he trial judge erred in his assessment of the complaint
evidence”; and
(2) that “[t]he trial judge’s decision to grant a costs certificate
was unreasonable or plainly unjust”.
matters should presently be noted about the Director’s appeal.
it was common ground that the Director is, pursuant to
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
(NSW), entitled to appeal from the decision of
the trial judge to award the costs certificate:
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW) v Rokomaqisa
[2025] NSWCCA 112
the Director confirmed during the course of submissions that, consistent with
the manner in which it had drafted its grounds
of appeal, the standard of
appellate review was not the correctness standard, but that applicable to a
discretionary decision deriving
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40 (T2.35-3.25).
The respondent did not submit to the
contrary. Given the approach of the parties, it is appropriate to proceed in the
way argued.
order to contextualise and resolve the competing arguments on appeal, it is
necessary to address the key and relevant background
facts. The summary of those
facts is principally drawn from the costs judgment supplemented, where
necessary, by reference to the
trial record and divided into eight parts: first,
an introduction to the respective cases; secondly, the complainant's evidence;
thirdly, the complainant’s complaint evidence; fourthly, evidence of the
complainant witnesses; fifthly, the respondent’s
case; sixthly, aspects of
the cross-examination of the complainant; seventhly, the (relevant) parts of the
closing submissions; and,
finally, the trial outcome.
respective cases: introduction
complainant and the respondent both lived in Victoria. In September 2020, they
met via the online dating app, Hinge. They subsequently
commenced a
relationship, during which they “engaged in consensual sexual intercourse
a few times per week”: CJ at [5].
February 2021, they decided to go on a trip to Yellow Rock, a small village in
the Blue Mountains, NSW, for six nights –
between 2 and 8 April 2021.
Crown case at trial was that the respondent digitally penetrated the
complainant’s vagina, without her consent, the morning
after their arrival
whilst she was performing yoga exercises. The Crown indicated during its opening
to the jury that, after the
complainant “broke up” with the
respondent, she told her mother and “some of her friends about what had
taken place”.
The Crown indicated that it was proposed to call evidence
from those friends and the complainant’s mother.
respondent’s counsel, when opening to the jury, accepted that on the first
morning of their stay the complainant was undertaking
yoga exercises and that
whilst she was doing so, the respondent “initiated sexual
intercourse” by “rubbing”
the complainant’s bottom.
However, the respondent’s case was that, whilst initially “she
physically responded”,
the complainant said “no” –
following which the respondent “ceased” that act and “that at
point did his fingers enter into her vagina”.
complainant’s evidence
2 April 2021, the complainant and the respondent drove from Melbourne to Yellow
the course of “talking generally about the accommodation”, the
complainant’s evidence was that the respondent
“started talking
“took the opportunity”
to advise him that she had been unable
“to refill [her] contraception pill”. The complainant’s
evidence was that
the conversation thereafter “wasn’t a very good
conversation” and that the respondent said in a “quite
aggressive”
way: “Looks like we are not having sex, then”. The
complainant said that, after making this statement, the respondent
went quiet afterwards, and it felt extremely tense in the car. And it was just
quiet after that”.
the drive, they experienced a flat tyre which considerably extended the time
involved to reach their destination.
the trial judge found that there was “tension between the couple during
the drive” and, at the time of their
arrival at around 7pm, that tension
“had not resolved” (CJ at [5]), his Honour did not make a further
finding about the
cause, or causes, of that tension.
complainant “went to bed and closed the door hoping that [the respondent]
would maybe sleep in the second room because there
was space”. However,
when she woke up in the morning, the respondent “was in the same bed with
woken, the complainant “got out of the bed”, put on her gym clothes,
set up her yoga mat in front of the television
and began doing some stretches.
By this time, the respondent came out of the bedroom and proceeded to heat up
his breakfast: CJ at
the complainant was performing a yoga pose described as a “downward facing
dog” – which meant that the complainant
was in an upside down
V-shape with her hands and feet touching the ground – the respondent
“walked up behind her, pulled
down her exercise pants and
underwear”: CJ at [7]. The complainant “started saying
‘no’” and, despite
this, the respondent “put his fingers
inside her vagina”, and although she repeatedly kept saying
respondent “continued to penetrate the
complainant’s vagina”: CJ at [7].
complainant’s evidence was that after this occurred, she
“couldn’t talk”, she “pulled [her] pants
that “[n]othing else was said. The complainant gave evidence that she
“put [her] shoes on straightaway
because [she] could feel that [she] was
panicking and ... was very upset” and that she didn’t know how to
what had happened”. She went outside and returned to the
property after she “had calmed down a bit”. When she did,
respondent “asked why [she] ran off and that [they] needed to talk about
the relationship and the conversation that [they]
had in the car. There was no
acknowledgement about what just happened before that”.
complainant gave evidence that, having returned to the house and spoken with the
respondent, she did not “say anything to
him” because she
“felt like [she] had to put it in a box. [She] didn’t feel like
[she] could bring it up because
[they] were in ... very isolated accommodation;
[they] drove in his car; [she] couldn’t leave if [they] had an
The complainant’s evidence was that there was no
“other conversation” between her and the respondent “about
what had occurred”. The complainant did tell the respondent that she
“wanted to leave” and he said in response:
leaving this relationship is over”.
complainant’s evidence was that she spoke with her mother and told her she
“wanted to fly home”, that the accommodation
was “far from a
train station” and that she did not have the “financial means to get
[herself] to the airport and
the respondent had said that he wouldn’t take
[her] to the airport, that he wouldn’t drive [her] anywhere”.
complainant and the respondent stayed at Yellow Rock for the scheduled six
nights, driving back to Melbourne on 8 April 2021.
their return to Melbourne, the respondent stayed at the complainant’s
premises “upstairs in the lounge room on the
couch” for two
relationship between the complainant and respondent ended on 17 April 2021. The
complainant met with the respondent at a café
in Cheltenham because she
“wanted to break up with [the respondent], but in a public
The complaint evidence: the complainant
foreshadowed by the Crown when opening to the jury, the complainant gave
evidence about complaints she had made to friends and
her mother about what
occurred between her and the respondent when she was exercising on the yoga mat
on the morning of 3 April 2021.
trial judge, in the costs judgment, agreed with the respondent’s
submission that the complainant, when invited to give evidence
told each of the complaint witnesses, “used that opportunity to almost
verbatim repeat her allegation about
digital-vaginal penetration”: CJ at
the importance attached to complaint evidence given at trial, it is useful to
briefly set out the complainant’s evidence
on that topic.
complainant’s evidence was that, prior to the end of the relationship
between her and the respondent, she “went out
for dinner” with Cale
Antonello and she “told him about what happened in Yellow Rock”
– that is, that the
respondent “pulled [her] pants down and he put
his fingers inside of [her] vagina”.
“few days after” the conversation that the complainant had with Mr
Antonello, she spoke with Emma Azzopardi. It appears
that, at this time, Mr
Antonello was also present. The complainant said that she had “something
to tell [Ms Azzopardi] about
the trip to Yellow Rock ... but [she was] not going
to like it”, and she “told her about what had happened, the details
repeated back to him, I thought we would having sex on this
complainant later added that she told Ms Azzopardi that, when undertaking her
stretches and yoga poses, the respondent
“pulled [her] pants down and put
his fingers inside of [her] while [she] kept saying no and that the only way he
was when [she] said I thought we weren’t having sex on this
complainant spoke with Tyronne Gietzmann sometime “after the break
up” on the telephone. During that call, she “told
him about the
details of what [the respondent] did, how he put his fingers inside of [her] and
[she] kept saying no”.
complainant also spoke with her mother on the telephone “about the
trip”, after the relationship had ended. Her evidence
was that she told
her mother the “details about what had happened with [her] in the morning
on [her] yoga mat, and [the respondent]
pulling [her] pants down and putting his
- his fingers inside of [her] vagina”.
The complaint
witnesses: a summary of their evidence
later explained, the trial judge attached
considerable
importance to the
complaint evidence: the respondent’s (successful) application for costs
principally turned on this evidence
and the trial judge’s findings made
when addressing the respective arguments on appeal, given its
centrality to the issues on appeal, it is appropriate to briefly set
evidence from the four witnesses to whom the complainant spoke to about the
events on 3 April 2021: her mother, Tyronne Gietzmann,
Cale Antonello and Emma
The complaint evidence from the complainant’s
complainant’s mother gave evidence that she spoke with her daughter on the
telephone “between the 10th and 17 April”.
Relevantly,
the evidence of the complainant’s mother was that the complainant told her
that when they arrived, they “were
not talking because she was upset about
his reaction to the fact she didn’t have [a] contraceptive pill, so they
were not communicating”.
Her evidence was that the complainant told her
that whilst she “was trying to stretch”, the respondent “came
behind her and started to initiate sex” and that, having done so, the
respondent “put his finger into her vagina. She
told him to stop”.
The complainant’s mother said that the complainant told her that she
“repeatedly asked him to
stop”, and that she did not “recall
whether she said he stopped on his own or whether she pushed him off, but by
he had more fingers in her vagina”.
respondent’s counsel briefly cross-examined the complainant’s mother
2024. During that
cross-examination, the complainant’s mother agreed that she had told
police that the respondent had “whispered
something” in the
complainant’s ear but she could not remember what was said. She also
agreed that she said, “twice
in [her] statement”, that the
respondent “was whispering things in her ear ... while this act was
occurring”.
The complaint evidence from Tyronne
Gietzmann was a friend of the complainant, having known her “for over 10
years”. It was through his friendship
with the complainant that he came to
meet the respondent.
Gietzmann gave evidence that he spoke with the complainant “about the
trip, casually at first, and then - there - the sexual
assault did - was
disclosed as well in the - in the - the weeks after - after”. He was
unable to remember when the
conversation took place, but suggested
it “would have been a few weeks after the trip away”. His evidence
was that the
conversation with the complainant “was in
person” and “would have been maybe a week or two after that initial
call”. It was during this conversation that the complainant told him
that the respondent “had sexually assaulted her”:
his evidence was
that this occurred when she “had been exercising”, the respondent
“had sort of advanced”
and that “she’d indicated a clear
no and that he was pushy and then forced himself on her”.
Gietzmann’s evidence was that the complainant did not “go into any
further details about what was meant by that”
and that he
“didn’t push it either given the sensitive nature of it”. His
evidence was that the complainant “was
visibly upset ... it clearly had
[an] impact on her when she was telling [him] the details”.
Gietzmann was not cross-examined.
The complaint evidence from
Cale Antonello
Antonello was a friend of the complainant, having known her for “[c]lose
to ten years ... now”. He gave evidence
that “[a]t some
point,” he spoke with the complainant after the trip had occurred. When
asked to elaborate upon what
the complainant said “about that trip”,
he said that it “was a very long time ago. The incident that happened,
got told about that, regarding the trip”.
asked to describe what the complainant had told him about “the
incident”, he said that the complainant “was
doing some sort of
yoga” when the respondent “inserted himself into her without her
consent”. Mr Antonello was
asked to recall whether he was told “any
further details” about what was meant by “inserted himself”,
which he responded: “Penetrated her”. Later, he described that
the complainant told him that the respondent’s “penis
was inserted
the evidence from Mr Antonello about what he was told by the complainant
regarding the nature of the penetration that occurred,
the Crown sought leave,
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW), to cross-examine Mr
Antonello based upon the content of paragraph 9 of his police statement dated 12
July 2023 – where
Mr Antonello said: “I don’t remember the
specifics of what the penetration was”.
respondent did not object to the grant of leave, which was duly granted, and the
Crown cross-examined him upon that paragraph
of his statement. During that
cross-examination by the Crown, Mr Antonello was asked to confirm whether what
he told police “in
that statement [was] correct” to which he agreed
it was. Mr Antonello’s attention was then drawn to the last sentence
paragraph 9 of his police statement – which stated: “I know that
[the complainant] used the words ‘penetration’
and said it was
against her will but I don’t remember the specifics of what the
penetration was”. He agreed that what
was contained in that paragraph of
his statement was what he told police on 12 July 2023. When asked to comment
upon whether his
“memory of the conversation” was better now or when
he made his statement on 12 July 2023, his response was: “[i]t’s
probably better now, yeah”.
Antonello was not cross-examined.
The complaint evidence from
Emma Azzopardi
Azzopardi was a friend of the complainant, having known her for “about
eight to ten years”. Ms Azzopardi stayed in
the complainant’s house,
looking after her dog, at the time the complainant and respondent went to Yellow
gave evidence that she spoke with the complainant about the trip the day after
the respondent left the complainant’s home
in Melbourne, or possibly the
next night, at which time the complainant “went into detail about what
happened on the trip”.
Azzopardi said that the complainant told her that “she thought she was
sexually assaulted”, following which Ms Azzopardi
said to her: “What
do you mean by, ‘I think’?”. Her evidence was that the
complainant said to her:
“... she was feeling very anxious, her and [the respondent] had been
arguing and she was doing some yoga to calm and relax
herself and she was in a
downward facing dog position and he came back – came up from behind her
and pulled her pants down
and she asked him to stop and he continued.”
asked to elaborate about whether the complainant said “anything further
during that conversation”, her evidence was:
“She did but I don’t recall exactly what – what she said to
me. She did – she did mention that – can’t
remember the exact
wording but it was along the lines of, ‘He penetrated me.’”
Azzopardi observed that the complainant, whilst she was having that conversation
with her, was “very visibly upset and she
kept stopping to – to take
deep breaths and kind of like staring into nothing, like she was a bit
vacant”. When asked
whether the complainant said anything else to her
during that “conversation about the trip” and what occurred, her
was that the complainant “said that they had been arguing over
the period of the trip, but it’s – honestly it was
it’s a bit blurry so I can’t really recall exactly.”
Azzopardi was briefly cross-examined in connection with the statement she made
to police, dated 23 April 2024. During that cross-examination,
she agreed that,
within her statement, she had said that the complainant told her: “I think
[the respondent] sexually assaulted
me” and also that she told her that he
said: “I’m going to fuck you”.
respondent’s case
the Crown opening, the respondent’s counsel briefly opened to the jury and
in doing so advised them that it was “not
in dispute” that the
complainant began doing exercises on her yoga mat and, further, that it was also
“not in dispute”
that the respondent “initiated sexual
intercourse”: the respondent’s counsel advised the jury that this
the respondent “rubbing” the complainant’s
“bottom, to which she physically responded” but that, following
complainant saying “no”, the respondent “ceased” that
act and “that at no point did his fingers
enter her vagina”.
is convenient to presently note that, during the cross-examination of the
complainant, the respondent’s case was put to her
– the substance of
which was that, whilst she was undertaking her yoga poses, the respondent
“started to play with [the
complainant’s] bottom on the outside of
[her] clothing”, the complainant reciprocated by moving her bottom
and forwards” and that he removed her leggings and
continue to play with, and to kiss, her bottom, but he ceased doing so
moment [the complainant] said no”.
the cross-examination of the complainant and the respondent’s case
cross-examined, a number of additional matters emerged, including (relevantly)
the following four matters:
(1) First, that there was “affection and cuddles” throughout the
stay for the week as well as sexual activity between
the complainant and the
respondent. The complainant accepted that the “sexual activity”
occurred on two occasions –
being 3 and 4 April 2021 – and that the
second occasion involved anal intercourse.
(2) Secondly, although the complainant did not initially recall this, she
ultimately agreed that on 6 April 2021 she went with the
respondent “to
Bondi to sightsee” and that, whilst there, she “posted an image of
[her and the respondent] in Bondi
on [her] socials”.
(3) Thirdly, on 7 April 2021, due to poor weather, the complainant and
respondent “spent the day at [their] accommodation in
Yellow Rock”
and that she sent “a picture of [her] bottom in a black G-string”
from her phone to the respondent’s
phone. The complainant accepted that
the image of her in that photograph “can be described as a sexual
(4) Fourthly, although the relationship ended on 17 April 2021, it was not until
December 2022 that the complainant “decided
to go to the police”.
respondent gave evidence and his account of the interactions that occurred on
the morning of 3 April 2021 was broadly in line
with the case put to the
complainant during cross-examination.
The (relevant) parts of the
closing submissions and summing up
the focus of the Director’s appeal (notably through ground 1) is upon the
finding made by the trial judge about the complaint
evidence, reference will be
made to the way in which the Crown and respondent addressed the jury on that
closing submissions to the jury, the Crown indicated its reliance upon the
“evidence of complaint that the complainant
made to Cale Antonello, Emma
Azzopardi, Tyronne Gietzmann and [the complainant’s mother]”. The
Crown submitted to the
jury that the evidence could be used by them in two
first way the complaint evidence could be used was described in these terms by
“... it can be regarded as additional evidence that the [respondent]
engaged in the sexual activity as described by the complainant
... Not only
would you have the complainant having given evidence before you about the
[non]-consensual sexual activity, but you
also have the description of the
nonconsensual sexual activity by Cale Antonello, Tyronne Gietzmann, Emma
Azzopardi, and [the complainant’s
second way the complaint evidence could be used was described in these terms by
“... it can be relevant to the truthfulness of the complainant’s
evidence in Court. The Crown says that the fact that
she complained to Cale
Antonello, Emma Azzopardi, Tyronne Gietzmann, and her mother ... when she did
and in the manner in which she
did makes it more likely that she’s telling
the truth about the sexual activity that occurred with the [respondent].”
final submissions, the respondent emphasised to the jury that there were two
aspects to the complaint evidence that were “important”
namely, what the complainant “said she told them, and what they
relation to what the complainant said “she told them”, it was
submitted that the complainant “used that opportunity
to almost verbatim
repeat her allegation”. In relation to what the complaint witnesses said,
the essential submission made
was that their accounts were all different and,
given those “different accounts”, they cannot assist in resolving
to accept the complainant’s account beyond reasonable doubt.
his summing up, the trial judge crystallised the competing submissions, on the
complaint evidence, in this way:
“The Crown relies on the evidence of the complainant having told others,
such as her mother, about the conduct of the accused
towards her. The defence
response is to say, ‘Just have a look at what it is that the complainant
says she said to these other
people, and then compare that with what it is those
people say the complainant said, and there’s a difference’.”
trial judge, after reminding the jury about the respondent’s submission in
relation to the complaint evidence, gave the
following direction to
“When you consider the competing arguments about the truthfulness of the
complainant and any gaps, inconsistencies or differences
in her evidence, such
as you may or may not find, you should bear in mind that people may not remember
all the details of an event
in the same way each time, and that trauma may
affect people differently and it may affect how they recall events.
Sometimes there are differences in an account of an alleged sexual offence. Both
untruthful and truthful accounts of an event including
an alleged sexual offence
may contain differences. It is your job, and entirely a matter for you, members
of the jury, as judges
of the facts, to decide whether or not any differences in
the complainant's account, meaning what she said to you here in court and
it is that she says she told other people, and what it is that other people say
to you in their evidence that they were told
by her, are matters that are
important in assessing the truthfulness and reliability of the
complainant.”
The trial outcome: the respondent is acquitted
trial judge summed up to the jury on 30 April 2025. The jury retired to consider
their verdict at 10:30am on 1 May 2025.
11:07am on 1 May 2025, the jury returned a verdict of not guilty and the
respondent was discharged.
The costs proceedings and
The costs proceedings
the jury’s verdict, the respondent foreshadowed his application for a
costs certificate under s 2 of the Costs Act.
timetable was ordered for the exchange of written submissions. The
respondent’s submissions are dated 23 May 2025 and the
submissions are dated 10 June 2025. The trial judge then determined the
application “on the papers” –
that is, upon the basis of the
written submissions, the trial evidence, the complainant’s police
statement dated 13 July 2023
and without a further hearing.
way of brief summary, the respondent argued, relying upon “the evidence
led at trial” as well as the complainant’s
police statement dated 13
July 2023, that, “particularly [given] the established unreliability of
the complainant”, it
was unreasonable to have commenced the prosecution of
the respondent.
respondent, in advancing his application, also relied upon the complaint
evidence. His submission was that the “[C]rown
case essentially contained
various witness [sic] providing versions of inconsistent complaints”. In
furtherance of this submission,
the respondent argued that there were “two
aspects to this, first the evidence given by these witnesses [was] inconsistent
to the allegation in the [C]rown case and second, they were inconsistent to the
evidence given by the complainant”. This submission,
which was not
developed further, and contained no references at all to any of the evidence
said to support it, was accepted by the
trial judge as later noted (see [
](7), below).
Conversely,
the Crown argued that a costs certificate should not issue because the
respondent had failed to demonstrate that “had
the [Crown] been in
possession of all relevant facts before the proceedings were instituted, it
would have been unreasonable to commence
the proceedings”. In relation to
the respondent’s submission about the complaint evidence referred to
above, the Crown
argued that “whilst there were some differences between
the evidence of complaint and the alleged conduct the subject of count
were also a number of consistent aspects”, providing detailed references
in their submissions to the evidence in support
of that overarching
submission.
earlier noted, on 12 June 2025, the trial judge granted the respondent a costs
certificate.
The costs judgment
given the arguments of the parties and the grounds of appeal, it will be
necessary to return to particular parts of the
costs judgment, what follows
sufficiently outlines the key findings and conclusions of the trial judge.
trial judge identified the relevant the statutory provisions and, having done
so, addressed the “relevant facts”,
as follows:
(1) The act described by the complainant in her evidence was “the same act
of sexual intercourse alleged by the complainant
in her statement to the police
dated 13 July 2023 and particularised by the prosecution in its opening
statement to the jury”:
(2) The respondent’s account was that, while he had “initiated
sexual activity with the complainant whilst she was doing
yoga on a mat in the
living room” and that he “played with the complainant’s
‘bum’” – with
her “pants” up and then down
– and touched her “vagina outside of her underwear”, when the
complainant
“said ‘stop’ or ‘no’ ... he pulled
back”: CJ at [9].
(3) Other evidence in the case established that the respondent was “a
person of good character”: CJ at [10].
(4) The complainant first reported the allegation of sexual assault to police in
Victoria on 27 December 2022, and her “statement
of complaint” is
dated 13 July 2023: CJ at [11]. In that statement, in paragraphs 36-39, she
described, following the alleged
sexual assault that she walked around “in
disbelief, crying and hyperventilating, like she was having a panic
The trial judge noted that, “[s]ignificantly”, the
complainant said “the rest of the trip was just cold and tense”:
at [11]. The trial judge found that the complainant’s evidence in chief,
“reflected this account of the aftermath
of the alleged offence, in those
paragraphs of her police statement”: CJ at [12].
(5) The complainant’s account given in her evidence in chief about the
“aftermath” is to be contrasted with the
account the complainant
gave when cross-examined, which the trial judge described in these terms (CJ at
[12]-[13]):
“[12] ... Eventually, the complainant agreed (contrary to her
evidence-in-chief) that there was additional sexual interaction
between the
[respondent] and she [sic], after the alleged offence of 3 April 2021, during
the time they were at Yellow Rock.
[13] Asked, ‘how many times did sexual activity occur between you and [the
respondent] while you were at Yellow Rock?’
The complainant answered,
‘Two ... the morning of the 3rd and the following day’. She added
that that the sexual activity
on the 4th was penile-anal intercourse.”
(6) The trial judge noted that whilst the Crown submitted that the
complainant’s evidence was “truthful and reliable”,
by making “reasonable concessions about the different events that had
taken place after 3 April 2021”, his
Honour also observed that those
“other and different events, omitted by her in her evidence in chief
included an apparently
pleasant trip to Bondi and the sending [of] intimate
photos to the [respondent] on 7 April 2021, whilst they were still at Yellow
Rock”: CJ at [14].
(7) The trial judge considered the submission made by the Crown during
closing submissions to the jury, to the effect that the evidence
given by the
complaint witnesses “supported the credibility of the complainant”,
to be an “ambitious” submission
given “[their] evidence of
complaint was inconsistent with the allegation advanced by the Crown at trial.
To put that another
way, the evidence of the complainant was in each instance
contradicted by the relevant complaint witness”: CJ at [16]. (It
noted that this finding, which is substantially repeated later by the trial
judge in the costs judgment at [28], is challenged
by the Director by ground 1
of the Notice of Appeal).
addressed the “relevant facts”, and setting out the respective
arguments for and against the issue of a costs certificate,
the trial judge
noted that, relevantly here, the entitlement to a costs certificate requires
“an objective analysis of the
whole of the relevant evidence, including
particularly the extent to which there is inherent weakness in the prosecution
CJ at [25].
trial judge observed that, whilst the “credibility and demeanour of the
complainant and the [respondent] were important
considerations”, the
prosecution “did not turn on the credibility or demeanour of the
complainant or the respondent”
and that it was “much more than a
‘word on word’ case”: CJ at [27]. Rather, the trial judge
described what
he considered to be a substantively flawed Crown case, making the
following findings and conclusions (CJ at [28]-[30]):
“[28] The issue in the proceedings featured significant weaknesses in the
Crown case that the Crown must have been aware of
at the outset, namely, the
glaring differences between what the complainant asserted she told her mother
and friends about the alleged
sexual assault and what those complaint witnesses
stated they had been told by the complainant. The relevant facts also include
contrasting aftermath account given by the complainant with the evidence
given by her under cross-examination.
[29] The legitimate interest which the community has in serious crimes being
prosecuted by the Director of Public Prosecutions is
undoubted. That does not
make it reasonable as between the Crown and an accused person, to prosecute in
the face of significant weaknesses
in the Crown case of which the Crown acting
reasonably, ought to have been aware:
(1997) 98 A Crim
[30] In this case, the weaknesses flowing from the glaring differences between
what the complainant asserted she told her mother
and friends about the alleged
sexual assault and what those complaint witnesses stated they had been told by
the complainant meant
the prosecution case was doomed to fail. To be clear, I am
of the opinion that this prosecution of the [respondent] was instituted,
maintained, either without, or in spite of, proper professional advertence as to
whether there existed reasonable prospects of
securing a conviction.”
trial judge accepted that the respondent had “discharged the onus upon
him” of demonstrating that it was “not
reasonable to institute the
proceedings brought against him” and that “if the prosecution had
evidence of all the relevant
facts immediately before the proceedings were
instituted it would not have been reasonable to institute the
proceedings”: CJ
trial judge further found that there was “nothing about this case that
warrant[ed] the exercise of a residual discretion
against the grant of a
certificate where the statutory test [was] otherwise satisfied” and
accordingly granted a certificate
in accordance with s 2 of the Costs Act: CJ at
The Costs Act
The statutory provisions and background principles
2 and 3 of the Costs Act relevantly provide:
Certificate may be granted
(1) The Court or Judge or Magistrate in any proceedings relating to any
offence, whether punishable summarily or upon indictment,
(a) where, after the commencement of a trial in the proceedings, a
defendant is acquitted or discharged in relation to the offence
concerned, or a
direction is given by the Director of Public Prosecutions that no further
proceedings be taken, or
(b) where, on appeal, the conviction of the defendant is quashed
(i) the defendant is discharged as to the indictment upon which he or
she was convicted, or
(ii) the information or complaint upon which the defendant was
convicted is dismissed,
grant to that defendant a certificate under this Act, specifying the matters
referred to in section 3 and relating to those proceedings.
3 Form of certificate
(1) A certificate granted under this Act shall specify that, in the
opinion of the Court or Judge or Magistrate granting the certificate—
(a) if the prosecution had, before the proceedings were instituted,
been in possession of evidence of all the relevant facts, it
would not have been
reasonable to institute the proceedings, and
(b) that any act or omission of the defendant that contributed, or
might have contributed, to the institution or continuation of
the proceedings
was reasonable in the circumstances.
(2) (Repealed)
relation to these provisions, and their application in the present case, the
following three matters should be noted.
s 2(1)(a) was plainly satisfied, given the jury’s verdict. Secondly,
having satisfied that section, ss 3(1)(a) and 3(1)(b)
establish the conditions
that must be satisfied before the Court can grant a certificate:
at [44]. Thirdly, there was no suggestion that s 3(1)(b) was
not met; rather, the
focus of the respondent’s application
turned upon s 3(1)(a) – that is, the opinion reached as to whether,
prosecution had, before the proceedings were instituted, been in
possession of evidence of all the relevant facts, it would not have
reasonable to institute the proceedings”.
3(1)(a) is directed to the hypothetical prosecutor being in “possession of
evidence of all the relevant facts”.
Section 3A defines “all the
relevant facts” to be a reference to “the relevant facts established
in the proceedings”
(s 3A(1)(a)); “any relevant facts that the
defendant has, on the application for a costs certificate, established” (s
3A(1)(b)); and “any relevant facts that the prosecutor” has
established to the satisfaction of the Court that “relate
to evidence that
was in the possession of the prosecutor at the time that the decision to
institute proceedings was made” and
“were not adduced in the
proceedings” (ss 3A(1)(c)(i) and 3A(1)(c)(ii)).
“relevant facts” were those summarised above. On the application,
the respondent tendered the complainant’s
statement made to police on 13
July 2023. The Crown did not tender any evidence.
test posed by s 3(1)(a) is well-established. It is whether, if the
“prosecution had evidence of all of the relevant facts
immediately before
the proceedings were instituted it would not have been reasonable to institute
the proceedings”:
Allerton v DPP
(1991) 24 NSWLR 550
Mordaunt v Director of Public Prosecutions
[2007] NSWCA 121
(2007) 171 A
Higgins v The Queen
[2022] NSWCCA 82
Ground 1: The trial judge erred
in his assessment of the complaint evidence
Introduction
this ground of appeal, the Director challenges the finding that underpinned the
trial judge’s conclusion that the prosecution
of the respondent was, in
effect, unreasonably pursued – namely, that the evidence of the complaint
witnesses was “inconsistent
with the allegation advanced by the Crown at
trial” or, as the trial judge also expressed it, the complainant’s
“was in each instance contradicted by the relevant complaint
witness”: CJ at [16].
outlining the respective arguments on this ground, two matters should presently
be noted. First, the trial judge substantially
repeated this finding when he
described there being “glaring differences” between what the
complainant said she told
her mother and her friends, and their evidence: CJ at
[28], [30]. Secondly, the submissions of the parties approached the matter
the footing that the key finding was the one made in CJ at [16], with the
subsequent references to “glaring differences”
being merely a
different way of expressing that earlier finding. I have approached the
arguments of the parties in conformity with
the way the matter was argued.
Director submitted that, contrary to what the trial judge found, “there
were not ‘glaring differences’ such
that the prosecution was
‘doomed to fail’”; the differences in the complaint evidence
did not amount to “a
‘significant weakness in the Crown
case’”; and the “complainant’s evidence was not
‘in each instance,
contradicted by the relevant complaint
witness’”: the Director argued that these “assessments were
not open on
the evidence and were made in error” (Director’s
submissions at [87]). To be clear, the Director’s challenge to
the finding
extended to
of the four complaint witnesses called.
Director further submitted that the erroneous finding was unquestionably
material to the ultimate determination and vitiated the
trial judge’s
conclusion that s 3(1)(a) of the Costs Act was satisfied: it followed, on the
Director’s argument, that
the order granting the costs certificate should
be set aside and the respondent’s application dismissed (Director’s
submissions
at [88], [121]).
respondent sought to uphold the finding the trial judge made about the complaint
evidence in respect of each complaint witness.
His essential argument was that
“[n]one of the three complaint witnesses” – Cale Antonello,
Emma Azzopardi and
Tyronne Gietzmann – “gave evidence that the
[c]omplainant told them that the [r]espondent inserted his fingers in her
vagina” and that, in relation to all complaint witnesses (that is,
including the complainant’s mother), “there
clearly were significant
differences” between what the complainant “asserted she told the
complaint witnesses, and the
evidence of the complaint witnesses about what the
[c]omplainant told them” (respondent’s submissions at [60],
my view, the Director’s challenge to the complaint evidence finding, as it
relates to the complainant’s mother and
Emma Azzopardi, should be upheld.
My reasons for so concluding follow.
The complainant’s
mother’s evidence
trial judge summarised the complainant’s mother’s evidence as
follows (CJ at [20], AB 14):
“The complainant’s mother testified that her daughter told her that
she was in another room, trying to stretch when the
[respondent] came up behind
her and started to initiate sex and then came up behind her and put his finger
into her vagina. The complainant’s
mother said that she did not recall
whether her daughter said he stopped on his own or whether she’d pushed
him off, but by
then he had more fingers in her vagina.”
why the trial judge considered this evidence to be inconsistent with, and
contradictory to, the complainant’s account
to her is not readily apparent
from his Honour’s reasons: aside from making the complaint evidence
finding, the trial judge
did not provide an explanation for doing so.
the absence of reasons to one side, I am, respectfully, unable to accept that
the complainant’s mother’s evidence
her occurred when she was exercising on the morning of 3 April 2021 was
inconsistent with, less still
contradicted, the complainant’s evidence. In
my view, the opposite is so: the mother’s evidence was consistent with,
and supported, the complainant’s account about what occurred –
., the complainant told her that, whilst she was exercising on her
yoga mat, the respondent digitally penetrated her vagina: see [
], above. That evidence
was, in the language of the trial judge, “the allegation advanced by the
Crown at trial”.
respondent acknowledged that the complainant’s mother
evidence that the complainant “said that she was digitally
penetrated” by him (respondent’s submissions at
[62]). Nevertheless,
he sought to uphold the trial judge’s finding by emphasising
aspect of the complainant’s mother’s evidence that did not mirror
the complainant’s evidence – namely, the
complainant’s mother
“did not give evidence that she was told that the [c]omplainant ever said
(respondent’s submissions at [64]). The import of
the submission appeared to be that,
the trial judge making
reference to this apparent difference in his summary of the
complainant’s mother’s evidence, the failure of the
complainant’s
mother in her evidence to use that
fatal to the challenge to the trial judge’s finding.
am unable to accept this submission. The evidence from the complainant’s
mother has been earlier set out but, given the submission,
warrants repeating.
It included the following: “She told him to stop ...” and “She
repeatedly asked him to stop.
She kept saying, ‘My hips are sore, please
stop’”. In the context of the trial, having regard to this evidence,
the fact that the complainant’s mother did not use the word
“No” is, I consider, of little to no moment but, in
quintessentially a matter for the jury. In the context of the costs application,
it does not, in my respectful view, justify
– or render as reasonably open
– a finding of inconsistency or contradiction in the terms made by the
trial judge.
completeness, I add the following. As is apparent from the trial judge’s
summary of the complainant’s mother’s
evidence, his Honour made
reference to that part of her account where she did not recall whether the
complainant said “he stopped
on his own or whether she pushed him off, but
by then he had more fingers in her vagina” (see [
], above). In relation
to that summary, the following two matters should be noted. First, the
respondent did
seek to rely upon that reference to support the
complaint evidence finding. Secondly, whilst the summary provided by the trial
is not inaccurate, it is nevertheless incomplete: there is no reference in
the summary to the fact that the complainant’s mother’s
evidence was
that the complainant told her that she repeatedly told the respondent to
“stop” whilst that penetration
was occurring.
my view, the trial judge was clearly in error – in the language of
House v The King
, he “mis[took] the facts” – when finding
that the complainant’s mother’s evidence was
“inconsistent”
with the complainant’s evidence or that it
“contradicted” her evidence. To be clear, I do not regard the trial
judge’s finding as reasonably open.
The other complaint
Director also argued that the evidence from the remaining complaint witnesses
– Tyronne Gietzmann, Cale Antonello and Emma
Azzopardi – was not
“inconsistent” with the complainant’s account nor did their
evidence contradict it and
that the trial judge was in error in finding
respondent supported the finding of the trial judge. He submitted, as I have
earlier noted, that none of these witnesses gave
evidence that “the
[c]omplainant told them that the [r]espondent inserted his fingers in her
vagina” (respondent’s
submissions at [60], [69]). Further, the
respondent argued that “there clearly were significant differences between
[the complainant] asserted she told the complaint witnesses, and the
evidence of the complaint witnesses about what the [c]omplainant
them” (respondent’s submissions at [65]).
will deal first with Ms Azzopardi’s evidence and, thereafter, the evidence
from Mr Gietzmann and Mr Antonello.
relation to Ms Azzopardi, the trial judge’s summary of her evidence was
that the complainant said to her that “she
thought that she was sexually
assaulted” when she was “in a downward facing dog yoga position and
the [respondent] came
up from behind her and pulled her pants down”: CJ at
[18]. It appears, given the trial judge did not provide an explanation
Ms Azzopardi’s evidence supported the finding he made, that it was based
upon her evidence being
to that contained within the trial
judge’s summary.
Azzopardi’s evidence, however, went beyond the trial judge’s
confined summary – it included her evidence that,
although she could not
“remember the exact wording but it was along the lines of, ‘He
penetrated me’” and
that the complainant was “very visibly
upset” when she told Ms Azzopardi this (see [
may be accepted that there are differences between the complainant’s
complaint evidence and that given by Ms Azzopardi in
terms of – to use the
language of the trial judge – the “allegation advanced by the Crown
at trial”: the
complainant’s evidence was that there was digital
penetration, whereas Ms Azzopardi could not remember exactly what was said
her by the complainant, only that it was to the effect that the “sexual
assault” described by her was “along
the lines of, ‘He
penetrated me’”. Notwithstanding this particular lack of
recall, Ms Azzopardi’s evidence supported aspects of the
complainant’s account – namely, that when undertaking
exercises, the respondent came up behind the complainant and pulled her pants
down and that there was a “sexual assault”,
albeit that Ms Azzopardi
could not remember exactly what was said by the complainant only that it was to
the effect that there was
penetration
. That evidence, which was not
referred to by the trial judge, remained of importance in the circumstances
given the respondent’s
case was that there was
penetration of
any kind. In my view, it was not reasonably open to characterise and find her
evidence as being “inconsistent”
with, or to contradict, the
complainant’s account. To hold otherwise, as the trial judge did, was an
error of fact within
House v The King
relation to Mr Gietzmann, his evidence was that the complainant told him that
the respondent “had sexually assaulted her”
whilst she was
exercising and that “she’d indicated a clear no and that he was
pushy and then forced himself on her”
], above). The trial
judge noted that, according to Mr Gietzmann, “the complainant did not go
into any further details about
what was meant by ‘forced himself on
her’”: CJ at [19]. Further, in relation to Mr Antonello, his
evidence was
that the complainant told him that, whilst doing “some sort
of yoga” the respondent “inserted himself into her
without her
consent” – which he said involved “penetration” and
later, despite indicating in his police statement
dated 12 July 2023 that he
“did not remember the specifics of what the penetration was”, said
the penetration involved
the respondent’s “penis [being] inserted
into her” (see [
]ff, above). The trial judge noted that his account
involved the complainant telling him that the respondent “inserted his
into her”: CJ at [17].
relation to the evidence from Mr Gietzmann and Mr Antonello, there is, in my
respectful view, room for legitimate differences of
opinion about the proper
characterisation of their evidence and, in turn, whether it admits to the one
preferred by the trial judge.
In the result, however, I am unpersuaded that, in
relation to their evidence, the trial judge mistook the facts, such that his
discretion miscarried.
Nevertheless,
for the reasons earlier given in connection with the evidence of the
complainant’s mother and Ms Azzopardi, ground
1 should be
Ground 2: The trial judge’s decision to grant a
costs certificate was unreasonable or plainly unjust
this ground of appeal, the Director challenged the trial judge’s decision
on the basis that the decision was unreasonable
or plainly unjust, and thus
within the second category of error formulated in
House v The King
appeal raising that ground of review, the specific error is not shown in the
reasons of the trial judge but inferred from
that there was
“a failure properly to exercise the discretion which the law reposes in
the court of first instance”:
House v The King
I would uphold ground 1, given the way the matter was argued by the Director,
ground 2 does not arise. Nor, given the conclusion
reached, do I consider it
possible to address it: the corollary to a ground framed reliant upon the second
category of error in
House v The King
is an acceptance of the findings of
fact made (contrary to my conclusion for ground 1), with error being inferred
from the result.
Disposition
earlier noted, the Director submitted that the Court should allow the appeal and
dismiss the respondent’s application for
a costs certificate. The
respondent, whilst resisting the appeal and seeking a certificate under the
Suitors’ Fund Act 1951
(NSW) if he was
unsuccessful
so, did not address the consequence of upholding the Director’s appeal on
either of its grounds.
my view, the cost application should be dismissed:
. Given I have previously set out the background, the relevant
statutory provisions and the evidence, including the complaint evidence,
briefly explain my reasons.
respondent sought a costs certificate from the trial judge essentially upon two
first ground rested on the argument concerning the “complainant’s
preparedness to provide a distorted picture of events”
and her evidence
lacking credibility and reliability (respondent’s costs submissions at
[18]-[20]).
may be accepted that there were questions about the credibility and reliability
of the complainant and her evidence. However, in
that situation “it will
generally not be unreasonable for a prosecutor to allow those questions to be
decided by the ... jury.
The administration of justice usually leaves to the
tribunal of fact determinations about the credit of witnesses”:
at [20], [22];
at [36](m).
The thrust of the
respondent’s argument, whilst acknowledging these guiding principles, was
to the effect that, in the
circumstances of this case, the
complainant and her evidence lacked credibility, with the consequence that those
observations do not apply here. The basis for the respondent's
submission was said to derive from, at least, the contrast between
complainant sought to convey about, in effect, the holiday being
“tense”, and her evidence in cross-examination
sexual activity with the respondent on the trip, going to Bondi and sending him
a picture which the complainant
accepted “can be described as a sexual
pose”: see [
](3), above, where this evidence has been set out.
do not accept this submission for the following reasons.
aspects of the submission implicitly rely, I consider, upon unstated assumptions
an alleged sexual assault that have
rejected by this Court –
., that sexual
activity between a complainant and an accused
the time of an
alleged sexual assault is necessarily incompatible with that event occurring.
[2019] NSWCCA 290
, Gleeson JA said (at
“The implicit premise of the appellant’s submission, that a victim
of sexual assault is not supposed to return to the
same bed as his or her
assailant under any circumstances, should be rejected. It reflects the kind of
stereotypical expectations
‘supposed’ or ‘expected’ to behave, which Button J
cautioned against
[2018] NSWCCA 131
. The significance of the complainant
returning to the same bed and the credibility of her explanation of why she did
so was, quintessentially,
a matter for the jury ...”
See also the discussion by N Adams J in
Zhao v The King
[2024] NSWCCA
and the authorities there cited.
the force of these authorities is properly recognised, then the fact that there
was some sexual activity after the alleged sexual
assault is, I consider, on the
respondent’s application, appreciably diluted as is the fact that that
evidence (together with
that of the trip to Bondi and the photograph) emerged
only in cross-examination.
the complainant gave
evidence in re-examination that was open to be
assessed and considered by the jury that provided context to the sexual activity
occurred after 3 April 2021, including (but not limited to) her evidence
that she “loved” the respondent; that they “spent
together” and that she “[t]ried to be as normal as possible”;
that she was on “holiday with [her] partner
at the time, who [she] loved
very much”; and that she was not “sure how to move forward. [She]
thought that, through
keeping it amicable ... was the best course of
action”; see also the evidence the complainant gave in her evidence in
The extent to which they answered the issues raised by the respondent were
matters to be resolved by the jury. On the respondent’s
application, I am
unable to accept that the issues about the credibility and reliability of the
complainant and her evidence were
as pronounced as the respondent contended,
particularly given my findings about the complaint evidence.
the respondent’s submissions appeared to suggest that questions about the
credibility and/or reliability of the complainant
and her evidence necessarily
presented a binary choice. However, that is simply not so, as Basten JA
explained in
[2018] NSWCCA 205
“At the most general level, a suggestion that a witness must be credible
in relation to all aspects of her evidence, or none,
defies common sense. First,
it elides questions of unreliability and untruthfulness. Once those elements are
separated, it will generally
be accepted that even witnesses who lie do not lie
reliable in another.”
my view, it would not have been unreasonable for the prosecution to institute
the proceedings even if possessed of evidence of
all the relevant facts relied
upon by the respondent as set out above.
second ground argued as supportive of a costs certificate was that the
“balance of the [C]rown case essentially contained
various witness[es]
providing versions of inconsistent complaints” (respondent’s costs
submissions at [19](iii)). I do
not accept that submission for the reasons I
have given in connection with ground 1. As I there concluded, the evidence from
complainant’s mother was consistent with, and supportive of, the
complainant’s account, and I consider, albeit to a lesser
degree, so too
did Ms Azzopardi’s evidence. Further, in connection with the evidence from
Mr Gietzmann and Mr Antonello, whilst
I accept that there were differences
between their evidence about what the complainant had told them and what the
complainant said
she told them, they were not of such order that it would not
have been reasonable for the prosecution to institute the proceedings.
my view, the respondent failed to demonstrate that it was not reasonable for the
Crown to institute the proceedings against him,
as required by s 3(1)(a) of the
that conclusion, it remains necessary to address the respondent’s
application for a certificate under
Suitors’ Fund Act
The respondent submitted, referring to the decision in
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW) v RDT (No 2)
[2019] NSWCCA 66
; (2019) 344 FLR 192
’), that it was open for this Court to grant him a
certificate. The decision in
supports the power of this Court, in an
appeal under
Criminal Appeal Act
, to grant a certificate:
Nevertheless,
in my view, given no submissions were advanced as to why the discretion in
should be exercised favourably to the respondent, the application should be
the above reasons, I propose the following orders:
(1) Appeal allowed.
(2) Set aside the decision dated 12 June 2025 granting the respondent a
certificate under
Costs in Criminal Cases Act 1967
in lieu thereof, order that the respondent’s application for a certificate
Costs in Criminal Cases Act 1967
(NSW) be dismissed.
(3) Dismiss the application for a certificate under the
Suitors’ Fund
: I have had the advantage of reading the draft judgment of Chen J. I agree
with the orders proposed by his Honour. Given the analysis
set out in his
Honour’s judgment, my reasons can be brief.
relation to ground 1, I agree that the trial judge mistook the facts relevant to
the complaint to the complainant’s mother,
and that this was material, for
the reasons given by Chen J.
to the complaint to Ms Azzopardi, there was an inconsistency insofar as the
complainant gave evidence that she told Ms Azzopardi
the respondent put his
fingers inside her, whereas Ms Azzopardi’s evidence was that the
complainant said words along the lines
of “He penetrated me”
(without referring to fingers specifically). However, this inconsistency is not
one which is able
to be described as “glaring”, or demonstrating
inconsistency with or contradiction of the allegations advanced by the
trial. As Chen J has explained, the trial judge did not make reference to Ms
Azzopardi’s evidence that the complainant
said that the respondent had
penetrated her. I accordingly also agree that the trial judge mistook the facts
relevant to the complaint
to Ms Azzopardi in a material way, and that the first
ground of appeal should be upheld.
reconsidering the application, my reasons for concluding that the respondent has
failed to demonstrate that it was not reasonable
for the Crown to institute the
proceedings against him differ to some extent from those given by Chen J.
was inconsistency between the evidence of the complainant that she told each of
her three friends that the respondent put his
fingers inside her, and the
evidence of those three witnesses which did not include specific reference to
the respondent’s
fingers. With the exception of the evidence of Mr
Antonello, I do not regard the difference as significant. The evidence of Ms
and Mr Gietzmann reveals only an inconsistency on the issue of whether
the complainant specifically referred to the respondent’s
penetrating her. Any inconsistency arising from the evidence of these two
witnesses is only a minor one regarding what the
complainant stated in evidence
she told them (which she may well have recalled wrongly). Their respective
accounts of the complaint
made to them were not inconsistent with the
complainant’s account of what happened to her in the alleged commission of
prospect of Mr Antonello mistakenly recalling at trial that the complainant, a
long time earlier, referred to the respondent’s
penis being inserted into
her, was obvious. This was particularly so in circumstances where he had two
years earlier said he did
not recall the details of the penetration she
described. Hypothetical possession of the fact of Mr Antonello’s
description
of the conversation at trial did not make it not reasonable to
institute the proceedings.
regard the other issue relied upon by the trial judge, namely the
“contrasting aftermath account”, as more significant.
I am not of
the view that the respondent’s submissions on this topic at first instance
or on appeal, nor the trial judge’s
reasons, rely on unstated assumptions
significance does
not lie in any suggestion that the complainant would be
unlikely to be sexually intimate with the respondent after the alleged offence
had it occurred. The significance is in the way the complainant herself
endeavoured to portray her circumstances and relations with
the respondent after
the alleged offence, which was capable of being viewed as lacking candour.
her statement to the police the complainant described feeling isolated in the
immediate aftermath of the alleged offence, with
no options to leave safely,
because of where they were. However she also described the rest of the trip the
same way. She referred
to feeling trapped because of the rural nature of where
they were staying. She mentioned specifically having gone on a few hikes,
these being really awkward, and the rest of the trip as cold and tense. That the
rest of the trip actually involved cuddles and
affection, sexual intimacy, a
trip to Bondi where she could easily have caught public transport home, and her
own forwarding of intimate
images of herself to the respondent, was in contrast
to the way the complainant portrayed her circumstances to the police. A
prosecutor in possession of these facts would have realised the
prospect of substantial, legitimate, undermining of the credibility
complainant if this was exposed to the jury.
am however not of the view that this problem was so profound that possession of
all these relevant facts would have rendered it
not reasonable to institute
proceedings. Accordingly, the respondent has failed to demonstrate that which is
required by s 3(1)(a)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (415 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter