URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCAT/2025/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:17:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Brandt v Burke; Bakes [2025] NTCAT 2 (12 February 2025)
Brandt v Burke; Bakes
DECISION NUMBER:
[2025] NTCAT 2
JORDAN MILAN BRANDT
JACKIE BURKE; CHARISSA BAKES;
1ST RESPONDENT; 2ND RESPONDENT;
MATTER TYPE:
Original Jurisdiction –
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
2024-01471-CT
HEARING DATE:
14 AUGUST 2024 (with further evidence filed on 15 and 23 August 2024,
and 29 January and 5 February 2025)
DECISION OF:
DATE OF ORDERS:
12 FEBRUARY 2025
APPEARANCES and REPRESENTATION (if any):
Gabrielle Martin (Gabrielle Martin Legal)
RESPONDENT:
Charissa Bakes (First National Real Estate O’Donoghues)
REASONS FOR DECISION:
application dated 3 May 2024 the applicant and former tenant, Jordan Brandt,
sought return of the security deposit or bond in the
sum of $1,400.00 from the
first respondent and former landlord, Jackie Burke, in relation to a residential
lease of premises at unit
3, 43 Kurrajong Crescent, Nightcliff, in
Brandt also claimed compensation of $2,300.00 from Ms Burke and/or the second
respondent, Charissa Bakes, in relation to mould
at the premises which was said
to have damaged Mr Brandt’s personal belongings, and to have rendered
the premises unsafe and
uninhabitable so as to justify his early termination of
Bakes is a property manager employed by Ms Burke’s agent, First National
Real Estate. She commenced that employment in December
2023, and previously had
worked for other Darwin real estate agents over several
From December 2023 Ms Bakes
was responsible for managing the premises on behalf of Ms Burke, and
represented her (as her agent) in
the Tribunal
proceeding.
Ms Bakes was also
named as the second respondent in her personal capacity, on the basis that
“some failings” in her administration
of the lease on behalf the
landlord had negligently caused loss to
Burke denied that the premises was uninhabitable, and denied liability to pay
compensation for damage to personal
Ms Burke sought to retain
the sum of $1,314.74 from the bond as compensation for: lost rent from the lease
break ($700.00 as of 29
April 2024, but later reduced to $550.00 since a new
tenant was secured); cleaning costs other than for the removal of mould
advertising costs ($195.00); and a lease break fee
Bakes did not formally file a form 2 response in her capacity as the second
respondent. However it was clear at the hearing that
Ms Bakes denied personal
liability, generally on the same basis as Ms Burke.
the reasons which follow Mr Brandt’s compensation claim against Ms Burke
must be dismissed. The evidence demonstrates that
the premises was both
habitable, and safe, when Mr Brandt terminated the lease on 20 April 2024 (with
effect from 22 April 2024),
purportedly pursuant to
and (c) of the
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
. Consequently this was a lease break,
with Mr Brandt abandoning the premises on 22 April 2024 (about 11 weeks
prior to the end of
its 52 week term on 30 June 2024).
Burke’s cross-claim for unpaid rent of $550.00 and cleaning costs in the
sum of $480.00, totalling $1,030.00, is upheld.
However Ms Burke’s
cross-claim for advertising costs in the sum of $195.00 and a lease break fee of
$89.74 fails, and is dismissed,
principally because the lease break clause in
the lease is void due to inconsistency with the
Residential Tenancies Act
offsetting against the retained bond of $1,400.00, Mr Brandt is entitled to the
return of the sum of $370.00 from the bond.
I order to that effect below.
Brandt’s claim against Ms Bakes in negligence (or otherwise) has no legal
foundation, and is dismissed.
lease of unit 3 was for a fixed term from 3 July 2023 to 30 June 2024 (ie 52
weeks), at a rental of $350.00 per week. The bond
or security deposit was
$1,400.00. It is evident from the ingoing and outgoing condition reports that
the leased premises included
several items of
albeit that they were
not listed as part of the premises in the
Brandt signed the lease on 29 June 2023, but the copy in evidence did not
include a signature by or on behalf of the landlord (so
as to create a binding
written contract).
Brandt emailed the lease (as signed only by him) to the agent on
30 June 2023, and paid the sum of $2,100.00: ie the bond
($1,400.00 )
and one week’s rent ($700.00). This sum was entered into the agent’s
tenancy ledger on 3 July 2023, which
together with other actions on behalf of
the landlord demonstrates acceptance of that
It thus came into force at
least by that time, whether or not signed by the
lease included additional terms, including a lease break clause which imposed
advertising and other fees on Mr Brandt if he terminated
the lease prior to the
end of its fixed term on 30 June 2024. As discussed below, in my view the lease
break clause is void due to
inconsistency with the
Residential Tenancies Act
the lease commenced on 3 July 2023, Mr Brandt did not physically (or legally)
take “possession” of the premises
until 18 July 2023 when he
returned to Darwin and collected the keys from the
At that time Mr Brandt
received an ingoing condition report for the premises, which is discussed below
when considering Ms Burke’s
claim to recover exit cleaning costs of
3 November 2023 First National Real Estate conducted an inspection of the
premises, with no adverse report about Mr Brandt’s
In that respect the
lease provides for inspections at least “every 16 weeks” (ie
quarterly).
A copy of the
inspection report was provided to Mr Brandt by the agent (but not by Ms Bakes,
who was not yet employed with First
National Real Estate).
21 November 2023 Mr Brandt decided to spend Christmas interstate with his family
(in Ballarat, Victoria), and to that end initially
expected to be absent from
Darwin for about three weeks.
Brandt said that, between 9 and 16 December 2023, he “prepared” the
his pending absence, and “took all necessary steps to ensure
the property would be clean upon my return”. This included
deep cleaning
the property, securing outdoor furniture, conducting a light pest fumigation of
the skirting, and placing pantry items
refrigerator.
Brandt departed Darwin by motor vehicle on 16 December 2023 (at around 6 am),
and left all three ceiling fans in the unit on a
low setting and the bathroom
window ajar to provide ventilation – his object being to prevent or
inhibit mould which is common
in the humidity of Darwin’s wet season (from
November each year to the following April).
taken these precautions, Mr Brandt was “confident” that upon return
three weeks later he would only need to “change
my sheets and vacuum some
dead cockroaches and
Brandt arrived in Ballarat on 18 December 2023. On 28 December 2023 he received
an email from Ms Bakes which advised of a “regular”
inspection of
the premises on 23 January 2024 (between 9 and 11 am), and requested
“permission to use our master key to enter
the property” that date
and time was unsuitable.
did not respond, and received a reminder email from Ms Bakes on
9 January 2024 which again requested permission to use the
agent’s master key to enter the premises if Mr Brandt was
email dated 11 January 2024 Mr Brandt responded that he was interstate visiting
family, but gave permission for Ms Bakes to enter
the property and carry out the
inspection in his absence.
Brandt did not receive a response to this email, particularly as to the outcome
of the inspection. Nor did Mr Brandt, in that circumstance,
further contact Ms
Bakes seeking a response or advice about the inspection.
Brandt planned to return to Darwin on 28 January 2024 (with travel over the
Australia Day long weekend). However on 19 January
2024 he postponed his return
due to the closure of the Stuart Highway from flooding with further heavy
rainfall scheduled. As a self-employed
contractor (who ordinarily worked from
on work should
there be delay when driving to Darwin along that highway.
email dated 14 February 2024 Ms Bakes said that “[a]s part of our service
to your landlord” (ie not a service to the
tenant) the “next
inspection” of the premises was proposed for 21 February 2024 (between 2
and 5 pm). Ms Bakes asked
for Mr Brandt’s response as to whether this was
a suitable time, and
cannot be present, we require your permission to use our master key to enter
the property.
email dated 15 February 2024 Mr Brandt responded that he was absent from Darwin,
and scheduled to return on 31 March 2024 (utilising
the Easter long weekend for
travel). Mr Brandt authorised First National Real Estate to “access the
property using the master
key” (as referred to by Ms Bakes in her email),
and asked for confirmation that the inspection scheduled for 23 January 2024
occurred. Mr Brandt said that the premises was tidy but could have dead insects
(due to his pest fumigation), and
if required
feel free to open any curtains or windows to assist with your report.
Brandt did not receive a response to this email, particularly as to the outcome
of the “Routine Inspection” which he
considered “should have
taken place”. Again nor did Mr Brandt, in that circumstance, further
a response or advice about the inspection on 15
February 2024 or the earlier inspection on 23 January 2024. Instead Mr Brandt
another routine inspection was completed with no issues due to
communication”.
was only open to Mr Brandt (the tenant) to make and rely upon that assumption as
a basis for claiming compensation if either Ms
Burke (the landlord) and/or Ms
Bakes (the landlord’s agent) was under a legal duty to provide advice as
to the outcome of an
inspection. As discussed below, in my view no such legal
duty exists.
Sunday 31 March 2024 Mr Brandt arrived in Darwin and entered the unit for the
first time since 16 December 2023, a period of 106
days (ie 15 weeks and one
Mr Brandt said that
the unit had a “damp stale smell” due to “almost every surface
[being] covered in mould from
the walls in the kitchen, living and bedroom to my
bed sheets, rug and workstation”. Upon opening the wardrobe Mr Brandt
“all my clothes damp and smelling stale, some covered in
apparent contributing cause to the mould was a “wet roof dripping onto the
couch and floor below”, with a consequent
“orange puddle by the end
of the couch near the back sliding
the advice of a family friend and former landlord, Mr Brandt bought a mask at a
hardware store and then took photographs of the
dripping ceiling, puddle and
mould throughout the unit. Mr Brandt telephoned both Ms Bakes (on her mobile
phone no) and First National
Real Estate, but there was no answer other than
voicemail. Mr Brandt arranged to stay with a friend, since he was concerned that
the unit was “unsafe or
uninhabitable”.
email to Ms Bakes dated 1 April 2024 (Easter Monday) Mr Brandt notified the
landlord about the “damp dripping roof and mould
throughout the entire
property”, and attached eight photographs of the ceiling leak and mould.
Mr Brandt said that he had “not
resided in the property since returning
[the previous day], as I do believe the property is uninhabitable and
unsafe”. He sought
to “discuss options and remedy a solution
providing this notification Mr Brandt fulfilled his duty under
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
to “notify the landlord of any
damage or apparent potential damage to the premises ... other than damage of a
negligible kind”.
Pursuant to
this duty is a term of the lease.
Mr Brandt also fulfilled the corresponding duty in cl 18.1 of the lease which
requires a tenant
to notify the landlord of any “defect” or the
“need for any repairs and maintenance ... as soon as practicable”
after being apprised of it.
Bakes responded to the notification on Tuesday 2 April 2024, initially in a
telephone call at around noon followed by an email
later that afternoon. Ms
Bakes advised that a plumber had been urgently engaged at the landlord’s
expense to investigate the
leak (ie the dripping ceiling), but that Mr
Brandt was responsible for the “cost/cleaning for the mould” since
was left vacant and unattended for several
Mr Brandt said that
during the telephone conversation he said he wished to end the lease “due
to the condition of the unit”,
and offered a “mutual lease
the afternoon of Wednesday 3 April 2024 a plumber from Precision Plumbing &
Drainage NT attended the unit, in the presence
of Mr Brandt. The plumber was
unable to locate any leak, and advised (by invoice dated 8 April 2024) that to
“investigate further”
it would be necessary to “contact people
in [the] unit above to gain access” to their property (which was not
on the day). Ms Bakes recorded in handwriting on the invoice her
understanding that “No further evidence of water
urgently engaging a plumber and further considering the leak as set out below,
Ms Burke fulfilled her duty under
Residential
Tenancies Act 1999
to exercise “reasonable diligence” after
receiving notification to “maintain the premises ... in a reasonable state
of repair, having regard to their age, character and prospective life”.
Pursuant to
this duty is a term of the lease. Ms Burke also fulfilled
the corresponding duty in cl 10.1 of the lease which requires a landlord,
receiving notification of any damage, defect or need for repairs from a tenant
(under cl 18.1), to “maintain the Property
in good and tenantable repair
and fit for human habitation ... having regard to the age, character and
prospective life of the
email to Ms Bakes dated Thursday 4 April 2024 Mr Brandt denied responsibility
for cleaning the mould on the basis that his “absence
from the property
did not cause the leak and the resultant mould damage” (which he presumed
occurred after the
scheduled inspection on 21 February
discussed below, whilst Mr Brandt did not physically cause the ceiling leak,
nonetheless he was legally responsible for the premises
including when absent,
and his omission to arrange for the unit to be regularly checked while he was
interstate was a direct cause
of the extent of mould upon his return on
31 March 2024.
Brandt repeated that the premises was “uninhabitable due to the mould
growth throughout” such that the lease could
be terminated on two
days’ notice (under
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
and offered (without prejudice) to mutually terminate the lease on the basis
that the bond was returned in full – with the
landlord bearing the cost of
cleaning the mould (and rectifying any leak), and Mr Brandt bearing the cost of
any damage to his belongings
from mould or water
Brandt further said that the existence of mould meant that he could not
facilitate an exit clean of the premises due to safety
scenario the full security deposit would be required to be released to me
immediately upon the lease ending (due to the mould
damage it is not appropriate
for me to engage a cleaning service for the usual exit clean as it is not safe
for the cleaners to attend
the property due to the mould).
Brandt’s position ignores the fact that a cleaner could wear a mask to
ensure safety, as Mr Brandt himself did on 31 March
2024 (when returning to the
unit), and as he (and a friend) subsequently did throughout 13 April 2024 when
clearing the unit of damaged
or mouldy belongings (see
email dated 5 April 2024 Ms Bakes accepted that this was a “stressful
situation”, but responded that in his capacity
as the tenant Mr Brandt
bore responsibility for the mould. This was because the premises was left vacant
“with no one to check
on it” for a significant period (ie 106 days,
or 15 weeks and one day), such that Mr Brandt could not report the ceiling leak
or take action about the growth of mould. Ms Bakes said that the routine
inspection on 21 February 2024 did not occur because the
agent did not possess
an additional key for the unit and thus could not access it. Ms Bakes advised
that the landlord did not agree
to an early termination of the lease, and for
“future reference” suggested that Mr Brandt “please ensure you
someone to check on the property while you are away when leaving for an
extended period”.
the hearing Ms Bakes explained that she presently manages about 100 properties,
but only possesses an additional key for about
half of them – since an
extra key was not provided by those landlords. This was also Ms Bakes’
experience when previously
working at two other real estate agents in Darwin
over several years. Ms Bakes said that an agent could not lawfully cut an extra
key unless a landlord agreed (which could not be assumed), and that in practice
the absence of an additional key was not ordinarily
a difficulty since the
tenant usually facilitated access for an
inspection.
6 and 7 April 2024 Mr Brandt spent the weekend washing and disinfecting his
belongings, particularly clothing, bedding and
email to Ms Bakes dated 8 April 2024 Mr Brandt acknowledged that this was a
“stressful situation for all parties involved”
which must be
“disappointing for the
and said that
the “leak and mould damage appears to have occurred quite recently (and
during the notified absence period)”.
This was the period of interstate
absence from 15 February to 31 March 2024, as per Mr Brandt’s email
to Ms Bakes dated 15
February 2024 (see above).
Brandt’s position was that the landlord bore responsibility for both the
leak and the mould during that period, particularly
given that a routine
inspection was scheduled for 21 February 2024 and that he was not advised
it did not occur. Mr Brandt reiterated
that he wished to mutually terminate the
lease because the premises was
“uninhabitable”.
email later on 8 April 2024, Ms Bakes observed that it was unlikely that the
landlord and Mr Brandt would reach agreement about
responsibility for the mould.
Ms Bakes emphasised that it was Mr Brandt’s “responsibility to
maintain the proper[t]y
and report maintenance” including when absent
interstate, and that it was “your choice to go away and leave the property
unattended at your own
13 April 2024 Mr Brandt attended the premises to sort furniture and other items
for disposal, given damage from mould. Upon entering
the kitchen light crackled
when turned on, and went out. Mr Brandt was “not certain if it was
the globe or an electrical fault
caused by the leak in the roof”, and
accordingly “turned off all fans and lighting”. These were not
switched on
again for the remainder of the
on 13 April 2024 Mr Brandt disposed of items at a rubbish dump, with the
assistance of a friend, Connor Campbell, and his utility
vehicle. Mr Brandt
noticed that some items “impacted by the mould had small clear like
insects crawling around on
The items disposed
of included:
rug, coffee table, coasters, ironing board, iron, stick vacuum, workout mat,
clothes rack, 2x lamps, wireless keyboard and
mouse, desk, office chair, shoe
rack, 2x decorative wooden boards, brooms, kettle, microwave, cooking utensils,
cutlery tray, 2x
pots, toilet brush and scrub, bedding, towels, towel rack.
Campbell confirmed that he assisted Mr Brandt on 13 April 2024, and said that
on arrival at the unit there was a “really damp, unpleasant
smell” and that the “walls
and the ceiling in the kitchen/lounge
area were covered in mould”, as were the hallway “walls and
ceilings”, the
“doors and windows”, all kitchen surfaces,
furniture (including the “whole bed”, “desk and office
lounge and coffee table with the wood in the desk starting
“to expand with the mould”), a rug, and the wireless keyboard
mouse. Mr Campbell wore a mask when providing assistance to remove
“anything that Jordan wanted taken to the dump”,
which he identified
in similar terms to
email to Ms Bakes dated 20 April 2024 Mr Brandt issued a form RT06 Notice of
Intention to Terminate the Tenancy Agreement, with
effect from 22 April 2024.
The termination was purportedly pursuant to
and (c) of the
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
, which empowers a tenant to terminate
a lease with two days’ written notice where the premises are unsafe or
uninhabitable.
Brandt maintained that the “property is a risk to my health due to the
mould” and is “uninhabitable”, such
that he had been
“unable to live in the property since my return” to Darwin on 31
March 2024. Mr Brandt sought release
of the bond since the “leak and
resultant mould were not caused by me or any actions I took”. Mr Brandt
acknowledged
that a landlord could withhold the bond to clean premises which was
“left unreasonably dirty by the tenant”, but reiterated
that it was
“unreasonable” for him to “engage exit cleaners to clean the
property with the mould being
Brandt also emphasised his view that the landlord bears responsibility to
inspect the premises during his extended absence, as
Furthermore,
you were notified twice that I would be absent from the property for that
extended period (which l am entitled to do)
and at no point did you request any
action from me in relation to the property during that absence (noting the only
advice I received
from you in that regard came in your email of 5/4 that noted,
for future reference, l should have someone check on the property whilst
away). lf you required and requested l have someone check the property during
that absence period l would have arranged same
(or authorised your office to do
so). Given the extended absence that you were aware of, your office could have
taken steps to inspect
the property in my absence if that extended absence
caused some concern to you.
l also note that you did not notify me that you would not complete the
inspections on 23/01 and 21/2 and so l reasonably assumed the
inspections had
occurred using the spare/master key referred to in your emails of 11/1 and 14/2.
At no time had you indicated you
did not hold a spare key until your email of
5/4, and l assumed you had retained a spare key when the keys were released to
the commencement of the lease (in accordance with standard leasing
discussed below, Mr Brandt’s position that, unless “required”
or “requested”, he need not “have
someone check on the
property whilst I am away”, ignored his legal obligation to “keep
the Property in a reasonably clean
and sanitary condition and maintain the
premises free from dirt, mould, oils, grease, insects and vermin” –
when he was absent from the
email dated 22 April 2024 Ms Bakes acknowledged Mr Brandt’s notice of
termination and covering email, and said that a final
inspection would occur
upon receipt of the keys to the premises. Ms Bakes said that while the unit must
be left in the same condition
as at the commencement of the tenancy, the
landlord would “disregard the mouldy areas that were in the [eight]
which Mr Brandt provided by email on 1 April 2024. Ms Bakes
also requested confirmation as to the number of the upstairs unit (which
plumber had been unable to enter), noting that her attempts to contact the
occupants had been
unsuccessful.
Brandt returned the keys to the agent and delivered vacant possession at 4 pm on
22 April 2024. By email later that day Mr Brandt
advised as to the number
of the upstairs unit, and gave notice that the kitchen light may be faulty (ie
either the “globe or
possible electrical damage caused by the
Mr Brandt said
that he was “under the assumption that this chapter of my life had finally
been settled and that both parties
were in an agreeance”, presumably that
the full bond would be returned and that rent (or compensation thereto) would
charged (or sought) after 22 April 2024. However no such concession was
made in any of Ms Bakes’ communications with Mr
23 April 2024 Ms Bakes conducted a final inspection of the unit, and forwarded
an outgoing condition report to Mr Brandt later
that day by email. This was the
first occasion on which Ms Bakes had entered the unit since being notified of
the leak and mould
on 1 April 2024. Ms Bakes considered that the mould was
an “inconvenience” which could be remedied with a “wipe
over”, and did not accept that the unit was uninhabitable. Accordingly the
termination would be treated by the landlord as
a lease break without lawful
justification. Ms Bakes did not see any evidence of “any water on the
ceiling”, and assumed
there “may have been a once off leak”
but would have “plumbers investigate either way”. Ms Bakes said that
there was some uncleanliness which a cleaner would rectify, but that this would
not include the cost of removing
email dated 29 April 2024 Ms Bakes confirmed her view that the premises did not
“present as uninhabitable”, and gave
notice that the landlord
intended to retain the full bond of $1,400.00 as compensation for lost rent
($700.00 as of that date and
continuing), cleaning costs other than for mould
($480.00), advertising costs ($195.00), and a lease break fee ($89.74) –
$1,464.74. The notice identified the premises as having been vacated
or abandoned on 22 April
on 29 April 2024 Bali Green Cleaners provided a quote in the sum of $280.00 to
remove mould, which referred to a “Light
layer of mould on the walls and
some spots on the ceiling”. The cleaner subsequently removed that mould
and cleaned the unit,
pending a new tenancy, as per an invoice dated 2 May 2024
which contained the
same description of the
Ms Burke did not claim
compensation for this cost.
property manager at First National Real Estate, Alicia Hansen, inspected the
premises on 30 April 2024 and “found no
issue that would have deemed the
premises un-inhabitable”. In expressing that view Ms Hansen said that she
9 years of Property Management experience and 32 years of living
in the NT”.
email to Mr Brandt dated 3 May 2024 Ms Bakes advised that a new tenant had been
secured, with the new lease commencing on that
day. Ms Bakes requested that
Mr Brandt fill out and return an attached form “so that we can return
the remainder of your bond”,
By this action Ms Burke
gave “consent” to Mr Brandt giving up possession of the premises,
meaning that the lease now
terminated on 2 May 2024 – rather than 6 May
the hearing Ms Bakes said that during the new tenancy the tenant had made no
complaints about mould, and that the ceiling leak
support of his application, Mr Brandt filed a total of 64 photographs of the
unit and his belongings showing the ceiling leak,
Brandt also obtained and filed an expert report dated 12 July 2024 from an
occupational hygienist, Paul Felvus, the Principal of
Atmos Health and Hygiene,
which attached “Guidelines on Assessment and Remediation of Fungi in
Indoor Environments” published
by the New York City Department of Health
and Mental Hygiene (2008). Published daily weather observations (including
relative humidity)
for Darwin from the Bureau of Meteorology for the period
December 2023 to April 2024 were also filed.
Burke filed a report entitled “Mold Course Chapter 9” from the
website of the Environment Protection Agency of the
United States of America (as
published on 9 August 2024).
discuss these reports, as well as photographs and related evidence, when
considering the question of habitability
Consideration
deal with the legal and factual issues which arise in this matter under separate
subheadings below.
Was the premises uninhabitable or
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
provides that a landlord
must “ensure” that the leased premises are “habitable”.
This is a term of every
residential tenancy agreement or lease.
pursuant to
, a landlord does not breach this term where the fact that a
premises is not “habitable” is “caused” by an
or omission of the tenant”.
Conceptually
this exclusion from the obligation in subsection (1)(a) gives statutory
recognition to the proposition that a landlord
cannot be expected to
“ensure” that a premises is “habitable” where a tenant
has “caused” it
to be uninhabitable (or unsafe).
word “habitable” in
has recently been the subject of
judicial consideration by the Northern Territory Court of Appeal in
Executive Officer (Housing) v Young
[2022] NTCA 1 (Grant
CJ, Southwood and
Barr JJ) and
Chief Executive Officer (Housing) v Pepperill & Ors
[2024] NTCA 10 (Kelly
, Brownhill and Huntingford JJ).
explained in those judgments, whilst the term “habitable” is not
defined in the
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
, the concept has a long
jurisprudential history in general tenancy law which has been transposed largely
unchanged into Australian
legislation. In
the Court of Appeal
explained that the concept “has two aspects or criteria: health and
safety, and reasonable comfort”.
The Court continued that for premises to
be other than “habitable” under
, it “must be not
reasonably suitable for occupation for residential use in that condition,
whether by reason of safety, health
or reasonable
issue is one of safety or health, premises will be other than habitable where
there is an actual and appreciable risk to
the health and/or safety of the
tenants in their ordinary residential day to day use of the premises.
it may be accepted that the extent of mould in the premises on 31 March 2024
when Mr Brandt returned to Darwin was both unpleasant
and confronting (as well
as surprising to him), the evidence demonstrates that the premises was both
safe, and habitable, on that
date – and specifically that that was the
case on 20 April 2024 when Mr Brandt terminated the tenancy, purportedly
and (c) of the
Residential Tenancies
that respect I accept the evidence of both Ms Bakes and Ms Hansen that the mould
could readily and safely be cleaned – and
thus was “reasonably
suitable for occupation for residential use”, noting that both are
experienced property managers
in Darwin. It follows that there was no actual or
appreciable risk to Mr Brandt’s health or safety in his ordinary use of
Bakes and Ms Hansen’s observations are corroborated by Bali Green
Cleaners, who observed a “Light layer of mould on
the walls and some spots
on the ceiling” which was readily cleaned for the invoiced sum of $280.00.
The fact that this invoice
was inexpensive, and that the cleaning did not
require specialist personnel or equipment (to remove dangerous fungal spores),
that the mould did not render the
premises unsafe or uninhabitable.
The fact that a new tenancy commenced on 3 May 2024 shortly after completion of
the cleaning, and
that there have been no subsequent complaints about mould or
safety, also confirms this conclusion.
64 photographs filed by Mr Brandt, insofar as they concern the premises (as
distinct from Mr Brandt’s personal belongings),
accord with the
observations of Ms Bakes, Ms Hansen and Bali Green Cleaners. In that
respect the photographs show much more extensive
mould on Mr Brandt’s
personal belongings than on the unit itself, particularly pillows and bedding
material and a lounge. By
reference to the opinion of the occupational
hygienist, Mr Felvus, those belongings can be taken as including
“organic materials”
on which mould will readily and extensively
grow, as distinct from the unit’s walls and floors which do not and thus
comparison of the photographs enclosed with the ingoing and outgoing condition
reports also support Ms Bakes’ position. The
landlord supplied a double
bed and mattress (as well as a mattress protector) as part of the premises and,
although personally used
for sleeping, the mattress is not shown as affected by
mould in the photographs dated 23 April 2024 which were enclosed with the
outgoing condition
Mr Felvus opined that the premises “can be cleaned” since the
conditions that caused the mould “have abated”
(ie the high humidity
of Darwin’s wet season and the ceiling
Mr Felvus’s opinion
accords with Ms Bakes’ position that the premises was both safe and
habitable since the mould could
be readily cleaned, and does not support Mr
Brandt’s claim.
relation to the ceiling leak, Mr Felvus identified a possible explanation for
the fact that the plumber was unable to locate a
leak. Mr Felvus explained that
where a unit is unattended over Darwin’s wet season combined with an
upstairs neighbour using
his or her air-conditioner at a very low temperature,
the ceiling of the unattended unit may be cooled below the dewpoint with
condensation of water and mould
this was the actual cause of the ceiling leak at unit 3 can be put to one side
insofar as the question of habitability is
concerned. It is clear from the
plumber’s investigation, and the subsequent use of unit 3 without
complaint by new tenants,
that the ceiling leak of itself did not render the
premises uninhabitable or unsafe.
Section 48:
obligation to “ensure” habitability and tenant’s
responsibility
above factual finding that the premises was habitable and safe on 31 March
2024 when Mr Brandt returned to Darwin, and on 20 April 2024 when he
the tenancy (with effect from 22 April 2024), means that Mr
Brandt's claim for $2,300.00 compensation from Ms Burke for breach of
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
must fail. Ms
Burke did not breach that provision.
factual finding also means that Mr Brandt’s termination of the tenancy on
20 April 2024 (with effect from 22 April 2024)
breached the lease and
was a ‘lease break’, since he had no power to do so under
and (c) of the
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
if, contrary to this finding, the premises was uninhabitable and/or unsafe on
31 March and 20 April 2024, Mr Brandt’s claim
fails on two
I do not accept that Ms Burke failed to “ensure” that the premises
was “habitable” as required by
s 48(1)(a).
the Court of Appeal explained at [96] that this question requires consideration
of whether uninhabitability was “a consequence
of the landlord’s
failure to take reasonable steps to ensure that the premises or ancillary
property were habitable”.
consideration involves questions as to the nature and degree of the risk to or
impacts upon the health, safety and/or reasonable
comfort of the tenants, the
measures available to the landlord to alleviate the risks or impacts, the
capacity and power of the landlord
to control or address those risks or impacts
and the nature and extent of any expertise or special skill involved.
Bakes was first notified of the mould and ceiling leak by email on 1 April 2024
(Easter Monday), and promptly responded to that
concern on 2 April 2024 (the
following working day) by arranging a plumber. Mr Brandt’s eight
photographs of the ceiling leak
and mould did not demonstrate that a landlord,
acting reasonably, must also take steps to remove the mould. Insofar as the
affected the unit itself, as distinct from Mr Brandt’s personal
belongings, the photographs confirm that he could readily attend
to that task
either personally or by engaging a cleaner. As extracted above, Mr
Felvus’s opinion that the premises “can
be cleaned” since the
conditions that caused the mould “have abated” supports this
finding. The circumstances are
not analogous, for example, to a European wasp
infestation where immediate professional assistance is required to restore
habitability,
which a landlord would promptly arrange.
if (contrary to this finding) Ms Burke failed to “ensure” the
premises was “habitable” as required
existence of mould and/or a failure to clean that mould prior to 22 April
2024 (when the lease terminated), Mr Brandt’s
compensation claim
still fails due to the operation of
That provision provides that a
landlord does not breach
if the fact that a premises is not
“habitable” is “caused” by an “act or omission of
the tenant”.
Mr Brandt failed to fulfil his duty under cl 24.1 of the lease to “keep
the Property in a reasonably clean and sanitary
condition and maintain the
premises free from dirt, mould, oils, grease, insects and vermin”. The
provision is not subject
to a qualification whereby Mr Brandt may be relieved of
that obligation if interstate, or if the landlord was notified to that effect.
Likewise the corresponding obligation imposed in the lease by
and (b) of the
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
whereby a tenant must
not maintain the premises in an “unreasonably dirty condition”, and
must notify the landlord of
any damage (such as a ceiling leak), is not so
unless separately arranged or agreed with the landlord (which was not the case
here), it was not open to Mr Brandt to rely
on the conduct of the
landlord’s routine inspections (or absence of advice thereto) as a means
of fulfilling his obligations
under cl 24.1 and
Again, those provisions do not state to that effect. These powers are for the
benefit of the landlord, particularly to protect
his or her asset – not
the tenant.
follows, if the premises was uninhabitable due to mould and/or the ceiling leak,
that this was “caused” by Mr Brandt’s
own acts and omissions
– particularly Mr Brandt’s omission to ensure that the premises was
regularly checked on his behalf
while he was interstate for an extended period,
or also his omission to clean (or arrange cleaning of) the premises between 31
and 22 April 2024. The exclusion in
is engaged, meaning that
there was no breach by Ms Burke of the habitability obligation in
s 48(1)(a).
outcome is that Mr Brandt’s claim for compensation under
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
on the basis that Ms Burke breached the
lease or an obligation under that statute
Brandt also claimed compensation under a separate cause of action, negligence,
as distinct from breach of the lease and the statute.
At the hearing this cause
of action was expressly identified in relation to Ms Bakes (sued personally, as
distinct from her employer,
First National Real Estate, which was not joined as
a party), particularly in relation to her omission to conduct routine
inspections
and/or advise thereto. In the circumstances I consider this question
below in relation to both Ms Bakes and Ms Burke.
my view Ms Burke was not subject to a duty to take care to ensure that her
actions vis-à-vis inspecting the premises (including
once notified that
Mr Brandt was interstate) did not cause reasonably foreseeable loss to
Mr Brandt, so as to ground a tortious claim
in negligence at common law.
Insofar as the condition of the premises is concerned, their legal relationship
was determined by the
statutory scheme and the lease – not tortious
was Ms Bakes (or her employer, First National Real Estate) subject to such a
common law duty. First National Real Estate was contractually
obliged to provide
agency services to Ms Burke, and Ms Bakes was employed to facilitate that
outcome. As Ms Bakes correctly explained
to Mr Brandt on 14 February 2024,
the conduct of inspections was “part of our service” to the
landlord; it was not a
service to the
Accordingly Mr
Brandt’s claim in negligence against Ms Bakes must
Unpaid rent
Brandt’s purported termination of the tenancy on 20 April 2024 (with
effect from 22 April 2024 when vacant possession was
delivered) breached
the lease and was a ‘lease break’, since he had no power to do so
and (c) of the
Residential Tenancies
this means that the premises was “abandoned” on Monday 22 April
2024, when vacant possession was delivered to
the agent. This was the first day
of a fortnightly rental period, noting that the agent’s tenancy ledger
records that Mr Brandt
paid rent up until Sunday 21 April
Specifically the ledger
records that Mr Brandt’s final fortnightly payment of $700.00 was made on
8 April 2024, being an advance
payment of the 14 day period up until 21 April
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
provides that, where
the premises is “abandoned” during a fixed term (which includes
vacating the premises), a tenancy
is “terminated ... on and from the date
on which rent was due and payable in relation to the premises”. The next
after abandonment (ie Monday 22 April 2024) on which rent was “due
and payable” was Monday 6 May 2024. Applying
termination occurred
“on and from” that date (ie Monday 6 May 2024), meaning that the
last day of the lease was Sunday
5 May 2024 (thereafter it was
“terminated”).
to the lease Mr Brandt was contractually obliged to pay rent until 6 May 2024.
Thereafter Ms Burke could apply to the Tribunal
for compensation for lost
s 122(1)(a)
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
or alternatively agree the quantum of compensation with Ms Robertson (thus
avoiding formal legal
Ms Burke mitigated her loss from the lease break, and secured a new tenant from
3 May 2024 – meaning that Mr Brandt’s
lease now ended on 2 May
being four days prior to
the former termination date of the lease on 6 May
outcome is that, pursuant to the lease, Mr Brandt owes rent for the period
(Monday) 22 April to (Thursday) 2 May 2024, being a
total of 11 days.
daily rent under the lease was $50.00 per day (ie $350.00 per week divided by
7). Accordingly the unpaid rent owed by Mr Brandt
to Ms Burke is $550.00 (ie $50
per day multiplied by 11).
Cleanliness
Burke claimed cleaning costs other than for the removal of mould in the sum of
National Real Estate prepared an ingoing condition report for the
This is a critical
document. Pursuant to the statutory scheme an “accepted” ingoing
condition report is conclusive evidence
of the condition of the premises at the
commencement of the tenancy. However where there is no “accepted”
ingoing condition
report, pursuant to
Residential
Tenancies Act 1999
the condition of the premises at the end of the tenancy
will be taken as being the condition at the commencement.
first page of the ingoing condition report has the date “06/06/23”
(ie 6 June 2023) printed next to the then property
manager’s signature,
with the same printed date also appearing in the footer at the bottom of all 77
pages of the report (most
of which comprises 284 photographs).
date is well prior to both 29 June 2023 when Mr Brandt signed the lease,
3 July 2023 when the lease commenced, and 18 July 2023
returned to Darwin and took possession of the premises (and was served with the
ingoing condition report). It may be that
the date of “06/06/23” (ie
6 June 2023) is inaccurate or a computer glitch, since each of the 284
photographs of the
report are dated "07/07/2023" (ie 7 July 2023). Nothing turns
on this since it is clear that the ingoing condition report necessarily
exist, at least in completed form, until 7 July 2023.
date of 7 July 2023 is four days after the commencement of the lease, which
raised a question as to whether the ingoing condition
report was served on Mr
Brandt within “3 business days” of him taking possession of the
In that respect Mr
Brandt’s declaration dated 10 July 2024 suggested that he took possession
on 3 July 2023 when the lease
If so the report
would have no statutory deeming effect as to the condition of the premises on 3
July 2023 (since out of time), and
Ms Burke’s claim for cleaning costs
would fail by force of
Residential Tenancies Act
after the hearing Mr Brandt clarified that he physically (and legally) took
“possession” of the premises on 18
July 2023 when he returned to
Darwin and collected the keys from the agent and was served with a copy of the
ingoing condition report.
means the report was served on Mr Brandt within “3 business days” as
required by
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
did not sign the report, or make any modifications to it, meaning that the
report is taken to be “accepted”
pursuant to
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
. Additionally, Mr Brandt instructed that
he reviewed the report and thought that it was “fair enough”,
meaning that he
did not dispute the record
means, pursuant to
and (2), that the “report is conclusive
evidence of
the condition of the premises” at the commencement of the
tenancy “unless the
Tribunal determines otherwise in a particular
case” (noting that no basis exists for doing so here).
ingoing condition report generally records that the premises was clean at the
commencement of the tenancy, with minor exceptions
(eg minor marks to the
kitchen ceiling, mould on the blue kitchen door (and marks on both sides of the
door), kitchen window dirty,
minor stains to kitchen curtains, minor marks to
the bathroom door, internal glass of bathroom window dirty). The photographs
this textual record.
23 April 2024 Ms Bakes conducted a final inspection of the unit, and forwarded
an outgoing condition report to Mr Brandt later
that day by email. Mr Brandt did
not sign this report, meaning that it was not “accepted” and does
not deem the condition
of the premises at the end of the tenancy. Nonetheless
the observations recorded in the report, and the enclosed photographs, are
evidence of the cleanliness of the premises after Mr Brandt delivered vacant
possession (on 22 April 2024).
outgoing condition report records that various parts of the premises were dirty
(eg cobwebs and grubby marks on the hallway floor,
grubby marks on the hallway
walls, dust build up on power points/fixtures in the hallway, living area and
bedroom). Some of this
uncleanliness related to Mr Brandt’s extended
absence from the premises.
Green Cleaners cleaned the uncleanliness recorded in the outgoing condition
report at the quoted and invoiced cost of $480.00.
The firm also cleaned mould
at a cost of $280.00, however Ms Burke did not claim compensation for that
accept that the invoiced cost of $480.00 to rectify the uncleanliness at the end
of the tenancy is reasonable, and uphold this aspect
of Ms Burke’s
Lease break clause: advertising and reletting fees
lease included additional terms, including a lease break clause which provided
as follows:
Tenant hereby covenants and agrees with the Landlord as follows:
3. Should the tenant be unable to fulfil their fixed term lease, they hereby
agree to allow the Landlord or the Landlords Agent to
re-let the premises on the
Tenants behalf and that the Tenant will pay the Landlord a Lease Break Fee based
on O'Donoghue's First
National Real Estates re-letting fee formula, shown below,
together with Rental payments up until the Lease expires or a new Tenancy
Agreement commences (if prior to the lease expiry). From signing this
Residential Tenancy Agreement, the Tenant/s agree to pay any
advertising costs.
Furthermore, the Tenant shall pay all costs incurred with their Breach of
Tenancy in accordance to
Section 122
Residential Tenancies Act
(Formula for re-letting fee: letting fee = equivalent to 1 x weeks rent +
LEASE BREAK INFORMATION: By signing this Residential Tenancy Agreement,
the Tenant/s agree to pay rent (as per the lease contract) up to the day
before a new Tenant (approved by the Owner) moves in to the
property, or up to
the lease contract expiry date (whichever occurs first).
Should the Tenant vacate the property before the lease expiry date, the
Tenant agrees to cover loss of rent (as mentioned above),
advertising and
covering the Letting Fee for the new Tenancy (Lease Break Fee).
SUMMARY OF LEASE BREAK COSTS (Tenant agrees upon signing this Residential
Tenancy Agreement):
- Lease Break Fee
- NTCAT Application Fee in accordance to
Section 122
Residential
Tenancies Act
(at cost of NTCAT)
https://ntcat.nt.gov.au/getting-started/fees
- Advertising Costs (at cost of realestate.com.au $186.00 per internet
- Paying residential rent up until this fixed term lease agreement expires or
up until the day before a new Tenancy (approved by the
Owner) commences,
whichever occurs first.
29 April 2024 Ms Bakes served Mr Brandt an RT08 Notice of Landlord’s
Intention to Retain the Security Deposit. The full bond
of $1,400.00 was
retained to meet the following costs: unpaid rent ($700.00 as of 29 April 2024,
and “continuing”);
cleaning costs other than the removal of mould ($480.00); advertising costs
($195.00); and a lease break fee
These costs total
basis for the specified lease break fee of $89.74 is quite unclear, noting that
the “re-letting fee” in the lease
break clause contemplates a fee of
$385.00 (ie “1 x weeks rent +
Nothing turns on
this since in my view the lease break fee is invalid.
effect, and validity, of lease break clauses has been discussed in various
Tribunal decisions, most recently by myself in
Wane v Robertson
to [85]. My reasoning in relation to the reletting and
advertising fees so claimed in that matter was as
Tribunal has previously considered the effect, and validity, of contractual
provisions which require a tenant to pay administrative
costs when a lease is
broken during a term.
Sananikone & Do v Sandy
[2015] NTRTCmr 1
to [119] Delegate
Bruxner considered that a requirement that a “tenant will be responsible
for the administrative costs incurred
by the owner in establishing a new
tenancy” purported to modify or exclude the effect of
landlord may retain the bond in trust as potential compensation for those costs
, and thus was void insofar as the requirement sought to
“establish the legal consequences of abandonment of premises”.
Gatty & Darcey v Nou
[2016] NTCAT 249
to [34] President
Bruxner and Member Macrides considered that a requirement that a tenant must pay
administrative costs by reference
to a “re-letting fee formula”, and
must do so “upon demand” with the landlord given advance
authorisation
to deduct those costs from the bond (rather than holding them on
trust), was void since inconsistent with the legislative scheme.
to the analysis in
is the legislative object that
the quantum of compensation for advertising and reletting costs cannot be
specified, or mandated or
constrained, in advance of a lease being terminated
during a fixed term. Upon termination a tenant has a statutory right to have
that question determined by the Tribunal under
, if he or she wishes to do
so. Pursuant to
a residential lease cannot “exclude, modify or
restrict” that right.
that respect, although not discussed in those two decisions,
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
(as in force when Ms Robertson’s
lease was entered on 22 May 2023, and also for the leases under
consideration in
) provided that a “landlord
must not require or receive from a tenant a payment, other than rent, a security
deposit or both,
for a tenancy”. The maximum penalty for breach of that
provision was 20 penalty
c) of the lease break clause purports to contractually “require”
Ms Robertson to make payments (ie reletting
and advertising costs), if she
vacates the premises during the term, which are neither “rent” nor a
“security deposit”.
reletting costs, a formula is provided whereby the maximum quantum a tenant must
pay is fixed at “1.1 week’s rent”.
That is, this maximum
quantum is fixed at the inception of the tenancy, and thus is not ascertained by
reference to the circumstances
which may later pertain if a premises is
abandoned and a lease is terminated.
advertising costs (ie “internet marketing”), a formula is also
provided to identify the quantum – ie the “current
cost at the time
of advertising”.
both cases the formulae are inconsistent with
, since they purport
to require Ms Robertson (a “tenant”) to make a
“payment” for reletting costs and advertising
Mr Robertson (a “landlord”) which is neither “rent”
nor a “security
Contrary to the
claim in paragraph c) that the required payments are “in accordance with
Residential Tenancies Act
the requirement was
prohibited by
of that statute.
follows, given this inconsistency, that pursuant to
the requirement for
payment of administrative costs in paragraph c) of the lease break clause is
reasoning applies equally to the lease break clause at additional term 3 of the
lease between Ms Burke and Mr Brandt. Relevantly
Ms Burke’s claim, by
reference to that clause, for a lease break fee ($89.74) and advertising costs
($195.00) is void due to
inconsistency with the
Residential Tenancies Act
Burke did not otherwise file any documentary evidence to establish that
advertising costs were incurred in relation to Mr Brandt’s
termination of the lease.
Accordingly
Ms Burke’s claim for compensation for a lease break fee and advertising
costs is dismissed.
outcome of this proceeding is that Mr Brandt’s claim for compensation from
Ms Burke in the sum of $2,300.00 fails, and is
Burke’s cross-claim for unpaid rent of $550.00 and cleaning costs in the
sum of $480.00, totalling $1,030.00, is upheld.
However Ms Burke’s
cross-claim for advertising costs in the sum of $195.00 and a lease break fee of
$89.74 fails, and is dismissed.
claimed sum of $1030.00 must be offset against the bond of $1400.00, which
Ms Burke retains. The difference is $370.00. Mr Brandt
is entitled to the
return of the sum of $370.00 from the bond. I order to that effect below.
Brandt’s claim against Ms Bakes has no legal foundation, and is
order as follows:
first respondent, Jackie Burke, shall pay the sum of $370.00 to the applicant,
Jordan Brandt, by close of business on 12 March
applicant’s claim against the first respondent is otherwise
first respondent’s cross claim against the applicant is otherwise
applicant’s claim against the second respondent, Charissa Bakes, is
12 February 2025
TRIBUNAL MEMBER
Ms Bakes’ evidence (audio
of hearing ~40 min 25 sec).
Pursuant to
s 130(1)(c)
Northern Territory Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2014
Martin’s submission on behalf of Mr Brandt (audio of hearing ~2 min 50
sec). Notwithstanding that Ms Bakes’ alleged
“failings” were
in her capacity as an employee, First National Real Estate was not instead
joined as a party.
Burke’s form 2 response (undated and unsigned) as filed on her behalf by
Ms Bakes on 24 May 2024 (hearing book (
) 11). The response did not
expressly address Mr Brandt’s compensation claim, but it was implicit that
it was opposed.
See RT08 Notice
of Landlord’s Intention to Retain the Security Deposit Dated 29 April 2024
Specifically several
lounge chairs, kitchen chairs, and a double bed base with mattress, as well as a
refrigerator and washing
The pro forma lease
provides for “additional matters, such as parking space or
furniture”, to be listed as part of the
leased “premises”,
however only a “car space” is listed (HB
The tenancy ledger is not
in the hearing book, since filed after the
It is necessary to
establish whether the lease (as signed only by Mr Brandt) was in force, since it
includes additional provisions
including about lease break which the landlord
relies upon. To that end the Tribunal requested to file a copy of the lease
by both parties (if it exists) be filed, but that did not occur. If the
lease was not in force, the default provisions in the
Residential Tenancies
would constitute the agreement between the parties, however they do
not include the additional
provisions.
Brandt’s email dated 30 June 2023 to the agent, and the agent’s
photographic record of his receipt of the keys
(as filed by Mr Brandt on 5
February 2024 after the hearing). This evidence means that the reference in
Mr Brandt’s declaration
dated 10 July 2021 at [1] (HB 21) to taking
“possession of the unit on 03 July 2023” does not mean that legal
(or physical)
“possession” occurred on that date. This appreciation
is relevant, because an ingoing condition report is only valid
if served on a
tenant within “3 business days” of the tenant taking legal
“possession” of a premises
Residential Tenancies Act
Mr Brandt’s
evidence (audio of hearing ~27 min 5 sec). Also application 3 May 2024 p 5 at
[3] (HB 5).
Clause 7 of the
additional terms of the lease provides (HB 39): “Routine inspections will
be carried out throughout the tenancy
Minimum every 16
Brandt’s declaration dated 10 July 2024 at [4] (HB 21).
Mr Brandt’s
declaration dated 10 July 2024 at [7] (HB
Mr Brandt’s
declaration 10 July 2024 (HB 21 to 25). This email is not in the hearing book,
since filed after the
Mr Brandt’s
declaration 10 July 2024 (HB 21 to 25). This email was filed after the
Mr Brandt’s
declaration 10 July 2024 (HB 21 to 25). This email was filed after the
This email was
filed after the hearing.
This email was filed after the
Mr Brandt’s
declaration dated 10 July 2024 at [29] and [30] (HB
days” rounded up, being Mr Brandt’s calculation (see Paul
Velvus’s declaration dated 12 July 2024
Mr Brandt’s
declaration dated 10 July 2024 at [34] to [37] (HB
Mr Brandt’s
declaration dated 10 July 2024 at [35] (HB
Application 3 May 2024
p 2 proposed order [1a. and b.] (HB
Ms Bakes’ email
dated 2 April 2024 (HB 107).
Mr Brandt’s declaration dated 10 July 2024 at [58] (HB
Invoice dated 8 April
2024 (HB 192). Mr Brandt said that the plumber was unable to access the upstairs
unit on 3 April 2024 because
nobody was home (Mr Brandt’s declaration
dated 10 July 2024 at [58] (HB
And as Mr Brandt
presumably also did on the weekend of 6 and 7 April 2024 when washing and
disinfecting his belongings (see
evidence (audio of hearing ~37 min 16 sec). Ms Bakes’ advice by email on
21 February 2024 (and earlier emails
dated 28 December 2023 and 9 January
2024) that the agent possessed a “master key” may have been a
misplaced assumption
on her part. There was no cross examination on this
question, since these emails were filed after the hearing on 14 August 2024.
is not necessary to clarify this question by further evidence, since nothing
turns on the factual issue of whether or not the
agent in fact possessed a
master key for the premises.
Mr Brandt’s declaration dated 10 July 2024 at [70] (HB
HB 110. Mr Brandt
declined to answer several telephone calls from Ms Bakes, particularly since he
thought it “best if all correspondence
was documented via email” (Mr
Brandt’s declaration dated 10 July 2024 at [71] (HB
Mr Brandt’s
declaration dated 10 July 2024 at [77] to [79] (HB
Mr Brandt’s
declaration dated 10 July 2024 at [81] (HB 24). See also Mr Brandt’s
unsigned statement (June 2024) prepared
for an expert which referred to some
belongings having “small white bugs crawling throughout” (HB
Mr Brandt’s
declaration dated 10 July 2024 at [77] to [80] (HB
Mr Campbell’s
declaration dated 12 July 2024 (HB 140). Mr Campbell said the following items
were disposed of:
“office furniture, the lounge, coffee table, coasters, foot stool and
the rug, a workout mat, the quilt, kettle, microwave,
cooking utensils, cutlery
tray, sheets, pillows, and pillow cases, clothes rack, lamps, towels, toilet
brush, towel rack, the ironing
board, iron, stick vacuum, brooms, wooden
114. Mr Brandt’s email also attached a “Routine Inspection
Report.pdf”, but it was not in
HB 112. Typographical,
spelling or grammatical errors appear in the original of this, and other,
quotations herein.
24.1(a) of the lease. See also
and (b) of the
Residential
Tenancies Act 1999
Mr Brandt’s
declaration dated 10 July 2024 at [91] (HB 24). The landlord’s limited
concession that there would be no
cleaning charge for mouldy areas shown in the
eight photographs did not imply an agreement about other
HB 194. The invoice was
filed on 23 August 2024, after the
Ms Hansen’s
statement dated 17 May 2024 (HB
HB 121. The remainder
of $85.26 was identified by Ms Bakes at the hearing (audio of hearing ~55 min 13
sec). Ms Burke’s anticipated
claim of $1,464.74 as per the RT08
notice dated 29 April 2024 had reduced to $1,314.74 because unpaid rent was no
longer sought up
to 6 May 2024. The difference between the bond of $1,400.00 and
the claim of $1,314.74 is $85.26. As of 29 January 2025 the remainder
had not been paid to Mr Brandt (see Ms Martin’s email to the Tribunal
of that date).
Pursuant to
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
). Also on 3 May 2024 Mr
Brandt commenced the present proceedings by filing an application seeking return
of the bond in the sum of
evidence (audio of hearing ~1 hr 44 min 0
This figure of 64
includes the initial eight photographs emailed to Ms Bakes on
1 April 2024, noting that three of those photographs
are duplicated in
the later batch filed by Mr Brandt on 11 July 2024 (see the photographs at:
HB 56 and HB 104 (second photograph);
HB 44 and HB106; HB 78 and HB
101 (second photograph)).
Pepperill & Ors
[2024] NTCA 10
to [34]. See also
Executive Officer (Housing) v Young
[2022] NTCA 1
Pepperill &
[2024] NTCA 10
Mr Felvus’s
declaration dated 12 July 2024 (HB
See ingoing condition
report (images 179, 180 and 201), and outgoing condition report (images 85 to
87, 89 to 92, 99 and 100).These
reports are not in the hearing book, since filed
after the hearing.
Mr Felvus formed this opinion on the basis of photographs and other documentary
information provided by Mr Brandt, but did
not personally inspect the
premises. Mr Brandt also enquired about testing samples of the mould to
“deem if the property is
habitable or uninhabitable”, but did not do
so presumably given the cost and time required for that task
(Mr Brandt’s
declaration dated 10 July 2021 at [75] to [76] (HB
Ms Burke filed a
report entitled “Mold Course Chapter 9” (USA Environment Protection
Agency, 9 August 2024). This report
principally concerns mould
prevention, particularly the importance of moisture control. The report accords
with Mr Felvus’s
opinion and the report from the New York City Department
of Health and Mental
HB 142. Mr Felvus
said that he gave evidence about this phenomenon in another Tribunal proceeding,
in which a body corporate sought
to limit the temperature of air-conditioners
used in multiple tenancy complexes so as to rectify condensation of water and
growth of mould in adjacent
Pepperill &
[2024] NTCA 10
Moreover the
landlord’s statutory power in
to inspect premises is discretionary
(as the word “may” makes clear), as is the corresponding contractual
power in cl
19. A landlord is not obliged to conduct inspections.
Additional term no 6 which contemplates routine inspections throughout the
tenancy at a “Minimum every 16 weeks” does not alter this conclusion
(HB 39). Again, the additional term is for the benefit
of the landlord with a
view to protecting his or her property; it cannot be construed as obliging the
landlord to conduct inspections
at least every 16 weeks, and does not accord the
tenant a right that that
This email was filed
after the hearing.
tenancy ledger is not in the hearing book, since filed after the hearing.
Specifically the ledger records that Mr Brandt’s
final fortnightly
payment of $700.00 was made on 8 April 2024, being an advance payment of the 14
day period up until 21 April
[2024] NTCAT 5
Pursuant to c 82(c) of
Residential Tenancies
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
). The outcome is
that Ms Burke’s claim concerns only unpaid rent which was payable under an
extant lease, as distinct from
compensation for lost rent under
s 122(1)(a)
to the premises being vacant after the early abandonment of the
The ingoing and
outgoing condition reports were not discussed at the hearing (which focused upon
habitability), and were filed after
the hearing at the Tribunal’s
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
. Tenants ordinarily, but
not invariably, take possession of premises on the commencement date of a
Mr Brandt’s declaration dated 10 July 2021 at [1] (HB
See Mr Brandt’s
email dated 30 June 2023 to the agent, and the agent’s photographic record
of his receipt of the keys
(as filed by Mr Brandt on 5 February 2024 after the
Ms Martin’s email to the Tribunal dated 29 January
See RT08 Notice of
Landlord’s Intention to Retain the Security Deposit Dated 29 April 2024
(HB 121), and Ms Bakes’ supporting
statutory declaration of that date
See RT08 Notice of
Landlord’s Intention to Retain the Security Deposit Dated 29 April 2024
(HB 121), and Ms Bakes’ supporting
statutory declaration of that date
literally, the figure for unpaid rent of $700.00 as of 29 April 2024 is
incorrect, since Mr Brandt in fact owed only $350.00
on that date. However I
presume the figure of $700.00 is a reference to the fact that an advance payment
of fortnightly rent in that
sum was not received from Mr Brandt on Monday
22 April 2024. Nothing turns on this, since the quantum of unpaid rent
ultimately owed
by Mr Brandt is otherwise identified herein as $550.00 (ie a
reduced sum due to Ms Burke mitigated her loss by securing a new
[2024] NTCAT 5
to [85] (footnotes excluded). See also
Herbert v Padovan
[2015] NTRTCmr 10
where Delegate Macrides
disallowed a landlord’s retention from the bond of a letting fee ($85.00),
advertising costs ($155.00)
and loss of rent ($200.00) since “imposing
contractual obligations that continue after a tenant has vacated, flies in the
section 82(1)(c)
, by which an abandonment leads to
determination”.
Herbert v Padovan
[2015] NTRTCmr 10
where Delegate Macrides
disallowed a landlord’s retention from the bond of a letting fee ($85.00),
advertising costs ($155.00)
and loss of rent ($200.00) since “imposing
contractual obligations that continue after a tenant has vacated, flies in the
section 82(1)(c)
, by which an abandonment leads to
determination”.
was amended by the
Residential Tenancies Legislation Amendment Act
, with effect from 2 January 2024. The principal object of
the amendment was clarificatory, particularly to replace the “current
drafting style with a more accessible format” (as per the explanatory
memorandum). The lease break clause in Ms Robertson’s
lease would
also have been void under the amended provision, if it had been in
In contrast to the
formula for the reletting fee (which fixes the fee ab initio when the lease is
entered), the formula for advertising
costs turns on circumstances which can
only be known at or after the time of termination. This temporal difference in
the two formulae
does not affect the question of compliance with
Even if such costs
were documented, in my view Ms Burke would not be entitled to the full cost of
advertising – since the early
termination was only 11 weeks prior to the
scheduled end of the 52 week lease on 30 June 2024, at which time the landlord
bore responsibility
for any advertising for a new tenant. A party may only
recover compensation for the actual loss incurred from a breach of contract,
with a view to putting that party in the position that would have applied the
contract had been fulfilled.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (37.2 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter