URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCAT/2025/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:17:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Friends of Lee Point Inc v Development Consent Authority [2025] NTCAT 13 (29 August 2025)
Friends of Lee Point Inc v Development Consent Authority
DECISION NUMBER:
[2025] NTCAT 13
FRIENDS OF LEE POINT INC
DEVELOPMENT CONSENT AUTHORITY
MATTER TYPE:
Review Jurisdiction -
Planning Act 1999
2024-03944-CT
HEARING DATE:
18 AUGUST 2025
DECISION OF:
LESLIE MCCRIMMON
DATE OF ORDERS:
29 AUGUST 2025
APPEARANCES and REPRESENTATION (if any):
RESPONDENT:
REASONS FOR DECISION:
interlocutory application arises within the context of an Initiating Application
brought by Friends of Lee Point Inc (the ‘Applicant’)
for a review
of a decision of the Development Consent Authority (‘DCA) not to take
further action on a complaint lodged by
the Applicant. The complaint related to
an alleged breach of
sections 75B
Planning Act 1999
Initiating Application was also filed by Kevin Quall (‘Quall’)
seeking the same relief as that sought in the proceedings
brought by the
Applicant. Pursuant to an order dated 4 April 2025, the Tribunal directed that
the Quall proceedings, being Tribunal
file number 2025-00298-CT, be heard
together with the proceedings brought by the Applicant. To the extent these
reasons relate to
the Quall proceedings, they are to be taken as the reasons for
decision in that proceeding.
the Applicant and Quall request that the following material be admitted into
evidence pursuant to
section 46(2)(b)
Northern Territory Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2014
(‘NTCAT Act’). The Applicant
seeks the admission of the following documents:
3.1. annexures
to the evidence filed by Applicant with the Tribunal on 16 May 2025;
3.2. Unattested
Declaration of Jessica Black dated 22 June 2025;
3.3. Unattested
Declaration of Emma Fitzsimmons dated 22 June 2025;
3.4. Unattested
Declaration of Ian Redmond dated 20 June 2025;
3.5. Unattested
Declaration of Graeme Sawyer dated 22 June 2025.
the Quall proceeding, it is submitted that the following documents should be
4.1. Statement
of Reasons for Decision prepared by the federal Minister for the Environment and
Water dated 28 March 2024 (‘Plibersek
Decision’);
4.2. Cultural
Heritage Assessment on the Lee Point Project Area prepared by Terra Rosa
Consulting dated December 2023 (Terra Rosa
Assessment’);
4.3. Abstract
and Site Information prepared by the Aboriginal Areas Protection Authority dated
8 January 2025.
DCA does not object to the annexures to the evidence filed by the Applicant
being admitted pursuant to section 46(2)(b) of the
NTCAT Act. It notes that most
of the annexures are either already in evidence or are otherwise publicly
The DCA does object to
the remaining evidence sought to be admitted by both the Applicant and Quall on
the basis that it is irrelevant
to the matters in issue in the review
proceedings.
Applicant also requested that the Tribunal take a view of the Lee Point area
relevant to the complaints filed by the Applicant
and Quall. The Applicant
submitted that a view of the area would assist the Tribunal to determine whether
the elements of
sections 75B
Planning Act 1999
Background facts
30 November 2018, a Development Permit DP18/0409 (the ‘Permit’) was
issued by the DCA for the subdivision by Defence
Housing Australia
(‘DHA’) of Lot 4873 Lee Point Darwin. The purpose of the development
was to create 513 residential
lots. On 14 July 2022, a variation to the Permit
was issued for the development to proceed in five stages.
Permit required DHA, as conditions precedent to the commencement of works, to
prepare to the satisfaction of the DCA a Shorebird
Monitoring Program, a
Construction and Environmental Management Plan (CEMP) and an Erosion and
Sediment Control Plan (ESCP). Before
April 2024, the condition precedents had
been fulfilled for stage 1 of the project, but the CEMP and ESCP had not been
approved for
any other stage.
works under the Permit commenced on 30 April 2024 by a subcontractor of DHA.
Contrary to the condition precedents relating
to the CEMP and ESCP, the
subcontractor commenced clearing stage 2 in addition to stage 1. On 2 May 2024,
DHA ceased clearing and
self-reported the breach to the DCA. In its Statement of
Reasons, the DCA found that:
Following further investigation,
including with representatives of DHA, the DCA found that premature clearing of
had occurred in breach of the Permit. However, based on
interviews and correspondence with DHA, the DCA found no evidence that DHA
a specific instruction for land to be cleared in the “stage 2” area
during the relevant period of time. On the basis
of the materials before it, the
DCA concluded that clearing occurred as a result of miscommunication between DHA
and the subcontractor,
such misunderstanding being exacerbated by the existence
of two separate sets of maps with different numbering of the stages
DCA chose not to consider
section 75C
Planning Act 1999
the same facts and circumstances were relied on by the Applicant to establish
the breach of both
section 75B
. In relation to
section 75B
determined that:
The DCA considered that a breach of the Permit had
occurred in respect of the “stage 2” clearing but could not be
that the evidence obtained through the investigation established the
requisite mental element under
section 75B
to prove the offence on the part of
DHA as required by
DCA went on to find:
Further, noting the difficulties in
establishing the elements of the offence under
section 75B
in this case, its
[DHA] position as a model litigant, the timely self-reporting of the breach of
the permit, the immediate cessation
of works and rectification of the breaches
of permit, the DCA considered that it was not in the public interest to proceed
with further
enforcement action. Accordingly, the DCA decided pursuant to
Section 79A(1)(a)(ii)
that the matter did not warrant
taking further
Issues in dispute in the review proceedings
fact that DHA breached the Permit in commencing the clearing of stage 2 of the
development before it had obtained a CEMP and ESCP
is not in dispute. The issues
in the review proceeding will centre on the following two questions:
12.1. Was the
mental element in
section 75B(2)(a)
(2)(a) of the
Planning Act
established sufficiently to warrant the issue of an enforcement
12.2. If the
preceding question is answered in the affirmative, does the matter “not
warrant taking further action” as
that term is used in
79A(1)(a)(ii)
Planning Act 1999
relating to review
proceedings arise within the context of the Tribunal’s review jurisdiction
, Division 3 of the NTCAT Act. Such review is not a hearing de novo,
nor is the Applicant required to identify errors made by the
DCA in its decision
to take no further action in relation to the complaint
The DCA’s decision is
reviewed on its merits
object of the Tribunal to produce the “correct or preferrable
Shi v Migration Agents Registration Authority
[2008] HCA 31
(2008) 235 CLR 286
, Kiefel J (as her Honour then was) discussed the meaning of the term
‘correct or preferrable decision’ in the context
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
(Cth). Her Honour’s
observations apply equally to the use of the term in section 46(1) of the NTCAT
“Preferable” is apt to refer to a decision which
involved discretionary considerations. A “correct” decision,
context of review, might be taken to be one rightly made. It is, inevitably, a
decision by the original decision-maker with
which the Tribunal agrees.
the context of an application to admit further evidence in a review proceeding
which was not before the original decision-maker,
the High Court of Australia
Frugtniet v Australian Securities and Investments Commission
[2019] HCA 16
(2019) 266 CLR 250
The question for determination
by the AAT on the review of an administrative decision under s 25 of the AAT Act
is thus whether the
decision is the correct or preferable decision. That
question is required to be determined on the material before the AAT, not on
as it was before the original decision-maker. As Bowen CJ and Dean
Drake v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
and has since been affirmed by this court in
Shi v Migration Agents
Registration Authority
, the AAT is not at large. It is subject to the same
general constraints as the original decision-maker and should ordinarily
its task as though it were performing the relevant function of the
original decision-maker in accordance with the law as it applied
decision-maker at the time of the original decision.
Depending on the nature of the decision the subject of review, the AAT may
sometimes take into account evidence that was not before
the original
decision-maker, including events subsequent to the original decision. But
subject to any clearly expressed contrary
statutory indication, the AAT may do
so only if and to the extent that the evidence is relevant to the question which
the original
decision-maker was bound to decide; really, as if the original
decision-maker were deciding the matter at the time that it is before
The AAT cannot take into account matters which were not before the original
decision-maker where to do so would change the
nature of the decision or, put
another way, the question before the original decision-maker.
relevant provision in the NTCAT Act relating to the admission of further
evidence in the exercise of the Tribunal’s review
been noted above, section 46(2), which provides:
(2) A proceeding in
the Tribunal’s review jurisdiction will include:
(a) an examination of the evidence or the material before the decision-maker,
(b) a consideration of any further evidence or material that the Tribunal
decides, in the circumstances of the particular case, to
admit for a rehearing.
Lock the Gate Alliance Ltd v Minister for Lands, Planning and Environment;
Imperial Oil and Gas A Pty Ltd
[2025] NTCAT 12
, the Tribunal held at
Two conclusions may be drawn from the wording of section
46(2)(b) of the NTCAT Act. First, the inclusion of the words “in the
circumstances of the particular case” evidence the fact that the
Tribunal’s decision to admit further evidence or material
large’. Secondly, the admission of further evidence or material is in the
discretion of the Tribunal, which
discretion is to be exercised with reference
to the relevant provisions of the NTCAT Act, the Act or subordinate legislation
confers jurisdiction on the Tribunal, and any relevant case law.
Submissions re Quall documents
submits that the documents he seeks to have admitted are relevant to the issues
in dispute in the review proceedings. Quall
refers to the three documents noted
at [4.1]-[4.3] above collectively as the ‘Cultural Significance
Documents’.
submit that the Cultural Significance Documents are relevant to the issue of
whether the DHA were “reckless” as they
demonstrate that DHA were
aware of the cultural significance of both the area in Stage 2 and the
surrounding area of Lee Point, and
therefore aware of the risks involved in
failing to meet the preconditions of the
fact that DHA was aware of both the Plibersek Decision and the Terra Rosa
Assessment, Quall submits, is evidenced by a letter
dated 25 June 2024 from DHA
to the DCA in response to the complaint lodged with the DCA by the Applicant.
The 25 June 2024 letter
is in evidence in the review proceedings. Neither the
Plibersek Decision nor the Terra Rosa Assessment were provided to the DCA.
notwithstanding, Quall submits that the representations of DHA concerning such
documents were made to the DCA and such representations
made by DHA were relied
upon by the DCA in coming to its decision.
DCA objects to the admission of the Cultural Significance Documents on relevance
The issue is not whether “Lee Point” generally
has cultural significance. The issue is the premature clearing of land
would have been lawfully permitted to clear had they met the necessary
conditions precedent. There is no evidence whatsoever
that there is some area of
cultural significance within the area which was cleared. The materials sought to
be relied upon by Mr
Quall are entirely
irrelevant.
Consideration – Quall documents
be admissible in a proceeding, whether in the Tribunal’s original or
review jurisdiction, evidence must be relevant to an
issue in the proceeding.
While the Tribunal is not bound by the rules of
evidence that is not
relevant to an issue in the proceeding does not assist the Tribunal in coming to
a decision. Further, the consideration
of irrelevant evidence prolongs
proceedings and may increase costs, both of which are contrary to the
Tribunal’s objectives.
follows, therefore, that only relevant evidence
should be admitted in a
proceeding.
be relevant, the evidence sought to be admitted “requires a minimal
probable connection between the evidence and the “fact
need not render a “fact in issue” probable,
or “sufficiently probable” – it is enough if it only makes
fact in issue more probable or less probable than it would be without the
evidence – ie it “affects the
probability”.
these proceedings, facts in issue are whether the DHA intentionally used or
developed land within the meaning of
section 75B(2)(a)
Planning Act
or intentionally engaged in conduct within the meaning of
Planning Act 1999
. The Tribunal is satisfied that there
is at least a minimal probable connection between the Plibersek Decision and the
Assessment and these facts in issue. In particular, the Tribunal is
satisfied that such evidence sought to be admitted by Quall makes
the issue of
recklessness on the part of DHA “more probable or less probable than it
would be without the
a matter which
will be addressed in greater detail at the hearing of the substantive
Plibersek Decision and the Terra Rosa Assessment were available at the time the
DCA was investigating the complaint lodged by
the Applicant. Reference was made
to both documents in evidence before the DCA, and the DCA could have accessed
such evidence had
it chosen to do so. The fact that the DCA, for whatever
reason, decided not to consider the evidence is not a bar to a consideration
the evidence by the Tribunal.
Abstract and Site Information prepared by the Aboriginal Areas Protection
Authority dated 8 January 2025 falls into a different
category. It was not in
existence at the time of the breach by DHA or when the decision on the
Applicant’s complaint was made
by the DCA. Contrary to Quall’s
submission referenced at [18] above, such evidence cannot “demonstrate
that the DHA were
aware of the cultural significance of both the area in Stage 2
and the surrounding area of Lee
because the
document was not in existence at the time of DHA’s breach. The document is
not relevant to the determination of
a fact in issue in the proceeding.
the exercise of its discretion to admit further evidence or material
pursuant to section 46(2)(b) of the NTCAT Act, the Tribunal allows into
evidence the following documents:
26.1. Statement
of Reasons for Decision prepared by the federal Minister for the Environment and
Water dated 28 March 2024;
26.2. Cultural
Heritage Assessment on the Lee Point Project Area prepared by Terra Rosa
Consulting dated December 2023.
Tribunal does not admit into evidence the Abstract and Site Information prepared
by the Aboriginal Areas Protection Authority
dated 8 January 2025. Such evidence
is not relevant to a fact in issue in the proceeding.
Submissions
re Applicant’s documents
contested evidence the Applicant seeks to have admitted consists of four
Unattested Declarations of individuals who were eyewitnesses
to the clearing
works conducted by DHA’s subcontractor. The Applicant maintains that, as a
consequence of their attendance
at the site on 30 April 2024, the evidence
contained in the Unattested Declarations are directly relevant to the requisite
elements contained in
sections 75B(2)(a)
(2)(a) of the
DCA submitted that:
It is accepted by all parties that DHA’s
contractor cleared an area of land prematurely, before the CEMP and ESCP had
been prepared/submitted
and ‘approved’. This is not in dispute and
does not require further evidence or
addition, the DCA maintains that the evidence provided in the Unattested
Declarations does not address any issue in dispute in
the proceedings.
Consequently, the evidence sought to be admitted is irrelevant and inadmissible.
Finally, the DCA notes that, in
its case management orders, the Tribunal
directed the Applicant to file any evidence upon which it intended to rely by 16
The Unattested Declarations were not filed until 23 June 2025 and are
therefore out of time.
Consideration – Applicant’s
further evidence
first with the Respondent’s submission that the Unattested Declarations
filed by the Applicant are out of time, the
Tribunal accepts that in this regard
the Applicant failed to adhere to the case management order made by the
Tribunal. Such orders
are made, inter alia, to ensure that “proceedings
are processed and resolved as quickly as possible while receiving a just
outcome” in accordance with section 10(d) of the NTCAT Act.
Tribunal is cognisant of the fact, however, that the Applicant is a community
organisation. Further, the Applicant is not represented
by a lawyer. While
non-compliance with a Tribunal order is not a matter to be taken lightly, the
NTCAT Act does provide in section
53(3) that the:
Tribunal may
accept any document into evidence despite any non-compliance with a time limit
or other requirement this Act or the relevant
Act relating to the document or
the service of the document.
addition, section 53(2)(d) provides that the Tribunal,
must ensure,
so far as is practicable, that all relevant material is disclosed to the
Tribunal to enable it to decide the proceeding
with all relevant facts.
the evidence proffered by the Applicant is relevant to a fact in issue in the
proceeding, which is discussed below, the Tribunal
may receive it
notwithstanding the Applicant’s failure to adhere to the case management
order for the exchange of evidence.
The circumstances of this case warrant the
application of sections 53(2)(d) and 53(3) of the NTCAT Act. The failure to
comply with
the Tribunal’s order relating to the exchange of evidence is
not a bar to the admission of the Unattested Declarations.
to the issue of relevance, the Unattested Declarations of Jessica Black, Ian
Redmond and Graeme Sawyer contain observations
which, if accepted by the
Tribunal at the hearing of the substantive issues, could affect the probability
of a fact in issue in the
proceeding. In particular, the evidence could be of
assistance to the Tribunal in its consideration of the questions noted at
[12.1]-[12.2]
Tribunal finds that there is a minimal probable connection between the evidence
of Black, Redmond and Sawyer and a “fact
such evidence was available to the DCA at the time it conducted its
investigation had the DCA investigators consulted with
members of the Applicant
who were at the Lee Point site on 30 April 2024.
evidence of Dr Fitzsimmons does not pass the relevance test and is not
admissible. Her evidence focuses generally on the way the
Lee Point site was
managed on 30 April 2024 and does not assist the Tribunal in its
consideration of the questions noted at [12.1]-[12.2]
Taking a view
93 of the NTCAT Act allows for the Tribunal’s inspection of the Lee Point
site if such an inspection is “relevant
to a proceeding”. At the
Directions Hearing, the Applicant submitted that such an inspection would assist
the Tribunal in answering
the questions at issue in these proceedings.
DCA submits:
With respect to the limited matters in dispute, a view
assist the Tribunal to resolve any issues of fact or understand
the evidence. Evidence is already available as to the area which was
prematurely. There is no reason why FOLP [the Applicant] cannot refer to these
maps in oral submissions. No reason has been
provided why a site inspection
would be of any greater assistance to the Tribunal in determining the matter.
Rather, the site inspection
would likely result in an undue waste of time for no
Tribunal agrees with the DCA’s submissions. The fact that DHA breached the
Permit conditions when it commenced its clearing
of stage 2 is not in dispute.
The issues in dispute relate to the matters noted at [12.1]-[12.2] above. A site
inspection will not
assist the Tribunal in the determination of these
the exercise of its discretion contained in section 46(2)(b) of the NTCAT Act to
admit further evidence in a review proceeding,
the Tribunal gives leave for the
following evidence to be admitted in Tribunal file number 2024-03944-CT:
41.1. annexures
to the evidence filed by Applicant with the Tribunal on 16 May 2025;
41.2. Unattested
Declaration of Jessica Black dated 22 June 2025;
41.3. Unattested
Declaration of Ian Redmond dated 20 June 2025;
41.4. Unattested
Declaration of Graeme Sawyer dated 22 June 2025.
application for an inspection by the Tribunal of the Lee Point site is
dismissed. There are sufficient documents currently in
evidence on which the
Applicant can rely. An inspection would not assist the Tribunal in the
resolution of the matters in issue in
the review proceeding.
Tribunal makes no order as to costs. This was an interlocutory matter and the
question of costs, if any, is best left to the conclusion
of the review
proceeding.
Accordingly, the Tribunal orders that:
Tribunal gives leave pursuant to
section 46(2)(b)
Northern Territory
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2014
for the following evidence to be
admitted in Tribunal file number 2024-03944-CT:
to the evidence filed by Friends of Lee Point Inc with the Tribunal on
16 May 2025;
Declaration of Jessica Black dated 22 June 2025;
Declaration of Ian Redmond dated 20 June 2025;
Declaration of Graeme Sawyer dated 22 June 2025.
application by Friends of Lee Point Inc for an inspection by the Tribunal of the
Lee Point site is dismissed.
29 August 2025
LESLIE MCCRIMMON
TRIBUNAL MEMBER
Outline of Submissions on
Behalf of the Respondent dated 6 June 2025,
Statement of reasons in
relation to decision under
section 79A(1)(a)(ii)
Planning Act
Lee Point Master-planned Urban Development at 577 Lee Point Road,
Statement of reasons in
relation to decision under
section 79A(1)(a)(ii)
Planning Act
Lee Point Master-planned Urban Development at 577 Lee Point Road,
Kasper v Psychology
Board of Australia [No 2]
[2015] NTCAT 179
Shi v Migration Agents
Registration Authority
[2008] HCA 31
(2008) 235 CLR 286
[140]-[142].
Shi v Migration
Agents Registration Authority
[2008] HCA 31
(2008) 235 CLR 286
, [140]-[142].
Northern Territory Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2014
Submissions on Relevance
on behalf of the Applicant [Quall] in Tribunal file number 2025-00298-CT
undated, [2].
Submissions on
Relevance on behalf of the Applicant [Quall] in Tribunal file number
2025-00298-CT undated, [15].
Outline of Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent dated 6 June 2025, [9].
Northern Territory Civil
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2014
Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2014
sections 10(d)
Australian Law Reform
Commission, Evidence (Interim) (ALRC Report 26),
Australian Law Reform
Commission, Evidence (Interim) (ALRC Report 26),
Australian Law Reform
Commission, Evidence (Interim) (ALRC Report 26), [641].
Submissions on Relevance on
behalf of the Applicant [Quall] in Tribunal file number 2025-00298-CT undated,
Submissions of the
Respondent as to a ‘View’ and the Admission of Further Evidence
dated 2 July 2025, [6].
Australian Law Reform Commission, Evidence (Interim) (ALRC Report 26),
Submissions of the
Respondent as to a ‘View’ and the Admission of Further Evidence
dated 2 July 2025, [617.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (35.8 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter