URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTLC/2022/26.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:20:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
City of Darwin v Carolyn Reynolds [2022] NTLC 26 (21 November 2022)
City of Darwin v Carolyn Reynolds
[2022] NTLC 026
PARTIES: CITY OF DARWIN
CAROLYN REYNOLDS
TITLE OF COURT: LOCAL COURT
FILE NO(s): 21934192
DELIVERED ON: 21 November 2022
DELIVERED AT: DARWIN
HEARING DATE(s): 9 November 2022
JUDGMENT OF: GORDON JR
CATCHWORDS:
Taxation of Costs - Form and content of Notice of Objection to Bill of
Application for adjournment refused - Leave to be heard at
taxation refused.
Local Court (Civil Jurisdiction) Rules
City of Darwin v Carolyn Reynolds
[2020] NTLC
Reynolds v City of Darwin
[2021] NTCA 3
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Kirby Dixon
Respondent: Self
Solicitors:
Applicant: Minter Ellison Lawyers
Respondent: N/A
Judgment category classification: B
Judgment ID number:
[2022] NTLC 026
Number of paragraphs: 69
IN THE LOCAL COURT
AT DARWIN IN THE
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
Claim No. 21934192
CITY OF DARWIN
CAROLYN REYNOLDS
REASONS FOR DECISION
(Delivered 21 November
Judicial Registrar Gordon
Taxation of costs was conducted in this matter on 9 November 2022. Prior to
conducting the taxation the Respondent’s application
for an adjournment
was refused and she was denied leave to be heard at the taxation. I indicated to
the parties that written reasons
in relation to those decisions would be
provided. These are those reasons.
23 August 2022 the Applicant filed a Summons for Taxation in accordance with
Division 3 of the
Local Court (Civil Jurisdiction) Rules 1998
The Bill of Costs, filed contemporaneously, contained a brief narrative of the
proceedings, in accordance with R38.12(2), which
Applicant commenced proceedings in the Local Court on 11 September
matter was heard in the Local Court by Judge Alan Woodcock on 5 March
August 2020, Judge Woodcock handed down a judgment finding in favour of the
Applicant but did not make an order on costs (
Local Court
August 2020, the Respondent appealed the Local Court Decision to the Supreme
Court of the Northern Territory.
matter was heard in the Supreme Court of the Northern Territory by Barr J on 9
October 2020.
October 2020, Barr J handed down a judgment finding in favour of the Applicant
but reserved the question of costs (
Supreme Court Decision
November 2020, the Respondent appealed the Supreme Court Decision to the Court
of Appeal of the Northern Territory.
June 2022, the Court of Appeal handed down a judgment on the papers in favour of
the Applicant and relevantly ordered:
the Appellant (Ms Carolyn Reynolds) is to pay the Respondent's (City of
Darwin's) costs of the proceeding before the Local Court in
File No. 21934192 on
the standard basis, with those costs to be agreed or taxed by the Local Court
taxing officer in default of agreement...
were not briefed in the proceedings and did not appear at the hearing.
parties cannot agree the costs and as such the question of cost is to proceed to
Summons for Taxation was marked returnable 5 October 2022.
38.13 sets out the process for objecting to and participating in a taxation of
Notice of objection
(1) If the party who is to pay costs objects to any items in
a bill, the party must file and serve a notice
of objection to
those items in accordance with Form 38B and provide in the notice the reason
for each objection.
(2) A party must file and serve a notice of objection not later
than 7 days before the date fixed for the taxation.
(3) If a party who is to pay costs fails to file and serve a
notice of objection, there is a presumption that the
party has no objection to
(4) Nothing in sub rule (3) is to be taken to affect the
discretion of the
taxing officer to tax off items.
(5) A party who is to pay costs and who does not file a
notice of objection is not entitled to be heard at the taxation
without the
leave of the Court.
final date for the filing of an Objection was 28 September 2022.
28 September 2022 the Respondent purported to file an Objection, under cover of
a ‘Form 23B Summons for Production of Documents’.
The filing was
declined by Registry and a blank Form 38B was provided to the Respondent. The
Form 38B was lodged with the Registry
by email on 30 September
various communications with Registry prior to the date for taxation the
Respondent foreshadowed an application for an adjournment
on medical grounds.
The Respondent was directed to seek the views of the Applicant as to the
proposed adjournment and provide medical
evidence in support of the
4 October 2022 at 2.37 pm an email was received from the Respondent which
As previously advised I am currently unwell and awaiting an
operation at RDH on Friday 7th October 2022. As previously advised I do
feel well enough to attend court tomorrow and respectfully request an
adjournment to these proceedings.”
accompanying medical certificate is annexed to these reasons and marked
At the commencement of the taxation on 5 October the Applicant confirmed they
did not consent to the adjournment. The Applicant raised
serious concerns about
the Respondent wilfully seeking to unreasonably delay the taxation on misleading
or erroneous medical grounds.
Applicant noted the findings of Local Court Judge Woodcock in
City of Darwin
v Carolyn Reynolds
[2020] NTLC 5
“I accept the
Respondent has seriously high blood pressure and was unwell at periods during
these proceedings, and various adjournments
were granted to accommodate her.
Ultimately, the hearing had to be attended to, it is a matter of short duration
and the Applicant
was entitled to have it heard.
It was apparent, quite apart from being unwell, the Respondent was
endeavouring to delay the proceedings and muddy the waters. This
exaggeration, untruths and red herrings of various types. On the evidence before
me, I do not accept her assertion that
she has a brain injury, was struck by
lightning or has Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) as she
issues arose before the Court of Appeal in
Reynolds v City of Darwin
[2021] NTCA 3
with their Honours noting at [2]-[4]:
[2] The appeal was originally listed to be heard on 17 February 2021. On
that day, the appellant made application to adjourn the
hearing of the appeal,
principally on the basis that her medical condition precluded her from properly
prosecuting the matter at
that time, and on the basis that she had not had
adequate opportunity to take legal advice and to procure legal representation in
relation to the matter. The application for an adjournment was
[3] At the commencement of the hearing, the appellant made an application
for a further adjournment of the appeal, essentially on
the same grounds. That
application was not supported by any medical evidence beyond a bare
certification from a general practitioner
that the appellant is suffering from a
“medical condition” and is “unfit” in some unspecified
manner. The
application was opposed by the Respondent on the ground that the
due and proper administration of justice now requires the determination
[4] This Court would ordinarily be slow to refuse an application for
adjournment made by an unrepresented litigant. However, in the
circumstances of
the present case there is no real prospect that the appellant will be able to
take the steps she asserts are necessary
in the prosecution of this
Medical Certificate relied upon to adjourn the Taxation on 5 October 2022
plainly suffers from similar deficiencies which diminish
the weight that can be
placed upon it for the purposes of adjourning and delaying the finalisation of a
Court process.
particular, the Certificate certifies the Respondent “
unfit for full
” on 28 September 2022 “
with the following
restrictions: 27/9/22
”, - the meaning of which is unclear. The
Certificate was dated 4 October 2022 and appears to be retrospective,
purportedly
covering the period 27 September 2022 to 14 October
Certificate is at best confusing and at worst nonsensical. Nonetheless, in the
absence of the Respondent I erred on the side of
caution. Adopting the most
favourable interpretation the Certificate does appear to indicate a medical
unfitness for not only the
date of the taxation, but also the final day that the
Respondent had to file her Notice of Objection.
also took the opportunity to issue procedural Orders in an effort to put the
self-represented Respondent on clear notice of the
expectations of the Court to
enable her participation in the taxation. Those directions were as
1. The Taxation of Costs Hearing is adjourned to 9 November 2022 at 10.00
2. The Respondent to file any Form 38B Notice of Objection to the Bill of
Costs by close of business on 26 October 2022.
3. Any Notice of Objection to the Bill of Costs must provide individual,
specific and relevant objections to any item objected too.
An objection may be
used more than once however any item objected to must have an individual
4. Any Form 38B which includes statements in the form of a narrative of
the proceedings or submissions will not be accepted for filing.
5. Should the Respondent fail to file a Form 38B in accordance with these
Orders and in a form considered acceptable for filing by
Registry, the
Respondent will not be entitled to be heard at the Taxation of Costs Hearing,
without leave of the Court.
6. Any further application for adjournment, by either party, will not be
considered by the Court unless the other party has first
been put on notice of
the application to adjourn and their views on the adjournment sought.
7. The costs of today are the costs of the Applicant.
Orders were distributed by email to the Applicant and to the Respondent on 5
October 2022 at 2.29pm.
or about 26 October 2022 the Respondent lodged a further Form 38B, which
commences with the following statement:
“The Requested Form 23 B (
) was submitted on 28th
September 2022 and the objects to the items in your biII of costs specified in
that form for the reasons specified
in relation to each item.
The objects marked in Pink and Orange highlighter are all items in the
bill of costs that are in question along with the reasons specified
in relation
to all items and included below. The abuse of the Business Tenancies Act and
lack of consideration by the local court
of the Law of Property, Contracts,
application of Government controls and Administrative law by the local court
caused an miscarriage
of justice by a bias conflicted Judge and bias from
conflicted Justices and a Chief Justice. Which did not consider the lawful
Contract between to the Rock Centre Lease and HELP NT Mrs Reynolds. At
no time did the City of Darwin consult with the people of
Darwin, Schools,
Climbing members, Juvenile diversionary clients, Military, Childcare facility
parents, indigenous community lawful
land owners (Larrakia and or The Carroll
family (Mick Carroll). I allege that this entire case has been a politically
motivated attempt
to hurt, harm, harasses and cause hostilities towards Mrs
Carolyn Reynolds (sic)”
follows thereafter is 28 paragraphs across 6 pages which contains content in the
nature of a chronology of the dispute and submissions
in relation the conduct of
parties and various people involved in the proceedings, including the Judicial
Officers who have variously
material clearly violates the Order 4 of the Orders issued on 5 October 2022. It
is irrelevant and unnecessary for the purposes
of a taxation.
taxation process is for the purpose of determining payable costs. The issues in
dispute in the litigation and each parties views
of the evidence and the
correctness of the judicial determination (notably in this case the decision of
the Local Court having been
affirmed on appeal and by the Court of Appeal) is
with respect, irrelevant.
the Respondents narrative has the potential to serve as a distraction and places
onto the Court record matters which cannot
be tested or challenged by the
Applicant. It ought not to be included in a Notice of Objection and I have so
plethora of dated medical material, irrelevant to the process of Taxation, was
also lodged.
the document concluded with “Annexure A” being the original Form 38A
Summons for Taxation of Costs and the Bill
of Costs filed by the Applicant. A
sample of this document is attached to these reasons and marked “B”.
and every item claimed has been disputed by highlighting such items. There
appears to be a ‘code objection’ or ‘objection
at the top of each column, although I am unable to discern what the
‘codes’ such as ‘dup’
dup’ and various others represent.
Respondent was advised by Registry that the Form 38B was not compliant with the
Orders of 5 October and would not be accepted
for filing.
my view the Respondent has failed to “
provide individual, specific and
relevant objections to any item objected too
Respondent has attempted to file a narrative &/or submissions despite being
clearly directed not to.
Respondent was on notice that a failure to file a Notice of Objection in
accordance with the Rules and the Orders of 5 October
2022 would jeopardise her
standing to be heard at the Taxation.
final Form 38B Notice of Objection to Bill of Costs was received on 8 November,
the date prior to the rescheduled taxation, together
with an email seeking an
adjournment. Although this document does briefly speak to more relevant matters
such as the time taken,
the complexity of the matter and reasonableness of the
costs incurred, it still contains 6 pages of material irrelevant to the
It seeks to be filed well outside the time allowed and is not
compliant with the Rules nor my directions. It will not be accepted
and will not be placed on the Court file.
note however, a further attachment to the email headed “Annexure A –
Dispute of Costs” appears to be a legible,
itemised list of disputed
costs. Furthermore the document contains a “Cost Code Key” on its
final page which sets out
what the shorthand notations such as ‘Nr’
‘dup’ ‘int’ pertain to.
Problematically
however, each and every item claimed is disputed on the basis of being
‘nr’ which is defined by the Respondent
in the Cost Code Key’
as follows “
it was not reasonable to do the work, or it was not
reasonable to include a claim for doing the work’.
Plainly it is
nonsensical to expect the Court to accept that
any and all
work done, in
a successful litigation was not reasonable or not reasonably claimed.
all items from 27 May 2015 to 10 October 2019 (items 1 – 192 of the Bill
of Costs) are objected to due to ‘scope’.
Scope explained by the
Respondent as thus “
This item is outside the scope of the costs order
(i.e. this is work performed before any court proceedings were even
contemplated.
. This is despite items 126 – 192 objected to
being costs incurred
proceedings had been
my view, even a most cursory review of the new iteration of objections makes it
clear the Respondent’s objections are unlikely
to be helpful to the Court
at taxation.
all of the circumstances of the history of the matter and the taxation process
to date, I am not satisfied that the Respondent
is willing or able to
participate in a reasonable or helpful manner in the taxation. She has
demonstrated an unwillingness to abide
by the directions of the Court and there
remains significant indicators that the Respondent will attempt to utilise the
as a means to re-litigate her arguments.
arguments have been dispensed with comprehensively. The Respondents case has
failed. The Application was successful and by order
of the Supreme Court the
Applicant is entitled to their costs.
Parties appeared before the Court on 9 November 2022 for the purposes of the
that the Respondent was self-represented and had placed herself in a position
whereby she required leave to be heard and had
further indicated, including in
the submissions under purported cover of a Notice of Objection to Bill of costs
lodged on 26 October
(not accepted for filing), that:
“Mrs Reynolds holds no legal qualifications and has never worked in
the legal spheres, so would not have any ability to understand
the process of
costs, how these were awarded or the comprehension to run a
being so, I took the unusual step of conducting the taxation in an open Court,
to ensure either party would be able to obtain
a transcript of same, should they
wish to do so.
Respondent first sought to adjourn the taxation, in part as a result of being
served with an Amended Bill of Costs the day prior.
This amended Bill provided
updated costs in relation to the taxation of costs only. The changes were
tracked on the face of the document
and it was clear that items 1 – 297
were unchanged.
prejudice to the Respondent by the late receipt of the additional costs could be
ameliorated by simply adjourning the costs of
taxation. There was no new or
unexpected costs in the first 21 pages of the Bill and no reason why the
Respondent had not been afforded
enough time to prepare for same.
Respondent continued to press for an adjournment of the entirety of the
taxation, on the foreshadowed medical grounds.
medical adjournment is supported by a document, which purports to be a reminder
of an outpatient appointment on 1 November 2022,
which has passed and is
irrelevant, and confirmation of an upcoming procedure at Royal Darwin Hospital
in December, the relevance
of which to the taxation is not established.
Additionally
there is a Medical Certificate from Top End Medical Centre date 8 November 2022
which states; “
Ms Carollyn (sic) Jane Reynolds has a medical condition
and is unfit for work from 08/11/2022 to 11/11/2022
”. The explanation
or correlation between this certification and period of unfitness and the
Respondents ability to participate
in a taxation is not specified.
asked how the Court can have any confidence or reassurance that a further
adjournment will resolve the issues preventing the
taxation taking place today,
the Respondent indicated that she anticipated to be fit to proceed in two weeks.
my view this seemed extremely unlikely, given that the Respondent had
communicated the following to the Court by email at 2.14
“I have written to Ms Sophie Cleveland from [Minter Ellison Lawyers}
explaining my ongoing medical requirements. I have surgical
procedures planned
in November and 1st December 2022 and I am still managing chronic migraines and
malignant hypertension which has
a detrimental effect on my eye sight.
I am currently on medical leave from any work as I endeavour to resolve my
medical issues caused by two assaults and considerable
anaphylactic reactions to
medications...
I again respectfully request an adjournment so that I am able to resolve
my ongoing medical issues which have been misdiagnosed during
the COVID 19
disruption to health services and lockdown period.”
Respondent was advised that, in the absence of the evidence of a medical
specialist that the Respondent would be fit to proceed
within a nominated
timeframe, the Court cannot accept her submission that an adjournment of 2 weeks
would improve her medical status.
view was compounded and reinforced during the proceedings when the Respondent
became agitated and frantic. When asked to take
a seat and to calm down and
compose herself, the Respondent began to wail ‘
can’t, I can’t
a 10 minute adjournment to allow the Respondent to collect herself, the
Respondent attributed her lack of emotional regulation
on a frontal lobe injury.
No submission was made, nor medical evidence tendered, to suggest that this
aspect of the Respondents parlous
health would improve to any degree during the
period of an adjournment.
parties were advised that the only purpose for adjournment which would be for
the purpose of the appointment of a litigation guardian.
Applicant opposed any adjournment, noting that Respondent had now had a
reasonable period of time to be adequately prepared to
proceed and had already
been afforded an earlier adjournment, which had not resulted in the Respondent
being able to proceed.
Applicant noted that the Respondent seems to have adequate cognitive ability to
prepare a detailed chronology and submissions
as to how the Courts had failed to
accede justice to the Respondent, despite being directed such material was
irrelevant and unnecessary.
This appears to be in deliberate contrast to her
claims of cognitive impairment when it comes to allowing the Applicant to deal
their costs Order.
accept this submission.
Applicant noted that Judge Woodcock considered the need for the appointment of a
litigation guardian during the proceedings proper
and drew the Courts attention
to paragraph 47 of his reasons for
Honour found:
“I am not satisfied on all the evidence that the Respondent is a
person under a disability such that she is incapable of managing
her affairs in
relation to this proceeding. lt would not have been appropriate to appoint a
litigation guardian.”
am satisfied therefore, that this issue has been dealt with. His Honour
considered such an appointment and determined that is was
not necessary or
appropriate.
have received no medical evidence or submissions to advance any such an
application for the purposes of the Taxation. I have no
evidence of a new or
intervening event that would cause me to detract from His Honour’s
conclusion in this regard.
concerns surrounding the Respondents many varied and extreme health issues have
been present and been pressed throughout all stages
of this lengthy litigation.
The Respondent has frequently made much of her lack of legal training and
understanding and medical disabilities
to the many Judicial Officers who have
presided over this matter.
remains the case that the Respondent is self-represented. She has not appointed
a litigation guardian. She has not instructed a
legal representative. Although I
note with sympathy that these things can be easier said than done, I am unaware
of any genuine attempts
by the Respondent to engage appropriate assistance to
improve her capacity to participate in the proceedings.
the taxation on 9 November in submissions the Respondent alluded to an intention
to obtain legal advice, however the most concrete
this intention became, was
words to the effect that her preferred legal counsel would be ‘ready
soon’. She further advised
the court that she had considered the
suitability and availability of various family members, be it as a litigation
guardian or a
McKenzie Friend, but for many reasons, none were able to assist.
status as a self-represented litigant, despite her parlous health and clear lack
of legal acumen is, in my view, by choice.
in terms of the Taxation, there is no evidence that would satisfy me that the
Respondent is taking steps to change that
situation. While she is entitled to
and should take the utmost care with her personal health and wellbeing, it is
not for the Applicant
to be prevented from finalising the matter and recovering
their costs while she does so.
Respondents application for an adjournment is denied.
Furthermore,
as a result of non-compliance with R38.13(5) of the
Local Court (Civil
the Court Orders of 5 October 2022 and the
Respondent’s inability to control or moderate her emotions during the
course of submissions
relating to an adjournment, the Respondent is not given
leave to be heard at the taxation.
completeness, I should note that as a result of the Respondents dismay,
emotional distress and unacceptable conduct when the above
decisions were
indicated, the Respondent was excluded from the proceedings pursuant to
Local Court Act 2015
Respondent was subsequently invited to re-enter the Courtroom and be present for
the balance of the taxation if she is able to
maintain control of her emotions
and not interrupt or delay the proceedings. Although the Respondent availed
herself of this opportunity,
she was not able to remain silent or respectful and
was again asked to leave.
taxation was completed in her absence.
a result of the taxation a total of $7,645.45 was taxed off the Bill of Costs
which claimed a total of $87,732.18 in costs and
disbursements.
costs allowed total $80,086.73 and a certificate of taxation will issue in this
Proceedings being commenced by
Form 30A Tenancy Application on Ii September
City of Darwin v Carolyn
Reynolds [2020] NTLC 005
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (20.9 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter