URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCA/2024/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:17:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Woods v Northern Territory of Australia [2024] NTCA 9 (18 December 2024)
Woods v Northern Territory of Australia
[2024] NTCA 9
PARTIES: WOODS, Denese
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: AP 6 of 2024 (22418099)
DELIVERED: 18 December 2024
HEARING DATE: 25 November 2024
JUDGMENT OF: Grant CJ, Kelly and Brownhill JJ
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION – Appeal – Whether the Supreme Court erred
in construing and applying the Act and the Guidelines
– Assessment of
compensation payable where worker has two injuries – Deductions for
pre-existing conditions or injuries
– Impairments arising from more than
one injury – Whether a ‘whole person impairment’ approach or
by injury’ approach should be applied – Language of
the Act presents a constructional choice – Constructional choice
made with reference to the scheme of the Act and the objects or policies of that
Act – Centrality of ‘injury’
in the Act points towards an
‘injury by injury’ approach – Absence of any provisions
addressing ‘double dipping’
point against a ‘whole of
person’ approach – Intention that nationally developed Guidelines
are to operate points
towards an ‘injury by injury’ approach –
Appeal dismissed.
Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd v Territory Insurance Office
[2008] NTCA 12
Attorney-General (NT) v Chaffey
(2007) 231 CLR 651
[2006] HCA 47
(2006) 226 CLR 535
Cooper Brookes (Wollongong) Pty Ltd v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[1981] HCA 26
(1981) 147 CLR 297
Esso Australia Resources Ltd
v Commissioner of Taxation
[1998] FCA 1655
(1998) 83 FCR 511
Federal Commissioner of
Taxation v Smorgon
(1977) 16 ALR 721
Lee v McMahon Contractors Pty
(2018) 41 NTLR 168
Northern Territory of Australia v Pengilly
(2004) NTLR 18
Public Transport Commission of NSW v J Murray-More (NSW) Pty
[1975] HCA 28
(1975) 132 CLR 336
R v Independent Broad-Based Anti-corruption
Commissioner
[2016] HCA 8
(2016) 256 CLR 459
SAS Trustee Corporation v Miles
[2018] HCA 55
(2018) 265 CLR 137
Victims Compensation Fund Corporation v Brown
77 ALJR 1797
Victoria v The Queen
[2014] FSCA 311
, Yuendumu Social
Club Inc v Day & Anor
[2010] NTSC 22
, referred to.
Interpretation Act 1978
Northern Territory WorkSafe Guidelines for the Evaluation of Permanent
1.27, 1.28, 1.63, 11.10
Statutory Interpretation in Australia
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: D McConnel SC, with C Heske
Respondent: JW Roper SC
Solicitors:
Appellant: Halfpennys Lawyers
Respondent: Finlaysons Lawyers
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 35
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Woods v Northern Territory of Australia
[2024] NTCA
No. AP 6 of 2024 (22418099)
DENESE WOODS
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
CORAM: GRANT CJ, KELLY & BROWNHILL JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 18 December 2024)
Introduction
[1] This is an
appeal from a decision of the Supreme Court dismissing an appeal from the Work
Health Court.
[2] The sole
ground of appeal is that the Supreme Court erred on a question of law in wrongly
(‘Act’) and the Northern Territory WorkSafe Guidelines for the
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment (‘Guidelines’)
by finding (at
[49]) that on the face of the relevant provisions of the Guidelines they do not
distinguish between compensable injuries
and non-compensable injuries such that
it was necessary to make a deduction for the impairment caused by the first
injury notwithstanding
that it was, as between the parties, a compensable
[3] This summary
of the background to this appeal is largely taken from the Reasons of the
Supreme Court.
appellant worked as a school teacher with the Northern Territory Department of
Education at two schools. She was a ‘worker’
as defined in the Act.
It was claimed that in the course of her employment the appellant was exposed to
traumatic and violent interactions
with students which substantially contributed
to her sustaining psychological injuries.
[5] The first
such injury occurred when she worked as a teacher at the Katherine High School.
It was agreed that, on 21 February 2017,
the appellant sustained a ‘mental
injury’ during the course of her employment (‘first injury’).
She received
benefits payable under the Act until returning to full-time duties
in about March 2017. Thereafter, the appellant sustained a further
injury’ in the course of her employment whilst working at the Palmerston
College on 22 June 2020 (‘second
injury’). Liability for the second
injury was initially disputed.
[6] The parties
agreed that, on 24 August 2020, the appellant served on the respondent a
permanent impairment assessment report by
a psychiatrist, Dr Takyar (‘Dr
Takyar’s first report’), which assessed the appellant’s whole
person impairment
(‘WPI’): (a) referable to the first injury at 11%;
and (b) referable to the second injury at 11%.
[7] On request
and pursuant to the legislation, this report was referred to the Work Health
Authority under the Act for a panel assessment.
On 5 February 2021, the Panel
Report was issued to the parties and this assessed the appellant’s WPI:
(a) referable to the
first injury at 5%; and (b) referable to the second injury
at 12%. At the time of the Panel Report, liability for the second injury
been accepted by the respondent for the purposes of the Act. Accordingly, the
second injury should not have been dealt with
in Dr Takyar’s first report
or the subject of a referral to a panel, and those assessments are of no legal
[8] On 1 March
2021, the respondent wrote to the appellant confirming that payment in relation
to the first injury would be made but
denying liability in relation to the
assessment by the panel of 12% for the second injury. On 7 April 2021, the
respondent paid $7,078.66
to the appellant in respect of the 5% WPI assessment
referable to the first injury.
December 2021, the respondent accepted liability for the second injury and, on
13 December 2021, the appellant’s Work
Health Court proceedings in
relation to that injury were resolved by way of a consent order.
[10] A further
report dated 3 May 2022 was obtained from Dr Takyar (‘Dr Takyar’s
second report’) in which he assessed
the appellant’s WPI: (a)
referable to the first injury at 9%; and (b) referable to the second injury at
[11] On 15 June
2022, without admission, the respondent paid the appellant $28,208.12 in respect
of the 13% WPI assessment referable
to the second injury.
Work Health Court decision
[12] The issue
before the Work Health Court which was the subject of the appeal to the Supreme
Court was identified by the parties
to be the nature of the first injury and the
second injury and whether, for permanent impairment assessment purposes, the
first injury
and the second injury gave rise to the one impairment.
[13] The Work
Health Court provided detailed written reasons for concluding that the
respondent had paid permanent impairment compensation
to the appellant in
relation to both the first injury and the second injury before the commencement
of the Work Health Court proceeding
and had therefore acquitted its liability
under the Act in relation to the appellant’s entitlement to compensation
for permanent
impairment.
[14] As appears
in the decision of the Work Health Court, the appellant had essentially
contended that compensation for permanent
impairment is founded upon permanent
disability, not injury; the respondent was solely liable to compensate the
appellant for the
single total degree of permanent impairment suffered as a
consequence of the two separate injuries (ie, the 22% WPI), with a deduction
the amount of compensation already paid to the appellant for permanent
impairment in respect of the first injury; and the separate
assessment of the
appellant’s permanent impairment by reference to each injury constitutes
an incorrect application of paragraphs
1.6.3 and 11.10 of the Guidelines because
deductions of pre-existing impairment levels are limited to pre-existing
non-compensable
impairments.
respondent had essentially contended that the entitlement to compensation for
permanent impairment under the Act is predicated
upon that impairment being
caused by a compensable injury; and where there were two separate compensable
injuries, the Guidelines
require that there be apportionment of the permanent
impairment as between each injury, such that, in respect of the
appellant’s
claim relating to the second injury, the respondent was only
liable to pay compensation for the 13% WPI attributable to the second
[16] There was
also an issue about whether Dr Takyar’s first report had any operative
effect, which is of no present relevance.
[17] The Work
Health Court held (at [48]) that there were two injuries; the first injury is a
pre-existing injury to the second injury;
and under paragraphs 1.28, 11.10 and
1.6.3 of the Guidelines, the assessment of the degree of permanent impairment
applicable to
the second injury was required to, and did, identify and then
deduct the degree of impairment caused by the first injury.
respondent was held to have paid permanent impairment compensation to the
appellant in respect of both the first injury and
the second injury prior to
commencement of the proceeding.
The appeal to the Supreme
appellant appealed to the Supreme Court on the ground that the Work Health Court
had erred in construing the Act and the
Guidelines to require the degree of
permanent impairment caused by the first injury to be deducted from the
assessment of permanent
impairment relating to the second injury, which led to a
determination that the appellant had received her full entitlement to
compensation
under the Act.
[20] The Supreme
Court dismissed the appeal, holding that there had been no error in the Work
Health Court’s construction of
the Act and the
Guidelines.
The appeal to this Court
appellant appealed to this Court, on the ground identified above, which was
essentially the same ground as was dismissed
by the Supreme
The legislative scheme
[22] The long
title to the Act is: ‘An Act about workers’ rehabilitation and
compensation’.
[23] Part 5 of
the Act deals with compensation and rehabilitation.
[24] Section
52(1) of the Act provides that no action for damages in favour of (relevantly) a
worker shall lie against (relevantly)
the employer of the worker in respect of:
(i) an injury to the worker; or (ii) the death of the worker as a result of or
contributed to by an injury. Section 52(3) provides that, except as
provided by the Act, no action for compensation or a benefit
of any kind by
(relevantly) a worker shall lie against the employer of the worker in respect
of: (i) an injury to the worker; or
(ii) the death of the worker as a result of
or materially contributed to by an injury.
[25] Section 53
is headed ‘Compensation in respect of injuries’. Section 53(1)
provides that, if a worker suffers an injury
and that injury results in or
materially contributes to his or her death, impairment or incapacity, there is
payable by his or her
employer to the worker or the worker’s dependants,
in accordance with Part 5, such compensation as is prescribed.
[26] Section 53
is the primary provision under which compensation is payable to workers under
the Act. It is clear from s 53(1) that
compensation is payable under the
Act in respect of injuries that result in or materially contribute to the
worker’s death,
impairment or incapacity. The touchstone for the
entitlement to compensation under the Act is that a worker suffers an injury,
that they suffer an
impairment.
[27] Division 3
of Part 5 deals with the amount of compensation payable to a worker in respect
of an injury under the Act.
[28] Subdivision
AA sets out limits on the compensation payable. Subdivision A deals with the
amount of compensation payable where
the death of a worker results from or is
materially contributed to by an injury (s 62(1)). Subdivision B deals with
the amount of
compensation payable where the worker is totally or partially
incapacitated for work as the result of an injury (ss 64(1), 65(1)).
[29] Subdivision
C deals with the amount of compensation payable to a worker who suffers
permanent impairment.
[30] Section
71(1) provides that a worker who suffers permanent impairment assessed at a
percentage of the whole person equal to not
less than 15% shall be paid
compensation equal to that assessed percentage of 208 times average weekly
earnings at the time the payment
[31] Section
71(2) provides that a worker who suffers permanent impairment assessed at not
less than 85% of the whole person shall
be paid compensation of 208 times
average weekly earnings at the time the payment is made.
[32] Section
71(3) provides that where a worker suffers permanent impairment assessed at a
percentage of the whole person equal to
less than 15%, the worker shall be paid
compensation equal to the relevant percentage specified in the Table applicable
to the assessed
percentage of permanent impairment of 208 times average weekly
earnings. The Table provides that for WPI of 5% to less than 10%,
the specified
percentage is 2%; for WPI of 10%, the specified percentage is 3%; for WPI of
11%, the specified percentage is 4%; for
WPI of 12%, the specified percentage is
6%; for WPI of 13%, the specified percentage is 8%; and for WPI of 14%, the
specified percentage
[33] ‘Permanent
impairment’ is defined to mean an impairment or impairments assessed, in
accordance with the guides approved
and published by the Authority, as being an
impairment, or combination of impairments, of not less than 5% of the whole
[34] ‘Impairment’
is defined to mean a bodily or mental abnormality or loss caused by an injury
‘injury’ is defined to mean a physical or mental injury arising out
of or in the course of the worker’s
employment, and includes (relevantly)
the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation, recurrence or deterioration of a
pre-existing
injury (s 3A(1)).
[36] The level
of permanent impairment for the purposes of s 71 is to be assessed in the
first instance by a medical practitioner
(s 72(2)). Where a person is
aggrieved by the assessment of the medical practitioner the person may, within
28 days after being notified
of the assessment, apply to the Work Health
Authority for a reassessment of that level (s 72(3)). The Authority must
then refer the
application to a panel of three medical practitioners to reassess
the level of permanent impairment (s 72(3A)). The Authority is
not required
to refer an application to a panel unless satisfied that the assessment is
properly conducted and is in accordance with
the guides mentioned in s 70
(s 72(3B)). The assessment made by the panel is taken to be the level of
permanent impairment suffered
by the worker and is not subject to review
[37] Compensation
is to be paid to the worker: (a) if no application is made for reassessment, not
later than 14 days after the end
of the 28 day period allowed for that
application; or (b) if an application is made for a reassessment, not later than
28 days after
the applicant is notified of the reassessment
The Guidelines
reference in s 70 to the guides approved and published by the Authority is
a reference to the Guidelines.
introduction to the Guidelines contains what is described as a basic summary of
some key principles of permanent impairment
assessments, which include that
assessing permanent impairment involves clinical assessment of the claimant as
they present on the
day of assessment taking into account their relevant medical
history and all available relevant medical information in order to determine
(relevantly) ([1.6.1]):
whether the
claimant’s compensable injury/condition has resulted in an
impairment;
the degree of
permanent impairment that results from the injury; and
the proportion
of permanent impairment due to any previous injury, pre-existing condition or
abnormality, if any, in accordance with
diagnostic and other objective criteria
as outlined in the Guidelines.
[40] Another key
principle is that assessors are required to exercise their clinical judgement in
determining a diagnosis when assessing
permanent impairment and when making
deductions for pre-existing injuries/conditions ([1.6.2]).
[41] Another key
principle is that, in calculating the final level of impairment, the assessor
needs to clarify the degree of impairment
that results from the compensable
injury/condition, and any deductions for pre-existing injuries/conditions are to
be clearly identified
in the report and calculated ([1.6.3]).
[42] Paragraphs
1.27 and 1.28 deal with the issue of deductions for pre-existing conditions or
injuries, as follows:
1.27 The degree of permanent impairment
resulting from pre-existing impairments should not be included in the final
calculation of
permanent impairment if those impairments are not related to the
compensable injury. The assessor needs to take account of all available
to calculate the degree of permanent impairment that pre-existed the injury.
1.28 In assessing the degree of permanent impairment resulting from the
compensable injury/condition, the assessor is to indicate
the degree of
impairment due to any previous injury, pre-existing condition or abnormality.
This proportion is known as “the
deductible proportion” and should
be deducted from the degree of permanent impairment determined by the
[43] Further,
impairments that result from more than one injury arising out of the same
incident are to be assessed together to calculate
the degree of permanent
impairment of the claimant ([1.17]).
relevant is paragraph 11.10, which relates particularly to psychiatric and
psychological disorders and provides:
To measure the impairment
caused by a work-related injury or incident, the psychiatrist must measure the
proportion of WPI due to
a pre-existing condition. Pre-existing impairment is
calculated using the same method for calculating current impairment level. The
assessing psychiatrist uses all available information to rate the injured
worker’s pre-injury level of functioning in each
of the areas of function.
The percentage impairment is calculated using the aggregate score and median
class score using the conversion
table below. The injured worker’s current
level of impairment is then assessed, and the pre-existing impairment level (%)
then subtracted from their current level to obtain the percentage of
permanent impairment directly attributable to the work-related
injury. If the
percentage of pre-existing impairment cannot be assessed, the deduction is
1/10th of the assessed WPI.
The alternative constructions of s 71
appellant argued that s 71 of the Act entitles a worker to compensation
calculated by reference to their degree of permanent
impairment on the day of
the assessment, regardless of whether that degree has been caused or contributed
to by one injury or more
than one injuries, whenever sustained, and regardless
of whether the worker has been previously paid compensation in respect of the
previous injury or injuries, including for the degree of permanent impairment
resulting therefrom. This construction may conveniently
be described as ‘a
whole person approach’ to compensation for permanent impairment.
respondent argued that s 71 entitles a worker to compensation calculated by
reference to only the degree of permanent impairment
caused or contributed to by
the particular injury or injuries that gave rise to the claim, and not to any
degree of permanent impairment
caused or contributed to by any previous
injuries. This construction may conveniently be described as ‘an injury by
approach’, or perhaps more accurately as ‘an incident by
incident’ or ‘claim by claim’ approach, to
compensation for
permanent impairment.
[47] On their
face, and as held by the Work Health Court and the Supreme Court, the Guidelines
are drafted on the basis that s 71
is construed as the respondent has
argued. The appellant argued that the Guidelines are inconsistent with s 71
and, in accordance
Interpretation Act 1978
must be ‘read down’ to ensure their validity, which would require:
(a) those parts which require a deduction from the degree of permanent
impairment referable to previous injuries (such as paragraphs
1.6.3, 1.27, 1.28
and 11.10) to be severed from the Guidelines; or
(b) those parts to be construed as referring only to ‘non-compensable
injuries’, ie injuries that did not arise out of
or in the course of
employment and are not ‘injuries’ within the meaning of the Act.
language of
(incorporating the relevant definitions) presents a
constructional choice
choice ultimately turns on an evaluation of the relative coherence of each with
the scheme of the Act and its identified
objects or policies, on the
understanding that a legislature ordinarily intends to pursue its purposes by
coherent means.
Textual and contextual indications
[49] It follows,
both from the definition of ‘impairment’ and the context in which
appears (as set out in paragraphs 23 to 37 above), that the
entitlement to compensation under
rests on the worker sustaining an
injury which causes impairment.
McMahon Contractors Pty Ltd
(2018) 41 NTLR 168
, the Northern Territory Court
of Appeal applied in relation to the Act (at [23]) the following observations of
Gummow ACJ, Kirby,
Callinan, Heydon and Crennan JJ in
Canute v Comcare
[2006] HCA 47
(2006) 226 CLR 535
(at [10]) regarding the definition of
‘injury’ in the
Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
...[T]hree things may be observed about the concept
of ‘an injury’. First, the Act does not oblige Comcare to pay
compensation
in respect of an employee’s impairment; it is liable to pay
compensation in respect of ‘the injury’. Secondly,
‘injury’ is not used in the Act in the sense of ‘workplace
accident’. The definition of ‘injury’
is expressed in terms of
the resultant effect of an incident or ailment upon the employee’s body.
Thirdly, the term ‘injury’
is not used in a global sense to describe
the general condition of the employee following an incident. The Act refers
disjunctively
to ‘disease’ or ‘physical or mental’
injuries and, at least to that extent, it assumes that an employee may
more than one ‘injury’. The use in s 24(1) of the indefinite
article in the expression ‘an injury’
reinforces that
conclusion.
[51] Section
24(1) of the Commonwealth Act provided that, where an injury to an employee
results in a permanent impairment, Comcare
is liable to pay compensation to the
employee in respect of the injury. The term ‘injury’ was defined in
similar terms
to the definition in the Act. The term ‘impairment’
was defined in less similar terms to the definition in the Act, but
Court’s observations (at [11]) about that term also appear apt to the
The definition of ‘impairment’ (and by extension
the concept of ‘permanent impairment’) is expressed in terms
effects on bodily parts, systems and functions. This disaggregated sense of the
word is reinforced by the use of the indefinite
expression ‘a permanent
impairment’ in s 24(1). Textually, the Act assumes that ‘an
injury’ may result in
more than one ‘impairment’.
[52] The Act
does not have that textual reinforcement, but it is clear from the definition of
‘permanent impairment’ in
s 70 that an injury may result in
more than one impairment.
[53] If it be
accepted that the High Court’s observations about the provision entitling
an employee to compensation for permanent
impairment and its foundational terms
in the Commonwealth Act are apt to s 71 and its foundational terms in the
Act, some guidance
following observations of the High Court (at [15]):
The scheme of
the Act proceeds ... from the occurrence of ‘an injury’, in the
defined sense. As previously remarked, the
Act assumes that more than one
‘injury’ may occur. Therefore it is not correct to say that
s 24(5) [which provides that
Comcare is to determine the degree of
permanent impairment resulting from an injury in accordance with the Guides]
imports a ‘whole
person’ approach to the determination of the degree
of permanent impairment. That ignores the centrality of ‘an injury’
to the scheme upon which Comcare’s liability to compensation depends.
observations fit with the proposition that the entitlement to compensation under
s 71 rests on the worker sustaining an
injury (ie, the resultant effect of
an incident or ailment upon the worker’s body) which causes impairment (a
bodily or mental
abnormality or loss). The centrality of an injury to the
employer’s liability to pay compensation under the Act, as confirmed
the fact that compensation is payable ‘in respect of an injury’,
points against a ‘whole of person’ approach
to the compensation for
permanent impairment in s 71.
Singular includes the
constructional choice is not necessarily resolved by consideration of the use of
the singular reference to ‘injury’
in the definition of
‘impairment’ because:
(a) the definition of ‘permanent impairment’ refers to an impairment
or combination of impairments, which would capture
the situation where a
worker’s degree of permanent impairment is comprised from multiple
impairments caused by a single injury;
(b) unless a contrary intention appears, the singular reference to
‘injury’ in the definition of ‘impairment’
includes the
so the definition of
‘permanent impairment’ would capture the situation where a
worker’s degree of permanent impairment
is comprised from a single
impairment caused by more than one injury.
Harsh, capricious or unjust
appellant argued that the respondent’s construction of s 71 would
yield an outcome which is ‘harsh, capricious
or unjust’ for a worker
who has a current permanent impairment of 15% or more of the whole person, which
is the result of two
separate injuries each contributing less than 15% of the
whole person. If the permanent impairment is compensated by separating the
components because they are each referable to a different injury sustained at
different times, the effect of s 71(3) is that
the worker would be entitled
to significantly less compensation for the current permanent impairment to which
both injuries have
contributed. This, coupled with the characterisation of the
Act as ‘beneficial legislation’ and the purposive approach
Interpretation Act 1978
(NT), was argued to require
that the appellant’s construction be adopted.
[57] It appears
that the appellant was describing, by way of a gloss, the approach to statutory
construction of taking into account
the consequences of giving a particular
meaning to a provision and the principle within this approach to the effect
that, if one
construction will do manifest injustice and the other avoid it, the
latter construction should be
This has been expressed
variously as: ‘where two meanings are open...it is proper to adopt that
meaning that will avoid consequences
that appear irrational and
construction of a statute which interferes with the legal rights of a subject to
a lesser extent and produces the less hardship
is to be preferred to another,
having the opposite
‘statutory text [must] be examined to see if it allows for an interpretive
choice which avoids manifest unfairness, legislative
redundancy and
expropriation of vested
[58] As Mason
and Wilson JJ observed in
Cooper Brooks (Wollongong) Pty Ltd v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[1981] HCA 26
(1981) 147 CLR 297
(at 320-321), the fundamental
object of statutory construction in every case is to ascertain the legislative
intention by reference
to the language of the instrument viewed as a whole. In
performing that task, the courts look to the operation of the statute according
to its terms and to legitimate aids to construction, the rules of which are no
more than rules of common sense designed to achieve
this object. When a court
labels the operation of the statute as ‘absurd’,
‘extraordinary’, ‘capricious’,
‘irrational’
or ‘obscure’, it assigns a ground for concluding that the
legislature could not have intended
such an operation and that an alternative
interpretation must be preferred. The propriety of departing from the literal
interpretation
is not confined to situations described by these labels and
extends to any situation in which for good reason the operation of the
on a literal reading does not conform to the legislative intent as ascertained
from the provisions of the statute, including
the policy intent which may be
discerned from those provisions. If the choice is between two strongly competing
interpretations,
the advantage may lie with that which produces the fairer and
more convenient operation so long as it conforms to the legislative
[59] However, as
explained in
Esso Australia Resources Ltd v Federal Commissioner of
[1998] FCA 1655
(1998) 83 FCR 511
, when different views can be held about whether
the consequence is anomalous on the one hand or acceptable or understandable on
other, the court should be particularly careful that arguments based on
anomaly or incongruity are not allowed to obscure the real
intention, and
choice, of the parliament.
[60] As Gageler
J observed in
R v Independent Broad-Based Anti-corruption Commissioner
[2016] HCA 8
(2016) 256 CLR 459
Legislation is sometimes harsh. It is
rarely incoherent. It should not be reduced to incoherence by judicial
construction.
[61] Reliance
was placed by the appellant on the observations in
Yuendumu Social Club Inc v
[2010] NTSC 22
(at [14]) that the Act is a remedial statute and
accordingly its provisions should be interpreted in a benign and liberal manner
such that a construction most favourable to the worker is to be preferred where
any ambiguity exists.
appellant did not argue that there was ambiguity as such in
Act. Putting that to one side, it may be accepted that the purpose of the Act is
beneficial or remedial. However, in the context
of legislation creating and
funding rights to compensation which might continue for many years, with
compulsory insurance, a purpose
of rehabilitation and monitoring by a
it does not follow
that a worker is entitled to compensation from their present employer for the
totality of their permanent impairment
arising from multiple injuries sustained
at different times (and for which compensation has been paid).
[63] To adapt
the High Court’s observations in relation to statutory compensation for
victims of crime, the Act confers benefits,
and no doubt it should not be
construed restrictively, but in dealing with specific limited words like those
, it is difficult to state the legislative purpose except at
such extreme levels of generality that it is not useful in construing
parts of the legislative
[64] That lack
of utility is compounded when the express objects of the Act, set out in
, include the competing objects of ensuring that the scheme for the
rehabilitation and compensation of injured workers: is fair, affordable,
efficient and effective; provides adequate and just compensation to injured
workers; and is balanced to ensure that the costs of
workers compensation are
contained to reasonable levels for employers.
[65] For these
reasons, we do not accept the appellant’s submission that there is a
discernible legislative intention that workers
who suffer a whole person
impairment of 15% or more as a result of compensable injuries sustained at
different times are to be understood
as suffering a serious impairment and
compensated at the rate directly commensurate with their actual level of
impairment rather
than ‘the discount rates’ in
appellant also argued that the respondent’s construction of
would have adverse implications for the appellant under
of the Act,
which limits the period over which benefits for incapacity may be paid for
workers who have permanent impairment of less
than 15%. This limitation applies
to a worker who suffers a ‘
permanent impairment’ of
less than 15%. No argument was put as to what is captured by that phrase. In any
event, for the same
reasons as just stated, we do not accept the submission that
adverse implications under
demonstrate a legislative intention that
workers who suffer a whole person impairment of 15% or more as a result of
compensable injuries
sustained at different times should be compensated without
that limitation.
[66] While it
may appear to the appellant in this case to be harsh or capricious or unfair
that the effect of
is that she is compensated for her 22% permanent
impairment by two payments of compensation calculated pursuant to
and thereby receives less compensation than if they were dealt with together
pursuant to
, that may be the consequence of the legislature’s
intention, as discerned from
and the other provisions that refer to
compensation ‘in respect of an injury’, that compensation is payable
to a worker
under the Act on an ‘injury by injury’ or ‘claim
by claim’ basis, rather than on a whole person approach
where the current
permanent impairment has arisen from multiple injuries occurring at different
The employer’s obligation to pay and ‘double
[67] On the
appellant’s construction of
, the employer would be liable for
compensation for the worker’s degree of permanent impairment where that
was caused or materially
contributed to by a previous injury or injuries,
including those which were caused by or arose out of previous employment.
the worker would be entitled to compensation for the worker’s
degree of permanent impairment at the time of the assessment,
even if the degree
of permanent impairment was referable in part to a previous injury or injuries
for which the worker had received
compensation under
in the past.
appellant argued that the amount of any previous compensation the worker had
received would be set off against their entitlement
to compensation under
There is no statutory mechanism which makes provision for this set
off. Consequently, reliance was placed on the decision of the
Northern Territory
Court of Appeal in
Northern Territory v Pengilly
(2004) NTLR 18
’). In that case, the worker had been assessed in
1997 as having a permanent impairment of 43% of the whole person following
injury to her arm which required surgery and subsequently caused the contraction
of dermatitis. The 43% was comprised of 24% attributable
to the dermatitis and
25% attributable to the arm injury which, according to the combined values chart
in the Guidelines, gave rise
to 43% WPI. Pursuant to
of the Act, she
was paid 43% of 208 times her average weekly earnings. In 2001, the
worker’s dermatitis deteriorated but her
arm injury resolved. She was
assessed as having a permanent impairment of 60% attributable to the dermatitis.
She reopened her claim
for compensation. The Work Health Court concluded that
the worker was entitled to 17% of 208 times her average weekly earnings, being
60% less 43%. On appeal, the Supreme Court held that the worker was entitled to
60% of 208 times her average weekly earnings less
the actual amount of
compensation that had previously been paid to her.
[69] The Court
held (at [10]) that, pursuant to
, the worker is entitled to
compensation for a 60% permanent impairment assessed in today’s terms
(referring to the phrase ‘at
the time the payment is made’). It had
been argued that the worker’s claim was a new claim for a 60% permanent
that exists today, not a claim under
for an additional
percentage for the increased incapacity over and above the 43% incapacity that
existed in 1997. The Court held
that the employer’s concession that the
worker, in 2001, could sue for compensation on the basis of 60% impairment (a
with it the concession that the appellant did not finally
discharge its
liability in respect of 43% of the worker’s current permanent impairment
by its payment in 1997. The Court held
(at [11]) that the worker was entitled to
compensation based upon the 60% permanent impairment and, because it arose out
of the same
injury which resulted in a 43% impairment in 1997 and for which the
employer compensated the worker, the employer was entitled to
set off the amount
paid in 1997 in
discharge of its later liability.
[70] That case
is of little assistance here. First, the employer had conceded that the worker
could make a new claim for the 60% permanent
impairment. There is no such
concession here; that is the very substance of the debate. Second, that case
concerned a second claim
in respect of permanent impairment arising out of the
same injury. That is not the situation here. Further, that fact had the
consequence
that the employer was the same, so a
set off of the
amount of compensation the employer had previously paid was available under the
general law.
[71] While that
situation pertains here as well, the appellant’s construction of
would equally operate where the worker’s permanent impairment is a
consequence of one or more prior injuries which arose out
of or in the course of
employment with one or more different employers than the present employer. In
that situation, the legal basis
upon which the current employer would be
entitled to deduct from the compensation it pays to the worker the amount/s
previously paid
to the worker by other employer/s, is not clear and was not
[72] Further,
where (as is the case here) the worker’s previous degree of permanent
impairment was below 15% of the whole person,
and the worker’s current
degree of permanent impairment is above 15% of the whole person, but the
component attributable to
the injury sustained in the course of the current
employment was also below 15%, significant difficulties arise as to upon which
employer the burden of the increased compensation should fall, and how that
burden is to be distributed between them.
[73] By way of
example, assume a worker suffers an injury in Year X and is assessed as having a
permanent impairment of 9% of the
whole person. By
of the Act, the
worker was entitled to payment of 2% of 208 times their average weekly earnings
in Year X. The worker was paid that
amount by their employer. In Year Y, the
worker suffers another injury whilst working for a different employer. The
worker is assessed
as having a total permanent impairment of 22%, which is
comprised of 9% attributable to the first injury and 13% attributable to
second injury. On the appellant’s construction, by
worker would now be entitled to payment of 22% of 208 times their average weekly
earnings, which is payable by the second employer,
despite the fact that only
13% of the worker’s current permanent impairment is attributable to an
injury in the current employment
which would, on its own, entitle the worker to
only 8% of 208 times their average weekly earnings.
[74] Numerous
questions arise. First, is the current employer obliged to pay the whole of the
22% of 208 times the worker’s
average weekly earnings?
[75] If not, by
what mechanism would the current employer deduct the 2% already paid? Unlike the
situation in
, there is no entitlement under the general law to
set off the past payment from its obligation to pay compensation because the
payment was paid by a different employer.
[76] If so: (a)
the worker would receive the current compensation in addition to the 2% of 208
times their average weekly earnings
paid in Year X, thereby receiving more
compensation than they are entitled to; and (b) the current employer would be
obliged to pay
compensation for a component of the permanent impairment that had
nothing to do with their workplace and was attributable to a past
employment.
[77] The Act
does not contain any statutory mechanisms or provision for resolving these
s 126A of the Act deals with the respective liability of employers (and
their insurers) to pay compensation where there
is more than one
it could only operate,
in its terms, in respect of the compensation liability of each employer for each
injury dealt with separately
under s 71(3), and would not address the
additional liability to pay compensation which arises because of the operation
of s 71(1).
[79] The absence
of any provision which deals with the apportionment of this liability is a
contextual indication that s 71 was not
intended to operate so as to give
rise to such issues. This also points against the appellant’s
construction.
The Guidelines intended as nationally consistent
Some legislative history
[80] Prior to
1991, s 70 of the Act defined ‘permanent impairment’ by
reference to an impairment or impairments assessed
in accordance with the
prescribed guides, and r 9(1) of the
(NT) prescribed those guides to be the American Medical Association
the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
edition) (‘AMA
[81] The Act was
amended in 1991 to:
(a) amend the definition of ‘permanent impairment’ in s 70 to
reduce the percentage of whole person impairment from 15%
(b) increase the compensation payable in s 71(2) and 71(3) from 104 times
average weekly earnings to 208 times average weekly earnings;
(c) insert s 71(3), providing for the compensation payable to persons with
a whole person impairment of less than 15% in accordance
with the Table.
[82] When the
Bill for that amendment Act was introduced into the legislature, the Minister
moving the Bill said that it was the result
of the Work Health Benefits Review
announced in September 1990.
of the issues in that Review was about the use of the AMA Guides for
calculations of s 71 benefits. It was noted that the AMA
Guides were used
under the Act.
Consideration had
been given in the Review to adopting the Table of Maims rather than the AMA
Guides, the main difference being that
the AMA Guides use the whole of body
approach to the measurement of loss of function of the injured worker compared
to a normal healthy
Review concluded that the AMA Guides had a number of advantages over the Table
of Maims, including that percentage impairments
for multiple injuries are
combined in such a way that the overall impairment can never be assessed at more
than 100% of the whole
body, and it was being used increasingly for a variety of
purposes by workers’ compensation schemes, motor accident compensation
schemes and various Commonwealth
departments.
recommended that the AMA Guides be retained, that recommendation was adopted,
and no legislative change was
[83] The Second
Reading Speech concluded with the
there will remain some people in the community who are unhappy with the
amendments proposed by the government. However,
we must remember that the
intention of the [RTWA] is not to provide huge gains to injured workers. The
first responsibility of the
work health system is to stop accidents at work. The
second responsibility is to get employees back to work if they are injured.
third responsibility is to provide monetary compensation to those injured
persons so that they can pay their medical costs and
continue to support
themselves and their families. All of the above must happen at a cost the
community can afford. I believe the
amendments in this bill achieve a fair mix
of compensation and affordability...
[84] Section 70
was amended in 2015 to remove the reference to ‘prescribed guides’
and refer instead to ‘guides
approved and published by the
Authority’.
At the same
time, r 9 of the Regulations was
Explanatory Statement to the Amendment Act stated that s 70 was amended to
empower the Authority to approve guides for the
evaluation of permanent
impairment instead of the guides being prescribed by regulation. This was to
enable greater flexibility in
the future adoption of proposed nationally
consistent guides currently being developed in consultation with the
[86] These, and
a number of other amendments, were passed following a further extensive review
of the Act.
The Minister for
Employment and Training introduced the amendment Bill by saying that the review
had advocated changes to benefits
necessary if the workers’ compensation
scheme is to remain affordable for Northern Territory
businesses.
One significant
change was to restrict compensation to five years for less seriously injured
workers, while others would increase
benefits and provide increased transparency
and claims management. The Bill was said to be the first stage of the
government’s
commitment ‘to provide a more efficient and effective
sustainable’ workers’ compensation
Guidelines adopted in the Northern Territory
[87] As set out
above, cll 1.63, 1.27, 1.28 and 11.10 of the Guidelines provide that the degree
of permanent impairment resulting
from pre-existing impairments should not be
included in the final calculation of permanent impairment if they are not
the compensable injury and that the degree of impairment due to any
previous injury, known as ‘the deductible proportion’,
deducted from the degree of permanent impairment determined by the
Guidelines state (in the Foreword and the Introduction) that they are based on a
template guide developed through a national
process facilitated by Safe Work
Australia. They were initially developed for use in the New South Wales
workers’ compensation
system and incorporate numerous improvements
identified across their use in New South Wales and South Australia. The
methodology
in the Guidelines is largely based on the American Medical
Association’s
Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
Edition, which are the most authoritative and widely used source
for evaluating permanent impairment around the world. The Guidelines
adopted for use in multiple Australian jurisdictions.
American Medical Association
Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent
Edition contain section 1.6, headed
‘Causation, Apportionment Analysis, and Aggravation’. That section
contains sub-section
1.6b, headed ‘Aportionment Analysis’. That
sub-section states that apportionment analysis represents a distribution or
allocation of causation among multiple factors that caused or significantly
contributed to the injury or disease and resulting impairment.
The factor could
be a pre-existing injury, illness or impairment. In some instances, the
physician may be asked to apportion or distribute
a permanent impairment rating
between the impact of the current injury and the prior impairment rating.
Generally, the most recent
permanent impairment rating is calculated, and then
the prior impairment rating is calculated and deducted. The remaining impairment
rating would be attributed or apportioned to the current injury or
Guidelines also state (in Appendix 2) the variations made to the national
template guide. None of those variations relate
to cll 1.6.3, 1.27, 1.28 or
Effect of these matters on the constructional
abundantly clear from the explanatory materials referred to above that the
intention of the legislature, at the time it
considered and passed amendments to
the Act, the last of which permitted the adoption of the nationally consistent
guides, was that
the nationally consistent guides would be adopted and applied
in the Northern Territory worker’s compensation scheme, and could
adopted and applied because they were consistent with the provisions of the
[92] Despite
that, the appellant argued that the Guidelines must be construed differently in
the Northern Territory as a consequence
of the appellant’s construction of
s 71 of the Act. In support of this argument, the appellant pointed to the
express provisions
in the South Australian and New South Wales workers’
compensation legislation prescribing that, in assessing a worker’s
permanent impairment, any portion of the impairment attributable to a previous
injury (whether a compensable injury pursuant to the
scheme or not) is to be
deducted from the assessed permanent
impairment.
This was said to
found the construction and operation of the nationally consistent guides adopted
in those jurisdictions, and the
absence of such express provisions in the Act
was said to found the inconsistency between the Act (on the appellant’s
construction
of s 71) and the Guidelines adopted in this jurisdiction which
compelled the ‘reading down’ of the Guidelines so as to
render them
consistent with the appellant’s construction of s 71.
constructional choice that gives effect to the clear legislative intention that
the nationally consistent guides for the
assessment of permanent impairment
would operate in the Northern Territory in essentially the same fashion as they
do in other jurisdictions
is to be preferred to the constructional choice which
necessitates a reading down or severance of parts of the nationally consistent
guides which the legislature intended to apply and operate in the Northern
[94] While the
general rule is that delegated legislation should not be referred to for the
purpose of interpreting the Act under
which they are made, there are recognised
exceptions to that general rule, namely
(a) the regulations together with the principal Act form part of a legislative
scheme and it may be useful to refer to them to ascertain
the nature of the
scheme; and
(b) the Act and the regulations have been drafted and promulgated together to
establish an interdependent regime.
[95] Both of
those exceptions are applicable here to some degree. The Guidelines and the Act
together form a legislative scheme for
the assessment and compensation of
permanent impairment caused by or materially contributed to by workplace injury.
The Act expressly
contemplates that the assessment will occur pursuant to and in
accordance with the Guidelines. Further, at the time of the 2015 amendment
s 70 of the Act, the nationally consistent guides were in contemplation and
being drafted for the purpose of establishing that
interdependent
Conclusions
constructional choice posed by the language of s 71 of the Act is to be
resolved in favour of the respondent’s construction,
rather than the
appellant’s.
[97] The reasons
for that choice are essentially: (a) the centrality of an ‘injury’
to the employer’s liability
to pay compensation under the Act, which
indicates that compensation is payable in respect of an injury and points
against a ‘whole
of person’ approach to the concept of permanent
impairment in s 71; (b) the absence of any provisions in the Act dealing
the issues as to the worker ‘double-dipping’ and respective
liabilities of employers (and insurers) for the additional
compensation payable
where a subsequent injury takes the worker over the 15% threshold; and (c) the
effect of the appellant’s
construction on the validity and/or construction
and operation of the Guidelines.
[98] Consequently,
the appellant’s arguments about how the Guidelines should be construed in
reading them down to be consistent
with s 71 of the Act fall away.
clear, we consider that the requirements in the Guidelines to deduct the
proportion of the WPI which is attributable to
a previous injury or pre-existing
condition should be construed according to their plain and natural meaning (so
as to require deductions
for both previous compensable and non-compensable
injuries or conditions).
not accept that the Guidelines should be construed so as to only require
deduction of proportions of the WPI attributable to
non-compensable injuries or
conditions.
[100] It follows
that there was no error in the construction or application of the Guidelines by
the Supreme Court or the Work Health
Disposition
[101] The appeal
is dismissed.
[102] We will
hear the parties as to costs.
-------------------
Woods v Northern Territory of
[2024] NTSC 35
(‘Reasons’).
Reasons at [2]-[11].
Woods v Northern Territory of
[2023] NTWHC 08.
Two other grounds were abandoned
before the hearing of the appeal.
So much is confirmed by
ss 54(3), 55 (in relation to the contraction of a disease), 57, 58 (in
relation to a heart attack injury
or a stroke injury), 60 and 61A(1).
See, for example,
SAS Trustee
Corporation v Miles
[2018] HCA 55
(2018) 265 CLR 137
, [17], [20] per Kiefel CJ,
Bell and Nettle JJ, [41] per Gageler J.
Ibid at [20] per Kiefel CJ, Bell
and Nettle JJ, citing,
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 262 CLR 362
per Gageler J.
Section 24(2)(a),
Interpretation Act 1978
See D Pearce,
Interpretation in Australia
ed, [2.59].
Public Transport Commission
of NSW v J Murray-More (NSW) Pty Ltd
[1975] HCA 28
(1975) 132 CLR 336
at 350 per Gibbs
Federal Commissioner of
Taxation v Smorgon
(1977) 16 ALR 721
at 729 per Stephen J.
Victoria v The Queen
[2014] FSCA 311 at [61] per the Court.
Esso Australia Resources Lt
d v Commissioner of Taxation
[1998] FCA 1655
(1998) 83 FCR 511
at 518-519 per Black CJ and
Sundberg J, at 670 per Finkelstein J.
Attorney-General (NT) v
(2007) 231 CLR 651
at [27] per Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne and Crennan
JJ. As to the legislative objects of a financially sustainable workers’
compensation
scheme, see
of the Act and the explanatory materials
referred to below.
Victims Compensation Fund
Corporation v Brown
(2003) 77 ALJR 1797
at [33] per Heydon J (McHugh ACJ,
Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ agreeing).
Allianz Australia
Insurance Ltd v Territory Insurance Office
[2008] NTCA 12
(2008) 23 NTLR 186.
These amendments were effected
by ss 10 and 11 of the
Work Health Amendment Act (No 2) 1991
(No 59 of 1991), which came into effect on 15 October 1991.
Legislative Assembly, Work
Health Amendment Bill, Second Reading Speech, 9 May 1991, p 1199.
Ibid, p 1202 ff.
Ibid, p 1203.
Ibid, p 1207
These amendments were effected
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Legislation
Amendment Act 2015
(NT) (No 9 of 2015), which came into effect on 1 July
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Legislation Amendment Act 2015
Explanatory Statement to the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Legislation Amendment Bill 2015
Legislative Assembly,
Rehabilitation and Compensation Legislation Amendment Bill
, Second Reading
Speech, 26 February 2015, p 6057.
Ibid, p 6059.
and (8)(g) of
Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
Interpretation in Australia
ed, [3.49] and the authorities
there referred to.
Noting that the Guidelines
contain a definition of the term ‘injury’ which is in the same terms
as the definition of
‘injury’ found in the Act: see Appendix 1.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (290 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter