URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCAT/2025/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:17:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Venture Housing Company Ltd v City of Palmerston [2025] NTCAT 1 (4 February 2025)
Venture Housing Company Ltd v City of Palmerston
DECISION NUMBER:
[2025] NTCAT 1
VENTURE HOUSING COMPANY LTD
CITY OF PALMERSTON
MATTER TYPE:
Review Jurisdiction -
Local Government Act 2019
2024-00433-CT
HEARING DATE:
31 JANUARY 2025
DECISION OF:
LESLIE MCCRIMMON
DATE OF ORDERS:
4 FEBRUARY 2025
APPEARANCES and REPRESENTATION (if any):
J Gatland instructed by McCullough Robertson Lawyers
RESPONDENT:
J W Roper SC instructed by Maher Raumteen Solicitors
REASONS FOR DECISION:
This is an application for costs arising from the decision of the Northern
Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal (the ‘Tribunal’)
Venture Housing Company Ltd v City of Palmerston
[2024] NTCAT 15
Venture Housing
’), published on 20 November 2024. In
Venture Housing
, the Tribunal found that lots made available by Venture
Housing Company Ltd (the ‘Applicant’) to eligible applicants
pursuant to the National Rental Affordability Scheme (‘NRAS’), the
Venture Affordable Housing scheme, and the Social
Housing scheme were exempt
from rates pursuant to section 222(1)(g) of the
Local Government Act 2019
(the ‘LGA).
on the evidence provided by the Applicant, no decision could be made as to
whether the Applicant’s three lots used for
Specialist Disability
Accommodation also fell within the exemption in section 222(1)(g) of the LGA.
The lots used for such a purpose
were only a small percentage of
number of lots considered by the Tribunal in
Venture Housing
the substantially successful party, the Applicant now seeks costs in the sum of
$34,916.09 or alternatively $28,916.09, pursuant
to the Tribunal’s
discretion to award costs set out in
section 132(1)
Northern Territory
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2014
(the ‘NTCAT Act’).
How such costs are calculated is set out in detail in the affidavit of a
solicitor for the Applicant,
Peter Stokes, affirmed on 4 December 2024. Mr
Stokes deposes to the fact that the Applicant is seeking approximately 50-60% of
actual costs incurred.
application is opposed by the City of Palmerston (the
‘Respondent’).
Background facts
general background facts are set out in some detail in
Venture Housing
and need not be repeated here. Of relevance to an order for costs, however, the
Tribunal notes the following.
Applicant’s claim for an exemption from rates pursuant to section
222(1)(g) of the LGA related to over 100 properties
located in the local
government area of the Respondent. The Respondent dealt with the
Applicant’s request in a timely manner
and in accordance with the
procedure established under the LGA.
Respondent complied with the case management orders made by the Tribunal during
the course of the proceeding and in no way
attempted to delay the
Law relevant to an award of costs
to section 131 of the NTCAT Act, the presumption is that in a proceeding before
the Tribunal parties are to bear their own
costs. The Tribunal, pursuant to
section 132(1), does retain a discretion to award costs provided the following
matters stipulated
in section 132(2) are taken into
making the costs order the Tribunal must take into account:
(a) the main objectives of the Tribunal that are relevant to simplifying
proceedings and issues before the Tribunal and to keeping
costs to parties in
proceedings before the Tribunal to a minimum; and
(b) the need to ensure that proceedings are fair and that
parties are
not disadvantaged by proceedings that have
little or no merit; and
(ba) the expectation that a party who has substantially succeeded against
another party would normally recover:
(i) any fee paid by the successful party that was required under this Act;
(ii) any fee paid by the successful party to serve documents, conduct a search
or obtain a similar service, if it was necessary and
reasonable to make or
respond to an application; and
(c) if the Tribunal has dismissed the proceeding – that fact; and
(d) any other matter specified by the rules; and
(e) any other matter the Tribunal considers relevant.
came within the Tribunal’s review jurisdiction. In the
exercise of such jurisdiction, section 133 of the NTCAT Act requires
Tribunal, in addition to the matters set out in section 132(2), also take into
(a) whether the party genuinely attempted to enable and assist the decision
maker to make the original decision on its merits; and
(b) whether the decision maker genuinely attempted to make the original decision
on its merits.
light of section 131 of the NTCAT Act, the Applicant must establish
something more than success or failure in an ordinarily conducted
NTCAT proceeding
a cost order will be made. As President Bruxner (as his Honour then was) noted
Dos Santos v Gallwey
[2015] NTCAT 9
, “in NTCAT
proceedings – in contrast to the usual position in Courts – costs do
not ‘follow the event’”.
[37]-[38] of
, President Bruxner went on to provide examples of
a case which may justify a departure from the presumption in section 131 of the
feature may be one that puts the outcome of the proceeding in a special light.
An applicant may, for example, have been unsuccessful
in a proceeding because
his/her case was hopeless, or was wholly misconceived. Alternatively, a
successful applicant may be able
to demonstrate that an NTCAT proceeding was
only necessary because the respondent unreasonably refused an offer of
settlement.
Alternatively, there may be a special feature of the way in which a party has
conducted him/herself in an NTCAT proceeding that justifies
a departure from the
ordinary rule. One party might, for example, have occasioned extra expense to
the other: by evading service;
failing to attend a hearing (and
necessitating an adjournment); by failing to comply with a direction; or by
unnecessarily prolonging
a hearing. In such situations – where the costs
order would likely be confined to the affected part of the NTCAT proceeding
– the actual outcome of the proceeding would be immaterial.
Applicant’s submissions
basis of the Applicant’s claim for costs is set out at [10] of its
submissions dated 4 December 2024.
The Applicant submits that the
following features justify a departure from the basic rule, under section 131 of
the NTCAT Act.
the outset, the Applicant genuinely attempted to enable and assist the decision
maker, being the Respondent, to make the original
decision on its merits in
accordance with section 133(a) of the NTCAT Act;
Respondent did not genuinely attempt to make the original decision on its merits
in accordance with section 133(b) of the NTCAT
financial position of the Applicant and its status as a registered charity
should be considered in accordance with section 132(2)(e)
of the NTCAT Act;
the award of costs is in the interest of justice which should be considered in
accordance with section 132(2)(e) of the NTCAT
Respondent’s submissions
its submissions, the Respondent maintains that:
Applicant, by failing to provide to the Respondent a copy of the Funding Deed
between the Applicant and Northern Territory
Government (‘NTG’) when
requested to do so by the Respondent, did not genuinely attempt to enable and
assist the Respondent
to make the original decision on its
Applicant’s submission that the Respondent did not genuinely attempt to
make the original decision on its merits “appear
to conflate success of
the one hand with a resultant lack of reasonableness
on the part of the CoP,
on the other”;
Applicant advances no argument as to why the financial circumstances or the fact
the that the Applicant is a charity is
a relevant consideration for the purposes
of section 132(2)(e) of the NTCAT
Applicant relies on Queensland statute and case authority to support its
submission that an award of costs in this proceeding
is in the interest of
justice. While the
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
expressly provides in
section 102(1)
that the interest of justice is relevant to
cost considerations, there is no equivalent provision in
, Division 6 of
the NTCAT Act.
Consideration
parties proceeded on the basis that matters set out in section 133 of the NTCAT
Act, in the context of review proceedings, are
additional considerations to
those set out in section 132(2). This is the correct approach to the
interpretation of Part 4, Division
6 of the NTCAT Act.
Respondent also submitted that sections 133(a) and (b) should be read
conjunctively, not disjunctively. “In simpler terms,
the Tribunal must be
satisfied both limbs are made out, before being required to weigh the additional
matters into consideration”.
This submission is not accepted.
sections 132 and 133 of the NTCAT Act set out matters which the Tribunal must
take into account when assessing whether an order
for costs is warranted. All
such matters must be considered before a costs order is made, however this does
not mean that the Tribunal
must be satisfied that all such matters are made out
before such order will be made.
conjunction “and” in both sections 132 and 133 must be read in the
context of the words “must be taken into
account” in both section
132(2) and section 133. The use of “and” rather than
“or” directs the Tribunal
to take into account each of the matters
enumerated in the sections. It does not require the Tribunal to find that each
made out before a costs order is made.
failure to comply with section 133(b) LGA
submitting that a costs order should be made against the Respondent, the
Applicant relies on the assertion that Respondent fell
short of its obligation
to make the original decision on its merits (section 133(b) of the NTCAT Act).
This submission is not accepted.
in its application for an exemption to the Respondent, and in its submissions to
the Tribunal in
Venture Housing
, the Applicant relied on
that it was a registered charitable institution providing affordable housing to
those with limited means to support its submission
land was used
for a non-commercial purpose. In
Venture Housing
, the Tribunal noted at
Section 222(3) of the LGA expressly directs the Tribunal to
focus on the nature of the use and not on the nature of the user. Proceeding
the basis pressed by the Applicant would be contrary to the express intent of
the subsection.
Tribunal did find that the lots made available by the Applicant to eligible
applicants pursuant to the NRAS, the Venture Affordable
Housing scheme and the
Social Housing scheme fell within the exemption in section 222(1)(g) of the LGA.
It came to this conclusion,
however, based on a proper consideration of section
222(3) and not on the approach to that section pressed by the Applicant.
Tribunal’s decision in
Venture Housing
rested largely on an
interpretation of the words “non-commercial purpose” in section
222(1)(g), and the proper construction
of section 222(3). The latter subsection
is not found in any other Australian
The submission that
the Respondent did not genuinely attempt to make the original decision on its
merits because the Respondent’s
interpretation of “non-commercial
purpose” in section 222(1)(g) was not ultimately accepted by the Tribunal
does conflate
success in the hearing with the alleged failure of the Respondent
to make the original decision on its merits. The Applicant’s
that land was “plainly used for a non-commercial
appreciate the complexity of the issues before the parties and the Tribunal in
Venture Housing
Application of section 132(2)(e)
Applicant submitted that its status as a registered charity of limited financial
means is a relevant matter for consideration
pursuant to section 132(2)(e) of
the NTCAT Act. In addition, the Applicant submitted that it is in the interest
of justice to make
a costs order in favour of the Applicant, and the interests
of justice should also be a matter the Tribunal may consider pursuant
the scope of section 132(2)(e) of the NTCAT Act appears broad, the following
observation in
is relevant.
Although the
discretion in section 132 to make a costs order is conferred in expansive terms,
especially having regard to section
132(2)(e) (‘any other matter the
Tribunal considers relevant’), it
must always be exercised with
section 131 in mind.
its written submissions, the Applicant stated:
The Applicant is a
not-for-profit organisation and registered charity with limited funds to expend
and was disadvantaged financially
by bringing proceedings which, the Applicant
submits, it should not have needed to bring had the Respondent genuinely
attempted to
make the internal review decision on its
found that the Respondent did attempt to make the internal review decision on
its merits, the foundation for the Applicant’s
submission that its
financial position should be considered pursuant to section 132(2)(e) of the
NTCAT Act falls away. Many parties
who appear before the Tribunal have limited
means. To find that, without more, a parties’ financial circumstances
a matter to be considered under section 132(2)(e) would be to ignore
the presumption in section 131 that parties bear their own costs
in a Tribunal
proceeding.
support of its submission that the interests of justice is a matter that should
be taken into account under section 132(2)(e) of
the NTCAT Act, the Applicant
quotes the following passage from Keane JA’s judgement in
Tamawood Ltd
[2005] QCA 111
[2005] 2 Qld R 101
“... where a party has
reasonably incurred the costs of legal representation, and has been successful
before the Tribunal, it
could not rationally be said to be in the interests of
justice to allow that success to be erred by requiring that party to bear
costs of the representation which was reasonably necessary to achieve that
of justice is an express
to the presumption in
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
, that each party must bear the party’s own costs. Such an express
exception is not found in the NTCAT Act.
there may be circumstances where the interests of justice is a relevant
consideration under section 132(2)(e) of the NTCAT Act,
this proceeding is not
such a case. The decision in
Venture Housing
illustrated that there were
legitimate, complex, issues to be tried. In particular, the parties had to apply
a legislative provision
which had received little judicial attention. Each party
was able to advance its case in the Tribunal through its legal representatives,
ensuring that no power imbalance between the parties arose. While the
Tribunal’s decision in
Venture Housing
ultimately favoured the
Applicant, the submissions of the Respondent did not lack merit.
Finally, no
attempt was made by the Respondent to delay the matter, and
it attempted to
make the original decision on its merits.
Applicant has failed to establish that this proceeding was, “something
more than success or failure in an ordinarily conducted
proceeding”.
Consequently,
other than as noted below, the general presumption in section 131 of the NTCAT
Act applies. Further, there is nothing
Northern Territory Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Rules 2016
which impacts on this conclusion.
found that section 131 of the NTCAT Act applies to this proceeding, it is not
necessary to address the Respondent’s submission
Applicant’s failure to supply to the Respondent a copy of the Funding Deed
until ordered to do so by the Tribunal
resulted in a failure to comply with
section 133(1)(a) of the NTCAT Act. The Applicant’s reasons for not
supplying the Funding
Deed when a request was made by the Respondent to do so is
canvased in the Tribunal’s decision in
Venture Housing Company Ltd v
City of Palmerston
[2024] NTCAT 10.
the decision in
, the NTCAT Act was amended to include section
132(2)(ba). This provision, quoted above, directs the Tribunal to take into
the fact that a party who has substantially succeeded against another
party would normally recover the Tribunal filing fee (section
132(2)(ba)(i)) and
fees expended in serving documents, conducting searches, etc (section
132(2)(ba)(ii)).
substantially succeeded in this proceeding the Applicant is entitled to recover
the filing fee the Applicant paid to the Tribunal.
This sum is $411.00.
award of costs is made pursuant to section 132(2)(ba)(ii) of the NTCAT Act. The
Applicant conducted a substantial number of Land
Title and other searches, which
were included in evidence filed in the Tribunal. Given the matters in issue in
the Tribunal proceeding,
which resolved primarily around questions of statutory
interpretation, such searches were not necessary and reasonable to make an
application. For example, while the Respondent did attempt to argue that the
NTG, through the transfer of properties as ‘in
kind’ support to the
Applicant, had effectively outsourced to the Applicant the task of managing
public housing stock,
was taken with the fact that the fee simple interest in the properties was
vested in the Applicant. Further, the Respondent
conceded that the Applicant was
a public benevolent institution registered with the Australian Charities and
Not-for-profits Commission
established under the
Australian Charities and
Not-for-profits Commission Act 2012
(Cth) within the meaning of section
222(1)(g) of
Accordingly,
the Tribunal orders that:
City of Palmerston is to pay to Venture Housing Company Ltd within 28 days from
the date of this order costs in the sum of
4 February 2025
LESLIE MCCRIMMON
TRIBUNAL MEMBER
Affidavit of Peter William
Stokes affirmed on 4 December 2024 at [11]-[15].
Section 134 of the NTCAT Act
also provides that the Tribunal may make a costs order against a representative
of a party, but the
grounds for such an order do not arise in this
proceeding.
Dos Santos v
[2015] NTCAT 9
, [35] (emphasis in original).
Various Applicants
from Santa Teresa v Chief Executive Officer (Housing) (No 2)
[2019] NTCAT
Respondent’s Written
Submissions as to costs dated 23 January 2025, [11]. The Applicant was ordered
to provide a copy of the
Funding Deed to the Respondent by order of the Tribunal
dated 12 August 2024:
Venture Housing Company Ltd v City of Palmerston
[2024] NTCAT 10.
Respondent’s Written Submissions as to costs dated 23 January 2025,
Respondent’s
Written Submissions as to costs dated 23 January 2025, [19].
Respondent’s Written
Submissions as to costs dated 23 January 2025,
Venture Housing
Company Ltd v City of Palmerston
[2024] NTCAT 15
Submissions for the
Applicant on costs dated 4 December 2024,
Dos Santos v
[2015] NTCAT 9
Submissions for the
Applicant on costs dated 4 December 2024, [17].
Queensland Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
Dos Santos v
[2015] NTCAT 9
, [35] (emphasis
Venture Housing
Company Ltd v City of Palmerston
[2024] NTCAT 15
, [17]-[20].
Venture Housing Company
Ltd v City of Palmerston
[2024] NTCAT 15
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (35.8 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter