URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTMC/2016/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:21:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Andreou v Martin [2016] NTMC 6 (8 April 2016)
Andreou v Martin
[2016] NTMC 006
PARTIES: Andreas ANDREOU
Henry Thomas MARTIN
TITLE OF COURT: Court of Summary Jurisdiction
FILE NO(s): 21602031
DELIVERED ON: 8 April 2016
DELIVERED AT: Darwin
HEARING DATE(s): 4 & 8 April 2016
JUDGMENT OF: Elisabeth Armitage SM
CATCHWORDS:
Criminal Law- Evidence- Identification- Relevance- by Aboriginal Community
Police Officer of the defendant from CCTV footage- Officer
in no better position
than the tribunal of fact to compare appearance of the defendant with
photographs and footage- evidence not
Criminal law- Evidence- Identification- Opinion evidence
Implied powers of the Court of Summary Jurisdiction- power to refuse to admit
evidence where there has been prejudicial non-disclosure
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation) Act (NT) ss 55, 76
[2001] HCA 50
(2001) 206 CLR 650
[2012] NTSC 18
R v Murdoch
[2005] NTSC 78
(2005) 195 FLR 421
O’Neill v Rankine
[2015] NTCA 3
Uniform Evidence Law, Stephen Odgers SC, Eleventh Edition, 2014, Lawbook
REPRESENTATION:
Prosecutor: Mr Rowbottam
Defendant: Mr Pettit
Solicitors:
Plaintiff: DPP
Defendant: NAAJA
Judgment category classification: B
Judgment ID number: 006
Number of paragraphs: 24
IN THE COURT OF
AT DARWIN IN THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
No. 21602031
Andreas ANDREOU
Henry Thomas MARTIN
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 8 April 2016)
SM: E. Armitage
Martin was charged with stealing and being armed with an offensive weapon at
night. The matter was listed for hearing on 4 April
2016. There was no question
as to the offences having been committed because the incident was captured on
CCTV footage. The issue
was whether Mr Martin was the offender.
witnesses present at the time of the incident barely saw the offender and were
unable to provide any identification evidence other
than a very general and
somewhat generic description. Accordingly, I understood the prosecution relied
on the CCTV in two ways to
prove the offender was Mr Martin. Firstly, that the
CCTV image was clear enough for me to be satisfied that the image was Mr Martin
or at least similar to Mr Martin such that he was not excluded from being the
offender. Secondly, the prosecutor sought to lead evidence
of identification
from Mr Martin’s uncle, Aboriginal Community Police Officer (ACPO) Mark
Casey. ACPO Casey was not at McDonalds
during the incident but in an effort to
identify the suspect, investigating police had internally circulated three still
photographs
of the offender taken from the CCTV. ACPO Casey saw those photos and
gave evidence that he recognised the person as his nephew, Mr
Martin. Later, on
the day of the hearing, ACPO Casey saw the CCTV footage and maintained it
depicted Mr Martin.
counsel objected to the admissibility of ACPO Casey’s identification
evidence. Relying on
the defence submitted:
firstly, that ACPO Casey’s evidence was not relevant because he was in no
better position than the court
to compare Mr Martin to the images of the of
offender on the CCTV footage; and secondly, that ACPO Casey’s evidence was
inadmissible
opinion evidence and did not fall within any of the exceptions to
that rule. In addition the defence submitted that ACPO Casey’s
should be excluded in the exercise of the court’s discretion because it
had not been disclosed in a timely fashion
to the defence.
significant issues to be resolved in the trial were:
(i) Was the
CCTV footage of sufficient quality to permit the court to come to its own
finding as to identity?
(ii) Was ACPO Casey’s evidence relevant?
(iii) Was ACPO Casey’s evidence inadmissible opinion
(iv) Should
ACPO Casey’s evidence be excluded in the exercise of a
discretion?
Was the CCTV footage of sufficient
quality to permit the court to come to its own finding as to identity?
events took place at McDonalds in Ludmilla on 10 January 2016. As already noted,
the prosecution case relied heavily on a few
minutes of CCTV footage. From left
to right, the CCTV footage showed the back view of a lady sitting at a table
with friends. The
lady’s handbag was sitting up on the table, just to the
right of her elbow. A street entrance to McDonalds was shown to the
right of the
table. The offender entered McDonalds through the street entrance holding an
upside down golf club in his right hand,
like a walking stick. The offender
walked casually from right to left across the screen, behind the lady and her
handbag. The offender
walked off screen to the left. Seconds later the offender
re-entered the CCTV footage from the left. He was no longer carrying the
club. He walked behind the lady, grabbed her bag off the table, and took off
running, exiting through the street entrance.
CCTV was of average quality. The general setting in which the offending took
place was clear and it was possible to get a reasonable
impression of the
offender. The camera was located above head height and the images were taken at
an angle from above. As the offender
entered McDonalds the CCTV captured his
general body type and movement. At this point the offender was walking with the
upside down
golf club in his right hand. As he walked closer to the camera, the
image captured his face in profile on the downwards angle. When
the offender
reappeared without the golf club, the image was of his back. He can be seen
taking a few walking steps, snatching the
bag and running away.
viewing the CCTV footage I considered that the offender was an aboriginal male
who appeared to be in about his twenties. He was
of slender to medium build. He
was barefoot and wearing black shorts and a blue, singlet style top. The top had
two smallish, mismatched
motifs on both the left and right side of the chest and
some white on the shoulders, sides and back. The offender’s hair was
curly and shoulder length, in a mullet style and possibly tied back. It was high
at the front, there was no fringe, and his
forehead was clear and reasonably
high. The hair was worn behind the ears. The offender had a reasonably heavy
brow and a broad triangular
prosecutor tendered photos of Mr Martin taken on 9 and 13 January 2016, that is,
both shortly before and after the incident and
also tendered a record of
interview showing Mr Martin on 13 January 2016. Accordingly his appearance at
was well established on the evidence. There was
one significant difference between Mr Martin’s appearance in January and
the trial in April. In January Mr Martin had a distinct blonde highlight in
his hair centred immediately above his forehead, but
at the hearing his hair was
a uniform dark brown colour. The blonde highlight was very obvious in the photos
taken in January but
was less obvious in the video of the record of interview.
The photos also appeared to have lightened Mr Martin’s skin colour.
remark on the difference between the photos and the record of interview, because
it seemed to me that Mr Martin’s blonde
highlight appeared more or less
obvious depending on the camera and lighting.
have described the CCTV in detail to provide an impression of its clarity and
quality. Whilst much could be seen on the footage,
the colours were not entirely
clear, the combination of the lighting and angle of the camera appeared to
create highlights and cast
shadows on the image of the offender, and the image
was somewhat pixelated. There was no single clear image of the offender’s
face. There was no single point where I could clearly see his eyes, cheeks,
mouth or chin as these were covered in shadow even when
his face was shown in
profile. Significantly, I could not clearly see the distinct yellow highlight in
the offender’s hair.
Whether this was because of the effects of the
lighting or because it was not there I do not know. Having looked at the footage
although I was satisfied that there were points of similarity between
Mr Martin and the offender, to my mind, the missing blonde
highlight was a
relevant point of dissimilarity. The CCTV was not clear enough for me to
positively identify Mr Martin as the offender,
but neither was I satisfied that
he was excluded.
prosecution case therefore relied on the admission and acceptance of ACPO
Casey’s identification evidence.
Was ACPO Casey’s
evidence relevant?
in the joint judgment of Gleeson CJ and Gaudron, Gummow and
Hayne JJ, the High Court held that the evidence of two police officers
identifying a person depicted in CCTV footage was irrelevant and inadmissible
because the police were “in no better position
to make a comparison
between the appellant and the person in the photographs than the” tribunal
of fact. However, their Honours
went on to discuss some of the factors that
might place a witness in a better position to make such a comparison and which
result in such evidence being relevant and admissible. Their Honours
“In other cases, the evidence of identification will be
relevant because it goes to an issue about the presence or absence
identifying feature other than one apparent from observing the accused on trial
and the photograph which is said to depict
the accused. Thus if it is suggested
that the appearance of the accused, at trial, differed in some significant way
from the accused’s
appearance at the time of the offence, evidence from
someone who knew how the accused looked at the time of the offence, that the
picture depicted the accused as she or he appeared at that time, would not be
irrelevant. Or if it is suggested that there was some
distinctive feature
revealed by the photographs (as for example, a manner of walking) which would
not be apparent to the jury in
court, evidence both of that fact and the
witness’s conclusion of identity would not be
irrelevant.”
Accordingly,
ACPO Casey’s identification evidence might be relevant if his experience
of Mr Martin brought with it “added
value to the exercise of
identification”
, that is, if
his evidence established that he was in a better position than the court to
compare Mr Martin to the CCTV.
Casey gave evidence that Mr Martin was his nephew, he had known him since birth,
and over the years there had been a “fair
bit of interaction”. ACPO
Casey said he was familiar with Mr Martin’s gait which he described as a
“springy motion
when he walks”. He said this particular trait had
earned Mr Martin the nickname “tippy toes”. ACPO Casey considered
Martin’s hair to be distinctive. He said it was a “big mullet”
with “orange peroxide at the front”.
ACPO Casey said that in January
2016 much of the Daly River community, including Mr Martin, were evacuated to
the Darwin Show Grounds
due to flooding. ACPO Casey said that in January he saw
Mr Martin around the show grounds. When asked how often he said “pretty
regular”. ACPO Casey said there were limited clothes washing facilities
and for this reason the evacuees wore their clothes
for several days in a row
before they were washed. He said he saw Mr Martin wearing the same clothes for
days. When asked to describe
the clothes, he said “he usually wears
singlets or t-shirts. Your blues, whatever. I think he had a blue
Casey said that he saw three still photographs circulated over the police
computer and recognised them to be photos of Mr Martin.
He said he did not see
the CCTV footage until he came to court but having viewed the footage he said he
recognised Mr Martin’s
walk and his blue singlet with motifs. ACPO Casey
was pretty certain it was the same shirt that Mr Martin was wearing when he
locked up a couple of days earlier”.
ACPO Casey had a long standing familiarity with Mr Martin’s general
appearance, in my view that did not place him in
a better position than the
court to make a comparison. The relevant point of comparison was at or about the
date of the offending.
The court was furnished with two photos and a record of
interview which clearly depicted Mr Martin’s appearance spanning the
of the offending and clearly revealed the only significant change in his
appearance, namely the blonde highlight. In those circumstances,
Casey’s long familiarity was of no real relevance to the task of
comparison and did not place him in a better position
than the court to carry
out that task.
Mr Martin’s springy step had truly contributed to ACPO Casey’s
identification of Mr Martin, it might have been a relevant
point of distinction
between his and the court’s capacity to make a comparison. However, ACPO
Casey first identified Mr Martin
from three still photos. Little can be seen of
the offender’s legs in two of those photos and at most, one step is
in the third. ACPO Casey did not point to anything in the photos which
he said was consistent with Mr Martin’s gait. I am satisfied
Casey’s knowledge of Mr Martin’s gait did not play any real part in
his identification from the photographs
and so, at least so far as the still
shots were concerned, he was in no better position than the court to make the
comparison.
shown the CCTV footage in evidence in chief, ACPO Casey said the shirt, the hair
and the facial features were points of recognition
but made no mention of the
offender’s movement. In cross examination he added “and the
walk”. However, at no stage
did ACPO Casey point to any part of the walk
as being “springy” such that it assisted him to identify Mr Martin
offender. Having viewed the footage, I am unable to detect anything
distinctive or “springy” about the offender’s
movements, other
than him being quick off the mark when he grabbed the bag. To the contrary, the
offender used the golf club like
a walking stick and his movements appeared
somewhat heavy footed and lopsided (perhaps because of the stick). In those
circumstances,
I am not persuaded that ACPO Casey’s knowledge of Mr
Martin’s gait placed him in a better position than the court to
comparison.
Casey also asserted that he recognised the shirt worn by the offender as being
one that he had seen worn by Mr Martin. His identification
of the shirt was a
further possible point of relevant distinction between his and the court’s
capacity to make a comparison.
However, I note the following. When first asked
to describe Mr Martin’s shirt, ACPO Casey only described it as blue and
no mention of any motifs. He went on to say he was “pretty
certain” the shirt in the CCTV footage was the same shirt
Mr Martin had
been wearing for some days and the same shirt he was wearing “when he was
locked up a couple days earlier”.
As already noted, the prosecution
tendered a photograph of Mr Martin taken on 9 January 2016 when he was in
protective custody. It
seemed to me most likely that this was the occasion ACPO
Casey was referring to when he recalled Mr Martin being “locked up
earlier”. As the court had the 9 January 2016 photograph, the court was
actually better placed to compare the two shirts, than
ACPO Casey who was
relying on his memory. Although there were similarities between the singlet worn
by Mr Martin on 9 January 2016
and the one worn by the offender on 10 January
2016, it was very clear that they were not the same shirt.
all the points of possible distinction that I could identify into account, I was
not satisfied that ACPO Casey was in a better
position than the court to compare
Mr Martin to the offender in the CCTV footage. In my view, ACPO Casey’s
evidence was not
relevant and it was not admitted.
Casey’s evidence inadmissible opinion evidence?
my ruling that ACPO Casey’s evidence was not relevant there was no need
for me to consider this further ground of objection.
Whilst I make no ruling on
this issue I do note the following. In support of the objection, the defence
relied on the single judgement
of Kirby J in
However, his Honour’s
application of the opinion evidence rule to this type of evidence did not form
part of the majority’s
reasoning in
, has apparently not been
considered or followed in the Northern Territory, and was the subject of
critical analysis and considered
questionable by Stephen Odger’s SC, in
his text, Uniform Evidence Law
Were Justice Kirby’s reasoning to be followed in the Northern Territory,
identification evidence of the kind admitted in
might no longer be
admissible.
Should ACPO Casey’s evidence be excluded in the
exercise of a discretion?
given my ruling that ACPO Casey’s evidence was not relevant there was no
need for me to consider this further ground
of objection. However, I think it
important to note the following. The defence complained that the identification
evidence relied
on by the prosecution had not been served on them in a timely
manner. The prosecution case rested substantially on the identification
of ACPO Casey. ACPO Casey identified Mr Martin before he was arrested and
charged on 13 January 2016. On 5 February 2016,
at the first directions hearing,
the defence indicated that identification was in issue. However, ACPO
Casey’s statement was
not served on the defence until the very morning of
the hearing. The defence, relying on the decision
, submitted that
procedural fairness required the exclusion of ACPO Casey’s evidence.
O’Neill v Rankine
the Court of Appeal recognised that the Court of
Summary Jurisdiction had an implied power “to refuse to allow the
complainant
to adduce evidence where there has been prejudicial non-disclosure
in breach of pre-trial directions by the
. I considered the
prosecuting authority’s apparently nonchalant attitude to disclosure
entirely unsatisfactory, but I do not
point to any individual as I understand
the brief passed through several hands. In my experience late or non-disclosure
of relevant
statements is unfortunately not uncommon and the prosecuting
authorities ought to consider how their disclosure obligations could
prioritised and implemented. In spite of those comments, in the circumstances of
this case I was not satisfied that there
had been any clear breach of pre-trial
directions or that any real prejudice was occasioned to the defence.
the date of his arrest, Mr Martin was aware that ACPO Casey had identified him,
as he was told about the identification in his
record of interview. The defence
were therefore not completely taken by surprise when ACPO Casey attended as a
witness. In response
to the late service of his statement, a short adjournment
was granted to allow the defence to consider his evidence. Had a longer
adjournment been requested, it would likely have been granted. Thereafter the
trial proceeded with the evidence taken under objection
pending a ruling as to
its admissibility. In those circumstances, and being satisfied as to the evident
capability of defence counsel
to deal with the late evidence, I was not
persuaded there was any real prejudice occasioned to Mr Martin by the late
service, nor
that it resulted in any unfairness in the conduct of the trial.
Accordingly, I would have declined to exercise my discretion to exclude
only evidence admitted which was relevant to identification was the CCTV
footage. As I was unable to positively identify Mr Martin
as the offender on
that footage, the charges were dismissed.
Dated this 8th day of April 2016.
_________________________
Elisabeth Armitage SM
[2001] HCA 50
(2001) 206 CLR
per Kelly J at [12]
Eleventh Edition, 2014,
Lawbook Co., at [1.3.4180]
(2005) 195 FLR 421
[2005] NTSC 78
[2015] NTCA
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (102 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter