URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTSC/2025/72.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:22:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Brown & Ors v CEO (Housing) & Anor [2025] NTSC 72 (18 September 2025)
Brown & Ors v CEO (Housing)& Anor
[2025] NTSC 72
PARTIES: BROWN, Kennedy
MCNAMARA, Anita
JACK, Johnny
PEPPERILL, Joanne
STAFFORD, Jamesie
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER (HOUSING)
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER (TERRITORY FAMILIES)
TITLE OF COURT: SUPREME COURT OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
TRIBUNAL exercising Territory jurisdiction
FILE NO: 2023-00352-SC
DELIVERED: 18 September 2025
HEARING DATE: 13 July 2023 and 14 July 2023 with
further submissions filed 1 December 2023, 16 April 2025 and 29 April
JUDGMENT OF: Huntingford J
CATCHWORDS:
NORTHERN TERRITORY CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL – application for
leave to appeal – question of law – whether
leave to appeal is in
the interest of justice – whether a substantial injustice would result if
the error is not corrected
- leave to appeal determined on the merits of each
NORTHERN TERRITORY CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL – Residential
Tenancies – whether proper weight was given to witness
statements –
complaint made generally –not necessary for Tribunal to consider every
point made - whether Tribunal failed
to comply with the rules of natural justice
– whether Tribunal erred in giving undue weight to documentary evidence
authors of those documents did not give evidence –whether
Tribunal failed to make relevant findings of fact – whether
Tribunal made
legally unreasonable findings – no legal unreasonableness found.
LANDLORD AND TENANT - consideration of “subject to this part” in
s 57 of the
Residential Tenancies Act
– whether Tribunal
applied the proper meaning to the phrase “reasonable diligence”
– Landlord’s obligation
is to take all steps that a reasonably
prudent landlord would take – consideration of whether Tribunal failed to
properly apply
s 57 of the
Residential Tenancies Act
notifications were made “as soon as reasonably practicable” –
whether Tribunal correctly applied
s 51(1)(a) of the
Residential Tenancies
–whether Tribunal correctly applied s 48(1)(a) of the
Residential Tenancies Act
– whether Tribunal applied a correct
understanding of s 49 of the
Residential Tenancies Act
Tribunal erred in confining any award of damages for disappointment and distress
pursuant to s 122
Residential Tenancies Act
– whether Tribunal
failed to apply a correct understanding of
regulations 3
Regulations 1983
Housing Act 1982
Northern Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2017
141, 53, 105.
Residential Tenancies Act
(NT), ss 19(1), 48, 49, 51, 55,
57, 63, 122.
Limitation Act 1981
s 44(2)(b)(i)
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
Housing Regulations 1983
(NT), rr 4, 5.
Interpretation Act 1978
Supreme Court Rules 1987
(NT), r 82.04(2)(b).
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Residential Tenancies Regulations 2000
Adjrun v Chief Executive Officer (Housing)
[2022] NTSC 42
& Ors v Minister for Territory Families and Urban Housing and Anor
[2022] NTSC 83
Baltic Shipping Co v Dillon
[1993] HCA 4
(1993) 176 CLR 344
Blatch v Archer
[1774] EngR 2
Booth v An Assessor
[2019] NTSC
CEO (Housing) v Pepperill
[2022] NTCA 1
CEO (Housing) v Pepperill
[2024] NTCA 10
DL v The Queen
[2018] HCA 26
Foote v Hahlos
[2002] NSWCTTT 855
(13 December 2002),
Ho v Powell
51 NSWLR 572
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Jack v Chief Executive
Officer (Housing)
[2021] NTSC 81
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
101 CLR 298
Kopp v Aughterson
[2015] NTRTCmr 6
McGinty v Western
[1996] HCA 48
(1996) 134 ALR 289
Minister for Immigration and Border
Protection v MZYTS
(2013) 230 FCR 431,
Minister for Immigration and
Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
(2018) 264 CLR 541
Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs v NBDS
[2006] FCA 265
(2006) 90 ALD 614
Nationwide News Pty Ltd v Rush
[2020] FCAFC 115
Pepperill v CEO
[2023] NTSC 90
Plaintiff M1/2021 v Minister for Home Affairs
[2022] HCA 27
(2022) 96 ALJR 497
Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty of
Animals (Vic) Inc v Marson Constructions Pty Ltd
[2000] VSCA 38
v Oaktech Pty Ltd
[2011] NTSC 11
Various Applicants from Laramba v Chief
Executive officer (Housing)
[2023] NTCAT 2
Willis v Whiteside
Young v CEO, Housing
[2020] NTSC 59
Young v CEO (Housing)
(2023) 97 ALJR, referred to.
Creake, R, et al,
Control of Government Action
LexisNexis, 2022.
Macquarie Dictionary
ed, Macquarie Dictionary
Publishers Pty Ltd, Sydney, 2009.
Pearce, DC,
Statutory Interpretation in Australia
LexisNexis, Australia, 2024.
REPRESENTATION:
Appellants: M Albert
Respondents: T Moses
Solicitors:
Appellants: Australian Lawyers for Remote Aboriginal Rights
Respondents: Mills Oakley
Judgment category classification: B
Judgment ID Number: Hun2506
Number of pages: 164
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Brown & Ors v CEO (Housing) & Anor
[2025] NTSC
No. 2023-00352-SC
KENNEDY BROWN
JOHNNY JACK
JOANNE PEPPERILL
JAMESIE STAFFORD
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER (HOUSING)
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER (TERRITORY FAMILIES)
CORAM: HUNTINGFORD J
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 18 September 2025)
is an appeal from a decision of the Northern Territory Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (the Tribunal) made on 17 January
2023 exercising its jurisdiction
pursuant to the
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
It concerns six applications
to the Tribunal by tenants of the landlord statutory body known as the Chief
Executive Officer (Housing)
relating to three separate tenancies in the township of Laramba. The tenants are
Mr Jack (Lot 22), Mr Stafford and Ms Pepperill (Lot
63) and Mr Brown and
Ms McNamara (Lot 67). The Tribunal proceedings sought orders, mainly for
compensation, based upon various alleged
breaches of the respective tenancy
agreements.
Procedural History
a) On 14 November 2019 three proceedings were commenced in the Tribunal (the
2019 applications). They were:
application by Mr Johnny Jack (2019-02699-CT) seeking orders in relation to his
tenancy of a house at Lot 22, Laramba, Northern
Territory that:
(1) The landlord install within seven days a filter to remove uranium from
the water emanating from at least one tap in the kitchen
of the house to within
safe drinking water levels in accordance with the Australian Drinking Water
Guidelines;
(2) The landlord make emergency repairs to Lot 22 as requested in a notice
pursuant to
of the RTA within seven days;
(3) The landlord produce documentary evidence relevant to the application
held by it; and
(4) The landlord pay compensation and/or rent repayment to Mr Jack in
accordance with
of the RTA as a result of a number of alleged breaches of
the tenancy agreement.
application by Ms Joanne Pepperill and Mr Jamesie Stafford (2019-02718-CT) in
relation to their tenancy of a house at Lot 63, Laramba,
sought orders in the
same terms as Mr Jack’s application, noting different emergency repairs
and breaches are claimed and therefore
the claims for compensation are
application by Ms Anita McNamara and Mr Kennedy Brown (2019-02722-CT) in
relation to their tenancy of a house at Lot 67, Laramba,
also sought orders in
the same terms as Mr Jack but based upon different allegations of breach and
therefore claims for compensation.
January 2022 the tenants commenced the following proceedings in the Tribunal
(the 2022 applications):
a) An application by Mr Jack (2022-00158-CT) in relation to his lease at Lot 22,
Laramba, seeking orders that the landlord:
compensation and/or rent repayment to the applicant pursuant to
the RTA with respect to the allegations of breach of the tenancy agreement
relating to the repair items in an attached list (repairs);
any repairs which remain outstanding.
b) An application by Ms Pepperill and Mr Stafford (2022-00162-CT) seeking orders
in the same terms as the application filed the same
day by Mr Jack, but in
relation to different alleged breaches (repair items) specific to their
c) An application by Ms McNamara and Mr Brown (2022-00163-CT) in relation to
their tenancy at Lot 67 Laramba, seeking orders in the
same terms as Mr Jack,
but in relation to different alleged breaches (repair items) specific to their
[3] During the
Tribunal proceedings, it was decided that questions arising from the allegation
as to the failure to ameliorate the
effects of allegedly unsafe water supply,
which formed part of each of the 19 November 2019 applications, would be heard
separately.
That part of those applications is not relevant to this appeal. The
remainder of the issues in the Tribunal were largely claims for
breach of the
tenancy agreement by the landlord, for which the tenants sought compensation.
There were 57 breaches (“repair”
items) arising across the six
applications, together with claims for repayment of rent and one claim for
emergency repairs.
January 2023 the Tribunal made the following orders in relation to the repair
and compensation applications in each of the
proceedings:
a) Mr Jack’s 2019 application, (2019-02699-CT), was dismissed in its
entirety (save for the claim relating to unsafe water
supply, which remains on
foot in this and the other two 2019 applications);
b) The landlord was ordered to pay to Ms Pepperill and Mr Stafford a total of
$4,400 in compensation in relation to their 2019 application,
(2019-02718-CT);
c) The landlord was ordered to pay to Ms McNamara and Mr Brown a total of $5,500
in compensation in relation to their 2019 application,
(2019-02722-CT);
d) The 2022 application of Mr Jack (2022-00158-CT) was dismissed in its
e) The 2022 application of Ms Pepperill and Mr Stafford, (2022-00162-CT) was
dismissed in its entirety; and
f) The landlord was ordered to pay to Ms McNamara and Mr Brown a total of $200
compensation in relation to their 2022 application,
(2022-00163-CT).
[5] Each of the
tenants seeks leave to appeal from the decisions in their respective
proceedings. There are 22 proposed grounds of
appeal, several of which have a
number of “sub-grounds”. In addition, the landlord has filed
(subject to leave) a cross
appeal which raises four grounds. Finally, the
tenants rely upon a notice of contention, raising one issue.
Tribunal all six proceedings were heard
The approach on appeal
was shaped by the approach taken before the Tribunal. The Tribunal proceeding
was framed by reference to an
“agreed list of outstanding issues to be
determined” (list of issues) which is set out in the Tribunal’s
exception of issues 1 and 2, the list of issues does not relate to specific
tenancies or premises but appears to have been
intended to refer to each of the
tenancies, in so far as a particular issue or question might be relevant to a
particular alleged
breach. While an attempt to narrow the issues in the absence
of pleadings was appropriate, each separate claim alleges a breach of
agreement and the focus must first be upon whether the breach has been proven.
Whether any compensation should be awarded
is a secondary consideration. With
the benefit of hindsight, it may have been more helpful to the Tribunal, and the
parties, to direct
attention to a traditional breach/causation/quantum
methodology, rather than focusing upon the list of issues.
tenants’ position before the Tribunal, and this Court, was that these
proceedings would serve as test cases, resolution
of which would assist in
determining a further 24 outstanding proceedings relating to tenancy disputes
between the landlord and individuals
at Laramba still before the Tribunal. The
landlord took a different view, stating that although the applications proceeded
Tribunal as “informal” test cases there was never any
agreement between the parties as to how these evidence-specific
claims could be
used to determine other
[8] Although
there are some common legal issues arising, and the test case approach is
understandable on that basis, at least at the
time the applications were
initially filed, there are significant limitations as to the utility of a
decision in one tenancy dispute
as a template for resolution of another. The
most obvious problem is that each dispute as to a particular allegation of
breach, whether
it relates to failures of habitability, security or failure to
repair, or a combination of those, and any resultant claim for compensation,
must be assessed according to its own facts. Therefore, it is very likely that
there will be different outcomes in different cases,
with little flowing by way
of precedent.
[9] A detailed
summary of the grounds of appeal at this point in the reasons would be lengthy,
and unenlightening. Suffice to say
that the appellants relied upon four broad
categories of asserted legal error. They are summarised as: incorrect
application of the
law (grounds 5, 5A, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15 and 17); failure
to afford natural justice (grounds 1, 2 and 18); and failure to evaluate
deal with every issue of significance raised (grounds 6, 7, 13 and 21); and
legal unreasonableness (grounds 1, 4 and 19). I will
proceed by setting out each
ground raised by the tenants by reference to the Tribunal’s decision as a
heading and then provide
reasons for my decisions.
landlord’s proposed cross appeal also raises grounds of procedural
fairness and legal unreasonableness, together with
a challenge to the
Tribunal’s findings that the tenancy agreement in relation to Lot 67 did
not comply with
of the RTA, and that the Lot 22 tenancy agreement was
not terminated. The landlord seeks remission in relation to its appeal grounds
relating to compensation and declarations as to the status of the tenancy
agreements for Lots 22 and 67.
[11] Some of the
tenants’ grounds of appeal raise very general complaints which are said in
submissions to be supported by “examples”
from the evidence and
submissions in relation to particular points. In most cases, the so-called
examples are actually particular
decisions in the proceeding which turn on their
own facts. It is not possible to make any general findings as to error based on
In addition, on an appeal it is for the appellant to point to an error
and the basis for it. It is not the role of an appeal court
to search for error.
I will proceed to deal with each ground raised by the tenants by reference to
the particular decision, evidence
and matters relied upon by the tenants (or
where relevant the landlord) in relation to each proposed ground of appeal.
[12] An appeal
from the Tribunal to this Court is governed by s 141 of the NTCAT Act and is
limited to a question of law. The principles
relevant to an appeal on a question
of law are set out in
Leave to appeal is
required. Leave should be granted only if it is in the interests of justice to
do so in all the circumstances
of the case. In making that assessment the court
will consider whether there is sufficient doubt about the question of law to
the grant of leave and whether a substantial injustice would result if
the error is not corrected.
error of law identified must be one which could vitiate the Tribunal’s
decision; that is there must be a real possibility
that the error could (but not
would) have affected the Tribunal’s
applications for leave to appeal rely upon the merits of each of the proposed
grounds of appeal, which were fully argued.
The landlord’s position was
that leave to appeal should be refused on all but ground 15.
explain in these reasons, leave to appeal on grounds 15 and 16, and cross appeal
ground 3, is granted and the appeal upheld.
The notice of contention is upheld.
Leave to appeal is not granted in relation to proposed grounds 2B, 3, 5A, 7, 11,
13, 19, 20,
21, and cross appeal grounds 1 and 2. Leave to appeal is granted,
but the appeal dismissed in relation to grounds 1, 2A, 4, 5, 6,
8, 9, 10, 12,
14, 17 and 18. It was unnecessary to determine cross appeal ground
Ground 1: The Tribunal acted in breach of s 53 of the NTCAT
Act by failing to comply with the rules of natural justice and/or failed
statutory task by failing to deal with submissions made to it on behalf of the
Appellants concerning how to approach the witnesses
and documents put before the
Tribunal by the Landlord.
[15] The tenants
argued that the Tribunal failed to comply with the rules of natural justice, as
required by s 53 of the NTCAT Act,
in that it failed to consider the
tenants’ submissions about the weight that should be given to certain
witness statements,
the weight that should be given to the absence of other
witness statements and the specific reasons that some of the landlord’s
witnesses should not be preferred in relation to certain points of
In oral argument, counsel
for the tenants referred to the tenants’ written closing submissions
before the Tribunal at paragraphs
[18] – [21], [26] and
together with the oral
submissions to the Tribunal on the same issues on 3 August
landlord argued that the tenants’ complaint relates only to the evaluation
of evidence by the Tribunal and is posed
at such a high level of generality that
it is not possible to identify how a particular error of law could have resulted
in a different
outcome in relation to any of the tenants’ claims. The
landlord further argued that, in any event, the Tribunal did consider
submissions of the tenants as it was required to do, that there was in the
circumstances no legal requirement that the Tribunal
address every point of
detail raised by the tenants in their oral and written submissions, and that the
submissions were in any event
without merit.
tenants’ argument relied upon the decision of the High Court in
Plaintiff M1/2021 v Minister for Home
That case concerned
a person whose visa had been cancelled on character grounds. He made
representations to an administrative decision
maker in support of an application
for revocation of the cancellation decision which included reliance upon
Australia’s international
non-refoulment obligations. The decision maker
who rejected the application considered the plaintiff’s representations,
those relating to refoulment, but declined to revoke the visa
cancellation, reasoning that the plaintiff had a separate right to
apply for a
protection visa and refoulment would be considered in the course of that
application.
majority in the High Court held that there was no jurisdictional error, or
denial of natural justice by the decision
In a joint judgment,
Kiefel CJ, Keane, Gordon and Steward JJ, said that “a decision-maker
must read, identify, understand and
evaluate the
representations”.
plurality then went on to
well-established that the requisite level of engagement by the decision-maker
with the representations must occur within
the bounds of rationality and
reasonableness. What is necessary to comply with the statutory requirement for a
valid exercise of
power will necessarily depend on the nature, form and content
of the representations. The requisite level of engagement – the
effort needed by the decision-maker – will vary, among other things,
according to the length, clarity and degree
of relevance of the representations.
The decision-maker is not required to consider claims that are not clearly
articulated or which
do not clearly arise on the materials before them.
[19] As the High
Court’s decision in
Plaintiff M1/2021
makes clear, in reference to
the statutory process under consideration there, the question of how a decision
maker is required to
take a submission into account depends upon the
circumstances. The decisions which are the subject of complaint in this ground
not made by an administrative decision maker, as in
, but by the Tribunal exercising its quasi-judicial powers. An
allegation that a body such as the Tribunal has denied a party procedural
fairness is a significant matter. It must be considered in the context of the
Tribunal’s function and governing statute.
[20] Counsel for
the tenants strenuously argued that this ground of appeal was not based on an
assertion that the Tribunal gave inadequate
reasons but upon an alleged failure
by the Tribunal to take the tenants’ submissions into account, which he
said amounted to
a denial of natural justice in the sense described in
Plaintiff M1/2021
. Notwithstanding that, it remains the case that
provision of adequate reasons is essential in order for an appeal court to carry
out its function.
possible to determine what the Tribunal took into account by reference to the
reasons given.
Tribunal addressed each individual claim for breach of the tenancy agreements
resulting from the “repair” items
as set out in the 2019 and 2022
Repair Tables and made separate findings for each
Those findings are
largely findings of fact, although some are mixed fact and law. The reasons for
each individual decision on the
separate breach allegations are, as is
appropriate given the nature of the proceeding, often brief. However, the
reasons must be
read as a whole.
[22] In order to
properly assess the tenants’ argument it is necessary to consider what the
tenants’ submissions were,
and how they related to the matters which the
Tribunal was called upon to decide. The tenants bore the onus of proof on each
of breach. At first instance the tenants sought to undermine the
evidence given on behalf of the landlord in order to convince the
Tribunal to
accept their evidence. In closing arguments, both oral and written, counsel for
the tenants urged the Tribunal to accept
the evidence of the tenants in
preference to the evidence of witnesses called for the
and by extension the
documentary evidence produced by the landlord, on a number of bases which were
directed to the credibility,
and reliability.
[23] The tenants
argued before the Tribunal that:
Roman (an employee of the landlord, acknowledged as an “on the
ground” witness) gave unreliable evidence because
her memory of the
particular premises was poor, and her record-keeping was “cursory”
and included a lot of errors;
other witnesses called by the landlord were “bureaucrats” from
“air-conditioned offices” in Alice
Springs and Darwin and did not
really know what was happening with the tenancies and therefore their evidence
was not reliable;
were a lot of errors in the documentary records kept by the landlord and
therefore those documents could not be relied upon
where they contradicted the
tenants’ sworn evidence;
landlord failed to call “on the ground” staff, such as housing
maintenance officers, or contractors about what occurred
with each repair item
founding an alleged breach by the landlord, without explanation, and therefore
an inference should be drawn
that those potential witnesses would not have
assisted the landlord’s
That inference was relied
upon to argue that the Tribunal should find that the tenants’ version of
events should be accepted.
[24] There are
two points to note about the tenants’ closing submissions in relation to
the landlord’s evidence. First,
the submission as to credibility was
general, although some examples were given, and did not address the evidence
relevant to each
of the particular factual findings which the Tribunal was
required to make in relation to each of the many alleged breaches. Second,
tenants also relied upon the documentary evidence, and to an extent the oral
evidence, called by the landlord. Reliance upon
the documentary evidence is
referred to both in the tenants’ closing
submissions,
and extensively
throughout their 2019 and 2022 tables of
[25] The way in
which the evidence was to be used is also relevant. The tenants stated in their
closing submissions to the Tribunal,
in the section which is said to have been
ignored, that Donna Roman’s evidence was relevant only to issues 11, 12
the “agreed list of
Kuhn’s evidence to issues 2, 14, 15 and 16, primarily as they related to
the applications concerning Lot 63; and Charlene
Mibus’ evidence to
issues 15 and 16, primarily as they related to the applications
concerning Lot 67.
[26] Issue 11 in
the list of issues was about whether the absence of a shower curtain or screen
made each of the premises not habitable
in breach of the term of the tenancy
agreement implied by operation of s 48(1)(a) of the RTA. It is dealt with in
paragraphs [110]
to [124] of the Tribunal’s
That issue was
resolved by the Tribunal largely upon legal grounds and on the basis that there
was no shower screen or curtain in
place in any of the houses. In so far as
Donna Roman may have given incorrect evidence about the presence or absence of
shower screens,
it was therefore irrelevant to the decision. There was no need
for the Tribunal to refer to Donna Roman’s evidence in relation
11 because the absence of shower curtains or screens, if ever in dispute, was
accepted by the Tribunal.
[27] Issues 12
and 13 refer to the tables of repairs annexed to the agreed list of issues (and,
in amended form, the tenants’
submissions).
The question asked
in issue 12 was whether the landlord’s conduct in relation to each item
set out in the tables resulted in
a conclusion that it was in breach of the
obligation under the tenancy agreement to take reasonable steps to provide and
reasonable security (implied by s 49 RTA) or, as relevant, whether the
landlord was in breach of the habitability condition implied
by s 48(1)(a) of
[28] Issue 13
was put in the alternative to issues 11 and 12. It asked for each of the items
in the tables of repairs (including the
shower screen/curtain referred to in
issue 11), where there had not been a breach of the landlord’s obligation
to provide habitability
or security, whether there had instead been a breach of
the landlord’s obligation to repair in s 57(1) of the RTA. This issue
required consideration of related questions as to notification and reasonable
diligence in conducting repairs.
[29] The factual
decisions which were required to be made pursuant to issues 12 and 13
are dealt with at paragraph [125] of the Tribunal’s
and in separate sections
of the decision under the headings “The 2019 Table of Repairs”
appearing between paragraphs
and “The 2022 Table
of Repairs” appearing between paragraphs [230] and
Consideration of these
matters formed the bulk of the questions the Tribunal was required to decide,
including the majority of the
factual findings. At [125] of the reasons the
Tribunal exposed its methodology as follows:
Issues number 12 and 13
have been addressed by the parties by way of tables of repairs based on the
Annexure to the agreed list of
issues. Those tables helpfully set out each item
of repair; purported dates of notification; the section of the Act said to be
and purported dates of repair. The parties include in the tables
reference to evidence upon which they rely. Issues number 12 and
13 require a
consideration of each alleged item of repair and whether or not a breach is
established under section 48(1), 49 or 57(1)
of the Act.
[30] Although
issue 13 refers to a repair claim pursuant to s
applying as an alternative
to every claim initially founded upon either s 48 or s 49, the tenants refined
their position in closing
submissions to specify which section of the RTA they
alleged to have been breached with respect to each alleged repair item. In some
cases, the tenants ultimately relied only on a failure to diligently repair in
breach of s 57(1). In others they continued to rely
upon that section as an
alternative to either an alleged breach of the landlord’s obligation for
habitability (s 48(1)(a))
or security (s 49(1)).
[31] The repair
tables attached to the tenants’ closing submissions included a table
headed “source and references”
which included detailed references to
documents in the exhibit book filed in the Tribunal
proceeding.
As part of its
written closing submissions the landlord filed a table which set out a detailed
summary of its position, including
by reference to the evidence relevant to each
of the repair items. In submissions in reply the tenants addressed the treatment
the evidence suggested in the landlord’s table, including some specific
matters which were raised by the landlord in relation
to individual repair
submissions which the tenants say the Tribunal failed to
in the process of
weighing evidence and making findings must be seen in the context of the whole
of the submissions made by the parties.
The submissions said to be ignored were
directed to the credibility of the landlord’s evidence and/or its weight.
The competing
evidence was that of the tenants. Further, while impressions and
interpretations may have varied and affected the weight given to
aspects of the
evidence, there were relatively few clear factual disputes. The Tribunal was
often faced with a lack of evidence,
rather than a need to resolve conflicting
versions of events.
[33] In the
tenants’ closing submissions to the Tribunal they conceded that the oral
evidence of Mr Jack should be “approached
with caution” due to his
limited command of English and the considerable difficulties with his
Similar, but less
pronounced, difficulties were conceded with respect to the evidence of Mr
Stafford, and it was also submitted that
lack of memory, given that three years
had elapsed since the unattested declarations were made, was relevant to the
evidence of Ms
Pepperill and Mr
In the same submissions
the tenants argued that the Tribunal should accept the evidence set out in the
tenants’ unattested
declarations where it differed from their sworn
evidence. Those closing submissions to the Tribunal do not sit well with the
argument on this appeal that the Tribunal should have accepted
the tenants’ sworn evidence in preference to documents authored
evidence of the tenants and of the landlord relevant to issues 12 and 13, in
particular 13, diverged on the question of when
notice of the need for the
repair of various items in the houses was given. Whether notice was given, and
its timing was, as the
Tribunal noted at [152] of the reasons, a critical fact
to be determined in relation to many of the claims. The Tribunal also noted
the tenants relied “substantially if not entirely” on the unattested
declarations. That is consistent with the tenants’
closing submissions to
the Tribunal referred to above. It strongly suggests that those submissions were
considered. In addition,
the Tribunal reasons closely examined the evidence of
Mr Jack, Ms Pepperill and Mr Brown and explained, by reference to passages
evidence, including from the transcript, why their evidence was not found to be
Tribunal President also explained why he did not find the unattested
declarations reliable. This was a matter upon which
both parties had made
submissions. The Tribunal’s comments as to the process involved in
obtaining the unattested declarations
including that they were made without the
assistance of interpreters should be read in the context of the detailed
findings as to
unreliability of the various witnesses’ evidence overall,
and bearing in mind that the Tribunal member had the advantage of
hearing each of the witnesses give evidence.
[36] Having
explained its reasons, the Tribunal found that the evidence of the tenants as to
dates of notification was unreliable
and that it preferred the documentary
evidence from the landlord because, as the President said, those documents
to identify with precision, points by which the respondent had
certainly been notified”. The Tribunal found that, in the absence
reliable evidence from the tenants, where there were documents recording an
issue, it would rely upon that evidence to find that
there was notification from
at least that point. The Tribunal was entitled to make that finding. The
Tribunal, having explained in
some detail why it did not generally accept the
tenants’ evidence of notification based on an assessment of the evidence,
went on to assess each claim set out in the tables of repairs as I have
described above. Those reasons are to be read in the light
of the evidentiary
findings which precede them.
tenants’ submissions in this Court focused upon the Tribunal’s
evaluation of the evidence of Donna Roman with
respect to 2019 Repair Table Lot
22 item (e). The argument that the tenants’ submissions on that topic were
ignored must be
rejected. Lot 22 item (e) alleged a breach of the tenancy
agreement by the landlord on the basis that the landlord had failed to
diligently repair a broken light and fitting in the kitchen of
Mr Jack’s house which, he said, had first been reported as needing
repair around the middle of 2018. The Tribunal reasons recite the claim and the
evidence and refer to the landlord’s inspection
records. Those inspection
records were prepared by Ms Roman and signed by Mr Jack. They each state
that the light cover is missing.
However, the Tribunal did not rely only on
Ms Roman’s records. The Tribunal referred to a job card completed by
maintenance
staff on 21 August 2019 to the effect that there were no covers
available to replace the broken one but that the light “still
works”. That was, along with earlier findings as to the unreliability of
the evidence of Mr Jack, the primary basis of the
Tribunal’s finding that
the light fitting became damaged sometime after 21 August 2019 and not in
mid-2018 as asserted by Mr
[38] In oral
submissions, counsel for the tenants also referred to a “condition
report” at exhibit book 3 page 4930 as
a document which the Tribunal
specifically used to reject the evidence of Mr Jack on the basis that there
cannot have been consideration
of the tenants’ submissions that Ms
Peckett, the apparent author of that document, was not called and the Tribunal
should draw
an inference from that, that her evidence would not have assisted
the landlord’s case. The document at EB 3
appears to be a rental
rebate and continued eligibility form, not a condition report. It appears to be
dated 11 September 2019. Counsel
for the tenants noted that the document
referred to Mr Jack not having a disability, by completing a check box to that
statement which was clearly incorrect. However, I do not accept the
submission of the tenants that this document was used by the
Tribunal to reject
the evidence of Mr Jack. The Tribunal’s basis for the rejection of
Mr Jack’s evidence where it was
not corroborated was that it was
unreliable for the reasons the Tribunal gave.
[39] Issue 14
before the Tribunal was a question about whether the
Limitation Act 1981
(Limitation Act)
applied to various repair items, largely claimed in
the 2022 applications. This was primarily a legal issue, understood to be really
Limitation Act
. Discovery of the terms of the tenancy agreement was
relied upon as the “material fact” for the purposes of the extension
of time application.
relevant factual question was whether the tenants of Lots 63 and/or 67 were
given a copy of their tenancy agreement at or around
the time they entered into
the tenancy. This was addressed in the evidence of landlord employees Amanda
Khun, and Charlene Mibus,
respectively. The Tribunal was not satisfied that,
based on their evidence as to the usual practice, copies of the tenancy
were not given to the tenants at the time of signing the lease. The
Tribunal reasons include a detailed assessment of the evidence
in relation to
this issue at [175] to [183].
The alleged material fact was therefore not proven. In addition, the Tribunal
held that even if the tenants were not provided with
copies of their leases that
was not a material fact for the purpose of an extension of time and, further,
that time should not be
extended in any event, in the exercise of the
discretion, due to prejudice to the
[40] Issues 15
and 16 in the list of issues related to the rent due under the leases and
whether there was any obligation for the
landlord to compensate the tenants for
overpayment of rent. The question is dealt with at [187] – [200] of the
Tribunal reasons.
Again there
was a clear engagement with the evidence and the tenants’ submissions. As
to the issue of whether a person was
“adequately housed” the
Tribunal resolved that whether particular officers turned their mind to that
question was irrelevant
[41] Failure of
a body such as the Tribunal to weigh and consider evidence and to explain, where
necessary, a preference for a particular
piece of contradictory evidence over
another on a relevant question, taking into account a parties’
submissions, may point
to an error of
However, in this case,
there was no such failure by the Tribunal. The Tribunal appropriately considered
the evidence and the submissions
of the tenants. It was not necessary for the
Tribunal to take up every point made. The tenants were not denied natural
[42] Leave to
appeal is granted, and the appeal is dismissed.
Ground 2A: The
Tribunal acted in breach of s 53 of the NTCAT Act by failing to comply with the
rules of natural justice and/or failing
to act fairly when it made findings that
tenants breached provisions of the Act without:
such breach being an issue agreed between the parties; and/or
such breach being raised by the landlord; and/or
question of the breaches found being put to the relevant tenants;
tenants’ lawyers being forewarned that those issues would be introduced
and then provided with an opportunity to address
[43] This ground
shares a procedural factual background with ground 19, but raises a different
legal issue.
Although the ground
of appeal refers to unspecified breaches of the RTA (meaning the implied terms
of the tenancy agreement) the
substance of the complaint is that the Tribunal,
having set a procedure by which the parties were required to compile a list of
for determination which was agreed by 26 August 2020, allowed the
landlord to raise additional issues, particularly pursuant to the
terms of the
tenancy agreement implied pursuant to ss 48(2), 51 and 55 of the RTA in a manner
which was unfair and/or did not comply
with the rules of natural justice.
Although there are four sub-grounds, those should more properly be seen as
particulars. They all
raise aspects of the same complaint.
[44] The tenants
relied, as evidence of unfairness, upon alleged unequal treatment based on the
refusal of the Tribunal to allow additional
allegations of breaches of the
tenancy agreement by the landlord to be added in May and July 2021, compared
with the Tribunal’s
acceptance for determination of the allegations on
behalf of the landlord referred to above. The procedural history of that dispute
is relevant to ground 19 and is discussed there. The fact that the tenants were
not given leave to amend to add new claims is not
relevant to the issue raised
in this ground.
[45] The first
question arising is whether the Tribunal should, given the list of agreed issues
for determination set out at [18]
of its reasons, have considered s 48(2) when
determining whether the landlord had breached its obligations under the tenancy
to ensure premises were habitable in the various ways alleged by the
tenants. Section 48 of the RTA is in these terms:
to be clean and suitable for habitation
(1) It is a
term of a tenancy agreement that the landlord must ensure that the premises and
ancillary property to which the agreement
(a) are habitable;
(b) meet all health and safety requirements specified under an Act that apply to
residential premises or the ancillary property;
(c) are reasonably clean when the tenant enters into occupation of the premises.
(2) It is not a breach of the term specified in subsection (1) if the failure
to comply with the term is caused by:
(a) an act or omission of the tenant; or
(b) the tenant’s failure to notify the landlord of repairs required to the
[46] A plain
reading of the provision shows that s 48(2) is integral to the question of
whether a landlord has breached the obligation
in s 48(1)(a), where it
arises on the facts. The tenants say that they were taken by surprise by the
landlord’s reliance upon
it in this case. That submission is made
notwithstanding that the responses filed by the landlord in November 2019
squarely put the
tenants’ conduct, as relevant to s 48(2), in
tenants’ argument proceeds on the basis that the list of issues prepared
in August 2020 does not specifically refer
to s 48(2). In their opening
submissions for trial filed 21 May 2021 the tenants said:
landlord has not put s 48(2) in issue (namely, by the agreed list of issues). As
such, this is not of concern in these proceedings
other than as context for
understanding why compensation must be owed from the time each habitability or
‘health and safety’
This statement was expressly refuted in the landlord’s submissions
filed on 28 May 2021. The landlord said:
The contractual term implied under s 48(1) is not breached if the failure is
caused by an act or omission of the tenant, or the tenant’s
notify of repairs (s 48(2)). For the avoidance of any doubt (AOS [35]),
s 48(2) is in issue in these proceedings. It is
within the scope of issue
12(b) in the SAI. The CEOH will address on its application after the evidence.
Section 48(2) provides in
respect of s 48(1) a necessary balancing of rights and
There is therefore no doubt that, having received the landlord’s
submissions, the tenants were on notice from late May 2021
as to the nature of
its case, even if they had been lulled into a false sense of security earlier
due to the wording of the agreed
list of issues.
several delays the Tribunal hearing commenced on 25 July 2022, over a year after
the landlord’s submissions had been
received by the tenants. There is no
evidence that the tenants took any procedural steps to clarify the issue in the
[49] At the
Tribunal hearing, objection was taken by the tenants, on the ground of
relevance, when the landlord’s counsel sought
to cross-examine Mr Jack
on the part of the tenants
That objection was taken
notwithstanding that Mr Jack had stated in his unattested declaration,
dated 10 December 2019, that he had
not caused any of the problems in his
In the course of argument
on that point before the Tribunal, counsel for the tenants submitted
Because if the question of cause was an issue in this trial
then it needed to be on the list of issues. We raised exactly this question
our written submissions of more than a year ago, saying that the list of issues,
...[has] no reference at all to s
position of counsel for the tenants in argument on this point before the
Tribunal, was that the issue of breach under s 48(1)(a)
and the question of
“defences” pursuant to s 48(2) were different issues. The tenants
also argued that it was unfair
that the landlord could rely upon s 48(2) given
the Tribunal’s refusal to “amend” the list of issues to add
Counsel for
the tenants then said that he was not prepared to argue s 48(2) and that it
was for the landlord to seek to add it as
hearing from counsel for the landlord the President ruled that evidence relating
to causation, as relevant to s 48(2),
fell within the matters he needed to
consider in determining whether the landlord was in breach of the tenancy
agreement, and would
be admitted. Counsel for the tenants did not seek an
adjournment.
[52] At the
conclusion of the hearing, the question was dealt with in submissions by both
parties. Counsel for the tenants submitted
that they had not had the opportunity
to respond to the s 48(2) issue by obtaining evidence from non-tenants who could
say how and,
if relevant, by whom, particular damage
The tenants’
written submissions of 19 August 2022 also dealt comprehensively with their
argument as to s 48(2), both procedurally
substantively.
submissions on that topic were also made by the tenants in reply to the
landlord’s submissions to the
[53] In the
tenants’ written submissions to the Tribunal of 19 August 2022, and in
submissions in this Court, counsel for the
tenants said that they would have
been able to obtain evidence from Mr Gilbert Wako (son of Mr Jack and a
person said to have knowledge
of how damage occurred in Mr Jack’s house)
but could not do so because he was in gaol at the time that the hearing at
took place.
two days of the Tribunal hearing were conducted at Laramba and then the evidence
resumed in Alice Springs on the third
to fifth days. Facilities for giving
evidence via audio visual link would have been available in Alice Springs. It is
people in custody to give evidence in courts, including in civil
matters, via audio visual link. There was no evidence, or submission
(based upon
the transcript), that any attempt had been made to visit the gaol to take a
statement from Mr Wako, or to have him give
evidence in relation to the
s 48(2) issues. The tenants did not suggest that there were any other
relevant witnesses who could have
been called.
Tribunal dealt with this issue at [127] – [144] of the
At [132] the President
correctly identified that the earlier (2021) application to add items of repair
to the proceeding was not
concerned with expanding the list of issues but rather
was an attempt to amend to add new claims for “repair items”.
of the new repair items carried with it a separate specific allegation of breach
of the tenancy agreement by failure by the
landlord to diligently repair and/or
to provide premises which were habitable or secure. Therefore, each individual
item” involved a separate cause of action, namely a breach
of the tenancy agreement, for which the tenants sought statutory
compensation.
giving reasons for his decision refusing the tenants’ 2021 application to
amend, the President then went on to explain
why the “good for the goose,
good for the gander” approach urged by the tenants was misconceived,
pointing out the substantial
difference between the tenants’ application
to add new causes of action and consideration of the law relating to the
claims. In doing so the President engaged directly with the
tenants’ submissions on the topic and concluded that, in relation
12, the assessment of whether the landlord was in breach of the tenancy
agreement necessarily involved consideration of
all aspects of the term implied
by s 48, namely the provisions of both s 48(1) and (2).
[56] From a
procedural point of view, the status of the list of issues agreed by the parties
in August 2020 is unclear. I do not think
that it was akin to a pleading.
However, even if it was, and if, despite the landlord having raised the matter
in the original responses
in November 2019, there was any confusion as to the
landlord’s case in reliance on s 48(2) after August 2020, the tenants were
clearly on notice as to the issue from 28 May 2021. The tenants gave evidence
and were cross-examined as to the cause of various
items of disrepair or damage
to their houses at the hearing in late July 2022. They also gave evidence as to
associated issues such
as notification of the need for repair of particular
items to the landlord. There was no evidence of any attempt by the tenants to
call additional evidence as to who caused the damage to particular parts of the
houses. Had such evidence been available, it was
a matter which might have been
addressed via an adjournment, but none was sought.
[57] The tenants
also complain that the list of issues did not include any reference to
determination of issues raised by reference
to ss 51 and 55 of the RTA. Section
51(1)(a) of the RTA makes it a term of a tenancy agreement that a tenant will
not maintain premises
in an “unreasonably dirty condition”, allowing
for fair wear and tear. A tenant is required to notify the landlord of
apparent or potential damage to the premises. Section 51(1)(c) provides
that a tenant must not intentionally or negligently
cause or permit damage to
the premises or ancillary property. However, s 51(3) states that a tenant
is not in breach of their obligations
in that regard if the breach is caused by
the landlord’s failure to repair or maintain the property and the landlord
that repair or maintenance was required.
[58] Section
55(1) implies a term into a tenancy agreement that a tenant must not make an
alteration or addition to premises, unless
the landlord has provided written
consent or the alteration or addition is authorised or required by law. Section
55(3) provides
that if a tenant causes damage by removing or installing a
fixture the tenant must notify the landlord and, at the option of the
have the damage repaired or compensate the landlord for the reasonable cost of
the repair. There is an exception in s 55A
for urgent safety or security
modifications.
landlord argued in its opening submissions to the Tribunal on 28 May
that the obligation not to
make alterations to the property was relevant to the evaluation of the
tenants’ claims for breach
of the security obligation implied pursuant to
s 49, and also to claims for breach of the landlord’s obligation to repair
by s 57(1), in relation to the “Lot 67 window claims”.
counsel for the landlord cross-examined Mr Brown (tenant of Lot 67) at the
hearing about the cause of damage to the doors
of his house, counsel for the
tenants objected on the basis of relevance because “there has been no
allegation, at any point,
that our clients have breached s 51 of the
Counsel went on to
say that the tenants were facing the allegation for the first time and it was a
“new case” by the
landlord. The President, after hearing argument
from counsel for the landlord allowed the cross-examination to continue.
Tribunal was clearly aware of the need to consider the balance of
responsibilities between a landlord and tenant when determining
whether the
landlord was in breach of the tenancy
At [32] of the
decision the President wrote:
The large number of duties imposed on
a tenant going to repairs, maintenance and use of the premises reflects the
practical reality
that it is a tenant who is in possession and day to day
control of the premises. Broadly, a landlord must lease premises that are
habitable, safe and clean; and reasonably maintain them. In return a tenant is
obliged to take care of the premises by keeping them
clean and free of damage;
and by letting the landlord know of damage other than negligible damage.
He then went on to consider the competing responsibilities enshrined in the
scheme of the RTA in some
This part of the reasons
must also be read in conjunction with the sections dealing with the individual
claims for breach.
Tribunal decisions complained of by the tenants relate to 2019 Repair Table
Lot 22 item (f) and (k) which were allegations
of cockroach infestations in
the kitchen and bathroom, respectively; Lot 63 items (k), (o) and (p) which
concerned lack of a stove,
a broken bathroom faucet and missing toilet lid; and
Lot 67 items (c), (k) and (w) which were failure to seal around the air
conditioner
in bedroom 1, grill section of oven not working and spider
infestation in the bathroom.
[63] In relation
to Lot 63 item (p) the Tribunal found that there was a breach by the landlord of
the s 57(1) obligation to diligently
repair, although the damage was caused by
the tenant. A breach of the s 57(1) obligation was also found in relation
to Lot 67 item
(k). All other claims were dismissed.
Tribunal weighed the evidence and considered the circumstances as a whole,
including the actions of the tenants, in deciding
in relation to each
“repair item” whether the tenants had established that the landlord
was in breach of its obligations
as alleged. It would be entirely artificial,
and contrary to the purpose of the RTA, to determine whether one party has
a tenancy agreement by considering the actions of that party in a
vacuum, that is without consideration of all of the circumstances.
There may of
course be situations where, on the facts, the actions of the party alleged to be
in breach will be the main, possibly
the sole, focus.
[65] It cannot
be the case that in determining whether a party is in breach of a tenancy
agreement, the factual basis for a claim,
including who was responsible for the
state of affairs said to be a breach, cannot be relevant. Such an inquiry must
include the
relevant conduct of both parties. Relevant matters may or may not
amount to a separate breach of the tenancy agreement (in this case
tenants), but that is not the purpose of the inquiry.
[66] I do not
accept that the tenants were denied natural justice because they were not aware
that their conduct would be called into
question in relation to the cause of
damage for which they were seeking compensation. It is not a matter of the
landlord setting
up a case against the tenants for breach of any implied term of
the lease and “setting off” one breach against another.
The landlord
made no claim for compensation for any breach by the tenants. Nor was it
necessary for the landlord to prove a positive
claim for breach of another
implied term of the tenancy agreement in order to defend the tenants’
claims by calling their conduct
into question.
[67] In my view
it is clear that the tenants were aware that their conduct as tenants would be
relevant in these proceedings well
in advance of the Tribunal hearing. The issue
had been live since the beginning of the proceedings and was made very clear in
landlord’s submissions of 28 May
The Tribunal was entitled
and in my view obliged, to take all of the evidence into account, including
evidence as to the tenants’
conduct where relevant to the questions in the
proceeding.
[68] A separate
complaint is made about the Tribunal’s decision in relation to issue 10,
which was the only claim for urgent
repairs pursuant to s 63 of the RTA which
remained outstanding at the time of the Tribunal hearing. The claim was for
repair of the
split system air conditioner in the lounge of Lot 67. The Tribunal
dismissed the application. The tenants’ complaint about
that decision
under this ground is that the only basis upon which the Tribunal could have
found against the tenants was s 63(1)(b),
namely that the premises were in a
state of disrepair arising from the contravention of the tenancy agreement by
the tenant.
[69] In my view
the “state of disrepair” referred to in s 63(1)(b) refers to the
repairs said to be required. It does
not refer to the premises generally. Any
other construction would be unreasonable because it would be unfair. The tenants
because s 63(1)(b) was not mentioned in the list of issues the
tenants did not have the opportunity to address the Tribunal on the
and, in addition, did not submit that the installation of the air conditioner
was an act of mitigation due to the landlord
failing to provide a habitable
dwelling during the summer months.
[70] The contest
before the Tribunal appears to have been whether the air conditioner was part of
the premises required to be maintained
by the landlord. This centred on evidence
gave no evidence about when the air conditioner was
Tribunal noted at [107] of the reasons that an order for emergency repairs
cannot be made where there was a contravention
of the tenancy agreement. It is
not controversial that installation of a fixture without the consent of the
landlord may be a contravention
of the agreement. That statement needs to be
seen in the context of the reasons on this topic overall and the case of the
at trial, which was that they did not install the air
conditioner.
[72] However,
the primary basis of the Tribunal’s decision to refuse the order for
emergency repairs was the finding, at reasons
[108] - [109], that there was no
evidence regarding any “fault, failure, breakdown or damage needing
repair”. That passage
is a reference to the definition of “emergency
repairs” at s 63(2) of the Act, noting that the tenants relied upon s
63(2)(m) arguing that the problem with the air conditioner was a
“fault” within the meaning of that
That finding, of mixed
fact and law, was fatal to the tenants’ claim.
[73] The tenants
were not denied natural justice. The question of any breach of the tenancy
agreement by the tenants was considered
only in the context of evaluating the
tenants’ conduct as relevant and to the questions the Tribunal was
required to decide.
The conduct of the tenants was relevant on the facts and the
tenants were on notice and were given sufficient opportunity to address
factual matters.
[74] Leave to
appeal on this ground is granted, and the appeal is
Ground 2B: The Tribunal acted in breach of s 53 of the NTCAT Act by
failing to comply with the rules of natural justice and/or failing
to act fairly
when it failed to consider or apply the maxim from
Blatch v Archer
deal with submissions on the principle from
Jones v Dunkel
in respect of
the authors of documentary evidence produced to the Tribunal by, and completed
on behalf of, the Landlord.
tenants’ complaint is that the Tribunal erred in giving undue weight to
documentary evidence relied on by the landlord
as to the state of the houses at
various times in circumstances where the authors of those documents did not give
evidence. The nub
of the complaint is that the statements in the documents could
not be tested because the authors were not
cross-examined.
Although the
complaint is made generally, the tenants made references to this ground
affecting the Tribunal’s decisions relating
to 2019 Repair Table
Lot 22 items (f), (j) and (k) and Lot 63 item
Those items concern the
infestation of cockroaches in the kitchen and bathroom and missing toilet flush
button at Lot 22 and the
lack of an oven or stove at Lot 63.
[76] The tenants
assert that the Tribunal failed, in breach of s 53 of the NTCAT Act, to act
fairly and according to the substantial
merits of the matter and failed to
afford them natural justice because it failed to weigh the evidence according to
the proof which
it was in the power of one side to produce and the other to
contradict.
The tenants rely in
particular on the principle in
as discussed in
Ho v Powell
was a claim for personal injury arising from a road traffic accident in
which the defendant had admitted liability but relied upon
contributory
negligence on the basis, among other things, that the plaintiff had no front
light on his bicycle. The defendant, Mr
Ho, was present at the hearing but was
not called to give evidence. There was no explanation for that failure. The
trial judge inferred
that his evidence would not have helped the
defendant’s case in relation to contributory negligence, an issue on which
defendant bore the onus of proof. The defendant appealed. By majority, the
New South Wales Court of Appeal held that the trial judge
was entitled to take
into account that the defendant did not give evidence in coming to her decision
that the defendant had not proven
that the plaintiff’s negligence
contributed to the accident.
[77] As Mildren
Shelton v Oaktech Pty
the principle in
relates to a situation where a party is not called to give evidence
and where that party bears the onus of proof. The legal burden
of proof in
relation to each alleged breach of the tenancy agreement by the landlord was on
the tenant. That is the case although
there was at various times an evidential
burden upon the landlord, for example as to whether a failure to ensure
habitability was
caused by an act of the tenant, or a tenant’s failure to
notify, in accordance with s 48(2).
[78] The tenant
complains that the Tribunal relied upon inspection reports and pest control
invoices to show that the cockroach infestation
in the kitchen of Lot 22 was
caused by him, although he had given evidence, in his unattested declaration,
that he did not cause
the problem. However, as discussed in relation to the
related issue in ground 1, above, the Tribunal did not approach the evidence
[79] Although Mr
Jack stated, in his unattested declaration, that he did not cause any of the
problems in his house, his oral evidence
on the cockroach issue was not to the
same effect. When he was cross-examined Mr Jack was asked about cleaning in the
house and agreed
that he found it difficult to do that due to his
disability.
Later, he was asked
specifically about cockroaches in the kitchen. He said he had tried to use a
cockroach kit and also boiling water
to get rid of them. At the end of this
portion of the cross-examination it was put to Mr Jack that the reason he had
cockroaches
in his house was that it was because it was dirty and there was food
for them to eat. His reply, through the interpreter, was “Yeah.
knows that”.
[80] The result
is, contrary to the submission of the tenant, that there was evidence upon which
the Tribunal was entitled to rely
in addition to the landlord’s records in
determining whether the cockroach infestation was caused by the actions of Mr
The Tribunal made findings of fact based upon the evidence before it,
which included the evidence of the tenants, the extensive business
the landlord, and the opportunity which the President had to inspect each of the
houses for himself during the hearing
at Laramba.
complaint as to the decision regarding the lack of a toilet flush button Lot 22,
item (j), was made in oral submissions.
This was an alleged breach by the
landlord by failing to diligently repair the toilet. The issue at the hearing
before the Tribunal
was the date of notification. Mr Jack’s evidence in
his unattested declaration that he had told the landlord about the problems
mid-2018 was rejected by the Tribunal for the reasons discussed above in
relation to ground 1. The tenant bore the onus in relation
to the question of
notification in relation to this breach.
[82] The final
decision complained of was in relation to Lot 63, item (k), which concerned the
lack of a stove or oven at Lot 63 for
various periods between (relevantly) 13
May 2016 and 31 October 2019. The tenants claimed that the landlord had failed
habitability as a result of the oven/stove not working, however the
Tribunal found that the appliance did not work at various times
because the
tenants had not appropriately maintained it and had, at one stage, removed it
from the house. The Tribunal took into
account the steps taken by the landlord,
which included provision of three new appliances in the period 2012 to 2019. The
held that the landlord was not in breach of the tenancy agreement
because the lack of an oven/stove was caused by the acts or omissions
[83] As with the
other decisions complained of under this ground, the Tribunal relied upon the
evidence of the tenants, which is quoted
in the Tribunal
as well as the
documentary evidence provided by the landlord. The tenants’ argument in
relation to this and the other two decisions
complained of is that the Tribunal
acted upon the documentary evidence in particular without the authors of those
reports being called.
The tenants argue that an inference must be drawn that the
evidence of those people would not have assisted the landlord’s
because the authors did not provide declarations to the Tribunal and “were
not made available for cross-examination”.
submission ignores the fact that there was other evidence upon which the
Tribunal could act. Because there was evidence
on the issue on which the
Tribunal could rely, no basis for a
Jones v Dunkel
inference was
established. The evidence included but was not limited to the documentary
evidence, which were business records of
the landlord which were in evidence
before the Tribunal.
[85] The tenants
also complain that the authors of condition reports, named as Cheryl Peckett and
Trevor Neill were not called to
give evidence and there was no opportunity to
cross-examine them. The denial of natural justice is said to be that the reports
those people were used to discredit Mr Jack in relation to his own
[86] However,
the issues which were said to be caused by the tenants, in particular as to
dirtiness, cockroach, and pest infestations,
were put to the tenants in
cross-examination and they had the opportunity to answer. In addition, the
tenants had the opportunity
to make submissions to the Tribunal. The lines of
dispute were well known to the parties to the litigation. In the circumstances
there was no denial of natural justice.
[87] Leave to
appeal is refused.
Ground 3: The Tribunal acted in breach of s
105(2) of the NTCAT Act in that it made no findings of fact concerning the
premises before
it on the question of the lack of reasonable comfort arising
from the absence of a shower curtain or screen.
[88] The tenants
assert that the Tribunal failed to make relevant findings of fact in deciding
issue 11 in the list of agreed issues,
which was the question of whether the
failure by the landlord to provide a shower curtain or screen in the bathrooms
of the houses
breached the landlord’s obligation to provide premises which
are habitable because they did not provide reasonable comfort.
It is referrable
to the 2019 applications in relation to Lots
Tribunal reasons for decision on the issue are at
paragraphs [110]
– [124] of the
[89] The tenants
argued in the Tribunal that the landlord was in breach of the habitability
obligation with respect to Lots 63 and
67, based on the requirement of
reasonable comfort, because failure to provide a curtain or screen failed to
cater for the tenants’
need for privacy taking into account the design of
the bathrooms.
[90] On appeal,
the tenants’ position is that the Tribunal did not provide sufficient
reasons on this question because it did
not, as required by s 105(2) of the
make necessary
findings of fact. The tenants argue that the Tribunal should have made findings
bathrooms of the house occupied by Mr
compared with that of
Ms McNamara and Mr Brown, the different number and category of occupants of
each house, and their different
those are objective circumstances which should have been taken into account by
Tribunal in coming to its conclusion that the absence of a shower screen or
curtain did not mean that there was a failure of the
landlord to let premises
which provided a reasonable level of comfort, and were therefore habitable in
accordance with the term implied
by s 48(1) of the RTA.
[91] The layout
of the houses, including the bathrooms, was not in dispute in the Tribunal
proceeding. The President visited the houses
as part of the hearing, and
inspected the bathrooms, and plans were tendered in evidence by the landlord
which showed the design
of the houses, including that the toilet was within the
bathroom in Lots 63 and 67. It was not entirely clear whether the number
occupants at Lot 67 was in dispute, but even if it was, the tenants’
submission to the Tribunal on this issue is quoted
at [120] of the Tribunal
reasons and directly refers to the colocation of the toilet and showers, and the
fact that Lot 67 had 11
addition, in oral submissions before the Tribunal in relation to Lot 67 the
tenants’ counsel referred to the number
of residents and the argument that
the layout of the toilets, showers and laundry meant that while one person was
having a shower
it was not possible to use the toilet without walking through
the shower room, and it was also not possible to use the laundry, without
interfering with their
[93] It is clear
from the Tribunal reasons that the Tribunal accepted and considered all of those
undisputed facts. It was not necessary
for the Tribunal to explicitly make
findings in relation to facts which were recited in the decision, plainly
accepted, and not in
is apparent from the Tribunal reasons that its decision was made in full
knowledge and acceptance of the facts now asserted by
the tenants not to have
been considered and the submissions made by the tenants at the hearing. The
tenants’ submission that
there was no finding of relevant facts on issue
11 must be rejected.
[94] Leave to
appeal is refused.
Ground 4: The Tribunal’s decision was
legally unreasonable in that it:
a. made findings that there was ‘broadly asserted ineffectiveness of
the [air conditioning] unit’ and ‘there was
no evidence before the
Tribunal about the size or capacity of the [air conditioning] unit [or] its
level of effectiveness’
in circumstances where the Tribunal member was
shown that unit and experienced it when it was on; and
b. found that spiders were only in the bathroom because the whole premises
were in an unreasonably dirty condition.
[95] This ground
of appeal relates to two decisions relating to Lot 67. In each case the
complaint is that the impugned findings were
illogical or otherwise
“bizarre” in the sense described in
Minister for Immigration and
Border Protection v
[96] The first
complaint is as to the Tribunal decisions concerning the split-system air
conditioner in the loungeroom of Lot 67.
This is the same air-conditioner for
which an urgent repair order was sought, as discussed above at ground 2A.
Compensation based
upon the ineffective operation of the unit was also claimed
as part of issue 12 before the Tribunal. The claim was based on an alleged
breach of the habitability
obligation.
Tribunal dismissed the application. In doing so, the President referred to the
reasons given for rejecting the emergency
repair claim at issue
There were three reasons for
the decision. First, the Tribunal was not satisfied that the air conditioner
formed part of the leased
premises on the evidence presented by the tenants, who
bore the onus of proof on that
The Tribunal determined
that it was unable to find that the landlord installed the air conditioner in
the absence of any evidence
to that effect from the tenants and in the face of
the evidence from the landlord that it did not do
The tenants’ position
was that they did not install the unit.
[98] Second, the
Tribunal found that, (impliedly assuming that the tenants installed the air
conditioner) unauthorised installation
of the appliance was a breach of the
tenancy agreement,
disentitling
the tenant to an order. However, as discussed above, this was a secondary
consideration.
[99] Third, the
Tribunal found that there was no evidence as to an identified fault with the air
conditioner. This finding was largely
directed to the meaning of emergency
repairs in s 62(2)(m) of the RTA, as discussed above. However, it is this
third finding which
is the subject of this proposed ground of appeal.
tenants’ argument is that, having experienced the effectiveness of the air
conditioner for himself on the view, the
Tribunal member could not have found
that there was no evidence of any fault, failure, breakdown or damage requiring
However the
Tribunal’s statement that there was “broadly asserted
ineffectiveness of the
was not a finding
but a summary reference to the tenants’ submissions. The Tribunal went on
to say that there was no evidence
as to the level of ineffectiveness of the
unit. The tenants’ complaint assumes that the President personally found
experience that the air conditioner was ineffective, however there is
no basis for that submission. A fair reading of the reasons
reveals that
the Tribunal did not find that the unit was ineffective. As he had the benefit
of experiencing the unit in operation
for himself, and noting his statement that
there was no evidence about the effectiveness of the unit, and that none was
by the tenant, there is no basis on which I can conclude that the
Tribunal’s finding of fact was legally unreasonable.
[101] I also
note that the main reason that the Tribunal did not find that the failure to
repair the air conditioner was not a breach
of the habitability obligation by
the landlord was that the Tribunal was not satisfied that the landlord had
installed it and therefore
it was not part of the premises which the landlord
was obliged to maintain. Once that finding was made the actual operation of the
air conditioner became a moot point.
[102] It does
not appear that the tenants argued before the Tribunal that the failure to
provide an air conditioner was a failure
to provide premises which were
habitable, in relation to any of the properties. That would have been a
different claim.
[103] The second
complaint relates to the tenants’ claim for compensation for the presence
of spiders in the bathroom of Lot
67. The Tribunal found that the presence of
the spiders was as a result of the tenants’ failure to clean the bathroom.
Tribunal also found that the premises were generally maintained in an
unreasonably dirty
tenants argue that the findings were unreasonable because (a) it was never put
to Mr Brown that these tenants failed to
keep the ceiling clean and therefore
there was a denial of natural justice; (b) there was a reliance upon s 51,
which was not included
in the list of issues; (c) the finding was illogical
because it found that the spiders were in the bathroom because the whole house
was in an unreasonably dirty condition when, if that were the case, there would
be spiders in the whole house, not only the bathroom
(notwithstanding the
tenants’ submission that spiders tend to gather in bathrooms for reasons
unrelated to cleanliness, i.e.
water); and (d) there was no evidence connecting
spider infestation with dirtiness, noting that although all three houses were
there was only a spider infestation in Lot 67.
tenants’ submission that they were denied natural justice cannot be
accepted. The transcript of the Tribunal hearing
shows that although questions
were not asked specifically about the ceiling, there was evidence from Mr Brown
that the tenants did
not frequently clean the
Spiders are a common
pest and may be present in any house. There was no evidence that the spiders
posed a risk to health or safety.
The Tribunal is not bound by the rules of
evidence and is entitled to inform itself in any way it considers
appropriate.
In this case the
Tribunal member inspected the bathroom, and the rest of the house, himself. The
tenants had an opportunity to give
evidence, including in cross-examination, and
to make submissions on the issue. The reference to s 51 was also not unfair, for
same reason I have explained in relation to appeal ground 2A.
complaint of illogicality misconstrues the Tribunal reasons. The Tribunal did
not find that the dirtiness in other parts
of the house caused the spiders to be
in the bathroom. What the Tribunal found was that the tenants did not clean the
spiders from
the bathroom, and that was why they were there. Periodic removal of
spiders, and their webs, is something which is part of ordinary
cleaning of any
house. The fact that the house overall was generally in a dirty condition was a
relevant matter which the Tribunal
was entitled to take into account (because it
indicated the tenants did not often clean the house), but it was not the sole,
the main, basis for the finding. The Tribunal also relied upon the
evidence of the tenant, Mr Brown, and the Tribunal member’s
inspection. The Tribunal was entitled to draw the inference that the presence of
spiders in the bathroom of Lot 67 was caused
by the tenants’ failure to
remove them.
[107] I also
note that whether the house, or even the bathroom, was in an “unreasonably
dirty condition” so as to involve
a breach of the tenancy agreement by the
tenants was not an answer to the tenants’ claim. However, in my view the
did not use the finding of general dirtiness in that way. A tenant
may choose to live with spiders on the bathroom ceiling. That
necessarily mean that the premises, or even the bathroom, is in an unreasonably
dirty condition. However, nor does it mean
that the presence of spiders involves
a breach of the tenancy agreement by the landlord.
[108] In finding
that the landlord was not in breach of the term in s 57(1) the Tribunal was
not required to find that the tenants
were in breach of s 51(1), although
the finding may have been open on the
Further, such a
finding would not necessarily excuse a landlord, depending on the nature of the
breach alleged. In many cases it
may be irrelevant. They are two separate
allegations of breach, and the interrelationship, if any, depends on the facts
and circumstances.
In this case, the relationship was simply that there was a
general failure to clean the house, including, relevantly, by removing
webs from the bathroom as any tenant would be expected to do.
[109] No legal
unreasonableness has been established. Leave to appeal is granted and the ground
of appeal is dismissed.
Ground 5: The Tribunal failed to apply a
correct understanding of s 57 of the RTA by interpreting the opening phrase
to this Part’ to mean that the Part was subject to s 57
(including ss 48 and 49), rather than that s 57 was subject to the
remainder of
[110] Section 57
of the RTA is as follows:
obligation to repair
(1) Subject to this Part, it is a
term of a tenancy agreement that the landlord:
(a) must ensure that the premises and ancillary property are in a reasonable
state of repair when a tenant enters into occupation
of the premises; and
(b) must maintain the premises and ancillary property in a reasonable state of
repair, having regard to their age, character and
prospective life.
(2) A landlord is not in breach of the term specified under
subsection (1) unless he or she:
(a) has notice of the defect requiring repair; and
(b) fails to act with reasonable diligence to have the defect repaired.
(3) A landlord is not in breach of the term specified under
subsection (1) if:
(a) the repairs were known to the tenant to be required at the time of entering
into the residential premises agreement;
(b) the repairs are not emergency repairs within the meaning of
section 63;
(c) the tenant has, in writing, waived the right to have the particular repairs
(d) the premises are habitable and meet all health and safety requirements
specified under any Act.
(4) For the purposes of this section,
ancillary property
includes gardening or watering equipment or other chattels provided in relation
to a garden but does not include vegetation, other
than a tree that poses a risk
to a person’s safety.
[111] Because s
57(1) is subject to the other provisions of Part 7, it has operation where it is
not inconsistent with or repugnant
provisions.
“subject to” indicates no more than which provision is to prevail in
the event of a conflict. It does not
imply that there will be a conflict in
every case.
tenants submit that the Tribunal erred because it misconstrued s 57(1) as
the “primary obligation to which ss 48 and
49 (among others) were
subordinate”. The tenants further argue that, due to that error, the
various “repair issues”
(allegations of breach by the landlord) were
first analysed by reference to s 57(1), with the associated expectation that
was required under s 58(1), and only if not upheld under that provision,
considered pursuant to other sections, such as 48 or 49.
reasons show that the Tribunal considered each item of repair set out in the
tenants’ tables in sequence. The 2019
and 2022 Repair Tables identified
the section of the RTA the tenants primarily relied upon, noting that, as agreed
at issue 13 of
the list of issues, where a claim in reliance upon s 48 or
s 49 was unsuccessful, the claim was also to be considered by reference
[114] It is
possible that more than one obligation of the landlord implied by the RTA is
engaged by a particular fact or situation
relied on by the tenant in an
application for compensation, although compensation will not be awarded
However, in relation to
any particular breach for which compensation was claimed, the starting point for
a date from which compensation
is claimable will ordinarily be the date of the
breach. That date may vary depending upon the term breached and the particular
and circumstances of the case.
[115] Contrary
to the tenants’ submissions on this ground of appeal, the Tribunal did not
find that s 57(1) was the primary
obligation to which s 48 and s 49 were
subordinate. In my view it is plain from the reasons that the Tribunal was well
“the section 57(1) obligation is subject to all of
argued by the tenants, did the Tribunal approach its task on the basis that only
if a defect fell outside the remit of s
57(1) did s 48 and s 49
have work to do. The passages from the reasons referred to by the tenants do not
Further, any general
characterisation that the Tribunal approached the matter on that basis is not
available on a fair reading of
the reasons, which shows that the Tribunal first
considered any alleged breach of the habituality or security obligations before
considering whether the landlord had failed to diligently repair a particular
[116] In the
introductory part of the reasons, the Tribunal correctly identified that the
claims in the proceedings before it largely
related to issues of repair and
maintenance founded on allegations of breach of the landlord’s obligations
implied pursuant
to ss 48, 49 and 57(1) of the RTA. There is no error apparent
in that general introductory
description.
Tribunal then commenced its discussion of the tenants’ claims by setting
out a summary of the scheme of Part 7 of
The Tribunal noted, first,
that the RTA balances the obligations of tenants and landlords, and secondly,
that ss 48 and 49 are in
Division 1, of Part 7 “Landlord’s
responsibilities” and s 57 is in Division 3, “Repairs”. A
short summary
of the relevant primary obligations of the parties arising from
Part 7 was included. Then followed a discussion of the requirement
for notice by
a tenant, as it applied to claims under ss 48, 49 and 57(1), and affecting
claims for compensation pursuant to s 122(2)(b).
Tribunal did not have the benefit of the High Court’s decision in
or the decision of
the Court of Appeal in
CEO (Housing) v
when preparing
its reasons. As the High Court pointed out in
Young v CEOH
the design of
the RTA provides for the application of the general law of contract, however the
statutory compensation provided for
in s 122 is an alternative, more
accessible, remedy.
[119] Whether
there has been a breach of a tenancy agreement, and whether compensation is
claimable pursuant to s 122, can only be
resolved by reference to each
particular fact situation said to constitute a breach. A failure to repair in
breach of s 57(1) might
lead to a situation where premises become, for example,
not habitable within the meaning of s 48(1)(a). In that case there would
two breaches of the tenancy agreement. However, not every habitability issue
will also be a breach of s 57(1), and
[120] In making
s 57(1) subject to the whole of Part 7 the legislature maintains the balance
between the obligations of the landlord
and the tenant. Neither party can rely
upon the general obligation to repair to add, or detract from, other more
specific provisions
of the tenancy agreement implied elsewhere in Part 7.
Contrary to the submissions of the tenants the obligations in s 57(1) are
“cut off” from nor “automatically” subordinate to
those in other parts of the RTA, including ss 48 and 49.
Nor does clause 10 of
the standard form tenancy agreement at Schedule 2 of the
Residential Tenancy
Regulations 2000
(NT) have that effect. Rather, the various obligations are
to operate together, and harmoniously, except that in the case of inconsistency
s 57(1) gives way.
tenants’ primary claim in the Tribunal proceedings was for compensation
pursuant to s 122(1) of the RTA. That is the
second step in a process which
commences with establishing that the other party is in breach of the tenancy
agreement. Section 122(1)
is subject to s 122(2). Section 122(2)(b) provides
that a party may not apply for compensation pursuant to s 122(1) for loss
suffered by reason of a breach of the landlord’s “duty to
repair” unless notice under s 58(1) has been given. Neither
“repair” nor the phrase “landlord’s duty to
repair” are defined.
[122] In my view
the requirement to give notice in s 122(2)(b) refers only to claims based upon a
failure to comply with the term
of the tenancy agreement imposed by s 57(1).
That is because: s 58 immediately follows s 57 in Division 3 of Part 7;
57(2) refers
directly to the waiver in s 57(3); and that interpretation reflects
the objective of fairly balancing the rights of tenants and
The limiting
provision in s 122(2)(b) therefore does not apply to claims for breach of the
terms implied by ss 48 or 49.
[123] However, a
landlord will not be in breach of the obligation to ensure that premises are
habitable if that failure is caused
by, either, an act or omission of the tenant
or the tenants’ failure to notify the landlord that repairs are
If there is no
breach, then no question of compensation can arise.
various provisions of the RTA may, and often will, have overlapping operation. A
simple example is a leaking pipe inside
the house. The leak might be quite
small, but noticeable. On becoming aware, the tenant must notify the landlord
that repairs are
required and the landlord must effect the repair with
reasonable diligence, in accordance with the obligation in s 57(1). If the
landlord fails to diligently effect the repair they will be in breach of the
obligation in s 57(1)(b).
[125] If the
leak is not repaired after notice is given and the problem escalates such that
the house floods and becomes uninhabitable
then, assuming the flood was not
caused by an intervening act or omission of the tenant, the landlord will also
be in breach of s
48(1)(a) – the habitability obligation - from the time
of the flood. As the tenant had notified the landlord of the need for
there could be no question of the cause being the tenant’s failure to
notify and the qualification in s 48(2)(b) would
not apply. However, had the
tenant not made a notification then the flood may well have resulted from that
cause and, in that case
the landlord would not be in breach. Further, and
separately, the tenant would not be in a position to claim any compensation for
the obligation to diligently repair implied by s 57(1), because no notice
had been given.
[126] As that
simple example shows, it is possible to have two (or more) factually related but
separate breaches arising. If a breach
on the part of the landlord were proven,
compensation would be assessed from the time each breach arose, and taking into
the matters in s 122(3).
Tribunal’s decisions in this case need to be considered in that light. It
does not matter whether the Tribunal first
considered the alleged breach of the
obligations implied by s 57(1) or s 48(1)(a), provided that each was separately
considered according
to its terms and relevant facts. In each case the most
convenient course for the Tribunal to take depended upon the facts. Taking
account the large number of claims and the relatively limited, indeed minor,
nature of many of them, in instances where two
or more allegations of breach
were factually inter-related, and relied upon the same factual findings, it was
not inappropriate for
the Tribunal to give reasons on both issues together, and
in summary form.
[128] Even if
the Tribunal misstated or conflated some of the notice requirements in its
analysis of Part 7,
tenants did not identify any particular decision of the Tribunal in relation to
an item of repair which was affected by legal
error as a result. A fair reading
of the part of the Tribunal reasons in which it determines each of the table of
repair items for
which compensation was
does not disclose that
the Tribunal failed to appreciate the differences between the nature of the
breaches alleged based on s 57(1),
s 48, or s 49. On the contrary, the Tribunal
appears to have approached each of the alleged breaches separately and on/to
For example, when assessing the claim for the loose latch on the laundry
door at Lot 22, a claim for compensation for breach of s
49 of the RTA, the
Tribunal expressly acknowledged and accepted the tenants’ argument that s
49 did not include a statutory
requirement for
The Tribunal went on
to state that notification could be a relevant consideration in a decision as to
whether the landlord had taken
“reasonable steps” to maintain the
security device as required by s 49(1) which was a relevant consideration. There
no error of law apparent in that
[129] Leave to
appeal is granted, and the ground of appeal is dismissed.
5A: The Tribunal failed to apply a correct understanding of s 57(2)(b) of the
RTA by not applying the proper meaning to the
phrase ‘reasonable
diligence’ in respect of the delays by the landlord in repairing
proposed ground of appeal is framed at a very high level of generality. The
question whether the landlord acted with reasonable
diligence within the meaning
of s 57(2)(b) is a question of fact. The answer will depend on the
circumstances.
[131] The one
decision which is said to be affected relates to 2019 table of repairs Lot 67
item (g). This concerned a broken door
handle and lock on bedroom 4. The
Tribunal explained why it did not accept the evidence of Mr
as to the date of
notification of the problem and found that notification of the need for repairs
was given on 25 October 2019. The
Tribunal also found that repairs were
made by no later than 3 December 2019. The Tribunal held, based on those
findings, that there
was no failure to act with reasonable diligence on the part
of the landlord.
tenants complain that the Tribunal must have misunderstood what reasonable
diligence was because the landlord’s evidence
was that (a) according to
the author of the 2017 manual the landlord would expect a repair of that type to
be effected within 10
days; (b) the landlord sent housing maintenance officers
to Laramba every week; and (c) the housing maintenance officers were capable
remedying such an issue. The tenants say that in those circumstances the
landlord cannot have acted with reasonable diligence.
The tenants further argue
that the Tribunal did not give adequate reasons because it failed to demonstrate
that it had considered
what reasonable diligence was in the context of the
evidence set out above.
Tribunal’s findings about Lot 67, repair item (g), need to be read with
the Tribunal reasons under the heading “Reasonable
Diligence”.
part of the reasons the Tribunal explains why it did not accept that the time
frames set out in the landlord’s Maintenance
Procedures Manual were
determinative. The Tribunal said that the timeframes in the Manual would often
be unachievable and found that
the purpose of the Manual was to create a system
of prioritisation rather than a time-frame for completion of remedial
Tribunal also referred to the evidence of Ms Bell, an employee of the landlord,
accepting her evidence that the times given
in the Manual were not “hard
and fast” and that there were a lot of reasons why effecting repairs in a
remote community
such as Laramba could take longer. The Tribunal set out a list
of matters which might impact a particular matter.
Tribunal did not attempt to define “reasonable diligence”. There was
no need to do so. However, the phrase “reasonable
diligence” does
not mean that the landlord was required to do everything possible. The
landlord’s obligation was to take
all steps that a reasonably prudent
landlord would take in the circumstances.
[136] Whether
the landlord acted to repair any item with reasonable diligence was a question
of fact. The Tribunal’s assessment
of the evidence and application to the
provision clearly demonstrates that it understood the application of the law to
and the reasons given were adequate.
[137] Leave to
appeal is refused.
Ground 6: The Tribunal failed to apply
Residential
Tenancies Act
(NT) on every occasion on which it concluded that an
issue raised by an Appellant was not a breach of
[138] Despite
the broad wording of this ground of appeal, the tenants pointed to only two
decisions in which the Tribunal is said
to have failed to consider, where a
breach of the
habitability obligation was not made out, whether there
had been a breach of the landlord’s duty to repair under
[139] The first
decision concerns the claim made in relation to 2019 Table of Repairs Lot 67
item (q) relating to a leaking and missing
shower head in one of the two showers
in the bathroom. Mr Brown had given evidence that the tenants did not use the
other shower
in the bathroom because it was
The Tribunal found
that it was unable to make a finding as to when the shower head was damaged or
fell off because there was insufficient
evidence. However, the Tribunal did not
accept Mr Brown’s evidence that the issue arose in 2018 and that he had
given notice
of it then because the President found that Mr Brown was not a
reliable witness for the reasons given at [161] of the Tribunal decision.
Tribunal found that the landlord was notified of the need for repair on 25
October 2019, by the tenants’ lawyers, and the
repair was carried out on
or about 3 December 2019, a delay of around five weeks.
Tribunal went on to find that, even if the missing or damaged shower head made
the premises not habitable (which the Tribunal
did not expressly find) that
situation was caused by the tenants’ failure to notify the landlord of the
need for repair. Therefore,
the Tribunal held that there was no breach of the
landlord’s obligation to ensure the premises were habitable as a result of
the missing shower head.
[141] Having
made that determination, the sole question in relation to the claim of breach
pursuant to
was whether the landlord had acted with reasonable diligence
in effecting the repair. The Tribunal reasons do not expressly address
question. The landlord argued that it was implicit in the Tribunal’s
finding that the landlord was not in breach because
any lack of habitability was
caused by a lack of notice of the need for repair by the tenants, which was a
condition of the allegation
of breach of the term implied pursuant to
[142] A lack of
habitability may arise because a landlord fails to act with reasonable
diligence. If so, the circumstances will be
outside the bounds of the
qualification in
because the cause will not be the tenant’s
failure to notify, but the landlord’s lack of diligence in effecting the
The cause of the problem in this case was that the shower head was not
replaced after it had broken
Therefore, once the
Tribunal had found that there was no breach of
, because the failure
was caused by the tenants’ failure to notify the landlord of the need for
repair, it was implicit in that
finding that there was no notification as
required by
It is implicit that the Tribunal found that repair of
the shower head within five weeks was a repair carried out with reasonable
[143] The second
decision complained of, 2019 Repair Table Lot 67 item (r), involved a claim for
a blocked drain in the outside shower
area. The Tribunal found that the drain
was blocked due to an act of the tenant, namely a failure to clean the shower
area, and the
presence of items of rubbish. The Tribunal’s reasons refer
to the photograph of the shower at Exhibit Book 3, volume 1, page
5421, dated 9
The job card, of
which that photograph is part, says “shower blocked” and
“plunged to
headed “cause” the document reads “tenant
responsibility”. The Tribunal found that the most likely
cause of the fact
that the shower did not drain was the tenants’ act or omission, namely,
failure to clean and placing items
of rubbish in the area. Therefore, the
Tribunal held that the landlord was not in breach of the habitability obligation
because the
failure to have a working shower was caused by an act or omission of
the tenants.
Tribunal also stated that “The landlord’s obligation to ensure
habitability is subject to notification under
That statement
is not correct. A tenant’s failure to notify qualifies the obligation of
the landlord such that it is not a
breach of the habitability condition if the
breach was “caused by” the lack of notification. Lack of notice
not causative of the failure to ensure habitability is not relevant.
However, the statement by the Tribunal was, in context, a shorthand
reference in
the course of a long judgment in which the President had demonstrated a proper
understanding of the need for the causal
connection required by
s 48(2)(b).
The primary basis for rejection of the particular claim was that the failure to
ensure habitability was caused by an act of the tenants.
The secondary basis was
that if the premises were not habitable by reason of the blocked drain to the
outside shower, that situation
had arisen because the tenants did not notify the
landlord in order to get the blockage cleared. The Tribunal therefore found that
the continued state of blockage was caused by the lack of notice. That
circumstance should be seen in the context of the primary
finding that the cause
of the blockage was the act or omission of the tenants.
Tribunal did not make any express findings as to the date of the repair or
whether that involved a failure by the landlord
to act with reasonable diligence
to repair the shower. Reasonable diligence involves consideration of more than
time. For example,
the Tribunal may take into account the actions of the
parties, including whether there have been repeated relevant breaches by the
[146] Further,
when a breach is found and the Tribunal turns to consider whether any
compensation should be ordered pursuant to
, the Tribunal is expressly
required to take into account whether the claiming party has complied with their
obligations under the
tenancy agreement, in respect of which the claim is
The landlord argued
that there was no reasonable prospect of this claim succeeding because the
problem was caused by the failure
of the tenants to clean the shower and,
possibly, by misuse of that drain as the tenants had been found (Lot 67, item
(l)) to have
misused other drains causing them to block. However, that
consideration does not arise in this appeal, which is concerned only with
Tribunal’s findings as to breach.
[147] It is
necessarily implicit in the Tribunal’s findings as to the dates upon which
the housing maintenance officers attended,
by reference to the documents
referred to, and the finding of the date of notification that the Tribunal was
satisfied that the landlord
was not in breach of the requirements to act with
reasonable diligence to repair the shower. In considering that matter the
also referred to the tenants’ history of blocked drains elsewhere
in the house and the evidence about that. The Tribunal was
entitled to take that
circumstance into account. I am not satisfied that the Tribunal failed to
consider the claim pursuant to
[148] Leave to
appeal is granted, and the appeal is
Ground 7: The Tribunal failed to apply
of the RTA by:
an assessment of the notice given by the tenant by reference to when that notice
could have been given ‘as soon as practicable’
rather than ‘as
soon as reasonably practicable’;
determining that notice was not given ‘as soon as reasonably
practicable’ by ignoring or overlooking:
terms of the agreement it found were provided to a tenant, which misdirected the
tenant as to the persons to whom they could
give notice; and/or
undisputed evidence that there was no phone or internet reception at Laramba at
the relevant time; and
undisputed evidence that the tenants were not literate or had limited literacy;
the question of when the tenant became aware of the need for the repair or
maintenance.
ground of appeal raises two separate issues concerning the Tribunal decisions on
four 2019 repair table items for which
the tenants sought compensation for
breach of the landlord’s obligation to effect repairs and maintenance with
due diligence.
Each of the four claims was dismissed by the Tribunal. In each
case the Tribunal found that notice was not given as soon as reasonably
practicable as required by
of the RTA.
makes it a term of a tenancy agreement that a tenant must give notice to a
landlord of a requirement for repairs or maintenance as
soon as reasonably
practicable after becoming aware of the need for the same. Unless the landlord
requires the notice to be in writing,
the tenant may give notice orally.
Pursuant to
s 122(2)(b)
no claim for compensation for breach of a
landlord’s duty to repair may be made unless notice has been given in
[151] The first
impugned decision relates to Lot 22, issue
This was a claim for
compensation for failure to diligently repair a shuddering noise emanating from
the plumbing in the house. The
Tribunal found that the issue arose sometime in
2018, that the landlord was notified on 25 October 2019, and that the problem
repaired by 13 November 2019. The Tribunal noted that no noise was evident
in a recording made at the house on 9 December 2019 and
inferred that the
repair was effected before then. The Tribunal found that the need for repair was
not notified as soon as reasonably
practicable because the tenant could have
notified the landlord when plumbing works were undertaken in the bathroom in
2018 or, at
least, when inspections were carried out in August, September and
October of 2019.
[152] In coming
to this conclusion, the President found that it was “not easy” for
Mr Jack to report the need for repairs.
This was an acknowledgement of
Mr Jack’s particular circumstances. Mr Jack was a disabled and
illiterate man living alone,
for whom English was an additional language. His
English was poor, and he required an interpreter when giving evidence before the
Tribunal. The Tribunal’s finding that Mr Jack could have reported the
problem when the landlord or its representatives attended
the premises, as
opposed to other methods, such as direct to the landlord via telephone or
written communication, impliedly acknowledges
that written or oral communication
was unlikely to be reasonably practicable for Mr Jack. There was also evidence
before the Tribunal
that a housing maintenance officer attended at the Laramba
community every Tuesday and received notifications as to the need for
and maintenance from tenants on those
[153] The second
decision relates to Lot 22 repair item (d). The claim relates to a loose tap in
the kitchen of the house. The Tribunal
did not accept the “broad
assertion” of Mr Jack that he reported the issue in 2018 because his
evidence on the question
of notification was found to be generally unreliable,
as discussed above.
Tribunal found that the need for repair was recorded in an inspection report
made by the landlord on 11 September 2019 (indicating
that the landlord was on
notice from at least that date) and was also notified by the tenant’s
lawyers on 25 October 2019.
The tap was repaired on 31 October 2019. The
Tribunal found that, if the issue arose some time in 2018 (which was asserted by
tenant but was not accepted by the Tribunal given the findings as to the
unreliability of Mr Jack’s evidence), the repair was
not notified as soon
as reasonably practicable after the tenant became aware of the need. The
Tribunal also found that the landlord
acted with reasonable diligence to repair
the tap once notified.
[154] The third
decision was in relation to Lot 63 repair item
It concerns holes in the
exterior mesh of that house. The Tribunal found that the tenants agreed that the
damage happened in 2015,
that it was first notified to the landlord on
25 October 2019, and that repairs were completed on 14 December 2019.
Based on that
timeline, the Tribunal found that the tenants did not notify the
need for repairs as soon as reasonably practicable, and that the
landlord acted
with reasonable diligence to repair the mesh once it was notified.
[155] The fourth
decision was in relation to Lot 67 repair item (a) which related to an
adjustment to the front door, which did not
fit into its frame. The Tribunal
noted Mr Brown’s evidence that he told the landlord about this problem in
2018, but did not
accept his account. The Tribunal found that the landlord was
notified on 25 October 2019 and the door was repaired no later than
2019. On that basis the Tribunal found that the landlord did not fail to act
with reasonable diligence to carry out repairs
once notified.
[156] Each of
the decisions challenged involved findings of fact. The questions of law said to
arise are that the Tribunal failed
to apply the correct
and, in addition, failed
to afford the tenants natural justice by failing to take into account every
issue of significance.
tenants’ complaint at Ground 7(b) is that the Tribunal did not properly
assess whether notification was given “as
soon as reasonably
practicable” because there was a failure to take into account the
tenants’ lack of phone or internet
service, illiteracy (or limited
literacy), when the tenants became aware of the issue and that the tenancy
agreement misdirected
them about whom they could notify that repairs were
[157] The phrase
“as soon as reasonably practicable” is not defined in the RTA and
there is no guidance as to factors
to take into account. In
Minister for Justice
Full Court of the Federal Court said that there are three elements to the
composite expression. The first was that the word “practicable”
meant “capable of being carried into action; feasible”, something
which the Court said identifies a thing that is able
to be put into practice and
which can be effected or accomplished. The second element was the qualification
“reasonably”
which limits or qualifies what would otherwise be an
absolute obligation, introducing an assessment or judgement of a period which
appropriate or suitable to the purpose of the legislative scheme. Finally, the
words “as soon as” import a temporal
element, directing attention to
taking action without delay once it is reasonably practicable to do
[158] As to
ground 7(a), the tenants’ first argument was that the Tribunal’s
misunderstanding of the phrase “as
soon as reasonably practicable”
was apparent from the reasoning of the Tribunal in relation to a different
question, namely
whether the terms of the written tenancy agreement for
Lot 67 and the term implied pursuant to
were “to the
same effect”.
of the Tribunal’s
show that the
President accepted, at [75] of the reasons, that “practicable” and
“possible” are not the same.
He then went on to find that the
qualification of “reasonable” in each phrase meant that the phrases
“reasonably
possible” in clause 7.1(a)(iii) and “reasonably
practicable” in
of the RTA were to the same effect in the
context he was considering.
That issue is discussed below in relation to cross appeal ground 3.
[159] The focus
of the President’s reasoning in the passage referred to was whether the
two terms were “to the same effect”.
That does not mean that, when
the President came to consider the question of whether the tenants had given
notice of the need for
repairs as required by
that he did not apply the
correct legal test. An examination of the reasons (discussed below), shows that
the Tribunal understood
and applied the test correctly, irrespective of whether
his conclusion as to whether the term of the Lot 67 tenancy agreement was
“to the same effect” as the term implied by
[160] In the
reasons, the Tribunal correctly identified the
test as “as
soon as reasonably practicable” in its discussion of the scheme of the RTA
at [43] of the reasons, and at
consideration of 2019 Table of Repairs
Lot 22, items (a) and (d) and Lot 63 item (d). It was not necessary for the
Tribunal to repeat
the test every time it was referred to. In my view, read in
context, the Tribunal had firmly in mind the correct test when applying
Insofar as the discussion of the different wording of the Lot 67 tenancy
agreement and
is relevant to this issue at all, in my view the
Tribunal compared the wording of the Lot 67 tenancy agreement against the
standard, not the other way around.
[161] Counsel
for the tenants also argued that the Tribunal left out the word
“reasonably” when considering
at a few points in the reasons
and that that was demonstrative of error. I identified that this occurred in the
reasons at paragraph
[68] and in the decision in relation to Lot 63 item (d). On
every other occasion when applying the test in
the Tribunal used the
phrase “reasonably practicable”. The two occasions upon which the
President did not use the more
compendious phrase were obviously a slip (or
shorthand) when read in the context of the reasons as a whole and do not
demonstrate
that a wrong legal test was applied.
[162] It was
further argued that the Tribunal misconstrued the word “practicable”
by stating that notice was to be given
“with reasonable haste” and
therefore replacing the word “practicable” with “haste”.
in my view a rather tortured misreading of the Tribunal reasons. What
the Tribunal said, in one place at [78] of the reasons, was
requirement is that notice be given with reasonable haste. The key requirement
is reasonableness.” That comment
was in the context of the discussion
, discussed above. It was not a finding about the test to be applied
pursuant to
and how it operated. Second, the discussion was clearly
a reference to the temporal aspect of the compound expression, as noted in
While there may be some infelicity of expression, this passage
of the reasons, about a different issue and where the Tribunal was
grappling with the meaning of the phrase as a whole, does not provide a basis to
infer that the Tribunal misunderstood the
import of the term implied by
relation to ground 7(b) the tenants argue that the Tribunal failed to undertake
the “fact intensive” assessment
required because the matters set out
were not considered. There was also a submission that the tenants were denied
natural justice
for the same reason.
[164] I do not
accept either submission, for a number of reasons. First, the suggestion that
the Tribunal should have taken into account
that the tenants of Lot 67 were
misled by the definition of “landlord” in the tenancy
in circumstances
where their evidence was that they did not receive, read, or understand it is
untenable. It was irrelevant because,
on the facts the tenants did not consider
the agreement, whether they received a copy or not. Second, as discussed above,
the Tribunal
did take into account the limited telephone or internet reception
at Laramba in making findings that it would not be easy for Mr
Jack to contact
the landlord and that there were housing maintenance officers in the community
on a weekly basis. Third, the Tribunal
was well aware that the tenants were not
literate or had limited literacy, including because some of them gave evidence
interpreter, and the Tribunal explicitly referred to this evidence in
relation to the lease documentation and preparation of the
declarations.
described above, the Tribunal did make findings about when the tenants became
aware of the need for maintenance, based
upon all of the evidence, including
consideration of the tenants’ own evidence in each case, which was that
they became aware
of the various problems at particular times. There does not
appear to have been any dispute at the hearing about the fact that the
were living in the premises and aware of the problems as they arose. To the
extent that Mr Jack was away for medical treatment
at any time, the tenants
did not point to any decision relating to a particular repair item which could
have been affected by that
circumstance. Finally, there was direct evidence from
Mr Brown and Ms Pepperill that they had contacted the landlord in relation
to repairs on a 1800
[165] As to the
tenants’ argument that the tenancy agreement at Lot 67 directed the
tenants to give notice to the wrong group
of people, I do not accept that
submission. The tenants’ evidence was that they did not ever receive or
read the document.
In those circumstances it is impossible to see how the
wording of the tenancy agreement, irrespective of its legal import, could
affected the determination of the question of whether the tenants gave notice as
soon as reasonably practicable.
[166] Whether a
tenant has notified the landlord in relation to each repair item “as soon
as reasonably practicable” is
a question of fact in each case. The
possibility of another finding, where reasonable minds might differ as a matter
of degree, does
not change that. Further, a wrong finding of fact is not
sufficient to demonstrate an error of law.
[167] Neither of
the proposed grounds identifies a question of law and there is no arguable basis
for a denial of natural justice.
Leave to appeal on this ground is
Ground 8: The Tribunal:
to apply a correct understanding of
of the RTA; or
terms of the tenancy agreement which were not operative at law by interpreting
‘not... an unreasonably dirty condition’
to mean the same as
‘reasonably clean condition’.
proposed ground of appeal is stated very broadly, however it was said to only
affect a relatively small number of the Tribunal
decisions. They were those
referrable to 2019 Table of Repairs, Lot 22 item (f); Lot 63 item (k);
and Lot 67 items (k), and (m).
The tenants’ complaint is that the Tribunal
failed to apply the law as set out in
of the RTA, and in the tenancy
agreement, in finding in respect of each item that the relevant tenants were in
breach of the tenancy
agreement because the premises were in an unreasonably
dirty condition.
[169] The first
thing to note, as explained above in the discussion of ground 4, is that it was
not necessary for the Tribunal to
find that the premises were kept in an
unreasonably dirty condition in order to also find that the landlord was not in
its obligations under the RTA in any of these claims. The relevant
question in each decision was not whether the tenants were in
breach of their
obligation in
, but whether the landlord was in breach of its
obligation to ensure that the premises were habitable, as required by
However, as
discussed above, the acts and omissions of the tenants are relevant to that
enquiry on the facts of this case.
[170] Lot 22
repair item (f) related to a cockroach infestation in the kitchen of that
residence. The tenant claimed that there was
a breach of the term implied by
of the RTA by the landlord as a result of that circumstance. The
Tribunal found that the presence of the cockroaches, which appears
to have been
accepted by the Tribunal as at least a potential habitability issue, was caused
by an act or omission of the tenant.
The Tribunal referred to
went on to say:
In my view the tenant at Lot 22 maintained the
premises in an unreasonably dirty condition which was at least a significant
contributing
factor to the cockroach infestation. The landlord’s failure
to ensure that the premises were pest free was substantially caused
tenant’s failure to maintain the premises
appropriately.
[171] In coming
to that conclusion, the Tribunal made findings of fact about the condition of
the kitchen, the notifications made
and their dates, and the actions taken by
the landlord by way of pest
The question of
causation of the cockroach infestation for the purpose of
was a question
of fact. It was independent of any finding that the premises were in an
“unreasonably dirty condition”
for the purposes of a breach of
by the tenant, but not inconsistent with such a finding.
Tribunal’s finding that the tenant was in breach of
have been relied upon as part of the context of the consideration of the alleged
breach by the landlord of
s 48(1)(a).
It was not, on a proper reading of the
Tribunal reasons, a finding by the Tribunal that the landlord was not in breach
because the
tenant was in breach of another obligation under the tenancy
agreement. So much is apparent from the Tribunal’s reference to
longstanding problems with cockroach infestations as manifest in the inspection
reports referred to in the Tribunal reasons,
and the direction given by the
landlord to the tenant on 26 November 2019 to rectify the
The discussion by
the Tribunal of the tenant’s obligations need to be seen in that light. In
other words, the action taken
by the landlord was taken because of the actions
of the tenant, which happened to be in breach of his obligations pursuant to
, and was relevant to the question of whether the cockroach
infestation was caused by the tenant. However, it was not necessary for
Tribunal to find a breach of
to find that the cockroach infestation
was caused by the failure of the tenant to remove food scraps and other rubbish
from the kitchen.
[173] Lot 63
repair item (k) concerned the lack of a stove in that house, and the presence of
mice and cockroaches. The landlord was
alleged to be in breach of
s 48(1)(a).
The Tribunal accepted that the lack of a stove in a house would mean it was not
habitable. Findings of fact were made that the landlord
had installed three
stoves in this house over a period of seven years. Further findings were made as
to notifications of the need
for repair made by the tenants, and inspections and
repairs conducted by the landlord. The Tribunal found that the lack of a stove
in the premises was caused by an act or omission of the tenants, which was found
to be the tenants’ failure to maintain the
appliances supplied, and in
particular to keep them clean. This was a finding of fact. The Tribunal found
that the landlord acted
reasonably and made a “genuine attempt” to
ensure habitability by replacing the stoves on three occasions. There is no
reference to a breach of
in this part of the Tribunal
[174] Lot 67,
repair item (k), concerned an allegation that the grill section of the oven was
not working. It was an alleged breach
of the landlord’s duty to maintain
the premises in a habitable condition. The Tribunal made findings of fact about
appliance was working and notifications made and the dates of various
repairs/replacements effected in the period May 2015 to April
2020. The Tribunal
found that the issues arising with the stove in Lot 67 were not a result of
reasonable wear and tear but were
due to the failure of the tenants to keep the
appliance clean and not to damage it. These were findings of fact. The Tribunal
found that the stove had at some point after 20 June 2017, but before
August 2019, been moved outside. The Tribunal found that these
combined acts of
the tenants caused the failure to provide a stove, and the resulting lack of
habitability, and therefore the landlord
was not in breach of
There was no
in the Tribunal decision in relation to this item.
Tribunal then went on to consider whether the landlord was in breach of the
obligation to repair implied by
, on the basis that the Tribunal had the
view that, even though the damage was caused by the tenants, once the landlord
was notified
it was under an obligation to effect a repair. For one of the
relevant periods, 26 April 2017 to 22 June 2017, the Tribunal found
landlord had not acted with reasonable diligence to repair the stove once
notified it was inoperative and therefore was
in breach of the duty to repair
diligently for that period.
[176] Once the
factual finding was made that the cause of the lack of an oven or stove was the
act(s) or omission(s) of the tenants,
the landlord was not in breach of the RTA
for so long as that cause remained operative. Because
is subject to
, including
, there could be no claim for failure to repair
with reasonable diligence during a period when the acts or omissions of the
were the cause of the problem. From a policy perspective, and noting
that these things are always a matter of fact and degree, it
would be unfair if
a landlord who is not in breach of the habitability requirement, because damage
was caused by an act or omission
of the tenant, is subject to the obligation in
while the tenant’s act or omission is the cause of that
circumstance.
The question of
whether the cause was the tenants’ acts or omissions at any point in time
is one of fact.
[177] Lot 63,
repair item (m) concerned a fly infestation in the kitchen sink, said to be due
to a breach of the landlord’s
obligation to maintain the premises in a
habitable condition. The Tribunal found that the evidence
that the oven and
kitchen were very dirty and that fat and food scraps were routinely washed down
the sink causing blockage of the
drains. The Tribunal therefore found as a fact
that the fly infestation was caused, or substantially caused, by the actions of
tenants in not keeping the kitchen clean. Therefore, the Tribunal found that
the fly infestation was caused by an act or omission
of the tenants and the
landlord was not in breach of
s 48(1)(a).
Tribunal also found in relation to this item, that the tenants were in breach of
in that the premises were kept in an unreasonably dirty condition. That
was a contextual finding, as discussed above in relation
to Lot 22 item
(f). It was not a finding which was required in order for the Tribunal to find
that an act or omission of the tenants
caused the fly infestation, nor does it
indicate that the Tribunal applied the wrong test in reaching that
conclusion.
tenants also argued that the Tribunal misunderstood the terms of
by equating the phrase “not... unreasonably dirty condition” with
“reasonably clean condition”. There is
no doubt that
“unreasonably dirty condition” involves a different standard than
“reasonably clean condition”.
In the discussion of 2019 Table of
Repairs Lot 67 item (k) the Tribunal said: “Any falling short of the
standard of habitability
has arisen due to the failure of the tenants to
maintain the premises in a reasonably clean condition and not to permit damage
the premises”. That comment was in the context of a finding that the
problem with the oven grill was caused by an act or omission
of the tenants for
the purposes of
s 48(2)(a).
It was not a finding of breach pursuant to
, which was not a matter the Tribunal was required to decide. Nor
was a finding that the premises, or the oven and grill, was in an
“unreasonably dirty condition” a necessary standard for the finding
the Tribunal made as to the cause of the problems
with the oven/grill.
findings as to causation of the various “habitability” items are
findings of fact. The Tribunal did not impermissibly
or a misunderstanding of the terms of that provision or of the tenancy
agreement, in determining the relevant issue.
[181] Leave to
appeal on this ground is granted and the appeal is
Ground 9: The Tribunal failed to apply a correct
understanding of
of the RTA:
adding to the text of
notice requirement of the kind found in
and not found in the text of
‘reasonable steps’ defence for a landlord of the kind found in
and not found in the text of
reasonableness qualification to any health or safety issue, including any risk
of injury, which might otherwise breach
misinterpreting or reading down the word ‘ensure’ to be qualified in
ways unexpressed and unintended by Parliament.
the Court of
Appeal said:
The relevant test of liability, apart from matters of
health and safety, is ‘comfort’, subject to Lord Atkin’s
qualification
that a reasonable view of that criterion must be taken. Questions
of fitness for habitation are to be judged against a standard of
reasonableness
having regard to the age, character and locality of the residential premises and
to the effect of the defect on the
state or condition of the premises as a
did not consider the question of whether a standard of
reasonableness also applied in the case of a health and safety limb of the
habitability requirement in
s 48(1)(a).
(Housing) v Pepperill
Court of Appeal found that the obligation upon a landlord to ensure that
residential tenancy premises are habitable is not an
obligation of strict or
absolute liability. The Court said:
Whether or not the landlord has
breached the implied term in
turns on whether the uninhabitable
condition of the premises (assuming that be established) was a consequence of
the landlord’s
failure to take reasonable steps to ensure that the
premises or ancillary property were habitable. That consideration involves
as to the nature and degree of the risk to or impacts upon the health,
safety and/or reasonable comfort of the tenants, the measures
available to the
landlord to alleviate the risks or impacts, the capacity and power of the
landlord to control or address those risks
or impacts and the nature and extent
of any expertise or special skill
tenants argued in this appeal that the Tribunal erred in law in that it applied
as if it: (a) included the same qualification as to notice as
of the RTA; (b) adopted an interpretation of
impermissibly imported a “reasonable steps” requirement as in
; (c) impermissibly introduced a “reasonableness
qualifier” to the “risk of injury to health” element of the
habitability requirement in
; and (d) impermissibly qualified the
word “ensure” in that section.
tenants’ submissions in relation to this ground identified three decisions
of the Tribunal which are said to be infected
by these errors, namely
2019 Table of Repairs Lot 67, items (h) and (l) and 2022 Table of Repairs
Lot 63, item (b).
case, the Tribunal dismissed the claim on the basis that the landlord was not in
breach of the obligation to ensure the premises
were habitable, having regard to
the reasonable actions of the
[186] Grounds
9(a)(ii) and (iii) and (b) cannot succeed as they are premised upon an argument
which is inconsistent with the reasoning
of the Court of Appeal in
(Housing) v Pepperill
. The Tribunal did not have the benefit of that
decision, however the approach adopted at [42], [116], and the analysis at [165]
[166] of the Tribunal reasons, does not indicate that the Tribunal was
in error as to the law by applying a standard of reasonableness
to questions of
health and safety, as well as reasonable comfort, for the purposes of
s 48(1)(a).
tenants submitted
(Housing) v Pepperill
, particularly related to the meaning of
“ensure”, and was at odds with authority of other intermediate
courts of appeal.
I do not accept that that submission is correct, and in any
event this Court is bound by the decision of the Court of Appeal.
leaves the question of whether the Tribunal misconstrued
by importing
a requirement for notice of the type required by
I agree with
the tenants’ submission that the focus of
is the question
of whether the landlord’s failure to comply is caused by either an act or
omission of the tenants, or the tenants’
failure to notify the landlord of
repairs required to the premises. The notice requirement in
different way because the provision of notice in that case is an essential
element of the establishment of a breach by
a landlord. Plainly, the landlord
cannot be required to carry out repairs or maintenance if they are unaware of
[189] The notice
referred to in
is of a different character. It conditions the
obligation of the landlord to ensure that premises are habitable. The question
not whether notice is given, as with
, but whether the tenants’
failure to give notice has caused the lack of habitability. As I attempted to
show in the example
a habitability issue
can be caused by a tenant’s failure to notify of the need for repairs or
maintenance. The comments in
the Tribunal reasons at [52], were directed only to
that situation and should be understood accordingly. To the extent that the
reasons might be interpreted as stating a broader proposition that
there could never be a breach by the landlord of their obligation
premises are habitable where notice had not been given by a tenant, that would
not be correct. However, I do not interpret
the reasons in that way.
tenants argued that the provisions of
placed an evidentiary burden upon
the landlord to show that the failure to ensure habitability was caused by the
act or omission
or the failure to notify the tenants. I agree that that is the
case. A tenant in this context also includes those for whom the tenant
vicarious liability pursuant to
of the RTA, noting that
(3) are implied terms of the tenancy agreement.
[191] I turn to
consider the decisions impugned. Lot 67 item (h) concerned a ceiling fan which
did not work properly. It was found
to have malfunctioned on 25 October 2019 and
was repaired on 3 December 2019. The Tribunal did not find that this was a
the requirement to ensure habitability because the landlord acted
reasonably to repair the fan. That assessment necessarily involved
consideration
of the circumstances, including the time period involved. There does not appear
to have been any reliance upon failure
to notify given the Tribunal’s
findings as to causation and the date of the tenants’ claim and the date
of notification.
It is not entirely clear what the Tribunal’s reference to
a time before the notification refers to. To the extent that there
may have been
an error in relation to the time when the fan stopped working, it was a question
[192] Lot 67
item (l) alleged a failure of habitability due to blockages in the kitchen sink.
The Tribunal decision sets out the evidence
which it relied upon to make the
finding that the lack of function of the sink pipes was caused by the actions of
the tenants in
depositing, at various times, fat, paint, lint and foodstuffs in
the plumbing. These were all findings of fact as to causation due
to the acts of
the tenants. No issue of causation resulting from failure to give notice
pursuant to
[193] Table of
repairs 2022 Lot 63 item (b) concerned a dangerous power point. The Tribunal
found that it was reported on 5 March
2013 and repaired by an electrician the
same day. The Tribunal also found that a separate problem arose with a power
point on 28
April 2022 and was repaired on 7 May 2022. The Tribunal found that
there was no evidence that the 2013 and 2022 problems were related.
No issue of
causation resulting from failure to give notice arose in relation to this claim.
I am not persuaded that the Tribunal
failed to apply a correct understanding of
of the RTA.
[194] Leave to
appeal on this ground is granted and the appeal is
Ground 10: The Tribunal failed to apply a correct
understanding of
of the RTA or was legally unreasonable by failing to
consider and determine:
an accumulation of repairs that it found existed (following notice and without
tenant intervention) during certain periods,
taken together, made the premises
not habitable.
the absence of a shower curtain in a four-bedroom home, where the only toilet
and laundry facilities were in the same room as
the shower deprived the tenants
of reasonable comfort, including by reason of either the lack of privacy to the
user of a shower
or the lack of access to all those facilities while a person
used the shower.
the absence of a complete lid on an in-ground septic tank gave rise to a risk of
injury or a risk of injury to health.
that an absence of a working stove for 6 weeks did not make the premises not
[195] Although
grouped together, this ground of appeal has four separate bases. Ground 10(a)
concerns the Tribunal decision that the
combination of repair issues did not at
any time mean that the landlord was in breach of its obligation to ensure that
each of the
premises were habitable. The tenants’ argue that in making
that finding that the Tribunal did not apply the law correctly and/or
decision which was legally unreasonable because it did not consider the
accumulation of defects in each house at all relevant
times and determine
whether, overall, each of the houses was habitable at those times.
[196] As the
Tribunal correctly stated, an accumulation of defects can render premises
uninhabitable.
The sorts of
matters which are to be considered under the heading of an accumulation of
defects can include those which, while relatively
minor repair or maintenance
issues in themselves, when combined mean that the premises are not fit for
habitation. The Tribunal addressed
this issue directly at [168] – [174] of
the reasons. That part of the reasons was clearly intended to be read with
to the detailed discussion of each of the repair items for which
breach by the landlord (and therefore compensation) is claimed in
Repair Table, which immediately precedes it, and also discussion of the 2022
repair items which followed.
tenants’ complaint that the Tribunal failed to engage with the
accumulation issue has little force when the reasons
are read as a whole. The
reason for that is that very few of the repair items were found by the Tribunal
to involve breaches of the
landlord’s obligations under the tenancy
agreement in a way which would allow them to be taken into account in an overall
assessment.
A landlord who is not in breach of the obligation to ensure
habitability of premises because the problem is caused by the act or
omission of
the tenant, will not be in breach because the tenant has also caused other
landlord was not found to be in breach in relation to any of the items related
to Lot 22. In relation to Lot 63, seven breaches
were found. They were: absence
of a cover on the inspection hole of the septic tank (in the
a leaking pipe at the
side of the house where a tap was
handle in bedroom 1,
doorknob in bedroom 2,
doorknob in bedroom 3,
lid missing bathroom 1,
damaged window in the living
The missing toilet lid
and damaged window in the living room were found by the Tribunal to have been
notified to the landlord on
25 October 2017. The toilet lid was replaced on
6 November 2019 and the window was repaired in December 2019. The broken or
door handles on the bedrooms were found to have been notified on 21
February 2019 and to have been repaired on 6 November 2019. The
Tribunal found
that the leaking pipe was notified to the landlord on 21 February 2019 and
repaired on 18 June 2019. The missing inspection
hole lid on the septic tank was
found by the Tribunal to have existed from 16 October 2018 until
20 July 2020. Therefore, all of
the repair items were outstanding for the
period 21 February 2019 to 18 June 2019, when the leaking pipe outside was
fixed, and the
remainder until 6 November 2019 when the toilet lid and door
handles were repaired, followed by the window in December that year.
[199] In oral
submissions, counsel for the tenants described the decision that the premises at
Lot 63 were not uninhabitable as “astounding”
because the air was
permeated with the smell of sewage and because a small child could fall through
the hole in the septic tank.
However the actual findings of fact by the Tribunal were that the lack of the
lid was “unpleasant” but was remedied by
covering the hole with a
paint tin, which the tenants
Later in the reasons,
the Tribunal found that there was an unpleasant smell when the septic tank was
full, and that the uncovered
hole was a tripping
There was no evidence
that the hole was large enough for a child to fall
question of whether any of the houses were not habitable due to a combination of
defects was one of fact. There is nothing
in the Tribunal’s decision which
indicates that the Tribunal failed to understand the legal import of
“habitable”
s 48(1)(a).
Further, noting the above summary, and
taking into account the duration of each defect, the relatively minor nature of
the door handle
repairs, and that two of the issues were outside rather than
inside the house, the Tribunal’s decision that those defects in
combination did not render the house unfit for habitation was not legally
unreasonable.
relation to Lot 67, from the 2019 Repair Table the Tribunal found that the
landlord was in breach of the duty to repair with
reasonable diligence for the
period 26 April 2017 to 22 June 2017 because the grill section of the oven did
there was a missing
toilet cistern lid for the period 25 October 2017 to 6 November
and a faulty hot water
system in bathroom 1 for the period 4 October 2016 to June
In addition, from the
2022 Repair Table the Tribunal found that the landlord was in breach for failing
to repair cracked tiles near
the bathroom sink for the period 20 January
2019 to 3 December
[202] Therefore,
there were two relevant breaches from April to June 2017, namely the grill
section of the oven and the faulty hot
water system. They were not insignificant
defects. In relation to the hot water system the Tribunal found that there was
but it took two hours to heat up once the water in it was expended.
The Tribunal found that this was inconvenient, but did not make
the premises
unfit for habitation. The difficulty with the claim in relation to the
oven/grill was that the Tribunal found that it
was caused by an act or omission
of the tenants. As I have noted above, in my view while that cause was ongoing,
there was no breach
by the landlord. Therefore, the only defect for which the
landlord was responsible was in relation to the hot water. I am not prepared
find that the Tribunal’s decision was unreasonable in that respect in view
of the findings as to the attempts to repair
and the fact that the unit did have
some, albeit reduced, functionality.
[203] For the
period January 2019 until November 2019 there was a missing toilet cistern lid
and some cracked tiles in the bathroom.
These were both found by the Tribunal to
be minor defects. It is difficult to see how they could make premises unfit for
habitation,
even in combination. There is no legal unreasonableness in the
Tribunal’s decision in that respect.
tenants did not identify the collection of accumulated defects that they say the
Tribunal should have taken into account
in relation to each house, nor the time
periods involved in support of their argument that the Tribunal’s decision
issue was unreasonable. Simply relying upon all of the originally
alleged defects without any specification, in circumstances where
the Tribunal
has denied many of the claims on the basis that the problem was caused by an act
or omission of the tenants, is insufficient
in circumstances where the tenants
bear the onus of establishing the error.
[205] The second
complaint under this ground appears to relate only to Lots 63 and
although neither the
ground of appeal nor the tenants’ submissions made that clear. The same
issue was discussed, in the context
of a complaint by the tenants as to the
Tribunal’s reasons for the decision, in ground 3 above. The tenants argue
ground that a person could not use the shower without a shower screen
because their privacy, and therefore their reasonable comfort,
was compromised
if someone else wanted to use the toilet, or the laundry, at the same time.
[206] The first
answer is that the Tribunal’s finding was one of mixed fact and law and
the reasons do not indicate any failure
to understand the requirements of
s 48(1)(a).
Second, the
suggestion that the finding is unreasonable cannot be accepted. As a matter of
common sense, a person who is using the
shower is not going to be in the shower
all of the time. Even if a shower curtain or screen was provided, it would not
necessary privacy if a person wanted to, for example, use the toilet
at the same time. The tenants’ argument on this point
is itself entirely
unreasonable in my view because the posited solution, provision of a shower
screen or curtain, would not solve
the issue which relates to the design of the
bathroom/toilet/laundry of the house. Combination toilet/shower bathrooms are
Waiting in turn to use the facilities is an ordinary incident of living
in a house with other people. It does not make the house
uninhabitable.
[207] The third
complaint relates to the Tribunal’s finding that the absence of the lid on
the inspection hole of the septic
tank did not breach the landlord’s
obligation to ensure habitability. It relates only to Lot 63. As to whether the
was unreasonable, I am not of the view that it was, for the reasons set
out by the Tribunal including that the smell was not present
all of the time and
that it was ameliorated by the tenants’ use of the paint tin as a
makeshift cover. That decision was made
in the context that the Tribunal did
find a breach by the landlord of the duty to repair and maintain the premises
and awarded compensation
accordingly. That compensation was ordered from the
time when the Tribunal found that the lid was likely smashed by the
contractors. Therefore, even if the Tribunal could have found a
, instead of a breach of
, the result so far as
compensation was concerned could not have been different because of the facts.
The Tribunal found that the
landlord was in breach of the tenancy agreement from
the time that the cover was damaged. Since the damage was caused by the
contractor, no notification issue arose.
[208] The final
complaint relates to the failure to provide a stove with a working grill section
in Lot 67 for the period 26 April
to 22 June 2017. As stated above, a breach of
the tenancy agreement was found by the Tribunal and compensation was awarded. I
already said above that if the cause of the problem remained due to the
acts or omissions of the tenants (damage or misuse of the
appliance) then I am
not convinced that
had work to do here. However, if I am wrong about
that I am not convinced that the finding of a breach by the landlord of the
rather than
could lead to a different outcome
in terms of the date from which compensation under
would run in this case
because the date of the breach, on the facts, was the same.
[209] Leave to
appeal is granted, and each ground of appeal is dismissed.
11: The Tribunal failed to apply a correct understanding of
by failing to conclude that a person with mobility issues was:
the class of person in respect of whom habitability was to be assessed;
provided reasonable comfort, having regard to all the features of that
ground of appeal relates only to Lot 22.
It was developed in oral
submissions
and was put on
the basis that the question of whether a residence is habitable needs to take
into account the needs of the known
It was not in dispute
that Mr Jack had a below knee amputation of one leg and that he used a
prosthesis. Although the date of amputation
of Mr Jack’s leg was not
clear, the Tribunal was satisfied that it was more likely than not that it
occurred at some point
during the tenancy and before April
controversial that as the bathroom in Lot 22 had the shower head in place over
the bath and that the tenant was required
to get into and out of the bath when
having a shower, which was difficult for him to do due to his disability.
[211] It was
submitted on behalf of the tenant, that for any person with a mobility issue, it
was particularly important that there
not be water on the floor as they accessed
the shower. This is in the context of evidence that the bathroom was,
irrespective of
the shower curtain issue, totally unsuitable for Mr Jack after
his amputation. It was common ground that the bathroom was remodelled
landlord before the litigation commenced, but after notice had been given, to
accommodate the tenant’s specific mobility
The question for the
Tribunal was whether the landlord had failed to ensure that Lot 22 was
habitable within the meaning of
, from the time that
Mr Jack’s leg was amputated until the bathroom was remodelled.
Tribunal found that, prior to the final remodelling of the bathroom, an earlier
report from an occupational therapist in
April 2018 had resulted in installation
of a hand-held shower hose in May of that year to allow Mr Jack to shower.
The evidence was
that Mr Jack was utilising the hand-held shower while seated on
a chair over the drain in the bathroom, and was not accessing the
shower, as at May 2018.
Tribunal found as a fact that as at May 2018 the shower head in Lot 22 was a
hand-held flexible hose, but that there was insufficient
evidence to determine
its condition as at 31 October
A shower curtain would
not have assisted Mr Jack at all while he was using the flexible shower hose.
Nor would it have helped him
get into the bath.
argument developed by the tenant in this appeal was that the legal test to be
applied is that the house is fit for habitation
by all classes of people who
might reasonably be expected to occupy it, including people with mobility
issues. It was argued that
anyone with a mobility problem, not necessarily a
missing leg, would have issues launching themselves over the small wall to get
into the shower and therefore required a curtain or screen to prevent water
getting onto the floor.
have already pointed out that the real problem was not due to the lack of a
screen or curtain. The evidence showed the real problem
for Mr Jack was getting
into the bath at all.
[214] However,
the tenant did not argue that the design of the bathroom made the premises
uninhabitable overall, just that the water
on the floor as a result of the lack
of a shower screen or curtain made the area unsafe for any person with mobility
issues. In other
words, the alleged legal error of the Tribunal was a failure to
assess whether there was a breach of the landlord’s obligation
a residence which was habitable, by reference to the fact that persons with
mobility restrictions could reasonably be
expected to occupy the house, because
the landlord did not provide a shower screen or curtain to minimise the risk of
slippage on
a wet floor. There does not appear to have been any evidence as to
the needs of a person with mobility issues (which would presumably
depending upon their individual circumstances) or whether a shower screen or
curtain, respectively, would have been more or
less likely to assist.
[215] The test
for reasonable comfort was considered by the Court of Appeal in
CEO (Housing)
In that case the
Court of Appeal considered the jurisprudence concerning habitability of
residential premises and referred to cases
in which courts had held that the
question of whether a house is habitable, is one of fact, and is to be
determined by reference
to the standards of the ordinary reasonable person of
the class of persons likely to occupy it. That is an objective standard, but
circumstances can be relevant. For instance, if a landlord is providing
accommodation specifically for the use of persons with limited
mobility that
would define the class of persons expected to occupy the residence.
[216] It is not
apparent to me on a fair reading of the Tribunal’s reasons that the member
failed to apply the correct test.
The Tribunal referred to the Court of
Appeal’s decision in
CEO (Housing) v Young
and said, at [118], that
the absence of a shower screen or curtain “...may render a particular
premises unsuited to a particular
resident but it does not make it objectively
uninhabitable.”. The Tribunal clearly considered the class of persons
to occupy the premises and was aware of Mr Jack’s particular
disability.
subjective assessment of habitability urged by the tenant does not represent the
proper test for the purposes of
s 48(1)(a).
The references in the various cases
refer to a broad “class” of persons who are foreseeable occupants
but does not descend
to the level of particularity urged by the tenant. The
argument under this ground is no more than a specific example of the more
general argument, advanced elsewhere on behalf of the tenants, that failure to
provide a shower screen or curtain renders the premises
uninhabitable. The fact
that the landlord made modifications to the bathroom to accommodate the
tenant’s disability does not
change that analysis.
[218] The tenant
also advanced an argument that the landlord was in breach because the fact that
a person with “mobility issues”
could not use the bathroom, was not
in keeping with international obligations dealing with the right to housing for
people with disabilities,
including as enacted in Territory
legislation.
However, as the
landlord pointed out, the interpretation urged by the tenants would impose a
more onerous burden than that arising
Discrimination Act 1992
(Cth) which requires only that a landlord must in
some circumstances permit a tenant to make reasonable modifications to a
at their own expense, and upon the proviso that the tenant must
restore the premises to their original condition at the conclusion
tenancy. The same obligation exists in
Anti-Discrimination
tenant’s argument is, leaving aside the general issue as to the lack of
shower screens/curtains, that the house became
not habitable for Mr Jack
after his circumstances changed due to his disability. That argument is founded
upon a view of strict or
absolute liability as to
imposed upon the
landlord which was rejected by the Court of Appeal in
CEO (Housing) v
Further, as pointed out by the Court of Appeal in that case, even if
premises are found to be not habitable, that does not necessarily
there has been a breach of the implied term at
by the landlord.
In order to establish a breach the tenant must show that the uninhabitable
condition of the premises, if that is
established, is a consequence of the
landlord’s failure to take reasonable steps to ensure that the premises or
ancillary property
were habitable in all the circumstances of the
In this case the
landlord appears to have taken steps, upon receipt of professional advice from
an occupational therapist in 2018
and in 2020, to make modifications to suit Mr
Jack’s needs. Those modifications were not as a consequence of the
obligations under the tenancy agreement. There was no evidence,
or submission made in this Court, which pointed to the relevance
of a shower
screen or curtain as part of those modifications.
decision complained of is one of fact. No question of law arises. Leave to
appeal is refused.
Ground 12: The Tribunal failed to apply a
correct understanding of
of the RTA by adding to the text of
requirement of the kind found in
[221] In this
ground of appeal the tenants complain that the Tribunal “repeatedly”
found that there could be no breach
of the RTA unless notice had been
given by the tenant to the landlord of the failure or removal of a security
device. Two decisions
were complained of. They relate to the loose latch on the
laundry door of Lot 22,
the lack of security in the windows of the bedrooms of Lot 67 following tenant
installation of the air-conditioners in those
of the RTA concerns the obligation of the landlord to provide premises which are
secure. There are a number of obligations implied
by virtue of that section,
which requires the landlord to take reasonable steps to
provide and maintain locks and other security devices necessary to ensure
the premises are reasonably secure. As Blokland J said in
establishment of a
does not depend upon the landlord receiving notice from the
tenant, unlike
The Tribunal acknowledged that this was the
[223] Had the
Tribunal found that notice to the landlord was required before a breach of any
of the landlord’s obligations in
could be established, that would
have been an error of law. However, a fair reading of the Tribunal reasons shows
that that was not
the case. The decision in relation to the laundry door of Lot
22 item (l) makes it clear that the Tribunal was considering the question
whether the landlord took reasonable steps to comply with its obligation. The
question of notice was a factual matter relevant
to the question of whether the
landlord acted reasonably. It was not relied upon by the Tribunal as either a
requirement of
conditioning liability, or as a defence.
Tribunal’s discussion of the question of whether the landlord was aware of
the problem with the windows at Lot 67
after installation of the
air-conditioners (items (c), (e) and (f)), similarly occurred in the context of
consideration of whether
the landlord had acted reasonably as required by
There appears to have been no dispute on the evidence that the
windows became insecure after the tenants removed windows and inexpertly
installed room air conditioning units in the spaces. The Tribunal referred to
various breaches of the tenancy agreement by the tenants,
as it was entitled to
do as, on the evidence, the tenants’ conduct was a relevant
consideration.
Tribunal refers in this part of the reasons to notification required by
s 52(1)(b).
That section does not involve any issue of notification. The
is to imply into a tenancy agreement a term that the tenant
may alter or add a lock or security device, which would include a window,
without the permission of the landlord, providing that the tenant has a
reasonable excuse for doing so. That was a relevant consideration
there was no dispute that the air conditioners were installed by the tenants
without the landlord’s permission.
However, in that context the reference
is most likely to have been a typographical error, the correct
reference being
s 51(1)(b).
That section does impose an obligation upon the
tenant to notify the landlord of damage to the premises, other than negligible
[226] There was
also a reference to
In context, that reference was not a reliance by
the Tribunal upon a tenant’s failure to notify as a condition of
establishment
of a breach, or a defence to a claim for breach of
simply an acknowledgement that the state of the landlord’s knowledge,
including any notification by the tenants pursuant
to the tenancy agreement, or
lack thereof, was relevant to the question of the reasonableness of the
landlord’s actions.
[227] I do not
find that the Tribunal applied an incorrect understanding of the implied term of
the tenancy agreement in
in assessing the tenants’ claims. Leave
to appeal is granted, and the appeal is dismissed.
Ground 13: The
Tribunal failed to apply
of the RTA after it concluded that a missing
window raised by an Appellant was not a breach of
ground of appeal was referable, in the tenants’ written submissions on
this appeal, to 2019 Repair Table Lot 63 item
The claim concerns a
missing window in bedroom 3 of that residence. The Tribunal found that the
window was damaged because the tenants
removed the window and installed an air
conditioner in the space. This was done without the consent of the landlord. The
claimed by the tenants as a breach by the landlord of the habitability
(s 48(1)(a))
in the 2019 table of repairs. The Tribunal found
that there was no breach because the damage to the window, at various stages
the period 25 October 2017 to 14 December 2019 (when the window was
replaced), was caused by the tenants.
tenants’ complaint is that the Tribunal considered that issue only as a
habitability breach
(s 48(1)(a))
and not as a security breach pursuant to
The 2019 table of repairs attached to the tenants’ closing
submissions to the Tribunal did not refer to
in relation to this item.
However, the tenants argue in this appeal that the wording of issue
meant that every item
marked in the table of repairs as either relating to
required to be analysed by the Tribunal by reference to whether there had been a
breach by the landlord of either of those sections.
That submission must be
rejected. Very simply, the vast majority of habitability claims raised no issue
of security. That plain fact
is borne out by the tenants’ approach at
landlord argued that, notwithstanding issue 12, the tenants did not make a claim
for breach of
in relation to the 2019 table of repairs Lot 63, 2019 item
(j). The landlord further argues that to claim that breach now is contrary
how the tenants ran their case at trial.
[231] A review
of the tenants’ closing submissions to the Tribunal shows that the
tenants’ approach of first focusing
upon whether the landlord was in
breach of a term implied by
, before considering a breach of a term
was predicated upon the tenants’ view that
compensation for a breach of
could only flow from the date of
notification of the need for repair, whereas compensation for a breach of
constrained.
The tenants
argued in their closing submissions to the Tribunal, that “If an issue is
a security or habitability issue, the
compensation period starts from the day
the issue arose”.
[232] As the
High Court made clear in
Young v CEO (Housing)
compensation pursuant to
of the RTA is not confined by common law
principles.
It is a matter of
statutory interpretation having regard to the nature and purpose of the
obligation with which there has been a
failure to comply, and the considerations
and exclusions set out in
of the RTA. It is very difficult to
envisage a situation where a landlord would be obliged to pay compensation from
a date earlier
than that on which they were found to be in breach of the tenancy
agreement, despite the date on which the “issue” (assuming
means the damage or need for repair) occurred. Because
a range of considerations, where damage is caused by the tenant (or those for
whom they are vicariously
it is quite possible
that a security device could be broken, or premises not habitable, for a period
after damage occurs but during
which the landlord is not in breach of the
tenancy agreement.
[233] Where a
failure to ensure habitability is caused by the tenant’s failure to notify
of required repairs (so as to come
s 48(2)(b))
facts relevant to
notification will obviously be crucial. Whether the landlord is in breach of the
tenancy agreement will depend
upon whether they act reasonably to ensure
habitability. Once the landlord is aware of a habitability issue the
tenants’ failure
to notify may no longer be the cause. The date of any
breach will obviously postdate the damage in that scenario, possibly by a
considerable
margin. Similarly, where a tenant, without the landlord’s
knowledge, damages a security device (assuming the landlord has otherwise
reasonable steps to maintain security), the date of a breach (if any) will be
the date upon which the landlord failed to take
reasonable steps to provide and
maintain the locks and/or security device, not the date of the tenant inflicted
damage. Whether the
landlord acted reasonably in either scenario will depend on
all of the circumstances. The state of the landlord’s knowledge
to be one relevant factor. That is not to say that it conditions a breach.
dispute is another example of the less than ideal approach taken to the
procedural management of this proceeding. The layering
of the list of issues
upon the alleged breaches set out by reference to their facts in the repair
tables made the proceedings more
complicated than needed to be the case.
relevant part of issue 12 reads:
In respect of each item marked in
the Annexure as an ‘alleged breach of
or any combination of those items, did the respondents conduct constitute:
(1) A breach of the obligation to take reasonable steps to provide and
maintain reasonable security, as required by s 49 of the Act;
(2) A breach of the obligation to ensure habitability, as required by s
48(1)(a) of the Act.
[236] It is
important to note that the table of repairs annexed to the tenants’
closing submissions was an updated document
which the tenants said replaced the
previous table.
The previous
table was annexed to the tenants’ opening submissions to the
Unlike the final
table, the original table specified every breach of the tenancy agreement by
reference to all sections of the RTA
relied upon by the tenants in relation to
each repair item. Although the numbering was, unfortunately, not the same, what
Lot 63 issue (j) was referred to in the original repair table as
section ‘B’, item ‘10’, described as “bedroom
window broken and boarded
That item was
claimed pursuant to ss 48, 49 and 57 of the RTA according to the original table.
However, the 2019 Repair Table annexed
to the tenants’ closing submissions
showed Lot 63 item (j) as a breach of s 48 only. Throughout that document,
and also the
2022 Repair Table, each item was marked as referable only to either
s 48, s 49 or s 57(1).
wording of the list of issues needs to be considered in light of the table of
repairs which was annexed to it at the time,
that is the original table
specifying each section of the RTA which was relied upon. That approach was
expressly abandoned by the
tenants in their closing submissions. To the extent
that any other interpretation of issue 12 is now urged, I reject that submission
and agree with the landlord that it is contrary to how the tenants ultimately
ran their case before the Tribunal.
tenants wrote in the section of their closing submissions to the Tribunal,
dealing with security claims pursuant to s 49:
...“security
devices” in section 49 include a door and bolts but the term is not
limited to those things. In short, anything
that makes the premises and
ancillary property reasonably secure is such a device. For example, a window
around an air-conditioner
is such a device. A claim in this respect is made for
Lot 67 arising from the bedroom
However, this general statement is a reference to Lot 67, not Lot 63. The
relevant items were 2019 table of repairs Lot 67 items (c),
(e), (f) and (i).
All are marked as referable to s 49 in the 2019 table of repairs.
[239] In my view
2019 Repair Table item 63(j) was not before the Tribunal as other than a breach
of s 48 so far as issue 12 was concerned.
The wording of issue 12, when
considered in light of the original and updated table, coupled with the clear
change in position of
the tenants and the lack of any specific reference to the
basis for this claim in the tenants’ closing submissions meant that
not an issue which the Tribunal was required to consider.
[240] In oral
submissions counsel for the tenants argued that the same error also infected
another of the Tribunal’s decisions.
That submission was that the Tribunal
referred to the wrong window pane when determining liability in relation to Lot
63 item (r).
concerned the windows and security screen in the living room of Lot 63. With
respect, that submission appears to have been
made in error. It is clear that
the Tribunal dealt with Lot 63 2019 issue (r) as a breach of s 49, although that
allegation of breach
was not proven. I think that counsel meant to refer to
ground 14 and the submission is noted in relation to that ground.
[241] Leave to
appeal on this ground is refused because it has no prospect of
Ground 14: The Tribunal failed to apply a correct
understanding of s 49 of the RTA or was legally unreasonable by failing to
that a plastic window pane which was described in the First
Landlord’s records as ‘not secure’ and was found to
‘loose’ meant that there was no breach of the obligation to provide
reasonable security.
ground of appeal concerns the breach alleged in relation to 2019 Repair Table
Lot 63 item (r), relating to the living room
window and security
The tenants’
core complaint is that the Tribunal acted unreasonably in finding that the
landlord failed to take reasonable
steps to maintain the window as a security
device by failing to replace a plastic screen which covered a window with a
glass pane,
between October 2017 and December 2019.
Tribunal found that when Lot 63 was initially rented to the tenants the
condition report of 8 June 2012 noted that security
screens were missing from
one window and that sometime between 8 June 2012 and 25 October 2017 a security
screen was installed. However
the part of the Tribunal decision which is
impugned here is not the absence of a security screen, but a window pane.
Tribunal also found that when the premises were inspected on 25 October
2017 it was noted that the window in the lounge
needed to be secured. Repairs
were effected by 21 November 2017 by resecuring a white plastic screen which had
been substituted for
glass in one side of the sliding window. The Tribunal also
found that there was a need to secure the window, which was identified
“loose” in an inspection on 14 August 2019. A request for a
repair to install a glass pane in the window, in lieu
of the plastic one, was
made on 31 October 2019 after the tenants had notified the landlord of the issue
through their lawyers. Temporary
repairs were effected on that date and a new
glass window pane installed on 14 December 2019.
Tribunal found that the landlord was not in breach of s 49, because the landlord
took reasonable steps to provide and maintain
the security device, that is the
window, by inserting the plastic panel. The Tribunal found that at all times the
window was covered,
although the cover was loose at the times referred to above.
Despite the presence of the plastic screen, the Tribunal found the window
no greater security risk than a glass pane window would have done. That was a
finding of fact. Apart from the two instances
where the panel was
‘loose’ referred to above, the tenants did not point to any evidence
that the window was not secure.
[246] Considering
the claim separately pursuant to s 57(1), the Tribunal awarded compensation for
failure to diligently repair the
window by replacing the glass between 25
October 2017 and 14 December 2019.
landlord’s state of knowledge is relevant to the reasonableness of the
landlord’s actions. In this particular
case, the landlord was aware that
the window was covered by a plastic panel. No issue of notification arose and
therefore the date
for assessment of compensation was not affected by whether
the breach was of the obligation in s 49 or s 57(1). The breach of s 49
could only have operated from the time when the landlord failed to take
reasonable steps to secure the window. The earliest date
for that was found by
the Tribunal to have been 25 October 2017.
[248] There is
nothing in the Tribunal’s reasons which leads to the conclusion that the
President failed to correctly understand
and apply the law as to the
landlord’s obligation to provide reasonable security in accordance with
the tenancy agreement.
The reasons were clearly directed to whether the landlord
had taken reasonable steps to provide and maintain the security device
finding which is challenged on the basis of unreasonableness, that the landlord
took reasonable steps by installing a plastic
panel in lieu of a glass pane, is
one of fact. A finding of fact cannot be disturbed on appeal on a question of
law on the basis
that is wrong, perverse, against the evidence or the weight of
the evidence, or contrary to the overwhelming weight of
Nevertheless, in
some circumstances an extreme deficiency in reasoning, such as a fundamental
misapprehension of the evidence, can
result in a conclusion of unreasonableness.
However, there is considerable need for restraint. It should be borne in mind
One illogical aspect of fact finding in a wider scheme of
factual analysis will rarely betray such a failure to attend to the
task’ so as to leave to a finding of invalidity; ‘all
one has really done, at best, is demonstrate how an error of fact
[250] Counsel
for the tenants suggested in oral submissions that the President may have been
confused about two adjacent windows in
the lounge at Lot 63, one which was
missing a security screen and one which was not. Counsel referred to the problem
being the lack
of a solid window, rather than the lack of a security
. The tenants’
written submissions argued that the Tribunal was unreasonable in finding that
there was no evidence of a missing
security screen when there was photographic
evidence of “exactly”
photograph referred to by the tenants at EB 5180 is the same photograph referred
to by the Tribunal in the
It was said to have
been taken on 21 November 2017. That page of the exhibit book contains three
photographs of a window. In each
photograph the security screen is intact but in
the middle photograph the glass pane to the right of the screen appears to be
The Tribunal found that the window was entirely replaced by 14 December
2019. A photograph taken on 14 January
shows the replaced
window. The security screen, covering the panel of the window which opens is on
the opposite side to the security
screen shown in the photograph taken in
November 2017. Since the entire window was replaced in 2020, that does not
necessarily mean
that the Tribunal referred to the wrong window. There was no
dispute that the window was replaced on or about 14 December 2019.
tenants further argued that the decision of the Tribunal that the landlord had
taken reasonable steps to provide security
by inserting the plastic window was
unreasonable because it was “lacking in common sense” and
“contrary to commonly
accepted knowledge”. The tenants submitted
that the Tribunal found that there was no difference in security risk between a
“loose” window covering made of plastic that was repeatedly
described as “not secure” and a fixed glass pane.
[253] As I noted
above, the Tribunal referred to evidence that the plastic pane was loose in a
report from 14 August 2019, and that
the plastic pane was “not
secure” on 31 October 2019. As to the second instance, the Tribunal found
that temporary repairs
were effected on the same day. No evidence was pointed to
which suggested that the plastic panel was always loose or not secure and
clear implications of the Tribunal’s finding was that the plastic pane was
secure at other times.
Tribunal’s findings as to the state of the window from time to time are
findings of fact. They were based upon the
Tribunal’s evaluation of the
evidence as set out in the reasons. The finding that the landlord took
reasonable steps was also
a finding of fact. Although I can understand the
tenants’ criticism, I am not able to conclude that the Tribunal decision
unreasonable in the legal sense.
[255] Leave to
appeal is granted but the ground of appeal is
Ground 15: The Tribunal erred by failing to award compensation for
disappointment or distress absent physical inconvenience arising
breaches by the landlord that it found of the Act, having regard to either or
both of s 122 of the Act or the second limb
Baltic Shipping Co v Dillon
[1993] HCA 4
(1993) 176 CLR 344.
Young v CEOH
the High Court held that the compensation which the Tribunal may award
pursuant to s 122(1) of the RTA includes compensation for distress
disappointment suffered by a tenant as a normal healthy reaction to a failure on
the part of a landlord to comply with a statutorily
imposed term of a
residential tenancy agreement that the landlord provide and maintain security
devices necessary to ensure that
the leased premises are reasonably
The High Court said
that s 122 of the RTA was an additional mechanism to any remedy available
under the common law or equity and
that the measure of the statutory
compensation was determined by the Act, noting among other things that double
recovery is avoided
[257] Without
the benefit of the decision of the High Court in
Young v CEOH
Tribunal erred in confining any award of damages for disappointment and distress
pursuant to s 122 of the RTA to physical inconvenience
caused by the
The clearly affected
parts of the Tribunal decision are at [204], [207] – [208], [212], [214],
[218] and 2022 table of repairs
Lot 63 item (c). However, all awards of
compensation are potentially able to be revisited on that basis.
[258] In their
further submissions of 1 December 2023, after delivery of the High Court’s
decision in
Young v CEOH
, the tenants did not specify which decisions of
the Tribunal they say were affected. Notwithstanding that, leave to appeal
be granted and the appeal allowed on this ground. The decisions affected
should be set aside.
correct disposition is to remit this aspect of the matter to the Tribunal for
consideration in accordance with the High
Court’s decision in
. Whether or not any additional disappointment or distress compensation
is awarded is a matter for the Tribunal.
[260] Leave to
appeal is granted and the appeal is allowed on this
Ground 16: The Tribunal erred in its award of
compensation of $2,700 for tenants being left with no cover on an in-ground
septic tank
for 931 days by reason that this award was manifestly
inadequate.
[261] In this
ground of appeal the tenants complain that the quantum of compensation awarded
to Mr Stafford and Ms Pepperill as a
result of the landlord’s contractor
removing the concrete cover on the septic tank at their house (Lot 63), and the
leaving it uncovered for a period of
was manifestly
inadequate.
Tribunal limited the damages awarded for distress and disappointment as a result
of the landlord’s failure to act
with reasonable diligence to repair the
cover to those arising from the physical inconvenience in having to ensure that
remained covered (with a paint bucket) so as to reduce the tripping
hazard and smell. In view of the High Court’s decision
the Tribunal erred in so limiting the basis for
compensation.
[263] As the
Tribunal’s assessment of compensation was made on an erroneous basis there
is little utility in conducting an extensive
examination of the cases relied
upon by the tenants to advance their case of manifest excess. Each case depends
upon its own facts
and there appears to be a dearth of comparatives such as to
enable a relevant range to be determined.
example, the tenants referred to the New South Wales decision of
Hahlos (Tenancy)
tenants were awarded compensation of $4765.40, for an initial period of about
six weeks, and intermittently thereafter,
because a bathroom and toilet could
not be used and the house smelt. Sewage had leaked onto a path at the side of
the house and ran
underneath a neighbouring property. Although much shorter in
duration, the effects of the breach in
appear to be much more
serious than the current case, largely because the problem was inside the house,
as opposed to the yard, the
extreme nature of the odour during the first six
weeks, and that part of the house (the downstairs bathroom) was rendered
[265] On the
other hand, in the Northern Territory case of
Commissioner of Tenancies awarded the tenants $71.43 for the loss of use of a
swimming pool for 10 days, based upon the pool
component of the rent being $50
That decision
appears to turn on concerns which are quite different to those in the present
compensation amount here was expressed as a daily figure. There is no
requirement that the Tribunal calculate compensation
by reference to an amount
per day, although that approach is not necessarily wrong. The Tribunal must
assess the compensation by
reference to the purposes of the Act, the justice and
equity of the case and the nature and purpose of the particular obligation
has been breached, taking into account the mandatory considerations in s
[267] Manifest
inadequacy is a conclusion. Assessment of damages as contemplated by s 122 RTA
is an intuitive process and there is
not one correct
In accordance with
the principle in
it is not enough that a
court on appeal might have awarded a higher amount. It must appear that some
error has been made in exercising
the discretion. Such an error may not be
discoverable, but can be inferred if the result is unreasonable or plainly
unjust upon the
[268] For the
reason stated above it is not necessary to determine in this case whether the
compensation awarded was manifestly inadequate.
There was an error of law in the
basis for the assessment of quantum for this item because the assessment was not
carried out in
accordance with the principles in the High Court’s decision
Young v CEOH
[269] Therefore,
leave to appeal is granted, the appeal is allowed. The Tribunal’s order as
to quantum of compensation must
be set aside and the question remitted to the
Tribunal for consideration according to law.
Ground 17: The
Tribunal failed to apply a correct understanding of
regulations 3
Housing Regulations
(NT), including the scope and application of the
definition of ‘eligible person’ and/or erred by failing to weigh the
material (and absence of it) before it.
[270] The rent
for each of the tenants’ dwellings was set in accordance with
determinations made by the relevant Minister pursuant
Housing Act 1982
Housing Act
) which set the rent payable
pursuant to the rental agreement between each tenant and the CEOH. However, the
rent actually paid by
a tenant from time to time was less than the determined
amount where they received a “rent rebate” in accordance with
CEOH policy concerning tenants in financial hardship. This ground of appeal is
result of a rent reduction in
accordance with
of the RTA.
tenants argue that the amount of rent actually paid, which was less than the
rent payable in accordance with the relevant
determinations and the tenancy
agreement, amounted to an ongoing rent reduction, rather than a rebate. The
significance of that is
said to be that once rent is reduced by agreement,
of the RTA provides that rent cannot be increased except in accordance
Section 41(1)
provides that a landlord may increase rent only
where a tenancy agreement includes both that right and either an amount or
of calculation of the increase. There is no such mechanism in the
relevant tenancy agreement. The tenants argue that the result is
that they paid
more rent than they owed.
question of law said to arise on this ground of appeal therefore is whether the
discounted rental rate paid by Mr Jack in
relation to Lot 22, and by
Mr Stafford and Ms Pepperill in relation to Lot 63, is properly
characterised as a rental rebate in accordance
Housing Regulations
Housing Regulations
), or a negotiated rent reduction.
There is also a more general complaint based upon the Tribunal’s alleged
failure to weigh
the evidence before it.
[273] The 2019
applications made by the tenants of Lot 22 and Lot 63 each sought compensation
and/or rent repayment pursuant to s
122(1) of the RTA for overpayment of rent.
Overpayment of rent was alleged and compensation sought to the value of the
overpayment.
The amount of the overpayment was not quantified at the time each
claim was commenced because the relevant records were not available
tenants. The records became available in the course of the proceedings. At the
hearing, Mr Jack was said to have overpaid
his rent by $520 and Mr Stafford and
Ms McNamara by $1358. The Tribunal found that there was no overpayment of rent
and dismissed
the applications.
[274] In Mr
Jack’s case, although the rent for his house was determined to be
$143 per week, he was only required to pay a proportion
of that amount
because he received the benefit of the CEOH’s policies relating to tenants
who are in financial hardship. The
CEOH’s position, before the Tribunal
and this Court was that the discounted rent amount applied because Mr Jack
was given the
benefit of a rent rebate in accordance with r 5 of the
Housing Regulations
Mr Jack argued that the discount he received
was a rent reduction not a rent rebate because the statutory conditions required
order to characterise the discount as a rebate for the purpose of those
regulations were not met.
[275] Pursuant
Housing Act
the rent for public housing dwellings is
determined by the relevant Minister by notice published in the
Section 23(4)
provides that:
The rent to be paid for a dwelling or
premises is the rent determined from time to time under subsection (1) and the
rent is to be
paid despite anything to the contrary contained in the tenancy
agreement entered into in respect of the dwelling or premises or in
arrangement or agreement, or alleged arrangement or agreement, between the
tenant of the dwelling or premises and any other person
(including the Chief
Executive Officer (Housing), the former Commission, the Territory or their
employees or agents).
[276] The CEOH
has the power, pursuant to r 4 of the
Housing Regulations
dwelling to an “eligible person”. An eligible person, at the time
this dispute arose, was defined in r 3 as
a person who in the opinion of the
CEOH was both of “limited means” and “not adequately
[277] The rent
for a dwelling rented to an eligible person pursuant to r 4 is, subject to r 5,
to be the rent determined under
Housing Act
Regulation 5
it was at the relevant time, gave the CEOH a discretion to grant a
“rebate” of all or part of the rent payable in
respect of a dwelling
by an eligible person.
Regulation 5
was in these terms:
Executive Officer (Housing) may, in its discretion, grant a rebate of the whole
of the rent payable in respect of a dwelling
by an eligible person, or of such
portion of that rent as it thinks fit, and for such period as it thinks fit.
Jack’s argument in the Tribunal was that the use of the term eligible
person in r 5 meant that in order for the CEOH
to grant a rebate it must form
the view that the person is both of limited means and not adequately housed at
the time the rebate
is applied. Mr Jack submitted that there was no evidence
that the CEOH formed the view that the tenant was not adequately housed
granting the rebate.
not appear that this was in dispute. The evidence, from various witnesses called
on behalf of the CEOH in the Tribunal, was
that rebates were determined based
only upon the financial means of a tenant, not upon any assessment of whether
their housing was
“adequate” at the time the rebate was sought.
landlord argued that the rebates were appropriately given because there is no
requirement that the CEOH form a view that
a person who is already a public
housing tenant is not adequately housed before granting a rebate. The use of the
term eligible person
in r 5 was, the landlord argued, part of a composite
descriptor referring to the rent capable of being the subject of a rebate. The
Tribunal accepted the landlord’s argument, noting that the regulations
were characterised as beneficial legislation and commenting
that it would be
absurd if a person eligible to receive social housing could then only receive a
rebate if they remained not adequately
Tribunal found that the rent for the entire period for Lot 22 was $143/week. The
Tribunal stated that the rebates were “likely
valid” and held that
there was no agreed rent reduction for the purpose of
of the RTA. The
Tribunal also held that even if the discount was not a rebate, because the
statutory terms were not made out, it
was not a rent reduction.
[281] Since this
matter was argued the Court of Appeal has considered the relationship between
Housing Act
rr 4 and 5 of the
Housing Regulations
ss 41, 42 and 46 of the RTA, in the decision of
Badari v Minister for
Territory Families and Urban
In very broad
terms, that decision concerns the impact upon rents charged for public housing
as a result of determinations made by
the relevant minister under the
together with changes to the rebate or “safety net” policy,
which came into effect from and after 6 February 2023.
[282] A question
was whether any increase in amounts payable by social
housing tenants as a consequence of the new determinations, and social net
policy, was impermissible because the landlord had not complied with
the RTA. One of the arguments advanced by the tenants in that case was the same
argument advanced here as to the operation of
Regulations
and s 41 of the RTA. However, that question was not
directly determined in
, which was resolved on other grounds.
[283] The RTA
Housing Act
are intended to operate as part of a scheme for
regulation of tenancies and provision of housing in the Northern
The Court of
Appeal held in
of the RTA does not impose any
limitation upon the Minister’s power to determine rents for social housing
dwellings under
The Court of Appeal
pointed out the difference between the Minister’s role in determining
rents and the role of the CEOH as
landlord, and also that
Housing Act
provides that the rent is as determined by the Minister,
notwithstanding any other agreement.
[284] I agree
with the conclusion of the Tribunal that the descriptor “eligible
person” in r 5 of the
Housing Regulations
is not intended to remove
the right of a person who is in public housing to receive a rebate by importing
the criterion that they
can only do so if they remain “not adequately
housed”. The proposition that a person who is provided with public housing
cannot then apply for a rebate based upon their straitened financial
circumstances, because they are already in public housing, which
entitled to because they were of limited financial means and not adequately
housed, is absurd and contrary to the purpose
of the legislative scheme of which
the regulations are part. It may give rise to a situation where a person could
apply for a rebate
before they entered into a tenancy (and were at the time not
“adequately housed”), but not once they are in place, even
financial situation deteriorated. In context, the use of “eligible
person” in r 5 refers to a person who is
eligible to receive public
housing and would be not adequately housed if they did not have it. The
Housing Act
Housing Regulations
are part of a scheme of
beneficial legislation and that is a relevant factor in favour of the above
interpretation.
[285] Even if
that is not the case, however, on the reasoning in
the CEOH has
no power to give a rent reduction because that is not permitted by
Housing Act
. That section provides that the rent is as determined
by the Minister, notwithstanding any other agreement. Therefore, except in
case of a rebate permitted by r 5, no reduction in rent can be
construction, there has been no overpayment of rent by the tenants.
[286] Leave to
appeal is granted, and the appeal is dismissed.
Ground 18: The
Tribunal erred by ignoring or overlooking evidence of agreement other than in a
Family Rent Agreement, including agreement
by conduct, of the parties in respect
of the premises of Mr Jack and Mr Stafford.
ground raises a similar issue to the previous one but based upon a policy or
practice of the landlord known as the “family
rent agreement”. That
practice or procedure was one whereby individual tenants would enter into an
arrangement to each pay
part of the rent for a dwelling. It was argued on behalf
of the tenants that these agreements amounted to a rent reduction.
argument was rejected by the Tribunal which found that the family rent agreement
clearly recognised the total cost of the
rent for each dwelling. The Tribunal
also found that the purpose of the family rent agreement was to facilitate
direct debits from
the tenants’ Centrelink payments and was not a
determination of a sum of
tenants complain that the Tribunal failed to act on a correct understanding of
the law and/or failed to accord the tenants
natural justice because it
overlooked or ignored evidence which contradicted or was “in tension
with” what the Tribunal
found to be an agreement as to rent between the
I do not agree. It
was not in dispute that the agreement between the various tenants and the
landlord was that they would each pay
a share of the rent. The Tribunal referred
to that in the reasons.
Tribunal found that there was no agreement to change the rent which was payable
for the dwelling.
[290] Each of
the documents referred to in the tenants’ submissions concerns a family
rent agreement. The document at EB2 2135
dated 14 October 2012, reflects
both the application of the rebate policy (discussed above in ground 17)
and the rent division between
Mr Jack and his then partner. The earlier
documents referred to by the Tribunal were different, but were to similar
effect. The tenants
have not pointed to other evidence which was ignored or
overlooked.
[291] I am not
satisfied that the Tribunal applied an incorrect understanding of the law when
considering this question. The Tribunal
clearly considered the tenants’
evidence and arguments. There was no denial of natural justice.
[292] Leave to
appeal is granted and the appeal is
Ground 19: In respect of the 2022 proceedings, the Tribunal acted;
breach of s 10 of the NTCAT Act;
a way that was legally unreasonable by making decisions that necessitated
separate proceedings to be issued and then relied on
the later date of those new
proceedings to strictly apply the
Limitation Act 1981
(NT) to disallow or
limit compensations claims by the tenants in them.
Tribunal dismissed a number of claims for compensation contained in the
proceedings (particularly the 2022 proceedings)
on the basis that they were not
brought within three years of the date upon which the claim arose. Those claims
were not part of
the 2019 proceedings and appear to have come to light in the
course of “exchange of material throughout the
proceedings”.
claim was for failure by the landlord to comply with the tenancy agreement by
reference to a specific failure to “repair”.
Each such claim can
form a separate ground of breach leading to a claim for compensation pursuant to
s 122 of the RTA. Each claim
requires proof of its own facts establishing first
the breach and secondly matters relevant to any compensation, including as to
quantum. In other words, as discussed elsewhere above, each claim is a separate
cause of action for breach of the tenancy agreement.
[294] It was not
in dispute before the Tribunal, or on this appeal, that the
Limitation Act
applied to each separate claim, or that the relevant limitation period
expired three years from the date that each relevant breach,
said to found a
claim for compensation, occurred. It was also not in dispute that where a breach
was ongoing, the breach was a continuing
breach, giving rise to a new claim for
compensation for each day that it persisted.
tenants argued before the Tribunal that they should be granted an extension of
time in relation to all claims arising before
14 November 2016 in relation to
the 2019 applications, and before 20 January 2019 in relation to the 2022
applications. As discussed
above, the Tribunal rejected all applications for
extension of time, on the basis that there was no “material fact”
as required by
s 44(3)(b)(i)
Limitation Act
that, in any event, the discretion to extend time should not be exercised in
view of the substantial prejudice to the landlord
due to deficiencies in memory
and unavailability of
This decision
covered both the 2019 and 2022 proceedings.
[296] There is
no proposed appeal from the decision not to extend time to make claims for
compensation for events which took place
more than three years before the
institution of either the 2019 or 2022 proceedings. Therefore, there is no
appeal from the Tribunal
decision to dismiss those claims.
proposed appeal ground focuses not on the correctness of the decision denying an
extension of time under the
Limitation Act
, but upon the unfairness said
to arise from doing so in the context of the two procedural decisions of the
Tribunal made in 2021,
the effect of which was to refuse the tenants leave to
amend the annexure to the List of Issues of August 2020 to include the repair
and compensation claims which were ultimately the subject of the 2022
applications.
The tenants say
that, had those additional claims been added to those made in the 2019
applications, all claims arising after 14
November 2016 would have been
within time, due to the doctrine of relation
Tribunal identified the difference between the list of issues and the cause of
action on which the proceeding was based
in its reasons of January 2023 where it
referred to the tenants’ application of 5 July 2021 “formally
seeking to expand
the list of issues” and commented that “In fact,
rather than an expansion of the list of issues, the application was
considering the issues agreed upon as they applied to newly identified items of
That passage
identified the important difference between the function of the list of issues,
and the function of the applications
in relation to each claim as particularised
in the list of “repair items”.
Tribunal operates informally and, usually, without pleadings. In that
circumstance there are often, and appropriately, no
real consequences attaching
to a failure to comply with the sorts of procedural requirements which would be
imposed by a court. However,
there are some circumstances, where procedural
matters can have legal consequences in the Tribunal. The operation of the
Limitation Act
is one such circumstance.
discussed above in ground 2A, the Tribunal pointed out in its reasons the
significant difference between the landlord’s
reliance upon
RTA in its argument and the tenants’ 2021 application to add new
“repair issues” (allegations of breach),
and described the purpose
of the list of issues as identifying “the issues to be considered in
determining [the]
proceedings”.
crucial difference is that the landlord’s reliance on
the conduct of the tenants, which was integral to the question of whether the
landlord was in breach in relation to each claim
where it was relevant, and an
issue in the proceeding from the date of the landlord’s original reply to
the 2019 application.
The tenants’ amendments, by contrast, sought to add
entirely new claims.
[301] For the
purpose of the application of
Limitation Act
the date of the
action is the date of the application to the Tribunal in respect of each alleged
breach of the tenancy agreement,
for which a remedy was sought. There is no
express provision in the NTCAT Act, or the NTCAT Rules, providing for the
amendment of
a document so as to gain the benefit of the earlier filing date by
“relation back”.
That point was not raised on this appeal, or before the Tribunal. It may
be that the Tribunal has an implied power to amend an initiating
application to
add a new cause of action. Such a power may well be consistent with the
objectives of the Tribunal. Since the question
was not in contention, I will
assume that there is an implied power to amend for the purpose of these
[302] The point
of law said to arise on the proposed appeal is legal unreasonableness, tied to a
failure to comply with the objectives
of the Tribunal in s 10 of the NTCAT Act.
The difficulty with the tenants’ position is that the questions of leave
and dismissal of claims which are statute barred are separate issues.
Further, the tenants’ predicament is largely of their
own making.
relevant procedural history is referred to in the Tribunal’s decision of
23 January 2023,
separate, interlocutory, decision given 21 July
The tenants’
primary complaint relates to the alleged unfairness of the 21 July 2021 decision
to refuse leave to amend the
2019 applications which, counsel for the tenants
submitted, “jammed” the tenants into issuing the 2022 applications,
resulting in the application of the
[304] The list
of issues to be determined, based upon the 2019 applications, was agreed between
the parties on 26 August 2020. On
22 May 2021 the tenants, in preparation for a
hearing then scheduled for 31 May 2021, filed written opening submissions,
to which was what was then the current version of the “table of
repairs”. It is not controversial that this was the first
time that the
repair/compensation complaints which ultimately became the subject of the 2022
applications were raised in the Tribunal.
The Tribunal ordered that, in view of
the proximity of the hearing dates, the new repair items could not be considered
that hearing.
[305] The May
2021 hearing was then rescheduled to 16 August 2021 due to COVID-19 travel
restrictions. On 5 July 2021 the tenants
filed an application in the Tribunal
seeking a variation of the “list of issues” to be determined at the
hearing to accommodate
all repairs listed in the table of repairs attached to
the submissions of 22 May 2021.
[306] On 26 July
2021 the Tribunal dismissed the tenants’ application to amend the list of
issues (or more correctly the annexure
to that document) on the basis that the
tenants intended to lead further evidence of the additional items from witnesses
to be called
during the hearing and that that would create unfairness to the
landlord because it would not be in a position to respond to the
new evidence.
It is clear from the Tribunal reasons that procedural fairness and case
management considerations were the key factors,
in view of the proximity of the
trial, for the decision to refuse leave to
There is no reference
in the Tribunal reasons of 21 July 2021 to any question of
Limitation Act
considerations or whether any new claims to be joined should be taken to have
been filed at the time of the 2019 proceeding, or at
some later time.
[307] The August
2021 dates were also vacated due to COVID-19 travel restrictions, as were
alternative dates fixed for February 2022.
Dates in May 2022 were vacated
for other reasons beyond the control of the parties or the
ultimately proceeded on 25 July 2022, for five days. There was no evidence that
the tenants sought to revisit the question
of amendment of the 2019 proceeding
following those delays.
tenants did not seek to appeal the Tribunal decision refusing leave to amend the
list of issues to add the additional claims
for compensation at the time it was
made in 2021. And they do not directly do so
Instead, the complaint
is one of general unfairness or unreasonableness.
[309] In so far
as the tenants complain that the Tribunal erred by “strictly
applying” the provisions of the
Limitation Act
, it is difficult to
understand how that can give rise to a ground of appeal. It is not disputed
that, as the claim for compensation
is founded upon alleged breaches of the
lease, which is a contract,
Limitation Act
the claims for breach of the tenancy agreement seeking compensation pursuant to
s 122 of the RTA, such that a claim must
be brought within three years of
the accrual of the right of
That being so, the
Tribunal did not have a discretion to ignore the statutory bar once it was
raised. On the contrary, it was obliged
to apply the law as set out in the
Limitation Act
addition, given that the tenants concede that the Tribunal decision as to the
effect and application of the
Limitation Act
provisions, including the
decision to refuse leave to extend time, was correct, it is difficult to see how
the Tribunal acted unreasonably
in applying the statute according to its terms.
There is also nothing in s 10 of the NTCAT Act, which sets out the objects of
inconsistent with the application of the
Limitation Act
[311] While
there was, perhaps, some hope on the part of the tenants that the applications
for extension of time might be successful,
it must have been apparent from at
least 26 July 2021,
more formal application for amendment of the list of issues was refused, that
there was a significant risk that any claim
for compensation arising before 20
January 2019 would be statute barred. Indeed, the agreed list of issues, raised
as a question
in the proceeding (issue 14) the extent to which the
limits the compensation payable pursuant to s
Therefore, it is clear
that all parties were aware that the
Limitation Act
provisions were an
issue at an early time. Despite this, the further applications, raising the
additional breaches alleged by the
landlord (separate causes of action), were
not filed until 20 January 2022. There is no explanation for the tenants’
between July 2021 and January 2022. There is also no proper explanation as
to why the tenants did not make claims in relation to
the various problems in
their own houses before 2021.
[312] In their
written submissions to this Court, the tenants argued that the Tribunal
“relied upon a roundabout, technical
and rigid method in conflict with its
statutory mandate” in order to force the tenants to bring further
proceedings and then
to have “relied upon those later filing dates to
exclude claims”. It was also said that the Tribunal “purported
formally excuse itself from having to deal with the evidence and submissions put
to it in the proceeding, notwithstanding its
obligations”, thus denying
the tenants procedural fairness, by failing to deal with all issues of
significance raised. This,
rather florid, characterisation of the
Tribunal’s approach in this case is both inappropriate, and
It is inappropriate
because it seeks to characterise the Tribunal as a participant, and one acting
against the tenants’ interests
at that, rather than as an independent
decision maker. It is wrong because there is no basis for suggesting, as the
tenants appear
to do, that the Tribunal deliberately tried to limit their
claims. Rather, as I have explained, the Tribunal applied the law as to
limitation of actions, and the 2021 application to amend in accordance with its
objects of the Tribunal include the requirement to act with minimal technicality
and formality. The process in the Tribunal
is not strictly adversarial, but in a
case such as this it has many adversarial features. Notwithstanding any
classification of where
a Tribunal proceeding like this sits on the adversarial
- inquisitorial continuum,
there is no doubt that it is the responsibility of an applicant to place before
the Tribunal the claims which they wish to have determined.
In doing so they
commence an “action” for the purpose of
Clearly the tenants failed to include all of their possible claims
(actions) in their original application. That was their failure,
whatever the
application to amend the list of issues in 2021 was made very shortly before
each of the anticipated hearing dates in May
2021(informally) and in July 2021
(on application). There is no legal error apparent in the Tribunal’s
exercise of its discretion
to refuse to expand the hearing by adding additional
claims for compensation for additional breaches of the tenancy agreement at
those times on the ground that it would not have been fair to the landlord to do
[315] The claims
in the 2022 proceeding were related to those in the 2019 proceedings because
they involved the same parties and the
same leased premises and involved similar
claims. They could have been included in one proceeding. However, they were also
separate claims which were capable of founding separate applications.
In addition, had the tenants made their application to have
the newly discovered
claims determined in a timely way they could have, at least, minimised the loss
by commencing actions for those
claims sometime in 2021, instead of January
juxtaposition of the refusal of leave to amend the 2019 proceeding, coupled with
the decision that the various claims were
time barred, does not lead to the
conclusion that the Tribunal acted in breach of s 10 of the NTCAT Act, or
unreasonably. Leave to
appeal on this ground is refused, because the proposed
ground of appeal has no prospect of success.
Ground 20: The
Tribunal erred in its decision concerning file number 2019-02718-CT by making
orders against a non-party to the proceeding,
being ‘Chief Executive
Officer, Territory Families’ rather than the statutory body corporate sole
known as ‘Chief
Executive Officer (Housing)’.
[317] There is
no doubt as to the correct name of the party to the proceeding and all parties
and the Tribunal were aware of it at
all times. The Tribunal’s reasons
erroneously named the landlord as “Chief Executive Officer, Territory
However, the
initiating applications and the responses all clearly named the landlord as the
Indeed, from my review
of the documents in the Appeal Book, the correct name of the landlord appears to
have been used throughout
the proceeding. The “CEO Housing” was also
stated to be the landlord in the body of the Tribunal’s
[318] There is
no doubt that the Tribunal can correct the name in the title to the reasons in
reliance on the power in s 79 of the
NTCAT Act. In the circumstances of the case
it was a clear clerical mistake and/or an error arising from an accidental slip
or omission.
This is exactly the sort of circumstance in which s 79 was intended
[319] Leave to
appeal on this ground is refused.
Ground 21: The Tribunal erred
by failing to make any decision on an application made at the trial for costs
under s 132 of the NTCAT
Act concerning the Appellants application dated 13
April 2022 for production of a copy of the policy referred to in paragraph 63
the unattested declaration of Kim Charles dated 4 February 2022.
[320] On 28 July
2023 in the course of the hearing before the Tribunal the tenants made an oral
application for costs of an earlier
application for production of the
landlord’s rent rebate policy, an application which was dismissed at the
time that it was
tenants’ application for costs of the
application
was on the basis
that the landlord originally stated that the policy was not encapsulated in a
written document which could be produced.
However, during the hearing a document
containing the policy was produced and the earlier statement was retracted. I
note in that
regard that it was the landlord’s position that the
tenants’ summons was properly dismissed in any event.
[321] Although
the Tribunal seemed to indicate at the hearing that that issue would be dealt
within its reasons, no decision has yet
been made by the Tribunal in relation to
the costs application. There is no evidence that the Tribunal has refused to
make a decision
on the costs application. It seems to be a matter which has
simply been overlooked. In the context of the scope and complexity of
detailed applications in these matters that is unfortunate, but
understandable.
appropriate remedy is for the tenants to approach the Tribunal requesting a
decision. The Tribunal has not performed its
function in that regard and remains
able to do so.
[323] Leave to
appeal is refused.
Cross appeal ground 1
[324] In this
ground of appeal the landlord complains that the Tribunal wrongly determined
claims which were not before it for determination
or, in the alternative,
determined claims without hearing the landlord or considering all of the
evidence. The nub of the appeal
ground is that the Tribunal determined, in the
case of each claim made on the basis of s 48 or 49 of the RTA which was
unsuccessful,
whether there was an alternative claim for breach of
discussed above, the two tables of repairs (one for each of the 2019 and 2022
proceedings) which were annexed to the tenants’
written closing
submissions before the Tribunal were the last in a series of iterations of those
tables setting out the tenants’
allegations as to the landlord’s
breaches of the tenancy agreement. In their written closing submissions, the
tenants stated
that that final version replaced all earlier versions. The tables
contain a column identifying which section of the RTA the tenants
relied upon in
relation to each breach. The tenants referred to one section of the RTA which
was relied upon in relation to each
item. This was a different approach than
that adopted in the table of repairs annexed to the tenants’ opening
submissions dated
21 May 2021. In that document each obligation implied into the
tenancy agreement pursuant to a provision of the RTA was separately
reference to a section of the
legislation.
procedure adopted in this litigation has been, as I have indicated elsewhere in
these reasons, and admittedly with the benefit
of hindsight, somewhat apt to
cause confusion. Considered in isolation, the change to the repair tables
annexed to the tenants’
closing submissions had the potential to be
confusing. However, it is apparent from the submissions and other material
before this
Court that the approach agreed upon by the parties, and accepted by
the Tribunal, was that the applications, repair tables, and the
list of issues
were to be read together as setting out the tenants’ case.
[327] The list
of issues, at issue 12,
asked, in respect of the items marked in the repair tables as a breach of s 48
or s 49, or any combination of those items, whether
the landlord’s conduct
involved a breach of the habitability or security obligations. Issue 13 asked
that, where there was
no breach of s 48 or s 49 found by the Tribunal in
relation to a matter raised in issue 12, the Tribunal consider in the
alternative
whether there was a breach of s 57(1). The tenants’ closing
submissions made it clear that issue 13 was not abandoned. A fair
reading of the
tenants’ closing submissions does not, as suggested by the landlord in
this appeal ground, indicate that the
tenant had abandoned any claim for breach
of s 57(1).
tenants made extensive written submissions as to issue
Counsel for the tenants
also addressed the Tribunal orally in relation to issue 13 on 3 August
In both cases, the
tenants made clear their position was that the various repair items should be
analysed first by reference to whether
there was a breach of s 48 or s 49 and,
if the Tribunal found that there was no breach of those sections, whether there
was a breach
of s 57(1). Similarly, counsel for the landlord addressed the
Tribunal as to issue 13, specifically issue 13(a) in oral
submissions
and in written
submissions.
[329] Although
there was potential for confusion, having considered the submissions made, in my
view both parties and the Tribunal
approached the case on the basis that each
item in the tenants’ repair table identified as a breach of s 48 or
s 49 would be
analysed with reference to whether there was a breach of the
identified primary obligation first, followed by consideration of a
breach of s
57(1). Therefore I find that those matters were properly before the Tribunal for
determination.
landlord further argues that, even if the issues were before the Tribunal for
determination, there was a denial of procedural
fairness and/or a specific
error, because the Tribunal did not determine those matters with regard to the
landlord’s submissions.
This aspect of this ground of appeal is only
pressed with respect to Lot 63 2019 repair item (c) and (r), and Lot 67 2019
[331] Lot 63
2019 repair item (c) concerns the missing cover on the inspection outlet of the
septic tank. The landlord complains that
it was only addressed by the landlord
as a breach of s 48(1)(a) but that a breach of s 57(1) was found by the
Tribunal. To the extent
that the landlord may have chosen not to make any
particular submission before the Tribunal when, as I have found above, the issue
was before the Tribunal to determine, does not give rise to a ground of appeal.
The landlord’s submissions on this appeal at
[172] to [181] relate only to
matters of fact, which the landlord says that the Tribunal should have found on
the evidence before
it. No question of law is identified.
[332] Lot 63
2019 repair item (r) concerns the windows and security screen in the loungeroom.
The landlord complains that there was
no complaint or notification as to the
installation of plastic rather than glass. That is a complaint as to the
finding of fact. No question of law is identified.
[333] Lot 67
2019 repair item (v) concerns the hot water system being slow to heat. The
landlord complains that there was evidence
which indicated that it acted with
reasonable diligence and points to evidence which was before the Tribunal. The
landlord says that
the Tribunal treated this as a single ongoing issue rather
than a number of separate problems which were addressed by the landlord
arose. I do not consider that is a fair reading of what the Tribunal did. The
Tribunal reasons
the Tribunal considered some of the very documentation which the landlord refers
to in its submissions.
fact that not all documentation is referred to does not lead me to the view that
the Tribunal failed to properly consider the
landlord also complains that the Tribunal took judicial notice of the fact that
it would be untenable to shower in the winter
months in Central Australia
without hot water.
the Tribunal was entitled to do so. The rules of evidence do not apply, but even
if they had it is a matter of common
knowledge that it is cold in Central
Australia in winter. Further to that it appears that there was evidence from the
tenant Mr Brown,
as to the inconvenience caused. These are all matters of fact.
No question of law is apparent.
landlord may assert that the Tribunal erred in its findings of fact, and as to
the application of those facts to the test
of due diligence, which is a matter
of mixed fact and law, but that does not disclose an error on a question of law.
Having regard
to the reasons, the evidence, and the landlord’s
submissions, I am of the view that the Tribunal did not deny the landlord
natural justice.
[336] Leave to
appeal is refused.
Cross appeal ground 2
[337] The second
cross appeal ground complains that the Tribunal erred in law in awarding
compensation to the tenants for breach of
s 57(1) of the RTA when it found that
the issue was caused by the tenants. This complaint concerns 2019 repair table
Lot 63 item
(r) and Lot 67 item (k).
[338] Lot 63
item (r) concerns the window in the loungeroom (discussed above at ground 14) in
which the non-moveable pane was replaced
with a plastic sheet. The landlord
complains that the Tribunal ordered that the landlord compensate the tenants for
failing to diligently
repair the window by inserting a glass pane after
receiving notification. The basis of the landlord’s complaint is that the
landlord was ordered to pay compensation notwithstanding that the tenants caused
the damage. However, the Tribunal did not find that.
The passage complained of
is, in full “Whether or not it can be correctly said that the tenant was
responsible for damage to
the window, the landlord remained responsible for the
That passage
comes at the end of a lengthy discussion about the history of damage to the
window in which the Tribunal made no finding
that the tenants were responsible.
The Tribunal was unable to find who caused the damage.
landlord argues that if causation cannot be determined then there could be no
breach of s 57(1). That is not correct. There
is nothing in the wording of
s 57(1), or any other section of the RTA which requires causation to be
determined before the obligation
to repair is triggered. That position is not
inconsistent with the more specific requirements of s 51(1)(b) which requires
to notify the landlord of damage caused, or potentially caused, by
the tenant and s 55(3)(a) which requires the tenant to notify
the landlord of
damage caused by the tenant removing or installing a fixture.
purpose of notifying the landlord of damage, however caused, is so that the
landlord may repair their property. Where damage
is the responsibility of the
tenant, the landlord has the option, in s 55(3)(b) of the RTA, of requiring the
tenant to repair, or
repairing the damage themselves and having the tenant
compensate them for the cost. Damage can be caused in a variety of ways. Damage
may be accidental or it may be that something in the house simply breaks or
wears out. Criminal damage by a stranger will not usually
be caused by the
tenant (or a person for whom they are vicariously liable). However, in all cases
there is an obligation upon the
tenant to notify the landlord of the need for
repair. Section 57(1) means that the landlord is in breach of the tenancy
if they fail to diligently repair damage of which they have notice,
unless that requirement is inconsistent with one of the other
provisions of Part
[341] A landlord
cannot generally rely upon the fact that the tenant has breached the tenancy
agreement by damaging the property and
elect not to repair the damage. However,
what is reasonable will depend upon the circumstances. The landlord’s
obligation to
repair under s 57(1) could be inconsistent with, for example, an
election by a landlord to require a tenant to repair damage pursuant
s 55(3)(b). The effect of the words “subject to” in s 57(1) is
not, as the landlord argues, to require the landlord
to repair the premises only
where there has been no breach by the tenant. However, a breach by the tenant
will often be a relevant
consideration in determining whether the landlord has
acted with reasonable diligence and in assessing, even where there is a breach,
whether compensation is payable. It depends upon the facts. A landlord has a
range of options under the RTA to deal with breaches
by a tenant, including
requiring repairs to be made, recovering costs or, in a serious case,
terminating the tenancy. A landlord
must be proactive in enforcing their rights,
but a tenant cannot expect in the normal course to be compensated for damage
caused. In this case the landlord knew about the plastic pane in the
window and took no steps to replace it. There was no evidence
as to how the
window was broken, and no error in the Tribunal decision.
[342] Lot 67
repair item (k) relates to the oven grill not working. The facts of this dispute
are discussed above. Compensation was
awarded for the period between 26 April
and 22 June 2017. The Tribunal found that maintenance to the stove was requested
on 26 April
2017 and 6 June 2017 and a replacement was installed on 22 June
2017. The Tribunal also found that as of 26 April 2017 the appliance
poor state of cleanliness and the door did not close. The Tribunal then went on
to deal with the chronology as it related
to another oven in 2019.
Tribunal found that “generally” the landlord had taken reasonable
steps to make the oven and stove available
in Lot 67 and that the problems with
the stove were not a result of reasonable wear and tear. The Tribunal also found
was no failure of the landlord to ensure habituality. It seems that
the landlord took no steps to enforce its rights to reimbursement
available, to require the tenants to repair or replace the stove. There is no
counterclaim for the cost of replacement. There
was also no explanation for the
delay in replacing the stove.
findings as to the cause of the problems, and whether the landlord acted with
reasonable diligence are findings of fact.
No question of law is identified in
this ground of appeal and leave to appeal is
Cross appeal ground 3
[345] This cross
appeal ground concerns issue 2 in the list of issues. That question asked the
Tribunal to determine whether the terms
of the tenancy agreement between the
landlord and the tenants of Lot 67 was in accordance with the tenancy agreement
signed 19 September
Schedule 2 of the
Residential Tenancies Regulations 2000
(NT) (RTR). The
answer is said to depend upon whether the 2017 tenancy agreement contained each
term, or a term to the same effect,
as each term specified by the RTA to be a
term of a tenancy agreement. That is because where a tenancy agreement does not
with s 19(1) of the RTA, s 19(4) mandates that the tenancy agreement at
Schedule 2 of the regulations is taken to be the agreement
between the
Tribunal found that the tenancy agreement entered into between the landlord and
Mr Brown and Ms McNamara in relation to
Lot 67 did not contain terms to the same
effect as those in the RTA because s 58(1) of the RTA requires notice of the
need for repairs
and maintenance to be given to the landlord, whereas clause
7.1(a)(iii) of the tenancy agreement refers to notice being given to
“Us”. The words “We, Us, Our” are used throughout the
2017 tenancy agreement as synonyms for the Landlord
at item 2 of the panel
and are included in the
definition of “Landlord” at clause 28.1 of the agreement.
[347] Clause
7.1(a)(iii) is in these terms:
You must ...
(iii) tell Us verbally or in writing if the Premises or Additional Property
requires repair or maintenance, other than repair or
maintenance of a negligible
kind, as soon as reasonably possible after becoming aware of the need for the
repairs or maintenance.
[348] Landlord
(including “Us”) is defined at clause 28.1 of the 2017 tenancy
agreement as:
In this Tenancy Agreement, unless the contrary
intention appears:
Landlord means the person who grants the right of occupancy under the Tenancy
Agreement as named in item 2 of Schedule 1 (CEO Housing)
and where context
permits, includes Public Housing Safety officers, employees, agents and
sub-contractors of the landlord, referred
to throughout this Tenancy Agreement
as “We”, “Us”, or “Our”.
[349] Section
58(1) of the RTA says:
It is a term of a tenancy agreement that if
premises or ancillary property require repair or maintenance, other than repair
or maintenance
of a negligible kind, a tenant is, as soon as reasonably
practicable after becoming aware of the need for the repairs or maintenance,
notify the landlord orally or in writing of the requirement.
[350] “Landlord”
is defined in s 4 of the RTA as meaning:
(a) the person who grants the right of occupancy under a tenancy agreement; or
(b) a successor in title to the tenanted premises whose title is subject to the
tenant’s interest,
and includes:
(c) a prospective landlord or a former landlord; and
(d) an agent of the landlord, prospective landlord or former landlord.
[351] In its
decision, the Tribunal accepted the tenants’ argument that the reference
Public Housing Safety officers, employees, agents
and sub-contractors of the landlord in the definition in the tenancy agreement
that that definition was inconsistent with s 58(1) of the RTA because that
section requires notification to be given to the landlord
as defined in the RTA.
The Tribunal said:
...the use of the
word ‘us’ in clause 7.1 and its reference to a number of different
entities creates a broader class
of people to whom repairs and maintenance can
be reported than the term of the tenancy agreement provided for in the Act. It
at all apparent, for example, that subcontractors of the CEO Housing have
been vested with any authority for the control and management
of the tenancy
agreement and consequentially cannot be considered to be agents. In
circumstances, for example, where a tenant reported
a plumbing repair item to a
subcontractor attending at the premises to undertake electrical work there is no
apparent obligation
on the subcontractor to do anything with that information.
On its face the reporting would be ineffectual under the Act which requires
reporting to the landlord or its agent.
definition of “landlord” in s 4 of the RTA includes an agent of the
landlord. In
Jack v Chief Executive Officer Housing) (No
the Chief Justice
considered the meaning of the word “agent” as used in the RTA. The
question arising in that case was
whether the Territory was at any relevant time
the agent of the Commonwealth or the CEO (Housing) as
The context was an
application by the tenant to join the Territory to a proceeding commenced by a
tenant on the basis that the Territory
was the agent of the Commonwealth or the
the Chief Justice noted the imprecise and protean meaning of the term
“agent” and drew attention to the many ways in
which the term is
used, both in relation to legal obligation and in popular
His Honour then
considered the context and purpose of the term as used in the RTA and drew a
number of conclusions. At [58] the Chief
Justice said:
absence of any statutory definition or technical meaning of the term
‘agent’ in this context, on proper construction
it denotes a person
or other entity having the landlord’s authority in relevant respects
concerning the control and management
of the tenancy. An ‘agent’ is
one within whose authority and power it is to discharge the landlord’s
obligations and exercise the landlord’s statutory rights under
Residential Tenancies Act
and the relevant tenancy
[354] The 2017
tenancy agreement stipulates that the (landlord at item 2 of Schedule 1) is the
CEOH. The definition of landlord at
clause 28.1 is qualified in two respects.
First, there is a general qualifier “unless the contrary intention
which applies to all definitions. Second, and more importantly,
before the reference to Public Housing Safety officers, employees,
sub-contractors is the phrase “where context permits”. That phrase
makes it clear that the group described
are not “agents” for all
purposes. However they may be agents “in context” if they have the
necessary authority
in relation to the relevant power or obligation of the
[355] Whether a
particular person has authority will depend on the facts and will vary with the
context. For example, Public Housing
Safety Officers have authority, given
expressly in the tenancy agreement clause 10, to act in accordance with their
powers under
Housing Act
. They have control and management of that
aspect of the tenancy on behalf of the landlord based on that authority.
Further, clause
18 of the tenancy agreement provides that conduct engaged in by
employees or agents of the landlord, within the scope of their actual
apparent authority, is taken to be engaged in by the landlord.
[356] There was
evidence before the Tribunal that the CEOH had contracted Tangentyere
Constructions to carry out general repairs and
maintenance at Laramba and that
most repairs were reported direct to Tangentyere through a 1800
This is consistent
with the oral evidence of Mr Brown who said in cross-examination that he would
call Tangentyere to come out and,
for example, plunge the kitchen
and repair a
Ms Pepperill (tenant
of Lot 63) also agreed in cross-examination that she sometimes contacted the
government or Tangentyere via a
1800 number to report problems with her
[357] While the
term “agent” is a term which can have a broad scope, there is no
reason in my view, why an organisation,
such as Tangentyere, which is
specifically contracted and therefore authorised by that contract to deal with
repairs and maintenance
in a particular area on behalf of the landlord,
including by receiving notifications on a dedicated 1800 number, should not be
as having authority to act on behalf of the landlord in that respect.
Such a contractor is the landlord’s agent while acting
within the scope of
its authorisation. In my opinion it is not correct that contractors can never be
authorised to act on behalf
of the landlord, or that such an authorisation must
be in respect of the whole of the landlord’s obligations under a tenancy
agreement. In my view
Jack (No 2)
is not authority for such a
proposition.
[358] Therefore,
I am unable to agree with the Tribunal’s conclusion that the 2017 tenancy
agreement did not comply with
of the RTA in that respect.
[359] I would
grant leave to appeal and allow the appeal on this ground, subject to the
findings in relation to the notice of contention
Notice of contention
[360] By their
notice of contention, the tenants contend that the finding of the Tribunal that
the requirement in the tenancy agreement
for Lot 67 to notify the landlord
“as soon as reasonably possible” after becoming aware of the need
for repairs and maintenance
was not to the same effect as the requirement in
clause 58(1), which is to notify the landlord “as soon as reasonably
practicable”.
question is whether the term of the tenancy agreement was “to the same
effect” as the requirement in s 58(1)
of the RTA. The phrases “as
soon as reasonably practicable” and “as soon as reasonably
possible” are composite
temporal phrases. The relevant context is that the
phrases are each qualifiers to the central requirement, which is the
notification
by the tenant to the landlord that the premises require repairs or
maintenance. In each case the trigger for the requirement to give
notice is the
relevant awareness of the tenant as to that circumstance. Once aware, the tenant
must give notice as soon as practicable
thereafter.
Ultimately,
a decision as to whether something was done “as soon as reasonably
possible” or “as soon as reasonably
practicable” is one of
fact which depends upon what might be expected of the person required to perform
the relevant act in
circumstances.
is defined in the
Macquarie Dictionary
as something “that may or
can be, exist, happen, be done, be used”. “Practicable”, on
the other hand means
“capable of being put into practice, done, or
effected, especially with the available means or with reason or prudence;
The phrases
“as soon as reasonably possible” and “as soon as reasonably
practicable” are not capable of precise
meaning. However, there is a
well-established legal distinction between the words possible and practicable.
Generally speaking “possible”
imposes a more stringent requirement
“practicable”.
[364] The focus
of the requirement that notice be given “as soon as reasonably
practicable” in s 58(1) recognises that
the timing of the obligation to
give notice is affected by what is reasonably capable of being done in a
practical sense. The phrase
“as soon as reasonably possible”
involves consideration of what may reasonably be done. The distinction is
unquestionably
a fine one and it is difficult to see how it would lead to a
different outcome in many fact situations. However, in the context of
which requires definite action from a tenant, and from which significant
consequences flow, I am unable to agree with the
Tribunal’s conclusion
that the phrases are to the same effect. I have reached that conclusion somewhat
reluctantly, and notwithstanding
the general provision at clause 1(a) of the
2017 tenancy agreement that both parties agree that the RTA applies to the
and they must both comply with that legislation.
landlord argued that, even if the terms in the tenancy agreement are not to the
same effect as s 58(1) of the RTA, the result
should be not that the entire
agreement is replaced by the presented term but that the situation is governed
of the RTA, which states:
An agreement or arrangement
that is inconsistent with this Act or the Regulations or purports to exclude,
modify or restrict the operation
of this Act or the Regulations, is void to the
extent of the inconsistency.
[366] Section 20
is directed to avoiding contracting out of the RTA. It does two things. First,
subject to some exclusions, s 20(1)
provides that an agreement that is
inconsistent with the RTA, or the Regulations, or purports to exclude, modify or
restrict the
operation of the RTA is void to the extent of the inconsistency.
Second, s 20(4) makes it an offence for a landlord to enter into
an agreement
which excludes, modifies or restricts the operation of the RTA, directly or
indirectly, or purports to do
However, in my view the
terms of s 20(1) are wider than those of the penalty provision and will apply
even in cases where the inconsistency
is not intentional.
[367] Section 19
has a different purpose, which is to ensure that the parties are aware of the
terms of the tenancy agreement. The
section sets out the various requirements
that must be included in a written tenancy agreement, one of which is, at s
19(1)(d), that
the agreement must contain each term, or a term to the same
effect as each term, specified by the RTA to be a term of a tenancy agreement.
There follow requirements that the landlord must sign the agreement and must
give a copy to the tenant. There are penalties attached
to the failure to comply
with those provisions, but not to the obligation in s 19(1). Finally, s
19(4) provides that if the tenancy
agreement does not comply with the
requirements in s 19(1), or is not signed by all parties, a tenancy agreement is
taken to be in
prescribed.
question is whether, when a tenancy agreement does not contain a term to the
same effect as a term implied by operation
of the RTA, the whole of an otherwise
compliant written tenancy agreement is replaced by the prescribed tenancy
agreement, or whether
only the part that is inconsistent with the RTA is void.
If the latter course is adopted, is the term severed or is it replaced with
the like term from the prescribed tenancy agreement? The point was considered by
Various Applicants from Santa Teresa v CEO
In that case
the member found that an inconsistency between the written lease entered into
between the landlord and the tenants engaged
s 19(4) and, because s
19(1)(d) required the written tenancy agreement to “contain each
term” said in the RTA to be a
term of the tenancy agreement, that led to
the result that the tenancy agreement was invalid and the terms were in
accordance with
the prescribed
That aspect of the
decision was not challenged on
landlord made only brief submissions as to the ascendency of s 20(1)
compared with s 19(1). I am unable to accept them.
In my view the purpose of
s 19 is specific and directed to the purposes I have described above. It is
not inconsistent with s 20(1)
because a tenancy agreement which is invalid
because it does not comply with s 19(1) is not “void to the extent of the
inconsistency”,
it is invalid. The result may appear draconian, but it
seems to me that is what was intended in what is consumer protection style
legislation. In so far as it might be argued that the effect of s 19(4) is to
give s 20(1) no work to do, that is not the case. A
tenancy agreement may
comply with s 19(1) but still be inconsistent with the RTA because it
contains, for example, an additional
requirement which is prohibited.
I also think that if only part of
the tenancy agreement were replaced by the corresponding prescribed term there
would be significant
potential for confusion. Avoidance of such confusion
appears to be a central purpose of s 19 of the RTA.
[370] Therefore,
I uphold the order of the Tribunal that the tenancy agreement is in accordance
with the terms of Schedule 2 of the
Regulations on the alternate basis set out
in the notice of contention.
Cross appeal ground 4
landlord’s complaint in this ground of appeal is that the Tribunal wrongly
found that there was no termination of
the tenancy agreement relating to Lot 22
in 2016. The landlord states however that as this ground relates only to Lot 22,
necessary to deal with this ground if any of those grounds are
successful on appeal. No grounds in relation to Lot 22 were upheld.
[372] It is
therefore unnecessary to determine this
Disposition
[373] Some of
the grounds of appeal have been allowed and there is a need to remit those
aspects of the proceeding to the Tribunal.
parties jointly submitted that the final form of the orders should await further
submissions based upon the effect of these
reasons. I agree that is an
appropriate way to proceed.
[375] In their
most recent submissions,
tenants argue that the remitter should be to a Tribunal differently constituted.
The landlord has not made submissions on that
point. In my view I should not
make such an order without hearing from the landlord and, in fairness to both
parties, giving them
the opportunity to consider these reasons. I will list the
matter for oral argument and the making of final orders at a time convenient
the parties.
Various Applicants from Laramba
v Chief Executive officer (Housing)
[2023] NTCAT 2
Housing Act 1982
But no formal order for
consolidation of proceedings pursuant to
Northern Territory Civil
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2014
(NT) (‘NTCAT Act’) was
Tribunal reasons at [16] –
Landlord’s written
submissions 11 May 2023 at [13]-[14]. The landlord also noted that since these
proceedings commenced representative
proceedings have also been taken in the
Federal Court against the CEOH in relation to all remote Indigenous community
tenants, seeking
compensation. On the other hand, the tenants argued that the
importance of the cases extended beyond the Laramba cases to about 90
currently pending in the Tribunal: Transcript 13 July 2023 at [7].
Similar concerns were noted by
Blokland J in
Young & Conway v Chief Executive Officer, Housing
[2020] NTSC 59
[2019] NTSC 89
) at [33]-[34].
at [33]-[34].
Pepperill v CEO (Housing)
[2023] NTSC 90
Tenants’ written
submissions, 12 April 2023 at [12].
Appeal book (‘AB’),
Transcript 3 August 2022
[38]-[40], AB 927-929.
[2022] HCA 27
(2022) 96 ALJR 497
(‘Plaintiff M1/2021’).
The questions framed by the
plaintiff in
Plaintiff M1/2021
referred to procedural fairness in a
“loose” sense. See comments by Edelman J at [99]. Procedural
fairness was not specifically
discussed by the plurality.
Plaintiff M1/2021
Ibid at [25], footnotes
DL v The Queen
per Kiefel CJ, Keane and Edelman JJ.
Except those the Tribunal found
to be out of time pursuant to the
Limitation Act 1981
Limitation Act
), in relation to which see ground
In particular, Donna Roman,
Charlene Mibus and Amanda Khun.
See ground 2A in relation to
Jones v Dunkel
See for example, tenants’
closing submissions to the Tribunal at [129], AB 360.
AB 375-383 under column heading
“source and references”.
The list of issues is set out
at [18] of the Tribunal decision at AB 114-116. See ground 2 for a description
of its role in the proceeding.
AB 136 – 138.
The tenants’ repair
tables for the 2019 and 2022 proceedings, are lists of individual items claiming
failure to repair, or
address (in the case of
claims) matters
which, are said to be breaches of the tenancy agreement entitling the tenants to
compensation. They are reproduced
at AB 375 – 383.
AB 147 – 171.
AB 181 – 186.
Sections of the RTA are
referred to for reasons of brevity and because that was the approach taken by
the Tribunal. In all instances
such references are to be understood as
references to the terms of the tenancy agreement implied by operation of those
And in this appeal.
Landlord’s submissions in
reply to the Tribunal at [58]–[65], AB 461-463.
Described at appellants’
written submissions, 1 December 2023 at [12], AB 21; transcript 13 July 2023 at
Appellants’ closing
submissions to Tribunal at [125] – [131], AB 359-361.
Appellants’ closing
submissions to Tribunal at [132] – [139], AB 361-362.
Tenants’ written
submissions, 12 April 2023 at [14], AB 21.
Tribunal reasons at [153]
– [164], AB 144-146.
Exhibit Book (‘EB’)
3, volume 1, p 4930.
Limitation Act
44(3)(b)(i).
AB 172 – 173.
Tribunal reasons at [184-]
– [186], AB 173-174.
AB 174 – 176.
Tribunal reasons at [193]
– [196], AB 175.
Minister for Immigration and
Border Protection v MZYTS
(2013) 230 FCR 431 at [49] – [50].
The relationship to ground 19
lies in the tenants’ assertion that they were not permitted to amend the
list of issues or list
of repairs to which the issues related on two occasions,
which is also addressed at ground 19.
See EB 1 at pp 9, 107 and
Transcript 25 July 2022 at
[36-37], AB 507-508.
EB 1 at [97].
Transcript 25 July 2022 at
[37], AB 508.
As explained in relation to
ground 19 this was a completely separate issue. The addition of new claims meant
the addition of new
causes of action for compensation pursuant to s 122 and was
relevant to the
Limitation Act
but had nothing to do with the argument
Transcript 3 August 2022 at
[17], AB 906.
Tenants’ closing
submissions to the Tribunal at [88] – [101], AB 350-353.
Tenants’ closing reply
submissions to the Tribunal at [44] – [45], AB 12.
Transcript 13 July 2023 at
AB 139 – 142.
Landlord’s opening
submissions at [71], [76], [78], [83], AB 306-310.
Transcript Tribunal hearing 26
July 2022 at [105], see generally argument at [106] – [107], AB
Tribunal decision at [31]
– [32], AB 118.
Tribunal decision at [34]
– [54], AB 118-122.
Landlord’s written
submissions to Tribunal at [56], AB 303-304.
Tribunal decision at [93]
– [108], AB 132-136.
Transcript 3 August 2022 at
[20], AB 909: split system was “provided by the landlord”.
Tenants closing submissions at
[52], AB 340 – 341. A submission was also made about the premises at Lot
67 not being in a “state
of disrepair” at [53].
Appellants’ written
submissions, 12 April 2023 at [26], AB 24.
This part of the
Tribunal’s reasons does not have separate paragraph numbers but instead
refers to the alphabetical identification
of each issue enumerated in the
tenants’ repair tables which are at AB 375-380 in relation to the 2019
applications and AB
381-383 for the 2022 applications.
In reliance upon the statement
Plaintiff M47/2018 v Minister for Home Affairs
[2019] HCA 17
(2019) 265 CLR 285
referring to
Blatch v Archer
[1774] EngR 2
(1774) 1 Cowp 63
[1774] EngR 2
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298.
(2001) 51 NSWLR 572
[2011] NTSC 11
Transcript Tribunal hearing 25
July 2022 at [55] - [58], AB 526-529.
Transcript Tribunal hearing 25
July 2022 at [66] – [67], AB 537-538.
Tribunal reasons p 47-48; AB
2019-02718-CT and
2019-02722-CT. Although the Appellants’ written submissions refer to all
three 2019 proceedings at [30],
and this was referred to in argument [Transcript
13 July 2023 at [31]], this appears to be an error. See Landlord’s written
submissions dated 10 July 2023 at [67] and Tribunal decision. An additional
argument in relation to the shower curtains/screens was
that there was a breach
of the habitability obligation on safety grounds, but that does not appear
relevant to this ground of appeal
There may be is some overlap,
or lack of clarity, between this ground and ground 11. Issues raised as to the
appropriate ‘class’
of persons to be considered in relation to the
test for the determination of habitability are dealt with in relation to ground
Before the Tribunal there also
appears to have been a health and safety argument (based on the risk of slipping
on a wet floor),
which is dealt with in the Tribunal reasons and which appears
to have related to all three lots [tenants’ closing submissions
Tribunal AB 341-344]. However, that was not pursued on this ground of
As it was at the time of the
decision. Since amended 27 November 2023.
The written submissions refer
to Mr Jack [at [31] Court Book 8] however it is not clear that Mr Jack’s
property was one where
the toilet and bathroom were collocated, and in any event
he lived alone, so the relevance of the comparison is not apparent.
Transcript, 13 July 2023 at
DL v The Queen
[2018] HCA 30
(2018) 264 CLR 541
Nettle and Gordon JJ.
As described above (ground 2A)
the tenants sought an order for emergency repairs on the ground that this item
met the criteria in
s 63(2)(m) of the RTA because the fact that the
air-conditioner did not effectively cool the premises was said to unduly
inconvenience
the residents.
Tribunal reasons at [92]-[109];
AB 132-136. That part of the Tribunal’s reasons appears to respond
directly to the tenants’
closing submissions on the issue at AB
Tribunal reasons at [100],
[102] – [107], AB 134 - 135.
Tribunal reasons at [22-26], AB
Within the meaning of s
63(1)(b) of the RTA.
Tribunal reasons at [108].
Tribunal reasons at [60], AB
Transcript Tribunal hearing 26
July 2022 at [100]-[101], [103]-[104]; AB 571-572, 574-575.
NTCAT Act s 53(2)(b). Even if
that were not the case this is the sort of matter of which the Tribunal could
take judicial notice:
Evidence (National Uniform Law) Act 2011
The Tribunal correctly
summarised the separate nature of the obligations at [35], AB 119.
McGinty v Western Australia
[1996] HCA 48
(1996) 134 ALR 289
, 327 per Toohey J, and the cases cited there.
Pearce, DC,
Interpretation in Australia
ed, LexisNexis, Australia,
2024, p 483 [12.4].
RTA s 122(3)(c).
Tribunal reasons at [34] and
Reference at footnote 64 of
appellants’ submissions to the cross appeal at [41].
Tribunal reasons at [27].
Tribunal reasons at [20]-[70],
AB 116-125.
[2023] HCA 31
Young v CEOH
[2024] NTCA 10
‘CEOH v Pepperrill’)
Young v CEOH
RTA s 3(A).
RTA s 48(2).
Tribunal reasons at [31]
Tribunal reasons at [37]
– [61], AB 147– 171. – y.
Tribunal reasons at [42], AB
CEOH v Pepperill
The Tribunal reasons on this
item need to be read with the general findings at [155] – [159], [161],
The appellants’
written submissions at [50] refer to the error being ‘of the kind’
described at [10] of the submissions,
which refers to a failure to weigh
evidence and submissions and articulate the evaluative process in the
Tribunal reasons at [145]
Tribunal reasons at
Transcript Tribunal
proceeding 25 July 2022 at [97-98]; AB 568-569.
Mr Brown’s evidence
was that he did not know how the shower head had been broken off: Transcript 25
July 2022 ata [97], AB
568. He went on to say that he had too many visitors and
a lot of things got broken: Transcript at [98], AB 569.
The exhibit books were also
part of the material relied upon by the parties in this Court.
EB 3, V1 at [5419] –
Tribunal reasons p 58; AB
RTA s 122(3)(a).
Tribunal reasons at [37], AB
Unattested declaration of
Bradley Parsons [8] – [19], AB 994-995. That evidence was generally
referred to at Tribunal reasons
at [170] in another context, AB 171, and also
relied upon at the Tribunal’s discussion of Lot 63 item (n) as evidence of
notification
Tribunal reasons at [152]
– [153], [156] – [160] and [164].
Tribunal reasons at [46], AB
Tenants’ written
submissions, 7 April 2023 at [8], AB 19.
Ibid at [10], AB 20.
[2014] FCAFC 156.
Ibid at [116] per Middleton
and Wigney JJ.
Tenants’ written
submissions, 7 April 2023 at [58]; AB 33.
Tribunal reasons at [71]
– [78], AB 125-128.
Ibid at [76], AB 127.
See discussion below at
cross appeal ground 3.
Tribunal reasons at [179]
– [181]; AB 173.
Tribunal transcript 26 July
2022 p 93; (AB 564-565); 136 (AB 607).
There was also a claim for
breach of s 57(1) in accordance with issue 13. However, see discussion in
relation to ground 2A and cross
appeal 3 in relation to the role of s 57(1)
where there is no breach of s 48(1)(a) because the lack of habitability is
an act or omission of the tenant in accordance with the qualification
in s 48(2)(a).
Tribunal decision at [39],
AB 149. It was not argued in this Court that a substantial cause was not a cause
for the purpose of s
AB 149. See also discussion
of the relevant evidence of Mr Jack in relation to appeal ground 2B above.
Tribunal reasons at [39]; AB
There is a reference to a
breach by the tenants of s 55(1) in that they removed the stoves at various
points. Presumably upon the
basis that the stoves were either fixtures or
chattels and therefore part of the “ancillary property” as defined
4 of the RTA. However the ground of appeal does not refer to this
The Tribunal reasons also
refer to the tenants being in breach of s 55(2). This appears to be an error,
the reference was presumably
to s 55(1), removal of a fixture/chattel. However
that reference appears to be ancillary to the Tribunal decision and not subject
to a ground of appeal.
This is also the basis for
cross appeal 2.
Discussed in relation to
other repair items in particular lot 67 item (l), AB 166-167 and the Tribunal
reasons on this item should
be read with the reasons relating to item (l).
[2022] NTCA 1
footnotes omitted.
Reference at footnote 64 of
appellants’ submissions to the cross appeal at [41].
Ibid at [96].
Tenants’ written
submissions, 12 April 2023 at [76].
Tribunal decision Lot 67
item (h) at [54]; AB 164.
Tenants’ additional
submissions 9 April 2025.
See ground 5 at [126]
Tribunal reasons at [168],
CEO (Housing) v Young
Transcript 14 July 2023 at
Tribunal reasons regarding
Lot 63(d) at [46], AB 156.
Tribunal reasons at [207]
Tribunal reasons at [45] and
evidence referred to there, including photographs of the hole.
Item 67(k), 2019 repair
Item 67(t), 2019 repair
Item 67(v), 2019 repair
Item 67(d), 2022 repair
Because that is the only
four-bedroom home involved in the proceeding.
Tribunal reasons at [111]
Application
2019-02699-CT.
Transcript 13 July 2023 at
Applicant’s written
submissions to the Tribunal at [60] – [61], AB 343.
Transcript 14 July 2023 at
Transcript 14 July 2023 at
EB 2, volume 3 at
Tribunal reasons regarding
Lot 22 (g) at [40], AB 149-150.
Transcript 14 July 2023 at
CEO (Housing) v Young
at [30] – [51].
Tenants’ written
submissions, 12 April 2023 at [102] – [103].
CEO (Housing) v
at [76] – [77] and [84].
Ibid at [96].
Tribunal reasons p 42 at
paragraph (i), AB 142.
Tribunal reasons at
[53]-[54] at paragraphs (c), (e), and (f), AB 163-164.
[2020] NTSC 59.
Tribunal reasons at [42], AB
Tenants written submissions,
21 April 2023 at [111] and footnotes 163 and 164.
Set out at Tribunal reasons
at [18], AB 115.
Tenants’ written
submissions to Tribunal at [66]-[68].
Ibid at [67].
Young v CEOH
Tenants’ closing
submissions to Tribunal at [110], AB 29.
Tenants’ opening
submissions to Tribunal, AB 288-294.
Ibid, AB 290.
Tenants’ closing
submissions to Tribunal at [84], AB 349.
Although the item is not
specified, counsel referred to p 51 and 52 and to the Tribunal reasons at
Transcript 14 February 2023 at
[88-89], and I therefore infer that this was the
subject item.
Tribunal Reasons at [51-52],
AB 161-162.
Adjrun v Chief Executive
Officer (Housing)
[2022] NTSC 42
and the cases cited there.
Creake, R, et al,
of Government Action
ed, LexisNexis, 2022, [14.3.187]
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs v
[2006] FCA 265
(2006) 90 ALD 614
, [11] per Allsop J.
Transcript 14 July 2023 at
Tenants’ written
submissions, 7 June 2023 at [115]; AB 46.
Erroneously referred to as
EB 580 at Tribunal Reasons at [51], AB 161.
EB 3 at [5239].
Young v CEOH
Ibid at [1], per Keifel CJ,
Gaegler and Gleeson JJ.
Ibid at [24].
AB 177-178, 184-185.
As found by the Tribunal at
[45] of the reasons, AB 155.
[2002] NSWCTTT 855
December 2002).
[2015] NTRTCmr 6.
Ibid at [51].
Young v CEOH
Nationwide News Pty Ltd v
[2020] FCAFC 115
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Although Mr Jack argued
elsewhere that his house had defects which made it not habitable during the
relevant period.
Tribunal decision at [190]
– [197], AB 174-176.
[2022] NTSC 83
Ibid at [44].
There might be an issue as
to the validity of r 5 if it is inconsistent with s 23(4), however that was
not argued in this proceeding.
Tribunal reasons at [188],
AB 174. This is also consistent with the evidence of Ms Pepperill who explains
that she and her partner
each paid $140 a fortnight for their dwelling:
transcript 26 July 2022, AB 607.
Tenants’ written
submissions, 12 April 2023 at [139], AB 52.
Tribunal reasons at [187]
Tribunal reasons at [133]
quoting Tribunal reasons of 26 July 2021, AB 140
Tribunal reasons at [175]
This is also discussed above
in relation to ground 2A. See schedule at AB 434-444 for details of
repair/defects claims relating to
the 2022 applications including the dates of
notification and periods of claim. A significant number, but not all, of the
in the 2022 applications appear to have pre-dated 14 November 2016.
Noting the abrogation of the
Weldon v Neal
Limitation Act
Tribunal reasons at [132],
Tribunal reasons at [139],
This is not the case in
other jurisdictions. See for example
Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 1998
Tribunal reasons at [5]
– [15] and [130] – [134] extracting part of Tribunal decision of 26
July 2021, and at [224] –
AB 997 – 1001.
Transcript 13 July 2023 at
Tribunal decision, 26 July
2021 at [19], AB 1000.
Tribunal decision, 26 July
2021 at [22] – [23].
Tribunal reasons at [11]
Time limit for instituting
an appeal is 28 days pursuant to r 82.04(2)(b) of the
Supreme Court Rules
The time bar in s 12
Limitation Act
applies to an ‘action’ which is defined as
‘any proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction’. A
of competent jurisdiction’ is defined in
Interpretation Act 1978
(NT) to include a tribunal.
which is probably more relevant.
The date of publication of
the Tribunal’s reasons for refusal of the application for amendment of the
2019 applications.
Tribunal reasons at
Tenants’ written
submissions, 12 April 2023 at [144].
R. Creyke, et al,
of Government Action
edition, 2022, LexisNexis,
AB, 195, 216.
Tribunal reasons at [1].
Transcript Tribunal hearing
28 July 2022 at [267-269], AB 738-740.
Ordinary application for
production of the policy document made 22 April 2022, AB 320-323.
See 21 May 2021 tables of
repairs at AB 288-294.
The list of issues is set
out in full at Tribunal reasons at [18].
Tenants’ written
submissions to the Tribunal at [109] – [124].
Tribunal transcript 3 August
2022 at [17-18] and [34-35].
Tribunal transcript 3 August
2022 at [46-47].
Landlord’s opening
submissions, 28 May 2021 (AB 307-309), expressly adopted in landlord’s
closing submissions of 16 September
2022 at [1] (AB 384), and annexure (AB
Tribunal reasons at
[59]-[60], AB 169-170.
submissions, 12 May 2023 at [192].
Tribunal reasons at [218],
Tribunal reasons at [52], AB
EB 1 at [197]-[208].
EB 1 at [197].
Tribunal reasons at [83], AB
[2021] NTSC 81
Jack (No 2)
’). This case concerned the same tenant of Lot
22, as in this case.
Ibid at [50].
Ibid at [58].
Unattested declaration
Jeremy Clifton, EB 2 at [887].
Tribunal transcript 26 July
2022, p.93; AB 564-565.
Ibid at [104] and [108]; AB
Ibid at [118]; AB 589.
Ibid at [136]-[137]; AB
Tribunal reasons at [78], AB
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty of Animals (Vic) Inc v Marson
Constructions Pty Ltd
[2000] VSCA 38
per Ormiston
ed, Macquarie Dictionary Publishers Pty Ltd,
Sydney, 2009.
v Whiteside
(1987) 2 Qd R 284
, 288, per Andrews
That provision
is an offence governed by Part IIAA of the
Criminal Code.
element is prescribed for an offence pursuant to s 20(4). Therefore, by
operation of s 43AM of the
Criminal Code
the fault element is intention.
Whether there is an intention to exclude the operation of the RTA in any
particular case will be
a question of fact.
The prescribed form is as
per r 10 and schedule 2 of the
Residential Tenancies Regulations
Tribunal reasons.
Supra at [78].
Young v CEOH
An example is
Whiteaker v
Commissioner of Tenancies & Tyron & Gooding
[2002] NTMC 17
tenancy agreement, which otherwise contained the clauses required by s 19(1),
also contained a clause requiring the tenant
to pay for tick and flea treatment
at the end of the tenancy, a requirement which was held to be inconsistent with
the RTA and void.
Tenants’ submissions, 29 April 2025 at [3].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.52 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter