URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTWHC/2023/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:24:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Renee Krum v Darwin Greyhound Association of the NT Inc [2023] NTWHC 5 (30 March 2023)
Renee Krum v Darwin Greyhound Association of the NT Inc
[2023] NTWHC 5
PARTIES: Renee Krum
Darwin Greyhound Association of the NT Inc.
TITLE OF COURT: WORK HEALTH COURT
FILE NO(s): 2020-00141-LC
DELIVERED ON: 30 March 2023
DELIVERED AT: Darwin
HEARING DATE(s): 6 to 9 April 2021, 10 September 2021
DECISION OF: Judge Macdonald
CATCHWORDS:
Lee v MacMahon
Contractors Pty Ltd
[2018] NTCA 7
Laminex Group Pty Ltd v Catford
[2021] NTSC 92
Newton v Masonic Homes Inc
[2009] NTSC 51
REPRESENTATION:
Worker: Mr B O’Loughlin
Employer: Mr D McConnel SC
Solicitors:
Worker: Halfpennys
Employer: HWL Ebsworth Lawyers
Decision category classification: B
Decision ID number: 2023 NTWHC 5
Number of paragraphs: 49
IN THE LOCAL COURT
AT DARWIN IN THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY OF
No. 2020-00141-LC
Darwin Greyhound Association of the NT Inc
REASONS FOR DECISION
(Delivered 30 March 2023)
MACDONALD LCJ
22 November 2002, Ms Renee Krum (the Worker) was employed by the Darwin
Greyhound Association of the NT Inc (the Defendant) in
office administration and
hospitality duties, and was a “worker” within the meaning of the
On that date the Worker fell
from a stool while adjusting a television and fractured her left and right
wrists. Hospitalisation and
remedial surgery ensued, including taking bone from
her left knee to assist the open reduction and internal fixation to the left
wrist, together with a skin graft. Further surgery to the Worker’s leg was
also subsequently required, due to infection.
Greyhound Association’s work health insurer was Territory Insurance Office
(the Employer), who accepted liability for the
injuries to the Worker’s
wrists and consequent injury to her leg, and commenced payment of benefits under
the RTW Act, being
weekly benefits and medical and rehabilitation costs.
physical injuries (Injuries) and consequent surgery caused the Worker
significant pain. It is also fair to conclude that, for
whatever reason(s), the
respective hopes and expectations of the Worker and Employer did not meet
happily in relation to management
of the injuries and consequent
in early 2003 the Worker first saw a psychiatrist, Dr Petros Markou, who
informed the Employer that the Worker was suffering
major depressive
” which he considered was “
completely related to the
injuries that she has sustained while at
The Worker then
saw a number of other psychiatrists over the ensuing 18 or so years, with the
Employer neither expressly accepting
or denying liability for any secondary or
consequential psychological or mental injury (Sequela) of the physical injury
it accepted liability.
21 November 2019, the Employer issued a notice under section 69 of the RTW Act
reducing the Worker’s weekly benefits to $392.37
per week (the Notice).
The basis of the Notice was essentially that each of an occupational physician
and a consultant psychiatrist,
namely Dr Robin Mitchell and Dr Wasim Shaikh
respectively, had opined that the Worker had capacity to work 20 hours per
The Pleadings
Worker sought mediation in relation to the Notice, which occurred on
7 January 2020 with no change to the Employer’s position
resulting. The Worker then commenced proceedings by statement of claim filed in
the Work Health Court, such that it was the Notice
which precipitated the
proceeding.
is often the case in complex worker’s compensation matters, the pleadings
progressed through a number of iterations. Ultimately
the pleadings comprised an
Amended Statement of Claim filed by the Worker on 28 April 2021 (Claim) and a
Further Amended Notice of
(Counterclaim)
filed by the
Employer on 15 September 2021, with a Defence to Counterclaim (Defence to
Counterclaim) filed by the Worker on 23 March
2021 remaining
the question of “injury” within the meaning of the RTW Act,
paragraph 3 of the Claim pled the (physical) Injuries,
and then paragraph 4A of
the Claim essentially asserts that as a consequence of the accepted physical
from at least 2005 the Worker suffered a consequential mental
”, being the Sequela referred to above. Paragraph 4C of the
Claim then contends that “
The Worker has been totally incapacitated by
and is entitled to weekly benefits for
...” due to the Sequela. That pleading is understood to be
in relation to the point in time of the Notice and ongoing. Paragraph
also contends that the Sequela had by “
on or about September 2020 ...
developed to also include a Generalised Anxiety
Employer by paragraph 4A of its Counterclaim denies any Sequela whatsoever, both
prior to and following 21 November
Logically, the Employer also
contends that from or before 21 November 2019 the Worker has not been totally or
partially incapacitated
for work due to any Sequela. By paragraph 5 of the
Counterclaim the Employer maintains or confirms the validity and effect of the
Notice. The Counterclaim also denies that the Worker is entitled to any relief
sought and contends that the Claim should be dismissed
with costs. Paragraphs 1
to 10 of the Employer’s Counterclaim are then reiterated for the purpose
of its counterclaim, and
both s 69(2)(d) and s 104 of the RTW Act are expressly
remainder of the Counterclaim pleads that the Worker has since 21 November 2019
been capable of working part-time at a level of
20 hours per week or,
alternatively, some lesser number of hours to be determined. The effect of the
Employer’s pleadings is
that the Worker is only partially incapacitated
and that none of that acknowledged incapacity is the product of the Sequela
Worker’s Defence to Counterclaim repeats the pleadings of her Claim and
essentially denies the Counterclaim, reiterates
the alleged Sequela, and then
pleads total incapacity “as a result of the Injury and/or the Mental
Injury”, so the physical
injury and/or the Sequela.
The Hearing and Evidence
would be expected with any claim of its age, significant administrative and
medical documentation in the matter has been generated
over time. The exhibits
tendered at hearing ran to well in excess of 500 pages, despite the
parties’ counsel and solicitors
having been discerning in what was
necessary and relevant.
hearing book comprising much of the documentation referred to was tendered at
the commencement of the hearing and became Exhibit
W1. A further 21 exhibits
were tendered during the course of the hearing, variously by the Worker and
Employer, and marked consecutively
accordingly.
hearing commenced on 6 April 2021 and proceeded over 4 days, with the evidence
concluding on 9 April 2021. The Court also had
the benefit of counsel’s
extensive written submissions, orally supplemented and highlighted to the court
on 10 September 2021.
Worker gave evidence first, taking the whole of 6 April 2021. Occupational
physician Dr Peter Wilkins, the Worker’s general
practitioner Dr Antonio
De Sousa, and psychiatrist Dr Ashish Takyar were then called by the Worker on 7
April 2021 and cross-examined.
The Worker’s further evidence was from her
husband, Mr Scott Krum on 8 April 2021. The Employer then called evidence
from occupational
physician Dr Robin Mitchell, occupational psychologist Justin
Clark, and psychiatrist Dr Wasim Shaikh. Other expert evidence was
tendered by
consent. The evidence also included surveillance footage from around 16 May 2014
through to 19 May 2014, 6 April 2015,
19 November 2016 through to 22 November
2016, 17 February 2019 and 18 March 2020.
regard to the pleadings, evidence and counsel’s extensive submissions
which the Court had the benefit of, I consider
the issues for determination
resolved to the following primary questions. Issues concerning onus are also
discussed below, the conclusions
on which inform the manner in which the issues
are characterised.
(i) Was the s 69 Notice valid in its terms and effect?
(ii) Did the Employer accept liability for the asserted Sequela?
(iii) Did the Worker sustain the asserted Sequela and, if so, was it out of or
in the course of employment?
(iv) If so, does the Worker suffer any incapacity for work as a result of the
(v) If so, to what extent is the incapacity partial or, alternatively, total?
Employer’s acceptance of the physical injury sustained 22 November 2002
was communicated to the Worker by letter dated 10
It may be accepted that the
extent of the injury properly the subject of the claim then expanded to include
the physical consequences
of a graft taken from the left leg for the purpose of
surgically addressing the fractured to the left wrist, and associated pain.
Those aspects were not the subject of any contention on the pleadings which, in
terms of injury, focused on the Worker’s allegation
of a secondary or
consequential psychological or mental injury (Sequela), and associated relevant
procedure prescribed by the RTW
initial focus of the pleadings was the validity or otherwise of the s 69 Notice
dated 21 November 2019. The Employer bears the
burden of proving the validity of
the Notice.
s 69 Notice and associated documents comprised folios 15 to 30 of Exhibit W1 and
precipitated the proceeding. The first page of
the Notice states that the
decision to reduce the amount of weekly benefits payable is “
relation to your claim for compensation dated 6 December 2002 (the claim) for
bilateral fractured wrists (the injury) suffered
on 22 November
” and noted that the Employer “
accepted the claim on
behalf of the employer for bilateral fractured wrists
”. The Notice
then refers to a report of occupational physician Dr Robin Mitchell dated 23
April 2019, including that he “
reported as
A9.4 Do you agree with the current certificate of capacity and/or the
Worker’s reported restrictions on work capacity? If not
please provide
your reasons.
No. There is no current capacity certificate however Mrs Thompson has
survival spondylosis and, as a consequence, her capacity for
some physical
activities is reduced. That reduction in capacity has been taken into account in
my recommended restrictions.
In a job which has physical requirements within my recommended
restrictions this is Thompson will not be placing stress on her neck
nature that might limit her capacity to work full-time hours. That is to be
compared to a job with physical demands exceeding
my recommended restrictions
where, due to pain or other symptoms resulting from stress on her neck she would
not be fit for full-time
work and would be expected to have a reduced capacity
for hours to work, with the capacity depending on the nature of the job and
associated physical demands.
Immediately
following the above paragraphs in A9.4 Dr Mitchell seals off his opinion with;
While Mrs Thompson considers herself unfit for work, in my opinion
based on the reasons given above she has a current physical capacity
full-time hours in jobs which are within my recommended restrictions, and for
which Mrs Thompson is otherwise qualified
.” The reader would generally
conclude that the “
” referred to would be based on the
facts set out immediately above and associated with the reasons and ultimate
is noted that the report of Dr Mitchell dated 23 April 2019 to which the Notice
refers correctly describes the Worker’s physical
injuries at paragraph
A2.2, but at A9.4 descends to the above. The Worker was provided with a copy of
Dr Mitchell’s report
prior to the Notice being issued in November 2019,
and it is also noted that Dr Mitchell subsequently corrected or
‘explained’
the misdescription of the Notice by reports dated 22
January 2020 and 21 October
in my view it is also significant that on 27 November 2019 the Worker wrote to
the Employer following receipt of the Notice.
That letter begged to differ with
a large number of propositions and conclusions contained in Dr Mitchell’s
April 2019 report
and reports of other clinical and professional practitioners
involved in management or consideration of the Worker’s injuries,
rehabilitation and capacity. Amongst those things, the letter refers to
paragraph A9.3 and states; “
It is at this point I believe Dr Robin
Mitchell is reporting on someone else. He is stating that I could work a full
week and overtime
but is saying I have
cervical spondylosis
stress on her neck
. My neck has never been part of my claim. I
have been unable to work at all for 17 years and have to take 16 tables
a day just to get by. I believe Dr Robin Mitchell is now reporting on
another case and his points are therefore null and void because
of this. This
makes all those reporting after him irrelevant because it is
misinformation
prescribed and other requirements concerning s 69 notices have been discussed in
a large number of the authorities, significantly
by the NT Court of Appeal in
Lee v MacMahon Contractors Pty Ltd
[2018] NTCA 7
, most recently applied
Laminex Group Pty Ltd v Catford
[2021] NTSC
69 requires that the Notice be a statement including; “
setting out the
for the proposed ... reduction
” and, crucially, that
the reasons set out in the statement ... shall provide
to enable the worker to whom the statement is
understand fully
why the amount of compensation is being ...
It is noted that an
objective test is to be applied in the application of s 69, including having
regard to the prudent course of
a worker consulting an appropriate legal
practitioner for explanation and
other clinical and professional views referred to in the Notice post-dated
Dr Mitchell’s report, and it may be inferred
that each of them had
and read Dr Mitchell’s report for the purpose of forming their opinions.
It cannot be assumed or inferred
that all contributors to the content of the
Notice, including Dr Mitchell, simply proceeded on the basis that the erroneous
to cervical spondylosis (and physical consequences which flowed from
it) was to be ignored. Due to its date of issue, it can also
confidently be
concluded that the first page of the Notice accurately describing the
Worker’s primary physical injuries was
not before Dr Mitchell or others as
part of their consideration, so is of no assistance in that regard.
Notice provided extensive information, with an apparently important
” being patently incorrect. In my view, the
misdescription was foundational and had the capacity to affect or infect Dr
” and opinions and those of other
clinicians and professionals involved. The error had a definite prospect of
impacting the
” for the reduction set out in the
Notice. The misdescription, when provided to the Worker, also constituted
significant information
likely to prevent, rather than enable, the Worker
to understand fully why the amount of compensation is being ...
”. That would be so even on obtaining the advice or explanation
of a legal practitioner, who would be unlikely to shed any acceptable
the relevant “
Court of Appeal’s statements concerning the extent to which s 69 notices
must comply with the provisions are apt to the
The misdescription of
the Worker’s injuries prevented and full or proper understanding of the
rationale and basis for Notice,
even with assistance from a
those reasons I consider that the Notice was invalid and of no
Regardless, the effect
of the pleadings is that the issues otherwise properly raised by the pleadings
are to be determined.
particularly in relation to the Sequela “
mental injury
asserted by the Worker.
is also my conclusion that, other than to essentially deny any mental health
issue being relevant to the partial incapacity which
the Notice acknowledged,
the Notice did not engage with the asserted Sequela which the Employer was on
Although the Worker
probably had no alternative given the manner in which the Employer had
approached the mental health issues throughout
the life of the claim and at the
time of serving the Notice, it is also my conclusion that the Worker’s
through their pleadings, broadened the issues for
determination of the Work Health
In my view the proceeding
bears significant similarity to a usual s 104 Application, which the Worker had
capacity to bring at any
time during the life of the
first indication of the alleged Sequela was in letters of Psychiatrist Dr Petros
Markou in February and March
Those letters were to the
Worker’s then GP, Dr George Chong-Wah following referral, and noted
symptoms of depression and that
an anti-depressant had been prescribed. The
Employer then had the Worker examined by Consultant Psychiatrist and
Psychologist Dr
Philip Brown on 6 August 2003. Dr Brown’s opinion in
August 2003 was that the Worker “...
has developed an Adjustment
Disorder of mild severity as the result of the limitations from a series of
complications from her fractured
wrists. She is emotionally over reacting to her
situation and has not resolved her anger. Her psychological condition is the
of her employment as it is the direct effect of complications and
consequences of her injury at work
”. There then followed over the
ensuing 17 years or more, involvement of a number of psychiatrists concluding a
range of diagnoses,
as is common in the field. The Employer met the cost of the
Worker’s treatment and medication in that regard.
was not substantively suggested by the Employer that they were not ‘on
notice’ of the alleged Sequela. Had the court
been required to determine
the issue of “notice”, it could have confidently been
The real procedural issue
for determination is whether the Employer had at any time over the life of the
claim accepted liability
for the Sequela alleged.
Worker’s submissions point to a range of evidence indicating the Employer
had accepted liability for the
In my view the
Worker’s position has greatest weight in the context of the Employer
having effectively paid “
compensation
” in respect of medical
expenses apparently incurred in relation to the alleged
That the Employer also
required the Worker to attend and submit to a number of medicolegal psychiatric
examinations directed to diagnosis
and causation is also relevant.
Employer was fully aware of the asserted Sequela, however awareness of potential
liability cannot simply translate to acceptance
The various
documentation and statements from the Employer referred to in paragraphs 7.5 to
7.14 of the Worker’s Submissions
dated 13 August 2021 do not amount to
unequivocal acceptance of liability for the Sequela. The reference to resolution
of the Employer’s
refusal to accept liability for psychological
counselling
” reads primarily as a commitment to meet the costs of
treatment, which it did, rather than general liability for the Sequela.
willingness by an employer’s insurer to meet medical expenses incurred,
regardless of whether the issue of liability has
been unequivocally resolved,
‘acceptance’.
Similarly, it is not my conclusion that any of the weekly benefits paid by the
Employer can be specifically and directly attributes
to the asserted
relation to consequential or secondary injury, there is no requirement to comply
with some provisions or processes of the RTW Act
which apply a primary
That reality, together
with the Employer’s conduct in this matter, produced uncertainty in the
Worker’s position. The
Employer sought and received extensive psychiatric
opinion in relation to diagnosis and aetiology over an extended period of time,
which opinions advised of psychological issues of clinical significance, and
their connection to the physical injury for which liability
had been accepted.
Despite the capacity in a worker to make application under s 104 of the RTW Act,
had a finding of deemed acceptance
been open, the court would have been strongly
Nonetheless,
I do not find that the Employer accepted liability for the asserted Sequela. It
therefore falls to the Worker to prove
the Sequela and any incapacity arising
That is particularly
due to the conclusion that, by their pleadings, the Worker’s Claim widened
the scope of the proceedings.
noted, the Worker adduced her evidence first at hearing. The Worker’s oral
evidence was the subject of extensive and critical
cross-examination and,
subsequently, written submissions, including putting her credit in issue
both examination-in-chief and cross-examination Worker presented as distressed
and anxious, but sought to give a good account of
herself. The Worker
persistently displayed some unusual behaviour, particularly in using pressure
from her right thumb to apparently
relieve discomfort or pain in her left wrist
and hand. In cross-examination aspects of the Worker’s evidence appeared
and, at times contrary. In my view the Worker’s memory was
objectively poor, and she was at times confused. That conclusion
is open on the
basis of various incomplete answers given in evidence, which were then assisted
by reflection or reminder. It is noted
that, on one view, a conflict existed
between the Worker’s evidence concerning her capacity to be out of doors
and interacting
with people, particularly in relation to dropping her children
to primary school, and one or more answers in cross examination. However,
accept the context in which the Worker explained she understood the question and
answered in, being how she was coping and functioning
at the time of the
the issues in the proceeding and the confronting nature of formally giving
evidence in court, I consider that the information
provided by the Worker in a
clinical environment when attending medical specialists and the like, would be
more easily given by the
Worker, and in a calmer fashion.
Nonetheless,
a good degree of consistency existed between what the Worker has told clinicians
over time and her oral evidence to the
One example was in
relation to the two years the Worker spent in Wales, accompanying her serviceman
husband on posting, until 2018.
On return to Australia the Worker’s advice
to clinicians was that her existence in Wales was improved, and that she was a
deal better by the time of return. This was also freely conceded by the
Worker at court. That period, including having regard to
the differences in her
existence and apparent perceptions, is good evidence and insight into both the
Worker and the alleged Sequela.
Worker’s husband, Mr Scott Krum, gave evidence-in-chief by a statement
tendered by consent, followed by cross-examination.
It should be noted that Mr
Krum has more to do with the Worker than anyone. I do note that Mr Krum can be
said to have benefited
financially over the life of the claim, and depending on
the outcome of the Claim and Counterclaim has much to lose. Depending, it
be a simple matter to conclude his evidence to be partisan, and accord it little
or no weight. However, that is not my conclusion.
Mr Krum presented as honest
and unguarded, but also forthright or direct. Although I accept that at times Mr
Krum is engaged in employment
(including away from home at times), in relation
to the Worker’s activities I consider Mr Krum’s evidence on the
functioning and capacity is both significant and accepted.
medical evidence led by the Worker was generally supportive of a finding of
total incapacity. I consider Dr Wilkins’ evidence
to be particularly
reliable and significant, despite the period which had elapsed since he last
examined the Worker in person. The
evidence of neither Dr De Sousa nor Dr Takyar
was as sound or influential in my
conclusions.
Nonetheless, some
of their evidence was significant.
Employer’s evidence relied heavily on the reports of Dr Robin Mitchell,
extracts of the first of which were included in
the body of the Notice discussed
above. That report was a multidisciplinary product of the firm ECA, conducted by
Expert Experts
Pty Limited.
professional advice provided by Mr Justin Clark and Miss Rhonda Nohra rely upon
the clinical views and conclusions of Dr Mitchell,
in that those members of the
team carry out their assessments and functions within the medical parameters and
clinical advice and
conclusions provided by Dr
the potential confounding or confusing aspects of paragraph A9.4 in the first
report as at November 2019, it was the concerted
conclusion of the experts
comprising the multi-disciplinary ECA team that the Worker had capacity to work
20 hours per week. That
conclusion was also supported by Dr Shaikh’s
evidence. It should be noted that Dr Mitchell provided subsequent and clarifying
reports for the purpose of determining the Worker’s capacity.
to giving evidence, Dr Shaikh had provided reports in August 2013,
December 2015, November 2016 and August 2019. Typographical
aspects of the
reports were corrected on 9 April
Dr Shaikh explained his
references to “
abnormal illness behaviour
”, including that
the Worker “...
was perhaps overstating symptomology and
I, therefore, felt that there was evidence
to suggest abnormal illness behaviour
”. That was on the basis of
various aspects, including that the Worker wore a Fitbit device which recorded
12,000 steps on the
examination.
Dr Shaikh also
confirmed that the possible behaviour referred to was not malingering (so for
external gain) but for “
internal gain
”. On the last occasion
Dr Shaikh examined the Worker, being August 2019, he said; “
I struggled
material incapacity as a result of her psychiatric
condition I felt if she were to work
”. That included on the basis that
the Worker had confirmed to Dr Shaikh that she had just returned from two years
had engaged more and to a better capacity overseas and that her
symptoms had improved while
also note the surveillance evidence tendered by the Employer, detailed at
paragraph [15] above. That footage was not the subject
of further or detailed
consideration or specialist opinion by any of the medical experts called to give
evidence. The Court is left
to reach its own limited conclusions on viewing the
footage, which was recorded over an approximate period of six years. With one
definite exception, I consider most of the footage to be revealing a very
little, other than a person who at times walks with a limp
to the left leg, and
generally slowly and predictably. It is clear that the Worker obtains some
pleasure in spending leisure time
with her children, as she should. In my view
the only footage of significance was recorded in May 2014. At that time it is
that the Worker was capable of lifting five bags of
‘full-size’ potting mix from a ground-level hardware store shelf
onto the base level of a shopping trolley. Secondly she was also capable of
unloading those bags into the boot of her motor vehicle.
I also note that at the
time of unloading into the vehicle, by the fourth or fifth bag, the Worker
appeared to suffer discomfort
in her left wrist. That is surmised due to the use
of her right thumb to press into her left wrist, immediately following the
considered the Worker’s evidence both in person at court and that adduced
through clinical experts, I am satisfied to
the necessary standard that the
Worker has the Sequela pleaded by her claim, including that it arose out of
employment. Namely, as
a direct result of sustaining the physical injury for
which the Employer accepted liability. In particular, I find that the Worker
that 21 November 2019 and continuing was, in addition to incapacity arising from
her physical injury, suffering from the Sequela
and an incapacity as a result of
that Sequela. The Worker continues to suffer incapacity as a result of both the
physical injury
and the Sequela.
I am not satisfied to the necessary standard that the incapacity is total. That
is, although significantly incapacitated,
the Worker is not totally
incapacitated for employment. In the circumstances of my view on the evidence,
and due to the fluctuating
nature of the Sequela, it is impossible to precisely
define the extent of the current incapacity.
matters stood in November 2019 and at the time of hearing, the incapacity
resulting from the Sequela is more significant than the
ongoing physical
incapacity the product of the
the best I can, my conclusion is that, with appropriate rehabilitation supports,
the Worker should be capable of working 10
hours per week. Time will tell
whether that degree of employment might be exceeded due to improved capacity.
(i) The Worker is partially incapacitated as a result of the Injury and Sequela.
(ii) The Worker is capable of undertaking work in employment for 10 hours per
(iii) The Worker’s compensation under s 65 of the RTW Act is reduced
accordingly from 7 December 2019.
(iv) The parties have liberty to apply for costs, including supported by written
submissions and any Affidavit material relating
to efforts to resolve, within 28
(v) Any responses to written submissions are to be filed and served within 28
days thereafter.
At that time the Worker’s
surname was
, as will be apparent from various of the documentary
evidence at hearing.
W18 - Folio 1
The proceeding is
” under s 69, as compared with an
application
” under s 104 of the RTW
The first 10 paragraphs of
that pleading comprise the Employer’s defence, and then proceeds by
paragraphs 11 through to 17
to plead an amended counterclaim. That counterclaim
calls up and repeats paragraphs 1 to 10, in readiness for the possibility that
the Notice may be found
It is noted that
paragraph 4A of the Worker’s Amended Statement of Claim pleads "a
consequential mental injury within the meaning
of the Act", and that some issue
concerning WPI was touched on in submissions, although not including s 13A of
the RTW Act.
alternative that if any Sequela existed, it did not affect the Worker’s
entitlement to weekly compensation paid up
until 5 December
Which position is
consistent with the content and purported effect of the
The Exhibits Register
or "Log" refer. The court also had the benefit of councils extensive written
submissions
Being, at that
fractured left distal radius and right scaphoid
" - Folio 14 of
Exhibit W1.
MacMahon Contractors Pty Ltd
[2018] NTCA 7
Akin to the logic
previously demanded by
Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd v Sprowles
[2001] NSWCA 305
to 198 and 203 to 221 of Exhibit
Second folio of Exhibit
Lee v MacMahon
Contractors Pty Ltd
[2018] NTCA 7
, and the authorities cited at [21], and
paragraphs [37] to [39].
Sections 69(1) and (3) of the RTW
Newton v Masonic
[2009] NTSC 51
Lee v MacMahon
Contractors Pty Ltd
[2018] NTCA 7
Collins Radio
Constructors v Day
[1998] NTCA 15
(1998) 143 FLR 425
Ju Nominees Pty Ltd v
(1999) 9 NTLR
Noting that determination
has no regard for a query concerning who had signed the Notice, or any possible
issue concerning certification
which, on a plain reading of s 69(3) only applies
to cancellation of benefits, although
Lee v MacMahon Contractors Pty Ltd
[2018] NTCA 7
(a) and (c) indicate
remaining issues raised by the Amended Statement of Claim of 28 April 2021, the
Further Amended Notice of Defence (including
Amended Counterclaim) dated 15
September 2021 and the Defence to Counterclaim dated 23 March
The Notice refers to
Dr Wasim Shaikh’s report of 26 August 20219, but simply advises that
He cannot justify a psychiatric basis for your reported incapacity for
the facts pled by paragraphs 4A, 4B, 4C and (ultimately)
proceedings before the Court for the recovery of compensation under
Part 5 or for an order or ruling in respect of a matter or question
to or arising out of a claim for
compensation
Part of Exhibit W18.
Van Dongen v Northern Territory of Australia
[2009] NTSC 1
Lee v MacMahon Contractors Pty Ltd
[2018] NTCA 7
Pty Ltd v LCJ & Anor
[2020] NTSC 38
to [13] concerning accepted
submissions dated 13 August 2021 at paragraphs 7.3 to
Section 3 of the RTW
Act defining "
compensation
" in very broad terms. The Employer also sought
various medicolegal expert evidence from psychiatrists, which generally
up until 2019 that mental health issues consequent on or secondary to
the physical injury,
Lee v MacMahon
Contractors Pty Ltd
[2018] NTCA 7
Lee v MacMahon
MacMahon Contractors Pty Ltd
[2018] NTCA 7
to [27] and
Pty Ltd v LCJ & Anor
[2020] NTSC 38
Compare s 4 and s
80(2) of the RTW Act. I also note that any “estoppel” which might
possibly be raised would require
Masonic Homes Inc
[2009] NTSC 51
Laminex Group Pty Ltd v
[2021] NTSC 92
, noting that were any s 104 Application made
by the Worker, that onus would also prevail in the absence of any acceptance of
I take the statements in
Lee v MacMahon
(supra) at [21](e) and
[43] to apply to situations where the cancellation or reduction is in relation
to an accepted injury. Here,
the s 69 Notice addressed the injury which had been
accepted, took the position that weekly benefits had never been paid for any
unaccepted Sequela, and simply relied on a psychiatric opinion to characterise
the asserted Sequela as irrelevant.
Laminex Group Pty Ltd v
[2021] NTSC 92
, including the authorities cited at footnote
19 therein, but noting that the Worker probably had little choice but to do so
the circumstances, the “mental injury” not having been
Noting that, on
one view, the Worker has been obdurate from the outset and throughout management
of her claim. See Exhibits W4 for
Dr De Sousa has
treated and supported the Worker for a long period of time, however is a General
Practitioner rather than practising
any relevant speciality, and his protective
position in respect of the Worker’s vulnerabilities do not appear to have
that part of her rehabilitation which might result in employment. Dr
Takyar’s steadfast or even semantic position in relation
to some aspects
of cross examination did not assist determination of some
Page 136 onwards of
Exhibit W1.
Transcript page
Transcript pages 202
examination Dr Sheikh conceded that the 12,000 steps could be explained by the
gym attendance that she reported to him in
Which aspects
persisted for some time on return to Australia. For example, the Worker reported
that she was also trying to attend
the gym five times a week, and was being
partially successful, to the level of three visits per week at that
It is noted that the
Employer’s position through the s 69 Notice and paragraph 14 to 16 of the
Counterclaim, is that the Worker
is capable of "part-time" work, first
quantified and 20 hours per week by paragraph 16. That position is in the
context of there
being no relevant Sequela.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (197 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter