URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCCA/2025/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:18:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kerridge v The King [2025] NTCCA 6 (17 July 2025)
Kerridge v The King
[2025] NTCCA 6
PARTIES: KERRIDGE, Mathew Phillip Harrison
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: CA 14 of 2024 (21939935)
DELIVERED: 17 July 2025
HEARING DATE: 7 April 2025
JUDGMENT OF: Southwood & Brownhill JJ & Riley AJ
CATCHWORDS:
CRIME – Appeals – Application for leave to appeal against
conviction – Wrong decision on a question of law or a
miscarriage of
Whether trial Judge’s summing up regarding the use to be made of
evidence about complainant’s motive to lie was contrary
Summing up was not contrary to law – Leave to appeal refused.
Whether trial Judge’s summing up regarding the use to be made of
relationship evidence was inadequate – Summing up was
not inadequate
– Leave to appeal refused.
Criminal Code 1983
(NT) s 410, s 411
Brawn v The King
[2025] HCA 20
(2025) 99 ALJR 872
Cooper v The King
Doe v The Queen
[2008] NSWCCA 203
(2008) 187 A Crim R 328
Doggett v The
(2001) 208 CLR 343
EK v The Queen
[2010] NSWCCA 199
(2010) 79 NSWLR 740
83 A Crim R 502
Hamilton (a pseudonym) v The Queen
[2021] HCA 33
HML v The Queen
[2008] HCA 16
(2008) 235 CLR 334
Hoang v The Queen
(2022) 276 CLR 252
Hofer v The Queen
[2021] HCA 36
(2021) 274 CLR 351
Huynh v The
(2013) 87 ALJR 434
Huxley v The Queen
[2023] HCA 40
(2023) 98 ALJR 62
Katsuno v The Queen
[1999] HCA 50
(1999) 199 CLR 40
KTR v The Queen
MDP v The King
[2025] HCA 24
Munmurrie v Western
[2007] WASCA 184
RG v The Queen
[2010] NSWCCA 173
Pattison v Tasmania
[2017] TASSC 13
(2017) 30 Tas R 1
South v The Queen
The Queen v E
(1996) 39 NSWLR 450
The Queen v Fuge
[2001] NSWCCA 208
The Queen v G
[1993] QCA 267
[1994] 1 Qd R 540
The Queen v Maiolo
(2013) 117 SASR 1
The Queen v Uhrig
(unreported, NSWCCA, 24
October 1996, Hunt CJ at CL;
Weiss v The Queen
[2005] HCA 81
(2005) 224 CLR 300
v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 347
(2011) 33 VR 406
Wilde v The Queen
[1988] HCA 6
(1988) 164 CLR 365
referred to.
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: B Lodge
Respondent: PK Williams with LJ Auld & KL McIndoe
Solicitors:
Applicant: Shaw Legal & Advisory
Respondent: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Judgment category: B
Number of pages: 47
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Kerridge v The King
[2025] NTCCA 6
No. CA 14 of 2025 (21939935)
MATHEW PHILLIP HARRISON KERRIDGE
CORAM: SOUTHWOOD & BROWNHILL JJ & RILEY AJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 17 July 2025)
applicant was found guilty by a jury of 15 counts of aggravated assault and
sexual intercourse without consent committed from
2015 to 2018. The trial Judge
gave directions to the jury about evidence relating to the complainant’s
motive to lie and the
use to be made of relationship evidence. The issues in the
application were whether those directions gave rise to a wrong decision
question of law.
The charges, trial outcome and proposed grounds
applicant was charged on indictment with 17 counts of aggravated assault and
sexual intercourse without consent relating to
a number of occasions involving
his then domestic partner, the complainant.
applicant pleaded not guilty to all counts. On 16 September 2021, he was found
guilty of 15 counts, namely:
(a) three counts of aggravated assault of the complainant, contrary to
ss 188(1) and (2) of the
Criminal Code 1983
’) (Counts 3, 8 and 13); and
(b) 12 counts of having sexual intercourse without consent, comprised of
fellatio, penile-vaginal penetration and penile-anal penetration,
contrary to
s 192(3) of the
Criminal Code
(Counts 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14,
15, 16 and 17).
applicant sought leave to appeal against the findings of guilt on the grounds
that the trial Judge’s directions to the
jury about the
complainant’s motive to lie and the use to be made of the relationship
evidence gave rise to a miscarriage of
justice. Leave to appeal was required
because the proposed ground of appeal involved a question of mixed law and
applicant also filed an application for an extension of time within which to
appeal, which was required because the time for
filing a notice of appeal
expired on 29 November 2021.
[6] With the
consent of the respondent, pursuant to r 82.17(2) of the
Supreme Court
(NT), the applications were deferred until the hearing of the
appeal. The applications for leave to appeal and an extension of time
substantive issues were heard together.
respondent opposed the grant of leave to appeal on the bases that the directions
given by the trial Judge did not contain
error and, even if they did, there was
no realistic possibility that the jury engaged in impermissible reasoning to
guilt. In the
alternative, but for the same reasons, the respondent argued that
if leave to appeal was granted, the appeal should be
The Crown case
[8] The Crown
case at trial was that the applicant and the complainant met at school and
started their relationship as young adults.
Initially, the relationship was a
happy one. They lived in Queensland. They were both working and earning good
money. In 2010, just
before the birth of their first child, they began having
arguments about money. Initially, the arguments were infrequent and verbal,
over time they became more frequent and more severe, to the point where the
applicant began physically assaulting the complainant.
On one occasion when they
argued, the applicant blamed the complainant for their lack of disposable
income, called her a ‘waste
of space’, physically assaulted her,
pointed a firearm at her torso and head, told her it was loaded, said she
it’ and pulled the trigger. This conduct, committed in
Queensland, could not be and was not the subject of any charge.
followed a period when the applicant was working and making good money. The
relationship was in a good place. In around
2013, the applicant resigned from
his job and was unemployed. The relationship soured again because they were
reliant on the complainant’s
decided to move to Alice Springs to gain opportunities for better paid work. By
that stage, they had two children. After
they moved, the issues in the
relationship continued and arguments about money were frequent. On one occasion,
the complainant ran
away from the applicant and he chased her, caught up to her,
hit her in the shoulder and kneed her in the leg. On another occasion,
complainant drove to pick up the applicant after he had been out drinking, he
demanded that he drive home, the complainant was
not comfortable with that, the
applicant tried to grab her through the car window and punched the window
causing it to shatter. On
another occasion, the applicant told the complainant
that if she did not pull her head in, he would use a loader to dig a hole in
Central Australia and bury her in it. On another occasion, following an argument
by kicking and punching
her, grabbing her head and banging it against a kitchen panel, then using a
cattle prod on her for about
four to five seconds. On another occasion, after he
had difficulty starting his car, the applicant asked the complainant if she had
also had difficulties starting the car, she said she did not, he accused her of
lying, slapped her, kicked her, grabbed her hair
and slammed her head against a
kitchen cupboard. Evidence of these uncharged acts was given by the complainant
or tendered as agreed
facts. Also tendered were text messages between the
applicant and the complainant, which were abusive and offensive.
[11] On around 5
or 6 October 2015, the applicant and the complainant drank alcohol and argued
complainant in the face. They continued
drinking. The applicant told the complainant to sniff some white powder from a
plate, saying
she needed to ‘get on the same level’ as him. She
understood the powder to be MDMA and snorted some. The applicant told
complainant to take her clothes off because he wanted to have sex with her. She
complied. He grabbed her head and pushed it onto
his penis. He told her it was
her punishment for not paying the bills. He then pushed her onto the bed, pulled
her legs open and
had penile-vaginal intercourse with her without her consent,
during which she told him to stop. That is the offending the subject
of Counts 1
[12] Between 23
October 2015 and 1 July 2018, the applicant and the complainant argued about
money. He yelled at her and called her
a ‘waste of space’. He led
her into a bedroom, took a gun from a cupboard, loaded bullets into the gun and
at her, telling her the money issues were her fault and this was her
punishment. He then put the gun down and told her to get undressed.
He told her
to suck his penis. She did so but was choking and finding it hard to breathe.
She told him she could not breathe and
could not do it. He told her to get onto
the bed, on her back with her head hanging over the edge of the bed, and to suck
again, which she did. Again, she had difficulty breathing and was
choking. She was unable to pull away. The applicant then flipped
her over and
had penile-vaginal intercourse and penile-anal intercourse with her without her
consent. That is the offending the subject
of Counts 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7.
[13] Between 1
and 31 July 2018, the complainant was sitting on a couch watching television.
The applicant told her it was time to
go to the bedroom. He pulled her off the
couch by her hair and started hitting and kicking her. Once they were in the
bedroom, he
retrieved a cattle prod and told her she had to suck his penis and
have sex with him or he would use the prod on her again. As a
result, she
performed fellatio on him and he had penile-vaginal intercourse and penile-anal
intercourse with her without her consent.
That is the offending the subject of
Counts 8, 9, 10 and 11.
September 2019, the complainant was asleep on a couch. The applicant slapped her
face using his penis. He told her to wake
up and go to the bedroom to
‘give him a service’. She told him she did not want to. He pulled
her onto the floor, hit
and kicked her and told her to suck his penis and have
sex with him. She then performed fellatio on him and he had penile-vaginal
intercourse and penile-anal intercourse with her without her consent. That is
the offending the subject of Counts 12, 13, 14, 15,
The applicant’s position at the trial
applicant did not give evidence and did not call any evidence at the trial. The
applicant’s case was that the jury
could not be satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt of the reliability of the complainant’s evidence,
including because she had
a motive to lie.
The nature of the
appeal and the applicable principles
[16] This is an
application for leave to appeal under s 410(b) of the
Criminal Code
The proposed notice of appeal contains two grounds, as follows:
(a) The trial Judge’s directions as to the complainant’s motive to
lie caused a miscarriage of justice (Ground 1).
(b) The trial Judge’s directions as to the use that could be made of the
relationship evidence caused a miscarriage of justice
(Ground 2).
[17] At the
hearing, the applicant sought to amend the proposed notice of appeal to include,
in each ground, that the trial Judge’s
directions comprised a wrong
decision on a question of law. That application was not opposed by the
respondent.
The common form appeal provision
[18] Section
411(1) of the
Criminal Code
provides that, on an appeal against
conviction, the Court shall allow the appeal if it is of the opinion that the
verdict of the
jury should be set aside on the ground, firstly, that the verdict
is unreasonable, or cannot be supported having regard to the evidence;
that the judgment of the court of trial should be set aside on the ground of a
wrong decision on any question of law; or
thirdly, that on any ground whatsoever
there was a miscarriage of justice. Those ‘three limbs’ are followed
proviso’ in s 411(2), which provides that the Court may
nevertheless dismiss the appeal if it considers that no substantial
miscarriage
of justice has actually occurred. Section 411 of the
Criminal Code
common form of criminal appeal provision found in the States and Territories of
Recent High Court authority
[19] The High
Court has recently delivered two decisions in which the Court has attempted to
provide clarity of the principles applicable
(a) the second limb of the common form criminal appeal provision, namely
MDP v The King
[2025] HCA 24
’), in which the Court unanimously stated the
principles;
(b) the third limb of the common form criminal appeal provision, namely
[2025] HCA 20
(2025) 99 ALJR 872
’), in which the
Court unanimously stated the
principles.
Second limb of the common form appeal provision – MDP
[20] Relevantly
for the purposes of this appeal, in
, the High Court held that the
first step in engaging the second limb of the common form appeal provision is
for the appellant to
identify a ‘decision’ by the trial Judge on a
question of law.
Such a decision is
not confined to decisions of a trial Judge that are made over the objection of a
party; rather, it involves some
determination or response to a question of law
by a trial Judge that has legal effect in the trial, considered in the context
the duties and obligations of a trial Judge at a criminal
responsibility to deliver a summing up that correctly states the relevant
principles of law rests with the trial Judge and
thus, if a trial Judge
misdirects the jury on a matter of law, there will be a wrong decision on a
question of law for the purposes
of the second limb, whether or not those
decisions were the subject of submissions or counsel caused or contributed to
the decision.
[22] Although
a mere failure by a trial Judge to give a particular direction will not
ordinarily involve the making of a decision
on a question of law unless a party
has requested such a direction: (a) the failure to give a direction that was not
requested may
nevertheless amount to a miscarriage of justice (under the third
limb); and (b) given the context of the duties and obligations of
a trial Judge
in a criminal trial, there may be circumstances in which a trial Judge’s
failure to give a direction that has
not been requested that has legal effect in
a trial gives rise to a decision on a question of
High Court held that the second step in engaging the second limb of the common
form appeal provision arises if there is a
decision on a question of law and, if
there is, the appellant must then establish that the decision was
[24] The High
Court held that the third step in engaging the second limb of the common form
appeal provision arises if it is shown
there was a wrong decision on a question
of law, in which case the appellant must show that the wrong decision involved
that was either fundamental to the trial or, if not fundamental,
material in the relevant sense.
same approach to significance and materiality of the wrong decision for the
purpose of the second limb corresponds with that
applying to the third limb as
explained in
(see below).
error fundamental to the trial is an error in the sense discussed in the
authorities as necessarily meaning there was a substantial
miscarriage of
By way of example, in
Hofer v The Queen
[2021] HCA 36
(2021) 274 CLR 351
, such an error was described (at
[123]) as an error ‘so profound as to be characterised as a failure to
observe the requirements
of the criminal process in a fundamental
respect’. In
Huxley v The Queen
[2023] HCA 40
(2023) 98 ALJR 62
, such an error
was described (at [44]) as an error ‘so serious that it will be a
substantial miscarriage of justice irrespective
of whether it might have
affected the outcome of the trial’.
, the High Court held that, if the wrong decision is fundamental to
the trial, the guilty verdict must be set aside; the proviso is
necessarily
inapplicable, and it is unnecessary to undertake any further assessment of
whether the wrong decision could have had
any effect on the verdict and whether
no substantial miscarriage of justice has occurred; and the appeal must be
[27] Otherwise,
the appellant must establish that the wrong decision involved an error that
could realistically have affected the
reasoning of the jury to the verdict of
guilty in the trial that was
This does not include
‘truly innocuous or irrelevant wrong
decisions’.
[28] The fourth
step in engaging the second limb of the common form appeal provision arises if
the wrong decision on a question of
law does not concern a question that was
fundamental to the trial but is nevertheless found to be material and, in such
appeal must be allowed unless the prosecution establishes that no
substantial miscarriage of justice occurred, by applying the
the High Court held that, if the evidence the subject of a particular
decision on a question of law was admitted over objection by
counsel or the
direction the subject of a decision was sought by counsel but refused or given
over opposition by counsel, then no
question of the conduct of counsel who made
the objection or sought the direction contributing to any wrong decision will
While the decisions of
counsel will often provide the context in which a trial Judge may make a
decision on a question of law,
whether the conduct of counsel caused or contributed to the decision by the
trial Judge being wrong is irrelevant to whether there
is a wrong decision on a
question of
of the common form appeal provision – Brawn
, the High Court held that the third limb of the common form appeal
provision captures an error or irregularity affecting an appellant’s
and, if that error or irregularity was fundamental in the sense discussed in the
authorities, then there will be a miscarriage
of justice and no occasion to
address the proviso separately will arise because a fundamental error or
irregularity will necessarily
mean that there was a substantial miscarriage of
[31] For other
errors or irregularities to constitute a miscarriage of justice within the third
limb, they must be material in the
sense that the error or irregularity could
realistically have affected the reasoning of the jury to a verdict of guilty
returned by the jury in the criminal trial that occurred, where
‘could’ means ‘having the capacity to’ and
‘realistically’ distinguishes the assessment of the possibility of a
different outcome from a possibility that is fanciful
improbable.
This threshold of
materiality is for the appellant to establish, but the burden is not onerous,
and it does not invite an analysis
of whether, but for the error, the accused
might or might not have been found
This assessment is
qualitatively different from the assessment to be made in applying the proviso,
namely whether the evidence properly
admitted at trial proved, beyond reasonable
doubt, the accused’s guilt of the offence on which the jury returned its
, the High Court noted that it was not addressing whether or not the
establishment of an error or irregularity that is material will
be sufficient to
establish a miscarriage of justice in circumstances where that error or
irregularity was the product of, or contributed
to by, the accused as a result
of rational forensic decisions of their trial
Application
of the principles in this case
applicant argued that both its proposed amended grounds of appeal involved
complaints both of a misdirection and a failure
to direct, in the context of a
failure by the applicant’s trial counsel to object or seek a direction or
re-direction, with
the consequence, following
, that both the second
and third limbs of s 411(1) were at play and required to be considered. The
applicant accepted, however, that
under either limb the tests about the
significance of the wrong decision or error (fundamental and material) were the
[34] In this
case, where the proposed appeal grounds take issue with what the trial Judge
said and did not say to the jury about certain
subjects, it seems to us to be
artificial and pointless to separate the arguments under each proposed ground of
appeal into arguments
falling within the second limb and arguments about what the trial Judge did
say as an error or irregularity falling within the third limb. The reasons for
that view are:
(a) The fundamental and material tests apply in the same way to both the second
and third limbs of s 411(1).
(b) The High Court accepted in
that a failure to give a direction
without trial counsel’s request could give rise to a decision on a
question of law.
(c) The trial Judge’s responsibilities included to deliver a summing up
that correctly states the relevant principles of law.
(d) There is no issue in this case whether there was a discernible forensic
reason on the part of the applicant’s trial counsel
for the failure to
seek a direction or re-direction. The respondent does not rely on any such
[35] In the
circumstances of this case, a proposed appeal ground which takes issue with what
a trial Judge said
did not say about a particular subject matter, in
a context where trial counsel made no objection to or request for a direction or
misdirection, is sensibly regarded and dealt with as a ground asserting a
misdirection within the second limb. In this case, to also
deal with such an
appeal ground as an error within the third limb is not required and serves no
useful purpose.
Consideration of the misdirection in the context
of the trial
Hargraves v The Queen
[2011] HCA 44
(2011) 245 CLR 257
, French CJ, Gummow, Hayne,
Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ observed (at [46]) that a trial Judge’s
instructions to the jury, whether
by way of legal direction or judicial
commentary on the facts, must not deflect the jury’s attention from the
need to be persuaded
beyond reasonable doubt of the accused’s guilt before
returning a verdict of guilty. Accordingly, it was held (at [46]) that
ultimate question must be whether, taken as a whole, the Judge’s
instructions to the jury deflected the jury from its fundamental
deciding whether the prosecution proved the elements of the charged offence
beyond reasonable doubt, emphasising that whether
there has been on any ground a
miscarriage of justice must always require consideration of the whole of the
Judge’s charge
to the jury.
Huxley v The Queen
[2023] HCA 40
(2023) 98 ALJR 62
, Gordon, Steward and Gleeson JJ
repeated these principles concerning the approach to a misdirection of law (at
[40]-[41]) and held
(at [42]) that they apply in the same way whether the
misdirection is characterised as an error of law, a miscarriage of justice
wrong decision on a question of law. Their Honours added (at [43]) that where
there is a misdirection or other error of law,
the jury, who must take their
instruction on matters of law from the Judge, must necessarily be misled to some
extent unless the
error is corrected and whether a direction involves a
misdirection on the law may depend upon contextual matters, including the issues
at the trial, the evidence, closing addresses by counsel and the whole of the
trial Judge’s summing up.
[38] Nothing
said by the High Court in
(a case where the trial Judge’s
direction was wrong as a matter of law because it instructed the jury, contrary
to the law,
that they could use certain (inadmissible) evidence as propensity
evidence) or
(a case about a breach of the prosecution’s duty
of disclosure) has detracted from the principle set out in
whether there was a wrong decision on a question of law by virtue of a
misdirection by the trial Judge to the jury may depend
upon those contextual
contextual matters are important in this case, where the applicant’s
proposed grounds of appeal have a limited and
narrow focus on very small parts,
mere phrases or single sentences, in the trial Judge’s lengthy and
comprehensive summing
, Gordon, Steward and Gleeson JJ endorsed the observation of
French CJ, Crennan and Kiefel JJ in
that the decision of
Defence counsel at trial not to seek a redirection informs consideration of the
extent to which, taken in context,
the direction was likely to confuse or
mislead the jury.
[41] Again,
nothing said by the High Court in
has detracted from
this principle. The High Court held in
that whether the conduct of
counsel caused or contributed to the decision by the trial Judge being wrong is
irrelevant to whether
there is a wrong decision on a question of law. However,
that is not to say that, especially in a case like this in which the asserted
wrong decisions turn on a construction of words or phrases in the trial
Judge’s instructions understood in the context of the
summing up as a
whole, it is irrelevant that trial counsel did not raise any concerns with the
trial Judge or seek any redirection.
The failure to do so is relevant to
assessing the meaning and effect of the trial Judge’s instruction in the
context of the
summing up and the trial as a whole.
Motive to lie directions
The trial Judge’s directions about the complainant’s motive to
his summing up to the jury, the trial Judge addressed the jury about the drawing
of inferences.
His Honour told
the jury that they could draw inferences from a combination of facts which, when
viewed as a whole, persuade them
that the inference should be drawn, even though
no conclusion can be drawn from looking at each fact
individually.
His Honour said
that when the facts were looked at together in the light of all the
circumstances of the case, the jury may be able
to be satisfied that an
inference can properly be drawn from those
His Honour said they may
think that the probative force of the combination of the facts looked at
together has a cumulative effect
and they should therefore not reject one
circumstance simply because, standing alone, no inference can be drawn from it,
are entitled to draw an inference from a combination of facts, none of
which viewed alone would support that
His Honour then
Now, this is
important when we consider the subject of motive. It is not essential that
either the Crown or the defence establish
a motive before you can draw an
inference from it. Nevertheless, the presence of
or absence of
motive may be an important factor in deciding whether or not, for
example, [the complainant] has told you a lot of lies about these
assaults. But motive is only a piece of circumstantial evidence. The weight to
be given to motive,
if you find it proved
, is a matter to be considered
in the whole of the circumstances of the case.
So part of the defence submission to you was that you can draw an inference
that [the complainant] had a motive to lie about the alleged
rapes in order to
enhance her Family Law and child custody, and so on, aspirations. And the
defence took you to, you may remember,
a number of matters that they asked you
to consider that related to that. [Those matters were summarised.]
... So what is being put to you is from this sequence of events [y]ou can
draw the inference that she had a motive to lie in order
to enhance her claim to
proper[t]y in Family Law proceedings. You may remember that in December 2019, a
letter was sent from her
lawyer to the accused about Family Law matters.
Or it was put that, in addition, she also had a motive to lie in order to get
revenge for all the things that have happened to her.
And she denied those
things, but you are being invited to draw the inference that that is what
happened or, at least, that is what
may have happened.
And if there is a
reasonable doubt in your minds as to whether or not she had such a motive
then it was put to you that you might have a reasonable doubt as to whether the
Crown has proved the allegations that are contained
in the indictment. And that
is a matter for you.
[43] Subsequently,
near the end of the summing up, the trial Judge dealt with some evidence given
by the complainant in cross-examination
of the incidents.
course, ladies and gentlemen, before you can reach your verdicts I tell you, you
should scrutinise the evidence in this case
with great care. If you
reasonable doubt
as to whether or not [the complainant] had a motive to lie
and you have
a reasonable doubt
that she not only had that motive but
that she acted upon it then your verdicts ought to be not guilty.
The impugned decision on a question of law
applicant identified the wrong decision on a question of law, the
mis-directions, as the underlined parts of the two passages
set out above. The
complaints about the directions given were three-fold and there was an
additional complaint that the directions
did not go far enough. They will be
addressed in turn.
[45] First, the
applicant argued that the jury were directed that the
of a motive
to lie was a matter that could be taken into account in assessing the
complainant’s credibility, whether she had
lied about the alleged
was said to be wrong in law because it was inconsistent with the High
Court’s decision in
Palmer v The Queen
(1998) 193 CLR 1.
case, Brennan CJ, Gaudron and Gummow JJ held (at [9]) that a complainant’s
account gains no legitimate credibility
from the absence of evidence of a motive
to lie, and if credibility which the jury would otherwise attribute to the
complainant’s
account is strengthened by an accused’s inability to
furnish evidence of a motive for the complainant to lie, the standard
is to that extent diminished. Their Honours said that absence of proof of motive
is entirely neutral.
[47] It is clear
from this passage in
, from the authorities cited in
both before and after this
and from authorities
which have followed and applied
that the concern
is the risk that the onus of proof is transferred from the Crown to the accused
by reasoning that the complainant’s
evidence should be accepted if the
accused does not prove she had a motive to
[48] In this
case, the applicant’s case directly asserted a motive to lie. The
applicant’s trial counsel made that explicit
in his opening
telling the jury that
the complainant’s credibility was a central issue in the case, that the
applicant did not have to establish
that she was lying or provide reasons for
why she might be lying, that there would be evidence which, on the
applicant’s case,
provided a motive for the complainant to make false
allegations, but the applicant did not have to prove anything, and that
ultimately,
aside from any issue raised by the applicant, they had to be
satisfied of the complainant’s credibility and reliability such
could act on the allegations and find the applicant guilty, and if they had any
doubt about those matters they would have
[49] In this
case, telling the jury that the presence or absence of a motive to lie may be
important in deciding whether the complainant
is lying did not transfer the onus
of proof from the Crown to the applicant by directing the jury to reason that
the complainant’s
evidence should be accepted if the applicant did not
prove she had a motive to lie. It was simply to say that, whether or not the
complainant had a motive to lie may be important in the case, given that the
complainant’s credibility was critical in proving
the alleged offences and
that the applicant had asserted and relied on evidence said to show that she had
a motive to lie. So much
is confirmed by the trial Judge having told the jury
earlier in his summing up that the question of whether there is a motive to
tell the truth is a matter the jury will need to
[50] Secondly,
the applicant argued that the jury were directed that, before they could act on
the asserted motive to lie, it had
South v The
[2007] NSWCCA 117
, Hunt AJA (Simpson and Whealy JJ agreeing) observed
(at [42]) that, where there is evidence that the complainant had a motive to
lie, the jury’s task is to consider that evidence and to determine
in the light of such of that evidence as they accept
nevertheless satisfied that the evidence given by the complainant of the
commission of the offence charged is true. Further,
that task necessarily does
not include speculating as to whether there is some other reason why the
complainant would lie, nor does
it include acceptance of the complainant’s
evidence unless some positive answer to that question is given by the accused.
is nothing wrong with reference to a ‘proven’ motive to lie when:
(a) the context clearly indicates that the
trial Judge was referring to
satisfaction by way of inference; (b) the applicant was relying on evidence said
to provide a motive
for the complainant to lie; (c) the applicant’s trial
counsel had clearly indicated in his opening address the motive to lie,
likely evidence about it, and way he was asking the jury to approach that
applicant’s trial counsel reiterated in his closing address that it was
not for the Defence to prove a motive to lie,
but if there is evidence which
admits of a reasonable possibility of it, they would have to
and (e) the trial Judge
said to the jury, near the end of his summing up, that there were a few other
comments he needed to make
and the first of those was in relation to alleged
His Honour went
Now, a lie is a deliberate untruth. A lie is something where
someone knows the truth, but deliberately tells an untruth. That’s
lie is. It’s quite different from merely getting it wrong, having a wrong
memory but believing that what you’re
saying is true. It’s quite
wrong – quite different from being inaccurate in some respects about what
you’re saying
. Of course, the defence do not have to prove that [the
complainant] deliberately lied. They are not required to prove that. The burden
of proof throughout this case rests with the Crown. It is the Crown that have to
satisfy you beyond reasonable doubt of the elements
of each of the
sufficiently clear from the summing up considered as a whole that, when the
trial Judge referred to a ‘proven’
motive to lie, his Honour was
referring to such of the evidence about the complainant having a motive to lie
as they were prepared
[53] Thirdly,
the appellant argued that the jury were directed that they should acquit if they
a reasonable doubt
rather than if there was a reasonable possibility that she was acting on her
to lie. This was said to be wrong in law because it imported the concept
of reasonable doubt into consideration of the existence
of a motive to lie and
was confusing because if the jury were not satisfied about the possibility of
the existence of a motive to
lie, that would not lead to an acquittal, they
would simply put the motive to lie to one side.
[54] The first
reference to ‘reasonable doubt’ in the summing up extracted in
above is in the context
of a summary of the Defence argument. This is made clear by the words
‘then it was put to you’
and the consequence, ‘that you might
have a reasonable doubt as to whether the Crown has proved the
allegations’. Consequently,
what the applicant’s trial counsel said
to the jury in his opening and, particularly, his closing addresses would have
fresh in their minds and is relevant in considering how this part of the
summing up would have been understood by the jury. As set
out in paragraph
above, the applicant’s trial
counsel told the jury that it was not for the Defence to prove a motive to lie,
but if there is
evidence which admits of a reasonable possibility of it, they
would have to acquit.
[55] Further,
that reference to ‘reasonable doubt’ is preceded by the words
‘you are being invited to draw the inference
that that is what happened
or, at least, that is what may have happened
’, and is followed by
the words ‘whether or not she had such a motive’. It is in that
context that the word ‘doubt’
was said. In that context, it is
sufficiently clear that what was being referred to was a reasonable possibility
that the complainant
had a motive to lie.
[56] On that
basis, the two references to ‘reasonable doubt’ in the summing up
extracted in paragraph
properly understood as references to the reasonable possibility that the
complainant had the motive to lie, and the reasonable
possibility that she acted
applicant also argued that the trial Judge did not direct the jury that, if they
did not accept that the complainant had,
or there was a reasonable possibility
that she had, the motive to lie, that does not mean that they would accept her
evidence and
find the accused guilty. Reliance was placed on the observations of
Latham J in
Doe v The Queen
[2008] NSWCCA 203
(2008) 187 A Crim R 328
(at [58]) that where
the defence case directly asserts a motive to lie, and the issue has featured in
the addresses of counsel, a
miscarriage of justice may arise if the summing up
gives undue emphasis to the issue of motive or goes beyond the asserted motive
and poses the question at large, and the summing up does not contain full, firm
and clear directions on the onus of proof, including
a direction that the
accused bears no onus to prove a motive to lie and that rejection of the motive
does not justify a conclusion
that the evidence of the witness is truthful.
[58] True it is
that the trial Judge’s summing up did not include an express direction
that rejection of the motive to lie does
not justify a conclusion that the
evidence of the complainant was truthful. However, when addressing the jury
the trial Judge explained the purpose of
cross-examination, which was to test a witness’s evidence to see if the
truthful or accurate or both. His Honour went
So, you need to
consider the performance particularly of [the complainant] whilst under
cross-examination by counsel for the accused.
Did you consider that her approach to the answers, to giving answers to the
questions put to her in cross-examination was to do her
best to tell you what
she understood to be the truth or not? Was she giving direct answers to the
questions that were being put to
her or do you think she was trying to be
evasive? Do you think she made appropriate concessions when she was being
cross-examined?
And if she did does that assist you to draw a conclusion about
her honesty? Did she make or offer to make explanations about things
was sought? So, that’s another matter which might suggest a witness is
being more than just a witness.
I’m going to come to motive a little later on but the question of
whether there is a motive to tell the truth is also a matter
that you will need
to consider.
Another matter is was the witness’s credit put in issue, particularly
by reference to her prior statement which is shown to
be inconsistent with what
she has given to you in evidence? [The complainant was one of only two
witnesses, and the only female witness,
taken to a prior statement in
cross-examination.] ...
[59] Given these
clear references to the need for and manner of the jury’s assessment of
the complainant’s evidence, with
the motive to lie being only one of the
relevant matters going to her credibility (which both the applicant’s
trial counsel
and the prosecutor also made clear in their closing addresses),
the failure to expressly direct the jury that rejection of the motive
does not justify a conclusion that the evidence of the complainant was truthful
is of no moment. That direction was unnecessary
because it was plain that, aside
from the motive to lie, it was necessary for the jury to be satisfied of the
reliability of the
complainant’s evidence before they could convict the
applicant of the charges.
[60] Consequently,
we are not satisfied that, in relation to the issue of the complainant’s
motive to lie, the trial Judge made
a wrong decision on a question of law within
the second limb of s 411(1) of the
Criminal Code
[61] That is
sufficient to dispose of this proposed ground of
Fundamental or material?
[62] Given the
above conclusion, it is strictly unnecessary to consider this issue. However, we
will do so briefly.
[63] For the
same reasons that the impugned direction about the motive to lie was said to be
a wrong decision on a question of law,
the applicant argued that it was
fundamental in the sense referred to in the authorities cited in
In particular, it was said to reverse the onus of proof or diminish the standard
[64] For the
same reasons as set out above to conclude that the impugned direction about the
motive to lie was not a wrong decision
on a question of law, we reject that
argument. In the context of a lengthy and comprehensive summing up, and the
addresses of both
counsel, in which it was repeated many times that it was for
the Crown to prove the elements of the offences, that the applicant
did not have
to prove anything, and that the jury would have to be satisfied of the
reliability of the complainant’s evidence
before they could convict, the
burden of proof was not, by the trial Judge’s summing up, reversed or
diminished.
[65] Even if we
were satisfied that the impugned direction was a wrong decision on a question of
law, we do not accept that it was
material. That is, we do not accept that it
could realistically have affected the reasoning of the jury to the verdict of
in the trial that was had, taking into account the summing up as a whole,
and the addresses of both counsel. We do not accept that
the jury could have
reasoned to acceptance of the complainant as a credible witness, even in part,
on the basis that there was no
proven motive to lie. Nor do we accept that the
four references to ‘beyond reasonable doubt’ in relation to the
to lie could have led the jury to reason this way. We find that to be so
notwithstanding the low bar for the test of
materiality.
Conclusion in relation to proposed Ground 1
[66] It follows
that proposed Ground 1 would fail.
Ground 2: Relationship
evidence directions
The trial Judge’s directions about relationship evidence
[67] At the
trial, the Crown relied on evidence concerning the relationship between the
applicant and the complainant and the conduct
of the applicant towards the
complainant in that
relationship.
In particular, the
Crown relied on this evidence to establish that the complainant felt that she
had to acquiesce to whatever the
accused wanted her to do, no matter how much
she did not want to do it.
[68] Evidence of
this nature, commonly referred to as ‘context’ or
‘relationship’ evidence, may be admissible
for purposes other than
tendency reasoning, including the
(a) as affecting the plausibility of other evidence or to assess the credibility
and coherence of the complainant’s evidence;
(b) as essential background against which the evidence of the complainant and
the accused necessarily falls to be evaluated, to show
the continuing nature of
the conduct and to explain the offences charged;
(c) to overcome a false impression that the event was an isolated one, that the
offence happened ‘out of the blue’, particularly
where the acts are
closely and inextricably mixed up with the history of the
(d) to ensure that the jury are not required to decide issues in a vacuum;
(e) as negativing issues raised such as accident or mistake.
purposes also include to explain acquiescence to sexual abuse, which may
otherwise be confused with consent on the part
of the complainant and belief on
the part of the accused that the complainant was consenting, if evidence of the
full history of
violence and coercion is not placed before the
[70] During
the complainant’s evidence in chief, the trial Judge directed the jury
relationship
His Honour told the
jury they must consider each count separately and be satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that the Crown had proven
each one of them. His Honour then told the jury
that evidence about the relationship was admitted only for a very limited
and could only be used for that purpose and for no other purpose. The
purpose of the evidence was to enable the jury to make findings
matters to assist them as to whether they were satisfied, for example, that the
complainant did not consent to the
sexual intercourse with the accused the
subject of the charges; to assist the jury as to whether they accepted the
truthfulness and
accuracy of the account which the complainant had given in
relation to the alleged offences, whether or not she consented to any
charged acts and whether or not the accused knew she was not consenting or was
reckless about that. His Honour told the jury
they should ask themselves what
kind of relationship it was, an ordinary one or one of enmity and distrust or
something else. His
Honour said that, if the relationship evidence satisfies
them that the relationship was one of enmity and distrust, that would be
evidence from which they might infer that the complainant was not consenting and
the accused must have known that. His Honour went
Whichever view
you take of the relationship evidence, that evidence, by itself, doesn’t
prove anything. It is a circumstance
which, taken with the other circumstances
in the case, you are entitled to consider in deciding whether or not the Crown
the elements of the offence.
... So, you cannot leap to the conclusion that the existence of harm in the
relationship – or the existence of a bad relationship,
accused’s guilt. It is only a piece of circumstantial evidence, although
you may consider it an important piece
of evidence.
Now, you may think that this evidence shows other things; for example, that
the accused is a person with a propensity to violence
against the victim, or
that he is a person of bad character or things of that kind. You are not to use
the relationship evidence
for these purposes because, to do so would be very
prejudicial and that evidence is not probative of any fact in issue, and I
that you must not take it into account in that manner.
Honour reiterated that the evidence was admitted only for one purpose and
therefore the only use the jury could make of it
was to take it into account in
the way he had described. His Honour went
You will also
remember that there is an allegation about the first time a rifle was used.
Well, that’s not the subject of a
charge, nor could it be because, even if
that did happen, it happened in Queensland and this court has no jurisdiction
over offences
that are committed in other states. But you may think that that
shows that an offence occurred. You would need to be satisfied, before
that evidence that it, in fact, did occur. Then, you would only use it for one
purpose and that is to satisfy yourself as
to whether or not you accept the
complainant’s evidence about the fact that the weapon was used against her
in relation to
one of the charges on the indictment because, otherwise, you
might think that this sounds unlikely that he would take a weapon and
in it and threaten her with it.
But, if you know that he’s done it before, that may assist you to
accept her evidence that it happened on the occasion of which
it is complained
in the indictment
. Again, it is only a piece of circumstantial evidence and
you must not jump to the conclusion that, just because it happened that
must have happened this time. It is just something that you can take into
account as a piece of circumstantial evidence
to decide whether to accept her
evidence or not.
Basically, it is, again, a matter of credit
his summing up, the trial Judge again referred to the relationship evidence and
said it did not seem to be in dispute that
the accused was, from time to time,
violent, that he exercised a significant degree of control over the complainant
and treated her
the trial Judge told the jury that the purpose of the evidence was to give the
charges they were dealing with a context in
which to consider them, so the jury
could look at the entirety of the relationship and ask themselves whether the
allegations fit
in with that evidence, because otherwise they might think that
the allegations just came out of the blue with no particular reason
His Honour explained that
the relationship evidence was relevant to the issue of consent and how it was
relevant, that it was relevant
to the issue of the applicant’s knowledge
to the complainant’s delay in making any complaint, and it was
relevant to the complainant’s credibility generally. His
Honour went
... But what you
can’t do is, you can’t reason that
simply because
defendant treated her very badly from time to time throughout the relationship,
used force on her from time to time throughout
the relationship and assaulted
her in the matters which have been proven and which are not in dispute that
he therefore
committed the alleged rapes.
Because you cannot reason in that fashion. You cannot reason that,
he treated her very badly, that he
necessarily
raped her or
necessarily must
have raped her, because that would not follow as a
matter of logic. You cannot even reason that there was sexual intercourse on the
occasions between them, whether consensual or not, that are the subject of the
alleged rapes, simply because he was a man who was
domineering and the like.
But what you can reason, if you find that accept the evidence of [the
complainant] that there was these attacks upon her, that you
can use the
relationship evidence to decide whether you accept that. And to decide whether
the Crown has proven that she did not
consent to what was happening to her. And
to decide whether or not the accused knew that she was not consenting or, at
least, indifferent
or reckless about whether she was consenting or not.
But be very careful. You cannot just say, look, this is a bad man, he
have been guilty of these rapes. You cannot reason like that because
even if he was a bad man, it doesn’t mean to say that
necessarily
carried out a sexual assault upon her. There are lots of
people who are bad people. There are lots of people that commit domestic
violence acts against their partners. It does not mean to say that they go on
and sexually assault them.
The impugned decision on a question of law
applicant identified the wrong decision on a question of law, the
mis-directions, as the underlined parts of the two passages
set out above. The
complaints were three-fold with an additional complaint that the directions did
not go far enough. They will be
addressed in turn.
[74] Before
doing so, it is necessary to address a submission put by the applicant that the
highly prejudicial nature of relationship
evidence meant that ‘scrupulous
care’ needed to be taken to ensure the jury were properly directed as to
the use that
could be made of the evidence. Two authorities were cited for this
proposition.
[75] The first
MM v The Queen
[2000] NSWCCA 78
(2000) 112 A Crim R 519
. In that case, the
prosecutor had relied on relationship evidence for two purposes, namely as
context evidence and as tendency evidence
(see [48]). Hulme J held (at [49])
that, in those circumstances, it was incumbent on the trial Judge ‘to
identify with some
care’ the evidence relied on as establishing the
relationship and to direct the jury that, unless the incidents the subject
that evidence were proved beyond reasonable doubt, they could use the evidence
for no purpose other than to establish the relationship,
and could not use it as
tendency evidence. No mention is made in this paragraph of the prejudicial
nature of relationship evidence,
the words used were ‘some care’ not
‘scrupulous care’ and the care was as to identifying the
relationship
evidence. This authority does not support the proposition for which
it is cited.
[76] The second
case cited was
MM v The Queen
[2012] ACTCA 44
(2012) 232 A Crim R 303
passage, Burns J observed that the purpose for which relationship evidence is
tendered is determined objectively by considering
the process of reasoning that
the jury will be asked by the Crown to apply in using the evidence. If the
process is, in truth, a
process involving proof of a tendency, then the evidence
is tendency evidence and subject to the relevant statutory provisions. If
process of reasoning that the jury is asked to apply does not involve tendency
reasoning, and the context is relevant, and if
the evidence is not excluded
under ss 135 or 137 of the equivalent to the
Evidence (National Uniform
Legislation) Act 2011
(NT), it should be admitted as context evidence. Where
such evidence is admitted, the jury should be ‘carefully directed’
as to the confined use that may be made of the evidence, and that a process of
tendency reasoning is impermissible. No direct mention
is made of the
prejudicial nature of such evidence and the degree of care in directing the jury
is not qualified by the word ‘scrupulous’
or any other descriptor.
Again, this authority does not support the proposition for which it is
[77] The first
complaint made by the applicant was that the underlined words in the direction
set out in paragraph
encouraged tendency reasoning. We do not accept that submission. The impugned
passage does not tell or suggest to the jury
that, if they find that the
applicant pointed a firearm at the complainant on a previous occasion, they may
be satisfied that he
is a person with a tendency to engage in that kind of
conduct, and if so, that tendency may make it more likely that he committed
charged offence of threatening the complainant with a firearm. Rather, as is
entirely consistent with the purpose for which
it was led, the jury were told
that, if they find that the applicant pointed a firearm at the complainant on a
previous occasion,
that may assist them to accept her evidence that it happened
on the occasion for which the applicant was charged. The applicant accepted
this was correct, but complained that this direction did not tell the jury
this would be so. It was correct, of course, because the evidence may
assist to overcome a false impression that the event was an
isolated one, or
that the offence happened ‘out of the blue’, thereby affecting the
plausibility or coherence of the
complainant’s evidence and thus, her
credibility. The impugned direction did not encourage tendency reasoning
because: (a)
there is no reference to, or suggestion of, any tendency on the
part of the applicant to be established or used; (b) it is immediately
by the trial Judge telling the jury they can use it in assessing the
complainant’s evidence because ‘otherwise
you might think that [her
evidence about the charged offence with the firearm] sounds unlikely’; and
(c) it was immediately
followed by the instruction that the jury must not reason
that, just because it happened that time, it must have happened this time.
Further, the preceding paragraph telling the jury they can use the firearm
evidence in assessing the complainant’s evidence
because ‘otherwise
you might think that [her evidence about the charged offence with the firearm]
sounds unlikely’ answers
the submission that the trial Judge did not
inform the jury why they could use the evidence in this way. So too does that
the summing up in which the trial Judge told the jury that they could
use the relationship evidence to place the charged conduct
in context because
otherwise they might think the allegations just came out
[78] For the
same reasons, we reject the applicant’s second complaint, namely that the
underlined words in the direction set
out in paragraph
above told the jury that the
relationship evidence about the firearm made the complainant’s account
more reliable than it would
be without that
. As was observed by Latham J in
Qualtieri v The Queen
[2006] NSWCCA 95
(2006) 171 A Crim R 463
, context evidence
can bolster the credibility of the complainant in that her version of the
incident the subject of the charge may
be more capable of belief when seen in
the context of what the complainant says was her relationship with the accused,
explain why the accused and the complainant acted as they did in
circumstances where without the context of the relationship those
acts might be
inexplicable. Latham J added that, other than assisting the complainant’s
credibility in that way, context evidence
does not make the complainant’s
account more reliable than it would be in the absence of that evidence, or make
it more likely
that the accused committed the charged offences. The impugned
sentence to the effect that ‘it is a matter of credit’,
with the trial Judge’s references to the prior firearm conduct being only
a piece of circumstantial evidence, is
entirely consistent with the way
relationship evidence can bolster a complainant’s evidence, and in no way
directed the jury
that it made her account more reliable or made it more likely
that the accused committed the charged offences.
[79] The third
complaint made by the applicant was that the direction in the last two
paragraphs set out in paragraph
above did not go far enough because it only told the jury that they could not
use the relationship evidence to find that the applicant
was a person of bad
character or a person with a propensity to violence against the complainant. As
we understood it, the submission
was that this direction only told the jury that
they could not engage in the first stage of tendency reasoning (whether the
has a tendency) and did not instruct the jury that they could not engage
in the second stage of tendency reasoning (the tendency
makes the offending more
likely). No authority was cited for the proposition that a direction which only
instructed the jury not
to engage in the first stage of tendency reasoning was
contrary to law. In any event, the submission cannot be accepted. If the second
stage of tendency reasoning can only be reached after having engaged in the
first stage and the jury has been told not to engage
in the first stage, an
instruction not to engage in the second stage is unnecessary because, if the
jury follows the direction not
to engage in the first stage of tendency
reasoning, they will not arrive at the second stage and will have no opportunity
[80] The final
complaint made by the applicant is that the underlined words in the passage of
the summing up set out in paragraph
above meant the direction not to engage in tendency reasoning did not adequately
address the risk that the jury would so engage and
actually invited it.
[81] Reliance
was placed upon
Salgado v The Queen
[2022] NSWCCA 58.
In that case, the
appellant appealed against his convictions for three counts of supplying large
commercial quantities of drugs.
He had been charged with three other counts, to
which he pleaded guilty, of supplying much smaller quantities of drugs and
with the proceeds of crime. The Crown case was that the appellant was a
drug dealer involved in dealing large commercial quantities
of drugs. The
Defence case was that he was a drug user and small-time dealer but not involved
in the supply of large quantities.
After an application to sever the indictment
and deal separately with the counts concerning large commercial drug supply was
the appellant was arraigned on all six counts before the jury panel and
entered his guilty pleas to the three lesser charges. The
evidence relating to
the lesser charges was admitted, not as tendency evidence, but as context and
relationship evidence (being a
relationship between the appellant and the
co-offender). In the trial Judge’s summing up (set out at [68]), reference
to the fact that the accused had pleaded guilty to three counts on the
indictment, that the prosecution relied on the appellant’s
admission by
his plea to supplying small quantities of drugs and having a sum of cash in his
house, and the trial Judge then said:
It is very important that you
understand that you must not reason that, because the accused has admitted his
guilt in respect of [the
three counts], then he must automatically be guilty of
the remaining counts on the Indictment. You can only use the fact that the
accused pleaded guilty to those other counts as part of the Crown’s
circumstantial case, if you are of the view that it does
support the
Crown’s circumstantial case.
... But I repeat, what you must not do is reason that, because the accused
pleaded guilty to [the three counts], then he must automatically
be guilty of
the counts that you have to decide. You must not reason that, because the
accused has pleaded guilty to [the three counts],
he must be a person who
commits offences and commits drug related offences and must therefore
automatically be guilty of the other
counts. The accused has pleaded not guilty
to those counts and it is your role ... to decide whether the Crown has proved
reasonable doubt that he is guilty, based on the evidence that has been
[82] Hamill J
(with whom Brereton JA and Campbell J agreed) held (at [77]) that the direction
did not constitute an adequate anti-tendency
direction ‘in the complex
circumstances of the case’ because the directions failed to identify the
use that could properly
be made of the evidence concerning the offences to which
the accused pleaded guilty, and there was no direction to the effect that
jury could not reason that, if the appellant committed the other offences (to
which he pleaded guilty) therefore he must have
been the kind of person who
commits offences, and therefore he must have committed the charged offences.
Hamill J held (at [78])
that a direction does not guard adequately against
impermissible tendency reasoning
by instructing a jury not to
conclude ‘automatically’ that the accused is guilty by virtue of the
fact that they have
admitted committing a similar type of offence on another
occasion. The use of the word ‘automatically’ had the capacity
undermine the purpose of the direction because it allowed the jury to use the
evidence in an impermissible way provided it did
not ‘automatically’
conclude the appellant was guilty. The directions were also inadequate (at
[79]-[80]) because they
did not address the use, in any way, of the evidence
relating to one count (if satisfied of guilt) in relation to the other two
Brereton JA agreed with Hamill J’s reasons (at [1]), adding that
the use of the evidence for the purpose for which it was admitted
closely approached an invitation to tendency reasoning that, at the least, a
stringent anti-tendency direction was required’,
which the direction given
did not meet and it ‘practically invited’ tendency reasoning so long
as it was not ‘automatic’.
Campbell J also agreed with Hamill
J’s reasons (at [6]), adding that the use of the adverb
‘automatically’ undercut
the meaning the direction was intended to
convey to the jury because it implied that the jury could employ tendency
reasoning as
a result of ‘mature consideration’. The
appellant’s appeal against conviction was upheld and the convictions were
[83] We do not
accept that the observations in
directions given by the trial Judge in that case have some broader operation as
a principle of law to context
evidence generally or relationship evidence in
particular. It was a case confined to its facts, which the appeal court
as ‘complex circumstances’ involving context evidence
relied on for a purpose which so closely approached an invitation
to tendency
reasoning as to require a stringent anti-tendency direction. The direction given
failed to identify the use which could
be made of the context evidence, which is
a fundamental aspect of the anti-tendency reasoning direction. It was in that
context that
the use of the word ‘automatically’ was found to invite
tendency reasoning.
[84] To conclude
otherwise would be inconsistent with a long line of authority stemming from
The Queen v Beserick
(1993) 30 NSWLR 510
in which Hunt CJ at CL (Finlay
and Levine JJ agreeing) held (at 516) that, where relationship evidence is
admitted, an explanation
should be given to the jury as to the purpose for which
the evidence is admitted, together with a warning that they must not (relevantly
for this case) reason that, because the accused may have done something wrong to
the complainant on some other occasion or occasions,
he ‘must’ also
have done so on the occasion the subject of the charged offence. That passage
has been cited with approval
by the High Court and multiple intermediate
appellate courts as authority for the directions to be given concerning
relationship
[85] The trial
Judge’s anti-tendency directions were orthodox and we do not accept that
the use of words such as ‘must’
and ‘necessarily’ were
wrong in law.
[86] That is
sufficient to dispose of this proposed ground of
Fundamental or material?
[87] Given the
above conclusion, it is strictly unnecessary to consider this issue. However, we
will do so briefly.
[88] Correctly,
the applicant did not contend that the complaints made in proposed Ground 2 were
fundamental errors. The applicant
argued, however, that they were material
[89] Even if we
were satisfied that the impugned directions were a wrong decision on a question
of law, we do not accept that it was
material. That is, we do not accept that it
could realistically have affected the reasoning of the jury to the verdict of
in the trial that was had, taking into account the summing up as a whole,
and the addresses of both counsel. We do not accept that
the jury could have
engaged in impermissible tendency reasoning. We find that to be so
notwithstanding the low bar for the test of
materiality.
Conclusion in relation to proposed Ground 2
[90] It follows
that proposed Ground 2 would fail.
Disposition
[91] None of the
applicant’s numerous complaints about the trial Judge’s directions
and summing up to the jury have been
made out. This application for leave to
appeal, commenced more than three years after the applicant’s conviction
more than four and a half years after that conviction, truly fits the
description of an ‘armchair appeal’. That is, an
appeal in which
counsel not involved in the trial appears to have gone through the record of the
trial in minute detail looking for
error or possible arguments, without
reference to the manner in which the trial was
The complaints made
were overscrupulous and pernickety, being focussed on a few words or a sentence
or two appearing in a lengthy
and comprehensive summing up in a complex trial
involving 17 charges.
[92] We make the
following order:
application for an extension of time to file an application for leave to appeal
and the application for leave to appeal are
_______________________
Criminal Code,
The principles set out in the
reasons of Gleeson, Jagot and Beech-Jones JJ at [96]-[110] were adopted by
Gageler CJ at [3], Gordon
and Steward JJ at [9] and Edelman J at [44].
The principles set out in the
reasons of the Court at [8]-[16].
at [105]-[106],
referring to
at [9], which in turn cited
Wilde v The Queen
[1988] HCA 6
(1988) 164 CLR 365
Katsuno v The Queen
[1999] HCA 50
(1999) 199 CLR 40
Weiss v The Queen
[2005] HCA 81
(2005) 224 CLR 300at
Hofer v The Queen
[2021] HCA 36
(2021) 274 CLR 351
Hoang v The Queen
(2022) 276 CLR 252
Huxley v The Queen
[2023] HCA 40
(2023) 98 ALJR 62
at [109], citing
Doggett v The Queen
(2001) 208 CLR 343
Huynh v The Queen
(2013) 87 ALJR 434
at [15], citing
Hamilton (a pseudonym) v The Queen
[2021] HCA 33
(2021) 274 CLR 531
the cases there cited;
TKWJ v The Queen
[2002] HCA 46
(2002) 212 CLR 124
Orreal v The Queen
[2021] HCA 44
(2021) 274 CLR 630
King v The Queen
[2012] HCA 24
245 CLR 588
Hamilton (a pseudonym) v The Queen
[2021] HCA 33
274 CLR 531
Appeal Book (‘AB’)
AB 460-461.
At [6], citing
The Queen v
(unreported, NSWCCA, 24 October 1996, Hunt CJ at CL); at [8], citing
83 A Crim R 502
at 511-512,
The Queen v G
[1993] QCA 267
[1994] 1 Qd R
at 545-546 per Pincus JA,
The Queen v E
(1996) 39 NSWLR 450
per Sperling J and
The Queen v Uhrig
(unreported, NSWCCA, 24 October
1996, Hunt CJ at CL); at [10], citing
The Queen v Uhrig
(unreported,
NSWCCA, 24 October 1996, Hunt CJ at CL).
Doe v The Queen
[2008] NSWCCA 203
187 A Crim R 328
per Latham J (Spigelman CJ and Hidden J agreeing).
See, for example,
[2007] NSWCCA 117
per Hunt AJA (Simpson and Whealy JJ
Doe v The Queen
[2008] NSWCCA 203
(2008) 187 A Crim R 328
Latham J (Spigelman CJ and Hidden J agreeing).
This was made clear in the
prosecutor’s opening address: AB 58.
Cooper v The King
HML v The Queen
[2008] HCA 16
(2008) 235 CLR 334
[155]-[156], [425], [428], [430], [431], [498], [500], [513].
RG v The Queen
[2010] NSWCCA 173
per Simpson J (Campbell JA and Whealy J agreeing);
KTR v The Queen
[2010] NSWCCA 271
per McClellan CJ at CL (Simpson
and Fullerton JJ agreeing).
HML v The Queen
[2008] HCA 16
235 CLR 334
per Heydon J, and at [515] per Kiefel J.
Hamilton (a pseudonym) v
[2021] HCA 33
(2021) 274 CLR 531
per Edelman and Gleeson JJ;
[2010] NSWCCA 199
(2010) 79 NSWLR 740
per RA Hulme J (McClellan CJ at CL
and Simpson J agreeing);
Pattison v Tasmania
[2017] TASSC 13
(2017) 30 Tas R 1
per Wood J (Pearce and Brett JJ agreeing);
The Queen v Maiolo (No 2)
(2013) 117 SASR 1
at [81] per Peek J (Kourakis CJ and Stanley J agreeing);
WFS v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 347
(2011) 33 VR 406
per Robson AJA (Buchanan JA and
Whelan AJA agreeing);
Munmurrie v Western Australia
[2007] WASCA 184
per Miller JA (Pullin and Buss JJA agreeing).
The Queen v Fuge
per Wood CJ;
Ilioski v The Queen
[2006] NSWCCA 164
per Hunt AJA;
Darwiche v The Queen
[2011] NSWCCA 62
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (313 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter