URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTSC/2025/42.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:22:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Heritage and People's Choice Limited v Bofilios [2025] NTSC 42 (24 July 2025)
Heritage and People’s Choice Limited v Bofilios
PARTIES: HERITAGE AND PEOPLE’S CHOICE LIMITED (ACN 087 651 125)
BOFILIOS, John
TITLE OF COURT: SUPREME COURT OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: 2025-00438-SC
DELIVERED: 24 July 2025
HEARING DATE: 29 May 2025
JUDGMENT OF: Smyth A/AsJ
CATCHWORDS:
MORTGAGES – Default under a mortgage of real property –
Application for order for possession – Application for summary
determination for possession – Principles which apply to summary
determination – Defences raised – Discretion to
order possession
– Payment of money into Court – Factual dispute in existence in
respect to some defences – Summary
determination denied in part
Law of Property Act 2000
National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009
Allfox Building Pty Ltd v Bank of Melbourne
(1992) NSW Conv R 55-634
Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Limited v Oldroyd & Anor
[2025] NTSC 20
Bayblu Holdings Pty Ltd v Capital Finance Australia
[2011] NSWCA 39
Consolidated Press Holdings Ltd v Wheeler
(1992) 84 NTR 42;
Fancourt v Mercantile Credits Limited
[1983] HCA 25
General Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
Ors v Murdoch
[2010] NTSC 62
[1948] NSWStRp 58
(1948) 49 SR NSW 173
Heller Financial Services Ltd v
[1989] NTSC 36
Hunter v Hunter & Ors
[1936] AC 222
Indigenous Business Australia v Kani
[2012] NTSC 24
Commonwealth Trading Bank of Australia
[1972] HCA 74
(1972) 126 CLR 161
Milton Park
Country Club Pty Ltd v Yasuda Trust Australia Ltd
(Supreme Court (NSW),
Bryson J, 8 March 1991, unrep);
Murphy v Abi-Saab
(1995) 37 NSWLR 280
New Zealand Banking Group Ltd v Comer
(1993) 5 BPR 11, 748;
Civil Pty Ltd & Anor v Francis
[2011] NTCA 3
RAMS Mortgage
Corporation Ltd v Skipworth & Anor
[2007] WASC 24
Shew & Ors v
Police and Citizens Youth Club & Ors
[2013] NTSC 15
Sportsbet Pty
Ltd v Moraitis
[2010] NTSC 24
, referred to
, 6th ed., 2010
Croft & Hay,
The Mortgagee’s Power of Sale
, 3rd ed.,2013
Tyler, Young & Croft,
Fisher and Lightwood's Law of Mortgage
Aust. ed., 2013
Halbury’s Laws of Australia
, [295-7370] Mortgagee’s action
for possession (C) Proceedings for Possession.
REPRESENTATION:
Plaintiff: R Sanders
Defendant: Self Represented
Solicitors:
Plaintiff: Ward Keller
Judgment category classification: B
Judgment ID Number: Smy2505
Number of pages: 30
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Heritage and People’s Choice Limited v Bofilios
[2025] NTSC 42
No. 2025-00438-SC
HERITAGE AND PEOPLE’S CHOICE LIMITED (ACN 087 651 125)
JOHN BOFILIOS
CORAM: SMYTH A/AsJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 24 July 2025)
Plaintiff makes application for an order of possession in respect to the
property at 26 Muckaninnie Court, Moulden in the
Property”) by originating motion dated 21 February 2025 and summons
on originating motion dated 21 February 2025.
practice for possession matters, proceedings are commenced pursuant to r 45.05
Supreme Court Rules 1987
(NT) which provides for a special
procedure. Although commenced by originating motion, the proceeding is
commenced in anticipation
of orders being made retrospectively dispensing with
the requirement to require an appearance, and authorising the plaintiff to
the proceeding by originating
The relevant orders are
designed in part to save time and expense for the parties.
Defendant was duly served with the Court proceedings and appeared in person.
The Defendant contests the Plaintiff’s
application, and the Plaintiff
seeks summary disposition. In respect to determining whether the matter was
amenable to summary judgment
I directed parties to distil their objections, and
any replies, into informal
[4] In this
proceeding the Plaintiff has relied on the affidavits of: Rachelle Tilbury
promised 20 February 2025 and 8 April 2025,
Daniel Carroll promised 21 February
2025, Ronda Carroll promised 25 March 2025, and Wendy Jones made 28 April 2025,
de bene esse
for the purpose of the application. The Defendant
in turn relied on the affidavits of John Bofilios made 2 April 2025 and 30 April
2025 which are similarly received
de bene esse
[5] Subject to
the Defendant’s issues raised below, the facts are set out as follows.
The Defendant is the registered proprietor
of the Property. On 18 December 2012
the Plaintiff and the Defendant entered into three loan agreements. Two of the
loan agreements
were for monthly payments of principle and
The third loan agreement
was for a set period of monthly interest only repayments, extendable for a
further period/s in which interest
only would be
The loan agreements were
secured by a mortgage over the
in favour of the Plaintiff
over the whole of the Property. The loan agreements were also secured by a
second mortgage over another
property at 68 McInnis Circuit Driver, in the
Northern Territory (“the Driver
property”).
The Mortgage
incorporated provisions contained in the Memorandum of Common Provisions (MCP)
recorded in the Registrar General’s
Office as CP No. 371843. Pursuant to
the loan agreements the Defendant agreed to make certain monthly repayments.
The MCP provides
for the circumstances of default and action which would be
taken thereafter.
[6] In 2024,
relevant default notices were issued to the Plaintiff in respect to defaults
under the loan agreements, and enforcement
action, including court proceedings,
was commenced in respect to the Driver property. The Defendant was given notice
of that default
(a) Cover letter dated 3 April 2024 from the Plaintiff’s solicitors
indicating a default and demanding payment of $272,710.63;
(b) Notice pursuant to s 88 of the National Credit Code indicating a default in
respect to the three loans in the amount of $272,710.63
(comprising $70,085.08,
$95,520.16 and $106,590.59) plus enforcement expenses of $514.80; and
(c) Notice of Exercise of Power of Sale given under
Property Act 2000
(NT) indicating the amounts owing on the loans at as 2
April 2024 (by reference to balance and interest) plus enforcement expenses
the same amounts as the
The Defendant failed to pay the amounts due by the required deadline in the
notices. Pursuant to clause 26.3 of the loan agreements,
and clause 19.3 of the
MCP, on a failure to comply with the default notice, the Defendant became liable
to pay the balance owing
under the agreements immediately. The 2024 court
proceedings were discontinued with leave of the Court on 27 June 2024.
December 2024 the Plaintiff issued the default notice and the exercise of power
of sale notice relevant to these proceedings
in respect to the Property. Those
notices comprised:
(a) Cover letter dated 5 December 2024 from the Plaintiff’s solicitors
indicating a default and demanding payment of $991,956.80;
(b) Notice pursuant to s 88 of the National Credit Code indicating a default in
respect to the three loans in the amount of $991,433.20
(comprising $332,252.06,
$304,238.93 and $354,942.21) plus enforcement expenses of $523.60; and
(c) Notice of Exercise of Power of Sale given under
Property Act 2000
(NT) indicating the amounts owing on the loans at as 5
December 2024 (by reference to balance and interest) plus enforcement expenses
(in the same amounts as the
[8] As noted
above, the amount owing on the loan agreements had been accelerated by the prior
failure to comply with default notices,
and the accelerated amounts owed were
reflected in the 5 December 2025 default notices and notice of exercise of power
On 16 January 2025 the Driver property was
Proceeds of that sale were
applied to the loan balances, loan 90201387 was discharged in full and the
remaining funds were applied
to reduce loan account 90201386. The Defendant was
notified of the same by way of email on 21 January 2025. As of 8 April
the total amount owed by the Defendant, according to the Plaintiff’s
records, was $609,682.24 (comprising amounts of $316,110.13
and $293,572.11
respectively).
deposes that, save for a few nominal payments in the amount of $5, the Defendant
has not made any payments to either
of the loan accounts since June
Further, Ms Tilbury
deposes that the estimated value of the Property is approximately $450,000 to
, and subject to further discussion below, on the basis of the
materials filed by the Plaintiff, in respect to service of the default
and notice of exercise of power of sale, the Plaintiff would be entitled to an
order of possession on its application.
[10] However,
the Defendant resists the application. His “defence” was initially
set out in his affidavit of 30 April
2025. That affidavit sets out, in a
somewhat confusing format, the history of the Defendant’s grievances with
the Plaintiff
over an extended period, including details of various complaints
to the Australian Financial Complaints Authority (“AFCA”).
paragraph 47 of his affidavit the Defendant concludes with the statement
“At this point in time I can tell the court that
I dispute the amount that
HPCL claims I owe”.
Preliminary Matters
(A) Summary Judgment
[11] As noted
above, the matter proceeded on application by the Plaintiff for a summary
determination. The principles to be applied
are the same as those which apply
in respect to an application for summary judgment, notwithstanding an expedited
process was utilised.
[12] Although
the principles in respect to summary judgment are well established it is useful
to briefly restate them. The starting
position is that the power to summarily
dismiss an action is an exercise of the court’s inherent jurisdiction, to
protect itself
from an abuse of
On hearing the
application the Court may give judgment as is appropriate, unless the defendant
satisfies the Court of the claim,
or part of the claim, there is a question that
ought to be tried or there is some other reason to proceed to trial. The
is intended to apply only to cases where it is clear there is no real
question to be tried and where there can be no reasonable doubt
plaintiff is entitled to
The power to order
summary judgment must be exercised with exceptional
and will only be
enlivened where the plaintiff’s case is “so clearly untenable that
it could not possibly
As Luppino M
(as he was) stated in
Shew & Ors v Police and Citizens Youth Club &
A defendant
will be allowed to defend a case if there are facts which, if true, would
constitute a defence to the plaintiff’s
claim. The Court is reluctant to
try a case on affidavit where there are facts in dispute. An important issue is
whether the defendant’s
account of the facts has sufficient prima facie
plausibility to merit further investigation.
[13] The purpose
of the process is to prevent a defendant, who has no defence, from defending an
action merely to delay the plaintiff
in enforcing their rights. Summary
judgment is unavailable where relevant facts are in dispute between the parties
or some difficult
question of law has to be decided, and in such cases the
defendant is entitled to
[14] In respect
to discretionary relief, in
, Luppino M held:
extent that discretionary relief is sought, it may be inappropriate to grant
that on a summary judgment application because
all evidence may need to be heard
before the Court can decide whether the grant of discretionary relief is
appropriate.
(B) The “ordinary rule” in
and Exercise of the
Discretion to Order Possession
Plaintiff submits that, assuming the assertions raised by the Defendant were to
be accepted, a mortgagee will not be held
out of exercising its powers of
possession and sale merely because the amount due is in dispute, and that a
mortgagee will not be
restrained from exercising those powers unless the amount
claimed is paid into Court. That principle, the pay-in rule or the
rule” which applies in respect to the restraint of the
exercise of a mortgagee’s power of sale, was restated in
Commonwealth Trading Bank of
general rule an injunction will not be granted restraining a mortgagee from
exercising powers conferred by a mortgage and, in
particular, a power of sale
unless the amount of the mortgage debt, if this is not in dispute, is paid or
unless, if the amount is
disputed, the amount claimed by the mortgagee is paid
into court; and this rule will not be departed from merely because the mortgagor
claims to be entitled to set off the amount of damages claimed against the
Harvey v McWatters
was said that this rule operates to supplement the ordinary requirement of an
undertaking as to damages on an interlocutory application.
In Fisher and
Lightwood's Law of Mortgage, the authors note that the requirement for payment
into Court as a condition of a grant
of an injunction to restrain a sale by a
mortgagee is an aspect of the general equitable rule that the mortgagor must
offer to redeem
before he can bring the mortgagee before the
Plaintiff in support cited
Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Limited
Oldroyd & Anor
, which in turn cited
Hamwood & Ors v
in which Brownhill
J noted the principle involved an application for an injunction restraining a
mortgagee from exercising its power
of sale, but noted “nevertheless, that
situation is analogous to the present situation”.
[18] Hamwood
was a case of a disputed application for possession. The defendant, in
opposition to the application, had filed a summons seeking
dismissal of the
plaintiff’s motion and other orders. The defendant had not applied for an
interim injunction restraining
the plaintiffs from exercising a power of
A number of arguments
were raised including that the notices were defective and invalid, and that it
was harsh, oppressive or unconscionable
that the plaintiffs be permitted to have
possession.
, Luppino M found, in respect to the claims of harsh, oppressive
or unconscionable conduct, there was no evidence of such conduct
proceeding, but agreed as a general proposition that where there was established
an arguable case of a mortgagee taking unconscientious
advantage of a special
disadvantage of the mortgagor, and the mortgagor was vulnerable to exploitation,
there can be the foundation
for an interim injunction restraining the exercise
of a mortgagee’s power of
In what appears to be
, Luppino M stated that in such cases of an injunction it would be
inconceivable that a mortgagor should not be required to at least
pay something
(in that case the undisputed amounts) into
, Brownhill J noted that the general rule was that a mortgagee
will not be restrained from exercising a power of sale under the mortgage
because the amount due is in dispute, and the mortgagee will only be restrained
if the mortgagor pays the amount into
That is a correct
statement of the ordinary rule from
. However, there is judicial
doubt as to the strictness of its application and exceptions apply. As noted in
Fisher and Lightwood,
the mortgagee need not offer to redeem, and therefore need
not pay into Court, where it is alleged that the power of sale is not
exercisable.
Examples given by
the authors, in Fisher and Lightwood, of exceptions to the rule are: where the
validity of the mortgage is in
issue, or there is a question whether or not
there has been a breach or a question as to whether or not the notice was
, or where the power of
sale is being used for an improper
Bayblu Holdings
Pty Ltd v Capital Finance Australia Limited
, Campbell JA confirmed that
there is a long recognised exception where the dispute goes to whether the power
of sale has arisen at
Further, there are doubts as to whether the principle applies to a mortgagor
seeking to defend a mortgagee’s claim for possession,
as opposed to a
mortgagor actively seeking an injunction or otherwise seeking to bring the
mortgagee before the court for relief
In Butt, the author
payment-in rule strictly applies only to actions to restrain a sale or proposed
sale. It does not apply, for example, where the
mortgagor is seeking to defend a
mortgagee's claim for possession,
Australian and New Zealand Banking Group
Ltd v Comer
(1993) 5 BPR 11, 748 (seemingly approved by NSWCA in
, 20 July 1995, page 15) or where the mortgagor is seeking to set
aside a default judgment for possession (at least where the value
of the land is
adequate to protect the amount outstanding under the mortgage).
Zealand Banking Group Ltd v
, Young J, after citing
Harvey v McWatters
in support of an application to have
money paid into court, held that any such submission in the circumstances was
misconceived and
Whatever be the scope and rationale of the
rule, it seems to me absolutely impossible to import that rule of equity or of
the statutory
injunction into a purely common law case such as the present where
a bank is suing for possession of land. In such a case, there
is no room for any
principle, no matter what it is, that a person who disputes the amount of a debt
to a bank has to pay into court
the admitted balance before the court will
listen to his defence.
[22] I therefore
doubt whether the rule from
applies in these types of proceedings.
Even if I am wrong in that regard, although the Defendant disputes the amount he
he is correct, there will be doubt as to the correctness of the
relevant default notices, and therefore as to their validity, and
therefore as
to whether the power of the exercise of sale has become exercisable, such that
an exception to the general rule applies.
I would not require payment into
[23] On the
issue of defective default notices, in
, after referencing the
dealt with the statutory notice required before a mortgagee’s power of
sale could be exercised. Although one of the notices
in the current case
purports to be given under the equivalent Northern Territory legislation
(section 89 of the Act), the other notices
are notices of demand pursuant to the
Loan Agreement and Mortgage. Although there is some scope for application of the
principles to the current case it needs to be noted, as Mr Roper
pointed out, that the section 89 notice is not required to be given
pre-requisite to an order for possession. It is only a pre-requisite to the
exercise of the power of sale. Without conceding
that there is any defect in any
of the notices that have been given, Mr Roper submitted, correctly in my view,
that if there is a
defect in the section 89 notice, that is not fatal to an
order for possession as there is nothing to prevent the Plaintiffs from
further, and valid, notice pursuant to section 89 of the Act.
Indigenous Business Australia v
Luppino M, relying on
Hunter v Hunter &
pre-conditions to the exercise of a power of sale, and by extension an order of
possession, should be strictly complied
with, as to service and form. In
, Luppino M found that the defective service of the notice of the
exercise of power of sale meant that the power of sale had not crystalised
was not presently exercisable) and therefore an order of possession served no
useful purpose. That was a factor which weighed
in the discretion to order
possession.
[25] In respect
to the interaction between defective notices and the exercise of discretion to
order possession, in
, the Court held that, although a defect in the
power of sale is not an impediment to an application for an order for
possession,
such an order is not as of right, and it remains a matter for the
discretion of the Court. Relevant to the exercise of that discretion
purpose for which possession is sought. If possession is sought to facilitate
the power of sale, an impediment to the exercise
of that power, will impact on
the exercise of the discretion. In the exercise of a judicial discretion there
is a requirement to
balance competing
application is not a direct application by the Defendant to restrain the
Plaintiff in respect to the exercise of its power
of sale, although that may be
its practical effect, through resisting the application for possession. There
is nothing preventing
the Plaintiff from exercising its power of sale if
Law of Property Act 2000
(NT) has been complied with, and presumably
if the Defendant wishes to challenge that in separate proceedings then that is a
for him. However, for practicality’s sake an order of possession
is normally gained before the power of sale is exercised
to remove occupiers and
aid in the sale of the property, and it is assumed that is the case in this
proceedings. As noted in
an order for possession is not as of
right, it remains a matter for the discretion of the Court, and relevant to the
exercise of
that discretion is the purpose for which possession is sought. In
most, if not all cases, possession will be sought for the purposes
facilitating the power of sale, and any impediment to the exercise of the power
of sale will impact on the exercise of the discretion
in respect to an order for
possession.
[27] In this
case there may or may not be an impediment to the exercise of the power of sale.
It is not, as was the case in
, where service of the notice of the
power of sale was clearly defective. There is no dispute as to service.
Rather, there is, at
least, a dispute in respect to the amount owing by the
Defendant. If the Defendant is correct, and he owes less than is claimed,
raises issues as to the correctness of the relevant notices, which are required
to state the correct amount of arrears, and
therefore the ability to take
enforcement action, including by the exercise of the Court’s discretion
for any order for possession.
As noted in
that discretion needs to
be exercised judicially, balancing competing interests.
[28] Aside from
the Plaintiff’s response to the Defendant’s points of claim, which
are set out below, it is the Plaintiff’s
position that it is suffering
real prejudice in being held out of its entitlement to possession having regard
to the facts that the
Defendant has not made any payments on his loans
essentially for seven years and there is now insufficient equity in the property
to discharge the secured debt and accordingly the Plaintiff will suffer a
shortfall after the sale of the property, which will increase
with further
delay. However, there has been no specific evidence as to why enforcement
proceedings have only been commenced recently
given no payments have been made
to the loans since 2018. Reference is made in evidence to a number of AFCA
complaints, and it is
entirely possible that the Plaintiff’s enforcement
actions were delayed pending resolution of those complaints, which appear
date back to at least 2021. The default notices in respect to the discontinued
2024 proceedings were not served until April 2024
and the current default
notices were not served until December 2024.
Defendant raises seven points of dispute in respect to resisting the
Plaintiff’s application for possession, which
are set out below, under the
headings adopted by the parties.
Unaffordable Lending Practices
contrary to the
National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009
(“NCCP Act”)
Defendant claims that the Plaintiff has breached the unaffordable lending
provisions of the NCCP Act by originally granting
him the loans in
Taking that at its
highest, at best this claim would ground a claim for
compensation,
and possibly a
civil penalty, under the NCCP Act. The claim would be statute barred pursuant
to s 178(2)(b) of the NCCP Act, since
December 2018. I find this aspect
does raise any defence in respect to the Plaintiff’s application for
possession. There
is no relevant question to be tried on this
False and Unauthorised Transactions on the Loan
Defendant claims there were anomalies in the manner in which the Plaintiff
conducted transactions on his loan accounts, over
periods of time, known as the
“PRIN DR ADJ”.
far as can be made out, again taking it at its highest, the claim would appear
to be that, at certain times after a payment of
an amount against the loan by
the Defendant, the Plaintiff debited the account for the same amount for a short
period, and then re-credited
it a short period of time later. There is no
evidence as to the time between the debit and re-credit transactions and whether
would have affected interest calculated on the loans. Clause 16 of the
loan agreement
provides that
interest is calculated daily by multiplying the unpaid daily balance of the
account at the end of the day
the daily percentage rate, the daily percentage rate being the annual percentage
applying divided by 365. As I understand the
Defendant’s argument, if a
re-credit did not occur until the following day or subsequently, after the daily
interest was calculated,
it is possible the interest was calculated on an
incorrect higher account balance. That may have had a cumulative effect given
number of transactions and the period of time. The Defendant deposes that
this was discovered in March 2016, although there is no
evidence of the period
over which this was occurring or the effected accounts. The Plaintiff submitted
that, at best, if proved,
it could lead to a claim for mere damages of
negligible amounts for the fleeting impact on the balance of the account albeit
a short time, but more likely, as determined by an AFCA complaint made by
the Defendant, the Defendant did not suffer any loss at
all. This matter was
the subject of a complaint by the Defendant to AFCA, determined on
28 November 2024. The Defendant has selectively
extracted parts of the
AFCA Determination (Case 12-00-1058472) in his affidavit. That decision is
publicly available on the AFCA
decisions website, and given parts of it have
been put in evidence, I have reviewed the publicly available document and relied
its contents.
appear that, in respect to the Defendant’s AFCA complaint, evidence of
disputed transactions were provided, between
December 2012 and March 2016. The
outcome of the AFCA Determination, extracted in the Defendant’s affidavit,
says in part
“I am satisfied the transactions have not been shown to have
caused the Complainant loss...what is clear, is the transaction
records show
each entry did affect the Outstanding balance – either increasing it (PRIN
DR ADJ) or decreasing it (Payment).
I am therefore satisfied these were
financial entries which more likely than not did impact the balance of the
account, albeit for
a short time”. The relevant finding of AFCA, as set
out in its published decision, is set out in full as follows:
transactions have not been shown to cause additional interest
However, the transaction records do not show the time period between the PRIN
DR ADJ debit and the subsequent Payment credit on each
The loan contracts relevantly say interest on the outstanding balance is
calculated on a daily basis at ‘the end of the day’,
contract defines as midnight South Australian time for the purposes of the
interest calculations. The complainant correctly
Because the time of day that a transaction happens is not shown on the
transaction list it may well be that a [debit] and the following
[credit], could
be done and dusted before 'the end of the day' when interest is calculated and
there would thus be no impact on the
interest calculation.
The complainant has said there are instances where there was an overnight
difference between the debit and the subsequent credit.
However, a review of the
transaction records only shows:
‘Principal Debit Adj’ entries where there has been a fee due to
arrears or other enforcement charges imposed
‘Principal Debit Adj’ and Payment entries (of the type causing
concern to the complainant) which were all transacted
on the same day on each
I am satisfied the adjustments caused by fees and charges
to the account have not been identified as a cause of the alleged errors
complainant accepts the account has been in arrears for several years.
However, as the complainant has accepted, where the entries which the lender
says are internal accounting entries have been processed
all on the same day,
there is no differential in the outstanding balance as at midnight which could
cause an incorrect interest calculation.
As my review of the transaction records did not identify any occasion where
the debit and subsequent credit were processed on different
days, I am satisfied
the complainant has not substantiated there is any error which has affected the
interest calculation during
the relevant period December 2012 to March 2016.
Plaintiff says any impact at best is negligible to none. Counsel for the
plaintiff submitted that, even if it was accepted
that the transactions affected
the account balances, the amounts would only be negligible and it was still
within my discretion to
order possession given the circumstances of the matter
as described above. Whilst the Defendant has not had the opportunity to fully
present evidence, and full argument, in respect to these disputed transactions,
the same issues appear to have been the subject of
fairly substantial factual
analysis by AFCA. That is a factor which is relevant to the exercise of my
discretion in this matter.
However, I cannot say there is no real question to
be tried and there is no reasonable doubt the Plaintiff is entitled to judgment.
True it is, the matter has been considered by AFCA, but it has not been
considered and determined by this Court.
Unfair Contract Terms
in respect to unilateral variations
Defendant claims that the Lending Terms and Conditions which formed part of his
loan contracts contained a clause allowing
the Plaintiff to unilaterally make
variations to any provision in the contracts without his consent. The Defendant
appears to take
issue with those parts of the loan agreement which provide for
unilateral variation of interest rates, credit fees and charges, notification
periods, and the ability to vary a condition which provides variation of any
other term of the contract by giving 30 days’
notice. This aspect, and
the issues the Defendant has in respect to the fairness or otherwise of these
clauses, has no bearing on
the right of the Plaintiff to the order of
possession. I find this aspect does not raise a defence in respect to the
Plaintiff’s
application for possession. There is no relevant question to
be tried on this aspect.
Allocation of proceeds from the Sale of
the Driver property
Defendant claims that the Plaintiff allocated proceeds of the Driver property
incorrectly or otherwise not in accordance
with his expectations. His
expectations were that the proceeds of the property were to be applied to the
arrears on the loans, such
that the arrears were reduced to nil, and presumably
he would be cleared to commence repayments. Instead, the Plaintiff applied
proceeds to one of the loans to discharge it and the remainder to reduce the
balances on the others. The loans remained in default
and the adjusted
accelerated amounts remained due. In response the Plaintiff submits that,
pursuant to the terms of the mortgage
(Clause 21.1), it was entitled to apply
the proceeds of the Driver property in its absolute discretion. Further, and in
the Plaintiff submits that, at the time of the sale of the Driver
property, there were no arrears to pay down as the entire loan
amounts had
become payable. Taken at its highest, I see no grounds on which the
Plaintiff’s application for possession can
be impeached on this issue. I
find this aspect does not raise a defence in respect to the Plaintiff’s
application for possession.
There is no relevant question to be tried on this
Refusal to Accept a Promissory Note
Defendant claims that the Plaintiff had refused to accept a promissory note
tendered as payment of the outstanding debt.
In response the Plaintiff claims
it was not obliged to accept it.
I agree. I see no grounds on which the Plaintiff’s application could be
impeached on this ground. There is no relevant question
to be tried on this
Variation to the manner in which the Plaintiff calculated
loan repayments
Defendant claims that there was a variation to the manner in which loan
repayments were to be made, namely in respect to
the manner in which the
Plaintiff calculated the minimum monthly loan repayments which were required.
It seems the Defendant’s
issue was that the Plaintiff did not give notice
of the change to the calculations, as claimed it was required to do under s 36
the National Credit Code and clause 24 of the loan
This matter was also
the subject of a complaint to AFCA by the Defendant (Case no. 804941). In that
case, AFCA examined the circumstances
giving rise to the complaint. The issue
concerns the calculation of minimum monthly repayments in circumstances where
the account
loan balance exceeds the original loan amount (i.e. because no
payments had been made for so long), the amount in excess of the original
amount comprising the arrears. AFCA determined that arrears amounts are treated
separately than future minimum monthly payments,
because arrears are due and
payable immediately. Minimum monthly payments are those amounts which the
parties agree to pay over
an extended period of time, to pay down interest and
principal, not yet immediately due. Arrears are not taken into account for
purposes of minimum monthly payments on a loan, as to do so would have the
effect of capitalising them and adding them to the
loan amount. The AFCA
Determination found no issue with the manner in which the Plaintiff calculated
the minimum monthly payments.
Additionally, as I understand the evidence, there
have been little to no payments to the loans made in the last several years
the issue of the practical effect of the calculation of minimum monthly
payments largely irrelevant. Even taking the Defendant’s
case at its
highest, in the circumstances, the change in the calculation of minimum monthly
repayments, or failure to give notice,
would not impact on the order for
possession and the correctness of the balances on the loan for the purposes of
the notices. I
find this aspect does not raise a defence in respect to the
Plaintiff’s application for possession. There is no relevant question
be tried on this aspect.
Withdraw of interest waiver
[37] This aspect
of the Defendant’s case was also the subject of the AFCA complaint (case
no. 804941). On the basis of the
facts recounted in the AFCA complaint, which I
accept here only for the purposes of attempting to understand the factual
of the Defendant’s case, there had been no payments made by the
Defendant since 2018. Hardship assistance had been provided
by the Plaintiff to
the Defendant between June 2018 and January 2019. Discussions were held in
around 2019 in respect to the prospect
of selling the Driver property or the
Property or both. For whatever reason nothing occurred. That culminated in a
decision by
the Plaintiff not to charge interest on the loans between January
2019 to April 2021. That was described, in the AFCA decision,
as a commercial
decision by the Plaintiff and an act of goodwill to assist in the marketing and
selling of the properties, for which
the Defendant would receive a benefit of
not having interest applied to the loans. On the Plaintiff’s account,
according to
the AFCA complaint, although it waived interest charges over that
period, it did not waive the contractual requirement to pay the
minimum monthly
payment under the loan agreements. It still required the Defendant to make the
minimum monthly repayments. Although
minimum monthly repayments would
“normally” include components to pay down the principal and
interest, in this instance,
on the Plaintiff’s case before AFCA, the
monthly payment would go to reducing the principal. Thus, although payments
to be made, the principal would be reduced, which would ultimately be of
benefit to the Defendant. The Defendant paid nothing over
that period, neither
the minimum monthly payment or the principal component of the minimum monthly
[38] This part
of the Defendant’s claim takes issue with what he was led to believe would
happen in respect to the interest
free period, and in particular why he was
required to pay the minimum monthly amount payments, when interest was not being
It is, at best as can be discerned, a claim that he should not have
paid anything or only have been paying the principal component
of the minimum
monthly payment during that period and that any arrears cumulated in that period
should exclude the interest component
(i.e. or what would normally have been the
interest component of the minimum monthly payment had interest been charged in
that period).
That would be interest over a 14-month period. There is no
evidence of what that amount of interest may have been, but assuming
of at least $340,000
annum, equates to interest of approximately $12,000 over 14 months. The amount
of interest may have been more, or less.
Defendant deposes that he subsequently took issue with the AFCA Determination
and referred a number of things back for clarification
or amendment, but no
amendment was made. Further, the Defendant deposes on 6 June 2023 (two months
after the AFCA Determination
was made) he accepted the Determination, which he
describes as a “conditional acceptance”. Subsequently, the
deposes that he discovered that a file note provided to AFCA by the
Plaintiff was different to one he had previously been provided,
result the Determination contains falsehoods and voids his acceptance of the
Determination. What those differences are
and how they affect the Determination
is unexplained.
[40] Taking the
Defendant’s case as its highest, there are factual issues to be determined
in respect to whether there was agreement
or not make payments over the interest
free period from January 2019 to April 2021. If the Defendant was required to
make payments
over that period, and he failed to do so, missed payments would
form part of the arrears. That would impact on the calculation of
the accounts, which in turn may impact the arrears demanded on the relevant
default notices.
Disposition
[41] On the
above basis, I find that the Defendant does not have a defence in response to
the Plaintiff’s application in respect
to the issues relating to the
alleged unaffordable lending, unfair contract terms, allocation of proceeds of
sale from the other
mortgaged property, the refusal of the promissory note or
the variation to the calculation of minimum monthly repayments. Those
are to be the subject of summary judgment in favour of the Plaintiff.
[42] However,
there is a factual dispute relating to the issue of the “PRIN DR
ADJ” transactions and their effect on the
account balances. Whilst that
effect may have been small, or possibly nil, it is a fact which I require to be
established prior
to the exercise of the discretion to grant possession.
[43] Additionally,
there is a factual dispute whether the Defendant was required to make payments
(monthly minimum payments or possibly
principal only or any), during an interest
free period from January 2019 to April 2021, which may have impacted on arrears
calculations
on the loan accounts. AFCA have found otherwise, or at least found
that the Plaintiff was entitled to expect payment of the full
minimum monthly
amount during the interest free period. If the Defendant is correct, the
default notices may be incorrect. However,
the Plaintiff could re-issue notices
with the correct amounts. Again, the determination of that factual issue bears
on the exercise
of my discretion and the issue needs to be properly
[44] There is no
doubt the Defendant is in significant arrears and has been in default for
several years. The matter has been delayed
for some years, possibly pending
resolution of various AFCA complaints and the evidence reveals that the balance
of the loans exceeds
the equity in the Property. Further delay increases the
detriment to the Plaintiff who is being prevented from enforcing its security.
On the other hand, the Plaintiff has deposed that the Property is his family
who will have
nowhere else to live and, if possession is ordered, will need time to secure
alternate accommodation.
[45] I am of the
view this is matter which is not appropriate, other than as indicated, to grant
summary disposition for possession
on the basis that there are unresolved
factual issues concerning the correctness of arrears amounts and their effects
on relevant
notices required to exercise the power of sale. Those issues impact
on the exercise of my discretion, as I cannot be certain the
notices are correct
or incorrect (or if they are incorrect whether the amounts are so negligible as
to be irrelevant to the exercise
of the discretion). Those matters require
proper resolution and should be tested properly.
[46] Therefore,
I make the following orders:
(1) There shall be summary judgment in favour of the Plaintiff in respect to
those aspects of the Defendant’s claim comprising:
(a) Unaffordable lending;
(b) Unfair contract terms;
(c) Allocation of proceeds of sale from the other mortgaged property;
(d) The refusal of the promissory note; and
(e) Variation to the calculation of minimum monthly repayments;
(2) The remaining aspects of the Defendant’s claim, namely:
(a) False and Unauthorised Transactions on the Loan Accounts (i.e. the PRIN DR
ADJ transactions); and
(b) Withdraw of interest waiver period,
shall proceed to trial with orders for the filing of further evidence.
-------------------------------------
Otherwise described as Certificate
as to Title Register Book Volume 892 Folio 908 more particularly described as
Lot 2468, Town of
Palmerston from plan(s) S85/214A. Formerly Volume 660 Folio
227, the change in register details brought about by the transfer of
business of the original mortgagee to the current business namely Heritage and
People’s Choice Ltd. See the affidavit
of Wendy Jones made 28 April
2025 at paragraphs [4-13].
As provided by Rule 45.05(4) the
relevant order under Rule 45.05(2) may be made on application after the
proceeding is commenced.
This type of expedited procedure does not prevent full
consideration of matters in dispute as illustrated in
Australia and New
Zealand Banking Group Limited v Oldroyd & Anor
[2025] NTSC 20.
Known as Points of Dispute and
Reply to Points of Dispute.
Loan 1 (90201387) for an amount of
$287,000 over a 30-year term. Loan 2 (90201384) for an amount of $261,000 over
a 30-year term.
Loan 3 (90201386) for an amount of
$257,000, for an initial period of 2 years.
Registered Mortgage 518950.
Volume 689 Folio 045 being Lot 390
in Plan S 82/106A.
The precise circumstances of the
arrangement for the sale and application of the proceeds to the outstanding loan
amounts is not
addressed in affidavit materials filed by the Plaintiff other
than at paragraph 9 of Tilbury’s affidavit of 8 April 2025 where
states “sale of the McInnis Property was completed by the Plaintiff as
mortgagee”. Documents from the 2024 Court
file indicate the property was
voluntarily surrendered to the Plaintiff for sale in lieu of proceeding further
with court enforcement
proceedings. The Defendant by affidavit promised on 2
April 2025 takes issue with the manner in which the Driver property was sold
the value which was obtained for the sale. Those issues are not relevant to the
application for possession.
Tilbury affidavit made 8 April
2025 at paragraph [11].
Tilbury affidavit made 8 April
2025 at paragraph [13].
Tilbury affidavit made 8 April
2025 at paragraphs [14] – [16].
Consolidated Press Holdings
Ltd v Wheeler
(1992) 84 NTR 42.
Fancourt v Mercantile
Credits Limited
[1983] HCA 25
General Steel Industries Inc
v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125
Outback Civil Pty Ltd &
Anor v Francis
[2011] NTCA 3
Shew & Ors v Police and
Citizens Youth Club & Ors
[2013] NTSC 15
Sportsbet Pty Ltd v Moraitis
[2010] NTSC 24
per Southwood
Heller Financial Services
Ltd v Solczaniuk
[1989] NTSC 36
Inglis v Commonwealth
Trading Bank of Australia
[1972] HCA 74
(1972) 126 CLR 161
[1948] NSWStRp 58
(1948) 49 SR NSW 173
E L G Tyler, P W Young, C E
Croft, Fisher and Lightwood's Law of Mortgage (3rd Aust ed 2013, LexisNexis
Butterworths) at [20.38].
Hamwood & Ors v
[2010] NTSC 62
Australia and New Zealand
Banking Group Limited v Oldroyd & Anor
[2025] NTSC 20
E L G Tyler, P W Young, C E
Fisher and Lightwood's Law of Mortgage
(3rd Aust ed 2013,
LexisNexis Butterworths) at [20.38]. Also see
at pp 164-165.
Allfox Building Pty Ltd v
Bank of Melbourne
(1992) NSW Conv R 55-634
Milton Park Country Club Pty
Ltd v Yasuda Trust Australia Ltd
(Supreme Court (NSW), Bryson J,
8 March 1991, unrep).
Bayblu Holdings Pty Ltd v
Capital Finance Australia Limited
[2011] NSWCA 39
per Campbell JA at [58],
referring to
Harvey v McWatters
[1948] NSWStRp 58
(1948) 49 SR NSW 173
See for example
Mortgage Corporation Ltd v Skipworth & Anor
[2007] WASC 24
Murphy v Abi-Saab
(1995) 37 NSWLR 280
per Gleeson CJ at 289.
Butt, Land Law 6th Edition at p
677. Also see Croft and Hay,
The Mortgagee’s Power of Sale
Edition, p 90: “As the action for possession is a common
law proceeding a defendant who disputes the amount of the debt due
will not have
to pay into court the admitted balance before his or her claim is heard”.
RAMS Mortgage Corporation Ltd v Skipworth & Anor
[2007] WASC
. See Also Halbury’s Laws of Australia, [295-7370]
Mortgagee’s action for possession (C) Proceedings for Possession.
Websdale v S & JD
Investments Pty Ltd
(1991) 24 NSWLR 573.
Indigenous Business
Australia v Kani
[2012] NTSC 24
Hunter v Hunter &
[1936] AC 222
at [15] and [26].
Contrary to ss 128 to 132 of
the NCCP Act, a breach constituting civil penalties. There is also a related
claim of a breach of the
Criminal Code 1983
(NT), ss 28AK and 43 AGA.
Pursuant to s 178 of the NCCP
Act, compensation for contravention of a civil penalty provision.
Described in the affidavit of
Bofilios made 30 Aril 2025 at paragraph [68] as “principal debt
adjustment”.
Annexed to the affidavit of
Tilbury made 20 February 2025.
Defined as mid-night South
Australian time.
Decisions were located using
case numbers provided in the Defendant’s affidavit. The Defendant is not
identified, although
the Plaintiff is, and the facts correspond precisely to the
matters in this proceeding.
Rowe v National
Australia Bank Ltd
[2025] SASC 50
and the authorities referred to
Clause 24 of the loan agreement
provides the Plaintiff may vary a number of conditions including the method of
calculating the minimum
repayment, but if any of the variations increase the
borrower’s obligations, 20 days’ written notice is required. Clause
25 provides any other term of the loan agreement can be varied with 30
days’ notice, subject to applicable law and any industry
As the AFCA determination
notes, in the context of the complaint, the Plaintiff subsequently sought to
have the arrears reduced to
the principal component only during the interest
free period.
Using the principal of $170,000
for the two interest and principal loans only, the interest only loan did not
require any payments
as principal was not going to be reduced.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (276 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter