URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTADComm/1999/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:16:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Romelo, Joe v Darwin Port Authority [1999] NTADComm 1 (21 July 1999)
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION COMMISSIONER
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
No. 1 of 1999
IN THE MATTER OF
DARWIN PORT AUTHORITY, DICK ADEY &
DANNY GREIG
BEFORE: COMMISSIONER DAWN LAWRIE
COUNSEL ASSISTING: MR PAT
REGISTRAR: MS SHARON WOON
COMPLAINANT: MR JOE
FIRST RESPONDENT: DARWIN PORT AUTHORITY
represented by MR
ARTHUR BOLAND
SECOND RESPONDENT: MR DICK ADEY
THIRD RESPONDENT: MR
DANNY GREIG
BASIS OF COMPLAINT: SECTIONS 19(1)(a) AND 19(1)(k) - DISCRIMINATION ON THE
GROUNDS OF RACE AND TRADE UNION ACTIVITY
SECTION 23 – PROHIBITED CONDUCT OF VICTIMISATION
IN THE AREA OF WORK
DATE: 21 JULY 1999
INTRODUCTION
On 14 October 1997 a delegate of the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner
accepted a complaint from Mr Joe Romelo against the Darwin Port
Authority (first
respondent), Mr Dick Adey (second respondent) and Mr Danny Greig (third
respondent) in the area of work on the grounds
of race and trade union
Mr Romelo made a further complaint of victimisation against the
first and second respondents. On 25 November 1997 the first and second
respondents were advised that a delegate of the Commissioner had accepted the
complaint of victimisation.
As the matters had not been settled within
six months, the complainant requested they be listed for Hearing pursuant to
Anti-Discrimination Act 1992
matter was referred to the Commissioner on 30 June 1998.
The Commissioner
convened a preliminary Hearing on 20 July 1998 for the purposes of giving
directions relating to the Hearing of the
matter, which was set down for Tuesday
15 September 1998.
Certain matters including the decision of the
Commissioner to Hear the complaints pursuant to
were appealed to the Supreme Court by the respondents, and following the
dismissal of the appeals the Hearing commenced
23 March 1999.
was put before the Commissioner 23, 24, 25, 30, 31 March, and
1, 30 April
1999 with final submissions being put to the Commissioner
THE COMPLAINTS
Mr Romelo is an employee of the Darwin Port Authority, and alleged that
in the area of work he had been discriminated against by the
Darwin Port
Authority and his supervisors Mr Dick Adey and Mr Danny Greig on the grounds of
his race and trade union activity contrary
sections 19(1)(a)
Anti-Discrimination Act 1992
, and that after he
lodged a complaint with the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner he was victimised
by the Darwin Port Authority and
Mr Adey, because of having lodged the
complaint, contrary to
of the Act.
The Darwin Port
Authority, Mr Adey and Mr Greig denied they had individually or collectively
discriminated against Mr Romelo and the
Darwin Port Authority and Mr Adey denied
Mr Romelo’s further allegation of victimisation.
These separate
matters were considered at the one Hearing, and for the sake of convenience I
shall address the whole of the evidence
in arriving at my separate
THE LEGISLATION
Anti-Discrimination Act 1992
came into operation 1 August
1993, and makes discrimination based on race or trade union activity in the area
of work unlawful, unless
a specific exemption
“Discrimination” is defined in the following
“SECTION 20 - DISCRIMINATION
(1) For the purposes of this Act,
discrimination includes –
(a) any distinction, restriction, exclusion or preference made on the basis
of an attribute that has the effect of nullifying or impairing
equality of
opportunity; and
(b) harassment on the basis of an attribute,
in an area of activity referred to in Part 4.
(2) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), discrimination takes
place if a person treats or proposes to treat another
person who has or had, or
is believed to have or had –
(a) an attribute;
(b) a characteristic imputed to appertain to an attribute; or
(c) a characteristic imputed to appertain generally to persons with an
less favourably than a person who has not, or is believed not to have, such
an attribute.
(3) For discrimination to take place, it is not necessary that –
(a) the attribute is the sole or dominant ground for the less favourable
treatment; or
(b) the person who discriminates regards the treatment as less
favourable.
(4) The motive of a person alleged to have discriminated against another
person is, for the purposes of this Act, irrelevant.”
“Victimisation” is prohibited conduct and is outlined in the
Act as follows:
“SECTION 23 - PROHIBITION OF VICTIMISATION
(1) A person shall not victimise another person because the other person
(a) has made, or intends to make, a complaint;
(b) has given, or intends to give, evidence or information in connection with
proceedings under this Act;
(c) has alleged, or intends to allege, that a person has committed an act
which would amount to a contravention of this Act; or
(d) has done anything in relation to a person under or by reference to this
(2) Victimisation takes place if a person subjects
or threatens to subject another person or an associate of the other person to
(3) Subsection (1)(c) does not apply to or in relation to an allegation that
is false and not made in good faith.”
Section 91 of the Act is also
“SECTION 91 - BURDEN AND STANDARD OF PROOF
(1) Subject to this section, it is for the complainant to prove, on the
balance of probabilities, that the prohibited conduct alleged
in the complaint
is substantiated.
(2) Where a respondent wishes to rely on an exemption, it is for the
respondent to raise and prove, on the balance of probabilities,
exemption applies.”
THE EVIDENCE
A report pursuant to
Anti-Discrimination Act
referring the complaints for Hearing was tendered and accepted in
The contents of that report, together with the evidence
presented during the hearing have been taken into account in arriving at my
decision in this matter.
The complainant, Mr Joe Romelo, is a man of
Aboriginal descent, who has been working for the Darwin Port Authority for
twenty-four
years, and for the last five years has been a member of the
Waterside Workers Union – prior to that he was a member of the
Workers Federation. Mr Romelo has been a union member for the whole of the time
he has been employed by the Darwin Port
At the time of the
Hearing Mr Romelo had been on sick leave for fourteen months.
alleged that his inability to work was directly attributable to the
discrimination on the basis of his race and trade union
activity he had been
subjected to by Mr Dick Adey and to a lesser extent Mr Danny Greig, and to
victimisation by Mr Adey.
Mr Romelo submitted that the Darwin Port
Authority is vicariously liable for the discriminatory conduct of Mr Adey and Mr
Mr Dick Adey is Maintenance Manager for the Darwin Port Authority
Mr Danny Greig is Maintenance Foreman.
Mr Romelo outlined the
background and history of his complaints, and stated that the first incident of
discord with Mr Adey occurred
when Mr Adey was the Manager of the Wharf
Precinct, before joining the Darwin Port Authority as Maintenance
This occurred on Stokes Hill Wharf, when Mr Romelo was working as
dogman on a forklift positioning a gangway for a passenger liner
Mr Kenny Ewitt was the crane driver.
In Mr Romelo’s words, Mr
Adey came “screaming down the wharf abusing me”. Mr Romelo felt
insulted that Mr Adey
should approach him as
Mr Romelo had been
“putting gangways on ships for years” while he considered Mr Adey to
be inexperienced and “out
Some weeks following this
altercation Mr Romelo heard a rumour that
Mr Adey was coming across to the
Darwin Port Authority as Maintenance Manager – effectively to be Mr
Romelo’s “boss”.
A union meeting was held and Mr Romelo
went to Darwin Port Authority Operations Manager Captain Bruce Wilson and Deputy
Chief Executive
Officer of the Darwin Port Authority Mr John Butler –
asking if the rumour was true. Mr Romelo asserted that the customary
of first internally advertising such a vacancy had not been followed in this
case, and that as union delegate he challenged
the way in which the position had
been filled.
Mr Romelo’s evidence was supported by his witnesses,
and I accept their evidence that within the maintenance section there was
level of concern and animosity generated by the way in which Mr Adey was
appointed which was neither addressed nor alleviated by
management.
It was Mr Romelo’s evidence that the maintenance gang
Captain Wilson and challenged Mr Adey’s appointment, at which
meeting Captain Wilson apologised for the lack of adequate communication
the Maintenance Section about the appointment. Mr Romelo alleged that there was
considerable argument during the meeting, and
that because of his strong
representations on behalf of other union members, and his refusal to accept that
Mr Adey’s appointment
was in accordance with what had been normal
practice, he was subsequently singled out for unfair and discriminatory
In Mr Romelo’s words:
“..... if you oppose anything you’re pushed to one side.
You’re the bad boy of the company.”
Mr Romelo then went on to
outline a series of incidents which he believed demeaned him, causing him
stress, anxiety and eventually
leading to his inability to perform his duties
due to illness.
These incidents included Mr Adey spray-painting the limbs
of trees to be lopped; Mr Romelo being given a note listing his gardening
and the time to be taken to perform them; Mr Adey “passing little yellow
notes” to the Supervisor Lee Metner regarding
Mr Romelo; being told by Mr
Adey how to use a fire hose; being “directed” to clean drains and
being “spied on”
Mr Adey while performing routine tasks;
having Mr Adey take photographs of Mr Romelo’s work areas; being kept
under close supervision
on light duties painting whalers at Fort Hill Wharf
after being certified fit to resume normal duties.
Mr Romelo was
particularly distressed at the spray-painting incident, as he had won a
“Keep Australia Beautiful” award
for his maintenance of the Darwin
Port Authority precinct. He also resented the note, or job description of his
gardening duties,
as he had years of experience in that area.
stated that there was a “big drama” over his use of a Darwin Port
Authority ute, with talk of him being seen
“all over town” with the
ute – however Mr Romelo had never been spoken to directly by management
over this issue,
but was instead constantly harassed by Mr Adey, who wanted
|Mr Romelo to use a quad bike to travel from the maintenance shed at Fort
Hill Wharf to the Mooring Basin instead of the ute.
The maintenance staff
had a roster which ensured a rotation of duties, including rubbish removal,
cleaning and maintaining the grounds
and toilets of the Mooring Basin some 2 km
from the main Port area.
Ms Erica Seipel, the lock operator, was the
supervisor.
During one of his routine lock rosters, Mr Romelo was
involved in a traffic accident which resulted in three months sick leave and
his return to work Mr Romelo was, on medical advice, to be assigned light
The light duties consisted of painting an area of Fort Hill
Wharf. After a couple of weeks on that task Mr Romelo obtained a medical
clearance and requested he be returned to normal duties. However he was
informed by his immediate supervisor Danny Greig that he
would continue to paint
Fort Hill Wharf.
It is worthwhile quoting Mr Romelo’s direct
evidence, as it indicates his perception of what was happening to him:
Mr Romelo: “So I’ve
come back with a certificate and I’ve handed it to Danny Greig, I think it
was, or Lee Metner
and I said, right, Lee said, go back and report to Danny
Greig, he was a foreman at the time. I said, Danny, I’m back now,
to go back to my normal duties and I’m fit to go back to work, to go back
to my normal duties, and I was down the basin
that time. He said, no way, mate,
all you’re going to do is, you’re going to go back over the Fort
Hill Wharf and you’re
going to paint the wharf, you know, because
you’ve been a naughty boy you’re going to paint the whole lot till
you’ve painted the whole Fort Hill Wharf. Well, by that time
– and they made it out to be a priority job, right? They
made out this
had to be painted. So, right, as soon as I was taken off not an ounce of paint
has been on it, not an ounce of paint
has been painted. But this job was a
priority job. I think I spoke to Arthur Boland on occasions with this, I rung
him. I said,
Arthur, what’s the problem, what’s going on here?
This job here now all of a sudden no-one’s doing it. How come
there it was a priority job, you know, you had to do it, you’ve got to do
it, you know, all this caper? So this
is when all the – they said, of
course, I’m a naughty boy, you know what I mean, I would do this, I
you know, and all this caper.”
Mr McIntyre: “Who said those sorts of things to you?”
Mr Romelo: “These guys. Danny Greig was one of them.”
Mr McIntyre: “What sort of things did he – what did he actually
Mr Romelo: “He said because you rock the boat you are a naughty boy.
I think it was in this statement I’ve give, if
you have a look through it,
that I’m a naughty boy and if, you know, like, if I’m going to be a
naughty boy I’m
going to get, you know, put over the thing for it, over
the bench for it.”
– came up again, and Mr Romelo put in for the cleaning detail at Fort
duties included mopping the stairs of the amenities/office block on
Mr Romelo’s supervisor, Mr Metner, received another
yellow note from
Mr Adey directing that Mr Romelo scrub these stairs, rather
than mop them. Mr Romelo sought the assistance of Mr Brian Manning, the
organiser and the yellow note was binned and the directive to scrub was
Mr Romelo alleged that Mr Adey took photographs of the work he
had performed, causing further distress.
Mr Romelo and some of his
colleagues then met with Arthur Boland and outlined their grievances against Mr
Adey. At that time Mr Boland
was Assistant Secretary (Corporate Services) for
the NT Department of Transport and Works.
The Chief Executive Officer of
Transport and Works, Mr Paul Tyrrell, was also Chief Executive Officer of the
Darwin Port Authority.
Mr Romelo believed that Mr Boland would be able to
settle things down, however there was no improvement, despite several approaches
Mr Romelo then approached the Hon Mick Palmer MLA, who
was acting Minister for Transport and Works outlining his concerns. In
particular,
Mr Romelo was unhappy about Mr Adey’s decision to take the
work utility and allocate a quad bike to the maintenance gang for
travel between
Fort Hill and the Mooring Basin. Mr Romelo believed this action was
specifically aimed at him, to denigrate him.
There was a union meeting
called, and the decision was taken that members would refuse to use the quad, on
the grounds that it was
Mr Romelo alleged that in a further
effort to humiliate him, Mr Adey then ordered the fabrication of a trolley which
could be used
to carry cleaning gear around the Mooring Basin. When Mr Romelo
went into the workshop, persons unknown had hung a sign “Joey’s
trolley” on the offending piece of equipment, which caused further
distress and embarrasment.
It was at this stage that Mr Romelo had
approached the Acting Minister for Transport and Works, (Hon Mick Palmer MLA)
who, according
Mr Romelo’s evidence, spoke to the Chief Executive
Officer, Mr Paul Tyrrell, on Mr Romelo’s behalf.
Romelo’s belief that the Minister requested that he (Mr Romelo) was to be
left alone, however the harassment is alleged
to have continued, as a result of
which he had become severely stressed and had been unable to work for some
fourteen months. Mr
Romelo related the harassment back to
his original
altercation with Mr Adey, voicing his objections and in particular his role as a
union delegate in raising the manner
of Mr Adey’s appointment with Darwin
Port Authority management.
Mr Romelo runs a small security company and he
believed his race was a factor in action taken against him because of his
seek approval for outside employment – in essence Mr Romelo
believed that there was a culture of opposition to a person of
Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander descent running a successful business.
following an oil spill were also put forward as evidence of Mr Romelo being
unfairly singled out and harassed by Mr Adey.
It was alleged Mr Adey went
looking for Mr Romelo to assist in cleaning up the spill but failed to find him
as Mr Romelo was clearing
rubbish from the extreme end of the Mooring Basin at
He was reported by Mr Adey for being “off the job”
but was subsequently cleared of the charge.
Mr Romelo stated the third
respondent, Mr Greig, was used by Mr Adey as a conduit to convey instructions to
Mr Romelo which were part
of the pattern of harassment, that Mr Greig made
racially derogatory statements and that the continual demeaning conduct and
was because of
Mr Romelo’s actions in putting forward the
views of union members to management.
In summary in his evidence in chief
Mr Romelo outlined a series of allegations of intimidation, harassment and
victimisation culminating
in his being unable to continue working at the Darwin
Port Authority due to ill health.
Mr Boland (for the Darwin Port
Authority) pursued the issue of just who was the union delegate, and the means
by which the Darwin
Port Authority was formally notified. While this matter
remained unresolved, it was not disputed that at times Mr Romelo acted as
spokesperson for his fellow employees.
With Mr Romelo under cross
examination from Mr Boland, there was considerable time devoted to the
consideration of just when the undisputed
discord between Mr Romelo and Mr Adey
commenced; Mr Adey’s transfer from the Department of Transport and Works
to the Darwin
Port Authority; and the management and operation of Mr
Romelo’s security company,
JR Security. These issues were raised
throughout the Hearing of the various allegations of discriminatory
With the assistance of Mr Boland, a number of documents relating
to the appointment of Mr Adey to the position of Maintenance Manager
Darwin Port Authority were produced, including references to the
Public Sector Employment and Management Act
However, the
matters before me were pursuant to the NT
Anti-Discrimination Act
Public Sector Employment and Management Act
, and as it is not
disputed that Mr Adey’s appointment caused resentment among some Darwin
Port Authority employees, and that
Mr Romelo took the matter up on their behalf
with management, whether or not the correct public sector procedures were
followed is
largely irrelevant. The only relevant factor in this issue is
whether Mr Romelo’s approaches to management as a union delegate
spokesperson, resulted in his suffering unlawful discrimination and any
Mr Boland also addressed the issue of Mr Romelo’s
non-compliance with the requirement under the
Public Sector Employment and
Management Act
to seek permission to engage in outside employment, and the
following exchange illustrates the point each party sought to make:
Mr Boland: “I concede
that after that you did submit an application to engage in outside
employment.”
Mr Romelo: “Thank you, Mr Boland.”
Mr Boland: “My purpose, Mr Romelo, is to put to you that you are not
somebody who adheres to the rules. You are not somebody
who does as
they’re told. You are somebody who does as they please and that is why
you have to be supervised, because you
just won’t do it
otherwise.”
Mr Romelo: “What, for 23 years you’re telling me, Arthur, that I
haven’t done that?”
Mr Boland: “I’m talking about a period – and I think
I’m within the subject period – I’m talking
from mid 1997 to early 1998 when you say you were subject to victimisation.
What I’m putting to you is that
you are not subject to victimisation, not
on the basis of your colour or your trade union activity, you were subject to
because you wouldn’t play the game, because you wouldn’t
obey the rules.”
Mr Romelo: “That’s your opinion.”
proceedings I received evidence, which I accept, on changes to established
waterfront practices instituted by senior management
to improve the efficiency
of the Port, including references to “multi-skilling” of the
As part of that process was a performance development program
(PDP) was run by the Darwin Port Authority for its employees.
A memo from
Mr Dick Adey was sent to Joe Romelo, Tony Walsh and
Kevin O’Donoghue
informing them of their PDP interviews however they refused to attend with Mr
Adey whom they considered to
be the “new boy” at the Darwin Port
Authority and they were subsequently interviewed by Captain Bruce
Mr Boland, on behalf of Darwin Port Authority, was consistent in
portraying the considerable changes instituted by Mr Adey, including
given to Mr Romelo regarding his duties, as changes instituted as part of the
overall reforms taking place.
The complainant, Mr Romelo, was just as
consistent in his evidence that he was being subjected to discriminatory conduct
and harassment
by Mr Adey because of his union activities and race, and for
having lodged a complaint with the Anti-Discrimination Commission.
was evident from the proceedings was the unrelenting and increasing hostility
between Mr Adey, the new Maintenance Manager, and
Mr Romelo, the long-term
worker. Further, it is clear that this hostility was made known to Minister
Palmer MLA, the Port Authority
Chief Executive Officer
Paul Tyrrell, Captain
Wilson, Captain Butler, Arthur Boland and most, if not all of the workforce at
the Darwin Port Authority.
One of the recurrent issues raised by all
parties was the purchase of a quad bike on the recommendation of Mr Adey for use
by maintenance
staff, in place of a ute which had been used for that purpose and
which, it was alleged, Mr Adey had wanted for his (official)
Following representations from Mr Romelo, Mr Boland ordered an
occupational health and safety assessment on the proposed use of the
It is undisputed that the quad has remained in a shed at the Darwin
Port Authority and has not been used for the purpose for which
The second respondent, Mr Adey, outlined his work experience
before joining the Darwin Port Authority, including time spent with the
Division, Department of Transport and Works. This work included bush work, and
Mr Adey referred to the method of taping, or
marking trees and vegetation in the
survey of road reserves. It is accepted that this is a procedure with which Mr
Adey is familiar.
Mr Adey stated he used this procedure in deciding which trees
at the wharf precinct were to be lopped by Mr Romelo as part of the
maintenance duties.
Mr Adey stated the tree(s) had not been lopped, and
when he enquired as to why, he was told his instruction to Mr Romelo should have
been addressed through the acting foreman, Mr O’Donoghue – as the
correct “chain of command”. Mr Adey referred
to the hostility of
the three maintenance people, describing Mr O’Donoghue as
“uncooperative”, “abrasive”
and “obnoxious”.
He described another of the maintenance crew, Mr Walsh, as
Mr Adey also described Mr Walsh as
“provocative”, and a person who has failed to accept the concept of
multi-skilling.
Mr Adey made a lengthy submission, but much of the
material Mr Adey put to me in evidence was either irrelevant or hypothetical
such as what
Mr Adey may or may not have done in certain
circumstances in his previous experience with Roads Division.
In relation
to the original placing of the gangway incident, Mr Adey spoke at some length
occur when a ship comes alongside the
wharf, and stated that if he had wanted to engage
Mr Romelo’s
attention he would have had to shout and wave at him.
However, as Mr Adey
also stated he could not recall this incident, his evidence as to what might
have happened was unconvincing.
In addressing the complaints made by Mr
Romelo, Mr Adey stated the issue of the lopping of the trees had caused him
considerable concern,
as the job had first been delayed and secondly poorly done
with whole branches being cut off by a chain saw, creating a traffic hazard.
Adey denied having given Mr Romelo a note detailing his gardening duties and the
time to be taken to perform them.
Mr Adey denied having behaved in a
discriminatory manner towards
Mr Romelo either on the grounds of race or
trade union activity, or victimising him. Mr Adey dismissed suggestions by
witnesses that
he had been in the habit of driving past the “Grey
Collar” Club with his “eyes right” to check on Mr Romelo,
pointing out that there was a T-junction and traffic in the area, and in
addressing the issue of the scrubbing of the steps to the
office/amenities area
Mr Adey went into some detail regarding the need for the area to be clean on any
particular day.
Mr Adey alleged that Mr Romelo was lazy and had a poor
work ethic. He mentioned Mr Romelo’s use of a mobile phone, surmising
was for sending or receiving private calls, and vaguely remembering a visitor in
a blue ute speaking with Mr Romelo during work
In response to
questions by Counsel Assisting, Mr McIntyre, Mr Adey gave further extensive
evidence of his difficulty in dealing with
Mr Romelo, including referring Mr
Romelo for counselling, and his efforts to change the work practices in place at
Darwin Port Authority
since his recruitment as Maintenance Manager.
issue of the quad bike and the trolley was raised, and it was Mr Adey’s
evidence that the trolley was to be used to cart
cleaning materials around
Stokes Hill/Fort Hill Wharf, and the Mooring Basin.
The quad bike was to
be used to travel from Fort Hill to the Mooring Basin, a distance estimated by
Mr Adey to be approximately 1
kilometre, on a public road with relevant speed
Mr Adey was cross-examined by both Mr Romelo and Mr Boland, and in
response to Mr Boland, Mr Adey indicated that if the quad bike
was used to
travel between Fort Hill Wharf and the Mooring Basin the distance at which the
speed limit would be 60 kph would be between
500-600 metres – other speed
limits being 20 kph or 40 kph.
Mr Adey clarified that the trolley was not
being used at the time of the Hearing, nor was the quad bike.
respondent, Danny Greig is a Maintenance Foreman with the Darwin Port Authority
and has known Mr Romelo for approximately
25 years. Mr Greig denied having
discriminated against Mr Romelo on the grounds of trade union activity and/or
race. (Mr Greig is
not a party to
Mr Romelo’s complaint of
victimisation).
Mr Greig’s evidence was brief and to the point, and
he impressed me as an honest and credible witness.
The complainant, Mr
Romelo, called the following witnesses:
O’Donoghue (by telephone)
Minister Mick Palmer MLA (by
Erica Seipel
Lou Saracini
“Smokey” Archibald
Neville Shields
respondents, Darwin Port Authority, Mr Adey and Mr Greig called the following
Captain Bruce Wilson
John Butler (by
Ron Harbick
Cheryl Day.
All of the witnesses attested
to the hostility between Mr Romelo and
Mr Adey, but put differing views as
to why such hostility existed, whether the conduct of Mr Adey towards Mr Romelo
was one of persecution
and harassment, or whether it was a legitimate managerial
response to poor work performance and practice.
It is clear from the
evidence that the management of the Darwin Port Authority was under pressure to
implement reforms which would
bring greater efficiency to the Port, particularly
as their performance was under review in considering who, or what organisation,
would be given control of the new Port at East Arm.
While the day to day
management of the Port rested with senior officers at the Darwin Port Authority,
the Chief Executive Officer
Paul Tyrrell, the CEO of the
Department of Transport and Works, who was physically remote from the Port.
Similarly the effective
development and implementation of equal employment
opportunity (EEO), recruitment and training programs was coordinated by an
attached to Department of Transport and Works, not the Darwin Port
Authority. Mr Arthur Boland who was approached several times
by Mr Romelo, is
the Assistant Secretary (Corporate Services) Transport and Works, and is also
physically remote from the Port.
Simple questions as to who was responsible for
ordering/authorising vehicles for the Port Authority elicited somewhat
convoluted responses from witnesses, and it is in this context
that I consider
the evidence of the witnesses, whose perceptions of events differed in so many
One such example is the witnesses evidence relating to the
“washing down” procedures following the bulk loading of iron
Mr Romelo was ordered to participate in this task, which is a “dirty
job”. He and Joe Clarke did so, and Mr Clarke
stated that both Mr Adey
and Captain Wilson were present which Mr Clarke considered unusual – while
Captain Wilson and Mr Adey’s
evidence was that they were there to ensure
this particular procedure was carried out promptly and efficiently because of
some environmental
concerns which had been raised in the media. Mr
Romelo’s witnesses were more skeptical, one describing the presence of Mr
Adey and Captain Wilson as a “set-up”, and evidence of the
harassment of Mr Romelo.
On this issue I found Captain Wilson to be
defensive and somewhat unconvincing, and I believe his presence during the wash
down procedure
to be indicative of the unusual and close attention being shown
to Mr Romelo by Mr Adey and senior management.
I have carefully
considered the evidence of the witnesses called by the respondents, and while I
believe they gave an honest account
of events as they saw them, including the
difficulties of introducing reforms to long standing practices, I do not
consider much
of the evidence to be particularly helpful in addressing the issue
of whether the treatment of Mr Romelo by
Mr Adey (and to a lessor extent Mr
Greig) was unlawful as alleged by
Mr Ordogh is a leading
hand motor mechanic employed at the Darwin Port Authority for the last 29 years.
Mr Ordogh said in his opinion
Mr Romelo performed poorly “as a team”
and would leave his workplace without telling
his workmates or superiors
where he was going. Mr Ordogh has spent most of his 29 years service in the
garage, and under questioning
from Counsel Assisting stated that Mr Romelo had
never worked in the garage, and they only worked together occasionally on bulk
duties. Mr Ordogh agreed Mr Romelo would act as spokesperson for union
members from time to time.
In his evidence the Operations Manager Captain
Wilson referred to the challenge to improve the work practices in place at the
which he described as rorts and laziness. Captain Wilson referred to Mr
Adey as a very enthusiastic man, with whom he could work
to change the work
practices. Captain Wilson referred to a small core of three who were lazy and
did not like authority, and named
them as Joe Romelo, Tony Walsh and Kevin
O’Donoghue. Captain Wilson went on to describe Mr Romelo as “not
very intelligent”
and “against authority”. Captain Wilson
referred to the disciplinary action he had taken against other Darwin Port
workers, whom he stated had come on line, but he had not had the same
success with Mr Romelo, whom he considered resistant to change.
Wilson was scathing in his comments regarding previous middle managers at the
Darwin Port Authority, including a previous
Harbour Master, stating he had to
sort out middle management and senior management before he could get down to
maintenance staff.
Captain Wilson had been impressed by Mr Adey and put
in the request for Mr Adey to transfer from his position at the precinct to the
Darwin Port Authority – with the brief to assist him change work
Captain Wilson referred to the friction between Mr Romelo and
Mr Adey, and said he told Mr Adey to keep as far away as possible from
While Captain Wilson had given Mr O’Donoghue a written
warning regarding his employment, he was not aware of any such warning
been given to Mr Romelo, nor of any counselling regarding his job
performance.
Mr John Butler, now retired, had been deputy Chief Executive
Officer of the Darwin Port Authority – as Port Manager.
Butler’s evidence also went to the need for increased productivity and
changed work practices, and the resistance of some
workers, including
Romelo, Mr O’Donoghue and Mr Walsh.
Mr Butler had been responsible
for the overseeing of the harassment policy in place at the Darwin Port
Authority, but did not become
directly involved in Mr Romelo’s allegations
of harassment against Mr Adey as he considered
Mr Romelo had taken the issue
out of his hands by going to Mr Boland.
I accept Captain Wilson’s
clear unequivocal evidence that on taking up his appointment Mr Adey had been
briefed on the need
to reform the work practices, and it is clear from the
evidence that Mr Adey felt the attention he was showing to Joe Romelo was
essential part of that process. On the evidence of Captain Wilson, Mr Adey had
been briefed on a “small core of people”
who had trouble changing
their ways. Captain Wilson said that he didn’t think he mentioned
specific names, but I also find
that statement unconvincing.
Minister the
Hon Mick Palmer was called as a witness by Mr Romelo.
Mr Palmer confirmed
he had been approached by Joe Clarke who raised the use of the quad bike as a
safety issue, and the Minister also
remembered a similar conversation with Mr
Romelo. He advised that his procedure would have been to pass those concerns on
relevant Minister.
Throughout proceedings, Mr Romelo had been
variously referred to as “lazy”, “uncooperative” and
“provocative”
by Mr Adey and Darwin Port Authority management and I
have taken the evidence of Mrs Erica Seipel into account in considering and
assessing these remarks.
Mrs Seipel operates the lock at the Mooring
Basin, and was Mr Romelo’s supervisor when he was assigned cleaning duties
Mrs Seipel stated,
“I think if this is about work performance I had no problems at all
with his working. He was very quick, he got his work done.
I was quite cranky
at first when I thought I was getting Joe because you do hear stories and I
actually complained that he was being
sent down to me but I had to go back and
eat my words because when he did come down he worked really well. I had no
problems at
all. As for the racial bit, I have never come across any racism in
the Port, unless someone can refresh my mind but I don’t
believe there has
been any racism.”
and in response to a question from Mr Romelo who
referred to the “dramas” he had had with Mr Adey, Mrs Seipel
“I think there was a problem with Joe. Dick did seem pretty keen to
find out where he was all the time and probably where
I thought it may have been
a little bit unfair, there were other blokes also who weren’t always on
the job that were being
left alone and maybe – I think in a way and with
no respect (
) to Dick because he’s a hard worker, he just was
little bit obsessed with Joe. I just ....”
Mrs Seipel also stated
that having been in supervisory roles herself:
“I can understand how hard it is for Dick as well as Joe’s
problems, you know. I feel that – pretty soft with both
Mrs Seipel said she knew of Mr Romelo’s union
activities as a delegate, that he had long been a delegate, and that as a
“He’d listen to complaints from the workers and go to management,
make sure that the workplace is safe and basically that’s
Mrs Seipel was herself a delegate for administrative staff,
and referred to Captain Bruce Wilson as “very good” and “very
understanding”.
In explaining what she meant by Mr Adey being
“obsessed” with Mr Romelo, Mrs Seipel said:
“Well, I think somewhere along the line there had been an argument and
I think Dick sort of just didn’t like Joe and sort
don’t know. I just felt that Joe was being ridden and I won’t say
that it may not have been warranted but
I will say that there are other people
who should have been treated the same.”
Mrs Seipel knew of the
controversy over the proposed use of the quad to travel to the Mooring Basin,
and expressed her concern that
with cars speeding in the area such a proposal
was dangerous.
In answer to a question from Mr Boland (Darwin Port
Authority) Mrs Seipel repeated her statement about her initial misgivings on
Mr Romelo assigned to her area – and said that she had been misled
and went on to describe Mr Romelo as very good, a fast worker,
and that she had
not had any problems with him.
In answer to direct questions from Mr
Boland, Mrs Seipel stated she had not seen either Mr Greig or Mr Adey take
action against Mr
Romelo on the basis of his race or trade union
I have quoted Mrs Seipel’s evidence at some length as I
found her to be a straightforward, honest and reliable witness, without
discernable bias, a person who had supervised the complainant Mr Romelo, and who
was also aware of the difficulties facing managers
and supervisors during a time
I found Mr Romelo’s other witnesses to be honest, direct
and forthcoming and for the most part, extremely critical of Mr Adey.
I consider their obvious personal antipathy and resentment towards Mr Adey was
largely irrelevant to the proceedings and
my decision in these proceedings.
It’s only relevance is whether Mr Adey’s personal opinion of Mr
Romelo led to unlawful
discrimination and harassment of Mr Romelo. I have taken
account of the witnesses testimony as to Mr Romelo’s good work as
gardener and cleaner, and his activities in taking up issues with management on
behalf of his fellow workers. I also noted their
evidence as to comments made
by Mr Greig and Mr Adey regarding “coloured blokes”.
of these witnesses were clear in their recollection of Mr Romelo being given a
note detailing his gardening duties and their
time frame – which was
denied by Mr Adey. This was perceived as unnecessary, insulting and demeaning
to Mr Romelo, who was
regarded by his peers as a good worker, who had won a
gardening award for the Darwin Port Authority. On the evidence before me,
having observed the demeanor of all parties, I prefer the evidence of Mr Romelo
and his witnesses to that of Mr Adey.
I have placed particular reliance
on the evidence of Joe Clarke, a labourer at the Darwin Port Authority. Mr
Clarke was clear in
his recollection of a detailed note outlining his gardening
duties being given to Mr Romelo, and was equally clear in the events
surrounding
the cleaning of the drain at which Captain Wilson was present – the first
time Mr Clarke had ever known Captain
Wilson to be “on the job” on
It was Mr Clarke’s evidence that Mr Adey
“humbugged” only Joe (Mr Romelo) – that Mr Adey was
for Mr Romelo, that he was obsessed by
Mr Romelo and
hounded Mr Romelo. Mr Clarke also said that during a smoko break at the
“Grey Collar Club” Mr Greig said
“we’ve got a guy
that’s going to shaft Joe Romelo and his name’s Dick
Mr Clarke was unshaken in his evidence that in driving past
the Grey Collar Club, Mr Adey would always look to see if Mr Romelo was
(the “eyes right”), if Mr Romelo was known to be in the
Mr Clarke was a most impressive witness. I found him honest,
forthright and sincere, and where there is a conflict I prefer his evidence
Similarly, Mr Saracini referred to a campaign to
“out Joe, to break him, to belittle and demean him”.
taken into account witnesses’ responses to Mr Boland’s questions as
to whether they had directly observed Mr Romelo
being discriminated against and
have weighed up those responses in light of the bulk of their
Given the large amount of evidence presented on the issue of
the proposed use of a quad bike, the cleaning of certain areas including
Mooring Basin, tree-lopping, the painting of the wharf by Mr Romelo while on
light duties and the position of the Grey Collar
Club, a site inspection was
arranged and took place 31 March 1999. All parties, the Registrar
Woon, Counsel Assisting Mr Patrick McIntyre, and my Personal Assistant Mrs Karyn
Jessop were present.
The site inspection was useful in clarifying the
scope and range of duties undertaken by Mr Romelo, the traffic around the Grey
Club, the area of the “whaler” on Fort Hill Wharf painted by
Mr Romelo, the distance from the Mooring Basin to Fort Hill
and the traffic
likely to be encountered on that journey.
Odometer readings indicate the
distance from the rubbish bin area at the boat ramp to the southern extremity of
the Mooring Basin
1.1 kilometres, and it is a further 2 kilometres
to the maintenance shed. This is proportionately considerably further than the
There is considerable traffic in the
area, including trucks, tankers and large commercial vehicles.
Romelo’s strenuous objections to the use of a quad bike to travel in this
area to be entirely reasonable, and there
is considerable doubt in my mind as to
the reliability of Mr Adey’s evidence on this issue.
The trolley
referred to in evidence was also produced as an exhibit. It did little to add
to the credibility of the respondents representations
efficiency.
Throughout the Hearing I received evidence as to Mr
Romelo’s involvement with a private security company. This Hearing
to Mr Romelo’s employment with the Darwin Port Authority, and any
detriment he may have suffered because of discrimination
while so employed. His
outside employment is largely irrelevant to the issues at hand. It’s only
relevance is whether this
outside employment impacted on his ability to perform
his duties at the Darwin Port Authority. While Captain Wilson and Mr Adey
critical of Mr Romelo’s outside employment activities, they did not put in
place any of the counselling and disciplinary
procedures available to them under
Public Sector Employment & Management
SUBMISSIONS
Mr Romelo produced a report from Dr Ian
Jackson, a psychiatrist, prepared at the request of Cridlands Lawyers acting for
Port Authority in a Work Health Claim.
The respondents
objected to the document being received, and after carefully considering their
objections and the submission of Counsel
Assisting I received the document in
evidence and have considered it in my decision as to what detriment, if any, Mr
Romelo suffered
as a result of any prohibited conduct on the part of the
respondents.
In his final submission Mr Romelo outlined the detriment he
claimed to have suffered as a result of the alleged discrimination, and
orders including compensation for medical expenses, legal fees, loss of salary,
and hurt, humiliation and distress. Mr Romelo
further sought an order requiring
the respondents not to repeat or continue the prohibited conduct, a written
apology from the respondents
and an order requiring the first respondent to move
the complainant (Mr Romelo) to a position where he would not fall under the
supervision
of the second respondent, Mr Adey. Mr Romelo tendered accounts of
medical and legal costs in support of his claim.
Mr Boland put final
submissions on behalf of the three respondents.
Mr Boland submitted that
the issues placed before me were industrial issues which should not have
attracted the jurisdiction of the
Anti-Discrimination Act
matters outside the complainants points of claim should not be considered, and
Mr Boland then referred in some detail to the
evidence, which he submitted did
not support Mr Romelo’s allegations. Mr Boland referred to the second
respondent, Mr Adey,
as a man of “fair dealing” who on coming to
work for the Darwin Port Authority had not been given a brief to
Joe Romelo, but had had to deal with an individual Mr Boland
described as recalcitrant – that is, non-complying, obstinate
resistant to change.
Mr Boland submitted that there was no evidence
before me to support
Mr Romelo’s claims, and further submitted that,
theoretically, to move
Mr Adey would place his employment in the NTPS in
jeopardy. Similarly there would be a problem in placing Mr Romelo
Mr Boland did not make a final submission on the issue of
vicarious liability, but referred to previous submissions by the Darwin
Authority on this issues.
For the purposes of clarity I shall deal with
that issue separately. Given its importance, I am adopting the somewhat unusual
of quoting the submissions put to me in full:
“Submissions of the Darwin Port Authority (“The Authority”)
on Issue of Vicarious Liability (dated 13.4.99)
Anti-Discrimination Act
(NT) prohibits discrimination by
“persons” and specified bodies. Liability of an employer for
breaches of the Act by
an employee is not provided for under the Act.
- The predominant use of the word “person” through out the Act is
indicative of a legislative intent that, unless otherwise
specifically provided
for, the Act is intended to censure
individuals
for prohibited
2. - Messrs Adey and Greig are not employed by the Darwin Port Authority.
- The Authority is a statutory corporation created pursuant to section 6 of
Darwin Port Authority Act
(NT) 1983. Pursuant to sections 17 and 5
of that Act, officers of the Authority are
“employees” within the meaning of the
Public Sector Employment
and Management Act
working in service of the Authority.
- As Public Sector employees, Messrs Adey and Greig are employed by the
Commissioner for Public Employment pursuant to
Sector Employment and Management Act
3. - An employer will never be vicariously liable for conduct of an employee
falling outside the scope of that employee’s employment
or authority.
- “Prohibited conduct” (as defined) by a foreman, supervisor or
member of management at the Authority must fall outside
the scope of that
employee’s employment/authority in the absence of evidence establishing
that such prohibited conduct was
sanctioned by the employer –
v Grace, Smith & Co.
(1912) AC716;
Lackersteen v Jones
- There is no evidence that the Commissioner for Public Employment (or the
Authority for that matter) sanctioned prohibited conduct
by employees.
- At all material times Messrs Adey and Greig were:
(a) liable to disciplinary action under
Public Sector Employment
and Management Act
for breaches of discipline including, inter alia,
harassment of another employee (section 49g);
(b) subject to the Authority’s comprehensively publicised Harassment
Policy and grievance procedure promulgated pursuant to
Public Sector Employment
and Management Act
employment instruction number 8 as a document of “best
practice” (see evidence of CEO John Butler 29 March 1999).
4. - Not having been made a respondent to Mr Romelo’s complaints, the
Commissioner for Public Employment cannot be held to be
vicariously liable for
the alleged acts of his employees.”
Submission of Mr Romelo dated
19 October 1998:
“Submissions of Romelo on Issue of Vicarious Liability
The Darwin Port Authority is a “person” within the meaning of
that term in the
Anti-Discrimination Act
Interpretation Act
(NT) section 19 provides:
In any Act –
“person” and “party” include a body corporate and a
body politic.
There is no provision to the contrary in the
Anti-Discrimination Act
Subsection 4(7) presumes this general and usual construction of the word
“person” because it extends the meaning to
include unincorporated
associations. It is submitted that the word “person” clearly
includes a body corporate such as
the Darwin Port Authority which obtains its
corporate status from section 6 of the
Darwin Port Authority Act
“The Respondents cannot escape liability by seeking to confuse the
issue of who employs Adey and Greig.
If Messrs Adey and Greig are not employed by the Darwin Port Authority,
clearly they act under the direction of the Port Authority
and are its agents
(if not its servants) in all matters concerning the employment of persons such
as Romelo by the Port Authority.
Consider the following legislation:-
The Darwin Port Authority Act
Section 17(2) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), the Port
Authority has power to –
(t) appoint officers who are employees, for the purposes of carrying out the
powers and functions vested in it under this Act; ...
5. INTERPRETATION
(1) In this Act, unless the contrary intention appears –
“employee” has the same meaning as it has in the
Sector Employment and Management Act
The PSEM Act
Section 3(1) In this Act, unless the contrary intention appears -
“employee” means a person employed in the Public Sector, other
than the Commissioner or a Chief Executive Officer’
“Public Sector” means all the Agencies; ...
“Agency” means a Department or other unit of administration of
the Public Service of the Territory established under section
7 or continued in
existence, as an Agency, by the
Public Sector Employment and Management
(Transition and Savings) Act
or an organisation specified in Schedule 1;
[Note: the Darwin Port Authority is not specified in Schedule 1; it could not
have been established under section 7 of the PSEM
Act as it was established
under its own Act; and it was not continued in existence under the Transition
Act because its continued
existence is the result of the operation of its own
Act. See section 5 of the Transition Act.]
The Transition Act
Section 5 All departments and other units of administration of the Public
in existence under the repealed Act
immediately before the
commencement of this Act continue in existence as Agencies under their
respective names on that commencement
as if they were duly established on that
commencement under section 7 of the Principal Act.
The effect of this legislation is that persons appointed as officers of the
Port Authority under para 17(2)(t) must be persons employed
in the Public
Sector. Presumably they will remain so after their appointment as officers.
The argument of the Respondents is a barren one, however. Quite clearly the
officers of the Authority are subject to the direction
of their CEO who is in
turn subject to the direction of the Minister. The Port Authority is a body
corporate and may be sued. If
the Port Authority is arguing that it is
technically not the employer of
Messrs Adey and Greig, and therefore is not responsible for their actions,
then that argument must fail because of the following provisions
of the Port
Authority Act. They show that the Port Authority is constituted by the CEO who
then carries out the functions of the
Port Authority by either personal action
or delegation of powers and functions. While there is no requirement that
functions be
delegated to “employees” as defined under the Act,
clearly the general practice would be to delegate to employees or
Port Authority Act
7. CONSTITUTION OF PORT AUTHORITY
(1) The Port Authority shall be constituted by the Chief Executive
(2) The establishment of the Port Authority is not affected by reason only of
there being a vacancy in the office of the Chief Executive
8. CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
(1) The Minister shall appoint a person to be the Chief Executive
(2) [Omitted]
(3) Subject to this section, the Chief Executive Officer holds office on such
terms and conditions as the Administrator determines.
10. DELEGATION BY CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
(1) The Chief Executive Officer may, by instrument in writing, delegate to a
person any of his or her powers and functions under this
Act, other than this
power of delegation.
(2) A power or function delegated under this section, when exercised or
performed by the delegate, shall, for the purposes of this
Act, be deemed to
have been exercised or performed by the Chief Executive Officer.
15. MINISTERIAL CONTROL
(1) The Port Authority, in the exercise of its powers and the performance of
its functions, is subject to the directions of the Minister.
17. (2) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), the Port Authority
has power to –
(e) appoint agents; ...
Thus, there is no need to prove vicarious liability. The Port Authority acts
through its officers and agents, and through one mechanism
or another, acted
through Adey and Greig. If the Darwin Port Authority wishes to allege that
particular acts by Adey and Greig fell
outside of their delegated authority or
directions from the CEO, then it is for it to do so such that those acts can be
It is insufficient for it to say that the Commissioner for Public
Employment did not sanction prohibited conduct while ignoring
its own primary
role in directing the actions of its officers.”
Submission by
Counsel Assisting, Mr McIntyre dated 27 April 1999:
“2/. Submissions as to ‘Vicarious Liability’ of the First
2.1 The Respondents’ submission as to the correct construction of the
Act is contrary to
Interpretation Act
2.2 In any event to accept the Respondents’ construction would be to
Sections 4(7)
and 97 of all meaning. Such a construction should be
rejected. (
DPA & Ors v Anti-Discrimination Commission
Unreported, NT Supreme Court, Bailey J, 9
Feb. 1999).
2.3 Whether or not the First Respondent is the employer of the Second and
Third Respondent, it remains open on the evidence for the
Commissioner to find
the they were the servants or agents of the First Respondent which is sufficient
to give rise to vicarious liability
for their alleged prohibited conduct. (See
for example
Morgans v Launchbury & Ors
[1972] UKHL 5
(1973) A.C. 127
Lord Wilberforce @ p135:
“...The owner ought to pay, it says, because he has authorised the act
or requested it, or because the actor is carrying out
a task or duty delegated,
or because he is in control of the actor’s conduct...”
2.4 By virtue of
of the Act the Commissioner may join the
Commissioner for Public Employment should the Commissioner be satisfied that the
said Commissioner
for Public Employment is in fact the employer of the Second
and Third Respondents.
2.5 The Respondents’ third submission on vicarious liability fails to
make the necessary distinction between conduct of an employee,
2.5.1 that is authorised expressly or impliedly or so connected with
authorised conduct as to be an improper mode of performing it;
2.5.2 conduct outside the scope of the service of the employee servant or
2.6 The Crown does not escape vicarious liability in the circumstances of
2.5.1. (See
Commonwealth of Australia v Connell
1986 5 NSWLR 218
see also the general discussion of Vicarious Liability: Crown Servants, CCH
Australian Torts Report 1-940).
Lackersteen v Jones
92 FLR 45-47
is an example of 2.5.2.
It is not authority for the Respondents’ submission that the Third
Respondent cannot be vicariously
liable for the acts of the Second and Third
Respondents.
2.7 Neither is it necessary to establish that the Commissioner for Public
Employment sanctioned the alleged prohibited conduct.
2.8 The matters set out at paragraphs 3(a) & (b) are immaterial to this
2.9 It is open for the Commissioner on the evidence to find the First
Respondent vicariously liable for the prohibited conduct of
the Second and Third
Respondents (subject to issues of credibility).”
In his final
submission Counsel Assisting further addressed this issue, submitting
the Crown is bound by
respondent is bound by the Act
extends further than the usual definition of “person” in the NT
Interpretations Act
by virtue of
section 4 subsection 7
extends the Act to unincorporated
associations.
I have carefully considered all
the evidence put to me on the matter of vicarious liability, including cited
cases, and I am of the
opinion that if I find the second and third respondents
have engaged in prohibited conduct it is open to me to find the first respondent
vicariously liable.
Counsel Assisting addressed several sections of the Act,
in particular to
which outlines the grounds of discrimination
covered by the Act, including race and trade union activity.
Assisting drew my attention to
of the Act, in particular
section 20(1)(b):
“For the purposes of the Act discrimination includes harassment on the
basis of an attribute.”
Section 20, sub-section (3)
“For discrimination to take place, it is not necessary that the
attribute is the sole or dominant ground for the less favourable
treatment.”
Sub-Section (4)
of that section says
“The motive of a person alleged to have discriminated against another
is for the purposes of this Act, irrelevant.”
Opportunity Board and Another
(1985) VLR at page 317, decision of Nathan J
where, on page 323 he says this:
“It is an act of discrimination to deny to an employee a benefit
connected with the employment such as accrues to other employees.
A benefit of
employment is the entitlement to quiet employment, that is the freedom from
physical intrusion, the freedom from being
harassed, the freedom from being
physically molested or approached in an unwelcome manner.”
Assisting also referred to
section 31(2)(d)
“A person shall not discriminate by treating a worker less favourably
in any way in connection with work.”
“Subject to this section it is for the complainant to provide on the
balance of probabilities that the prohibited conduct alleged
in the complaint is
substantiated.
Sub-section (2)
Where a respondent wishes to rely on an exemption it is for the respondent to
raise and prove on the balance of probabilities that
the exemption
Counsel then addressed points of procedure raised by the
respondents, and pointed out the inquisitorial nature of the Hearing, and
powers to include inferences on the basis of the matters put before me in
arriving at findings of fact.
Counsel went through the evidence, drawing
my attention to inconsistencies, and conflicting evidence from the large number
of witnesses
called in this matter, such as the direct evidence of Mr Romelo, Mr
Walsh, Mr O’Donoghue and Mr Clark as to the existence of
the document
detailing Mr Romelo’s gardening duties and the time to be allotted to each
task, and the denial of the existence
of such a document by Mr Adey and Mr
Boland for the Darwin Port Authority.
Other conflicting evidence was
alluded to, with a corresponding need for me to carefully consider the credit of
the witnesses and
the credibility of their evidence.
Finally, my
attention was drawn to the question of quantum of any award for damages, and the
decision of the Full Court of the Federal
(1985) ALR 503
, in the matter of
Hall & Ors v Sheiban
Did the Darwin Port
Authority (first respondent), Mr Dick Adey (second respondent) and Mr Danny
Greig (third respondent) discriminate
against the complainant, Mr Joe Romelo, on
the grounds of race and/or trade union activity, contrary to
Anti-Discrimination Act
and did the first and second respondents victimise the complainant contrary to
of the Act?
Having carefully considered all the
evidence placed before me including the site visit; observed the demeanor of the
witnesses; taken
account of the submissions put by the parties and Counsel
Assisting, I find as follows:
That there is no evidence of discrimination
based on race or trade union activity by the third respondent, Mr Danny Greig
complaints are dismissed.
In considering whether or not the
second respondent Mr Adey, discriminated against Mr Romelo on the basis of his
race, the issue is
not quite so clear cut.
Mr Romelo is of the opinion
that Mr Adey resented a person of Aboriginal descent being either a successful
businessman or defying
authority. His opinion would not in itself indicate that
unlawful conduct had occurred, however I must also consider the evidence
Archibald that Mr Adey said “coloured fellows don’t know which
branch to cut” and the evidence of
Mr Hewitt that Mr Adey said
“tell that black bastard to cut the branches I’ve painted”.
This was specifically denied
by Mr Adey, who in his evidence in chief spoke of
his empathy with Aboriginal people and the time he had spent working on
communities. Mr Adey did not call independent witnesses to support
this view, and I prefer the evidence of Mr Archibald and Mr Hewitt
to that of Mr
The pejorative remark “black bastard” could be
dismissed as simply an indication of a racist attitude which is completely
of place in the workplace, but it needs to be considered together with the
“coloured fellows don’t know what trees
to cut” comment, and
the marking of branches which Mr Romelo found demeaning and humiliating, forming
part of his complaint
of discrimination on the basis of his race.
or not Mr Adey intended to demean Mr Romelo on the basis of his race is
irrelevant. Although Mr Romelo’s race was not
the only factor in the way
in which he was treated, on the evidence before me I find that Mr Adey drew a
distinction between “coloured”
or Aboriginal workers such as
Romelo, and by issuing detailed and unnecessary instructions, treated Mr Romelo
less favourably than he would have treated a non-Aboriginal
person, and that Mr
Romelo was offended and humiliated by this conduct. Further, in all the
circumstances, I find a reasonable person
would be so offended and
humiliated.
It follows, therefore, that I find the second respondent, Mr
Adey, discriminated against the complainant Mr Joe Romelo on the basis
contrary to
section 19(1)(a)
Anti-Discrimination
Mr Romelo also alleged he was discriminated against on the basis
of his trade union activity.
Section 4(3)
“For the purposes of this Act, trade union or employer association
activity shall be construed to include membership or non
membership of a trade
union or employer association and a lack or absence of trade union or employer
association activity.”
and the ordinary meaning of
“activity” as defined in the Macquarie dictionary is:
“1. the state of action; doing.
2. the quality of acting promptly; energy.
3. a specific deed or action; sphere of action:
social activities
4. an exercise of energy or force; an active movement or operation.
5. liveliness; agility.”
There was considerable evidence put
before me as to precisely when
Mr Romelo was a union delegate, and how that
information was relayed to management. Under the provisions of the Act as
outlined above,
it is not necessary to determine whether or not Mr Romelo was
the officially accredited union delegate at the time of the alleged
discrimination, it is sufficient to find that he was active, as a union member,
in promoting the interests of members of his union,
and that he suffered a
detriment because of that activity.
The overwhelming weight of evidence
is that Mr Romelo was indeed active in pursuing union matters; that he
approached management on
behalf of other union members to protest at Mr
Adey’s appointment to the position of Maintenance Manager, and that he was
and at times vociferous in protecting the rights of the unionised
workforce at the Darwin Port Authority, as those rights were perceived
workforce. This was at a time when management was pursuing changes to
established workplace practices to increase efficiency.
It is not disputed that
on his recruitment, Mr Adey was briefed by management to take an active part in
this process.
On the evidence before me, it is clear that the conflict
between Mr Adey and Mr Romelo started with the incident at the gangway on
Hill Wharf before Mr Adey even joined the Darwin Port Authority.
that the conflict intensified with Mr Romelo’s protests to management, on
behalf of other union members at the manner
of Mr Adey’s appointment, and
from the evidence I draw the clear inference that because of Mr Romelo’s
activities on
behalf of the maintenance crew, including insisting on the
established “chain of command” and his open opposition to
the quad bike by the maintenance crew, Mr Romelo was singled out by Mr Adey for
special attention.
I do not accept that Mr Adey’s close supervision
of Mr Romelo was simply to change the work practices and ethics of a
“recalcitrant”
worker, as expressed by Mr Boland on behalf of the
respondents, rather I find that Mr Adey engaged in a pattern of behaviour which
intimidated, belittled, demeaned and harassed Mr Romelo and that this behaviour
amounted to discriminatory conduct towards Mr Romelo
based in part on Mr
Romelo’s trade union activity, contrary to
section 19(1)(k)
Mr Adey’s behaviour towards Mr Romelo was not only
unconscionable, it was unlawful.
In assessing whether or not the Darwin
Port Authority as first respondent is vicariously liable for Mr Adey’s
conduct, I have
considered whether the Darwin Port Authority took all reasonable
steps to ensure discriminatory conduct did not occur.
I find it did
The complainant Mr Romelo sought advice and assistance from a number
of quarters, including Mr Boland Assistant Secretary (Corporate
Department of Transport and Works, and a Minister of the Crown
Palmer. The Chief Executive Officer of the Darwin Port Authority Mr Paul
Tyrrell was aware of Mr Romelo’s concerns,
as was the entire Darwin Port
Authority hierarchy, but the situation was allowed to deteriorate to a state
where Mr Romelo was unable
to continue working at the Darwin
Port Authority
because of the way he was being singled out and treated. Not only was the
Darwin Port Authority derelict in its duty
of care to one of its workers, the
evidence indicates that the Darwin Port Authority simply regarded Mr Romelo as a
troublemaker
and an inefficient worker, and actively encouraged and condoned Mr
Adey’s conduct towards Mr Romelo.
I find the Darwin Port Authority
vicariously liable for the unlawfully discriminatory conduct of Mr Adey toward
Mr Romelo, on the
grounds of both race and trade union activity.
Romelo’s further complaint of victimisation against the first and second
respondents was also considered. It is a sad reflection
on the treatment of Mr
Romelo that I find victimisation of him to be part of the normal pattern of
conduct towards him, and not as
a result of his having made a complaint to the
Commission. That complaint is therefore dismissed.
the Act provides as follows:
“88. ORDERS AFTER HEARING
(1) If, after the hearing of a complaint, the Commissioner finds the
prohibited conduct alleged in the complaint is substantiated,
the Commissioner
may make one or more of the following orders:
(a) an order requiring the respondent not to repeat or continue the
prohibited conduct;
(b) an order requiring the respondent to pay to the complainant or another
person, within a specified period, an amount, being an
amount not more than that
prescribed, that the Commissioner considers appropriate as compensation for loss
or damage caused by the
prohibited conduct;
(c) an order requiring the respondent to do specified things to redress loss
or damage suffered by the complainant or any other person
because of the
prohibited conduct;
(d) an order declaring void all or part of an agreement made in connection
with the prohibited conduct, either from the time the agreement
was made or
subsequently.
(2) In this section, the specified things a
respondent may be required to do, include, but are not limited to the
(a) employing, reinstating or re-employing a person;
(b) promoting a person;
(c) moving a person to a specified position within a specified time.
(3) In this section, "damage", in relation to a
person, includes the offence, embarrassment, humiliation, and intimidation
by the person.
(4) If, after the hearing of a complaint, the Commissioner finds the
prohibited conduct alleged in the complaint is not substantiated
Commissioner shall make an order dismissing the complaint.”
complainant sought compensation for legal/medical fees, salary entitlement, hurt
humiliation and distress, re-instatement of recreation
long service and sick
an order requiring the
respondents not to repeat or continue the prohibited conduct as per
of the said Act;
in accordance with
section 88(1)(c)
the first respondent
move the complainant into a position where he will not fall under the
supervision of the second respondent, Mr
a written apology from the
respondents.
produced documentary evidence as to his detriment.
This evidence included
the report from Dr Jackson referred to earlier, in which Dr Jackson diagnosed Mr
Romelo as suffering from depression
and anxiety, and found a causative link
between Mr Romelo’s employment at the Darwin Port Authority and this
mental injury.
The respondents were offered the opportunity to
cross-examine Dr Jackson on his finding, and also to introduce medical evidence
to Mr Romelo’s health. The respondents declined to do so, and I accept
Dr Jackson’s evidence as to Mr Romelo’s
ill health and its
I am also aware that Mr Romelo has a cause of action before the
Work Health Court, but that is irrelevant to the matter before me,
pursuant to the provisions of the NT
Anti-Discrimination Act
effect on Mr Romelo of unlawful discriminatory conduct.
I accept that Mr
Romelo has suffered substantially as a result of loss of salary, and has
suffered considerable hurt, humiliation
and distress.
I intend to make
orders requiring both the first and second respondents to pay compensation to Mr
Romelo, and in apportioning the
payments I have taken into account the failure
of the first respondent as the employer to take steps to ensure the complainant,
Romelo, was treated fairly by the second respondent, Dick Adey, although the
discriminatory conduct of
Mr Adey was known to the first
respondent.
Accordingly, pursuant to
section 88(1)(b)
Anti-Discrimination Act
I issue the following orders:
that the first
respondent, Darwin Port Authority, pay the complainant, Joe Romelo, the sum of
$5,000 for hurt, humiliation and distress,
and $50,000 for loss of income
(12/1/98-1/4/99), the payment to be made within 28 days of this order;
that the second respondent, Dick Adey,
pay the complainant,
Joe Romelo, the sum of $5,000 for hurt, humiliation and distress, the
payment to be made within 28 days of this
that on the complainant’s
discriminate against Mr Romelo
because of his race or trade union activity, and
that the first respondent take all reasonable steps to ensure the second
does not engage in any discriminatory conduct towards Mr
I recommend the Commissioner for Public
Employment examine whether, in all the circumstances, leave should be recredited
to Mr Romelo.
DAWN LAWRIE
Transcript of Evidence - 23
Transcript of
Evidence – 23 March 1999
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (117 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter