URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTWHC/2022/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:23:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Alcan v Bowes [2022] NTWHC 2 (22 March 2022)
ALCAN V BOWES [2022] NTWHC002
Alcan Gove Pty Ltd
Bowes Investments Pty Ltd trading as Zebra Metals & Environmental
TITLE OF COURT: WORK HEALTH COURT
FILE NO(s): 2021-03509-LC
DELIVERED ON: 22
DELIVERED AT: Darwin
HEARING DATE(s): 7
February 2022
DECISION OF: Deputy Chief Judge Fong Lim
CATCHWORDS:
Work Health Court – strike out application – lack of jurisdiction
– no statutory basis -application for indemnity-principal
Hopkins v QBE insurance Ltd [1991] NTSC33 -distinguished
Laminex Group Pty Ltd v Catford [2021] NTSC – considered
William Sergeant v MPJ Enterprises & QBE insurance
[2021] NTLC 017-
distinguished
Consolidated Press Ltd v Maxwell Raymond Wheeler[1992] NTSC -considered
Section 14 Work Health Administration Act
Sections 3, 104, 127,132 of the Return to Work Act
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr Tom Anderson
Respondent: Mr Duncan McConnell SC
Solicitors:
Applicant: Roussos Legal Advisory
Respondent: Rees R & Sydney Jones
Decision category classification: A
Decision ID number: NTWHC002
Number of paragraphs: 37
IN THE WORK HEALTH COURT
AT DARWIN IN THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY OF
No. 2021-03509-LC
Alcan Gove Pty Ltd
(Applicant)
Bowes Investments Pty Ltd
t/as Zebra Metals &
Environmental services
(Respondent)
REASONS FOR DECISION
(Delivered 22 March 2022)
DEPUTY CHIEF JUDGE FONG LIM:
Applicant (Alcan) was the principal contractor of a workplace where Mr Burgess
(the Worker) suffered a work injury. The Respondent
(Bowes) was the sub –
contractor who employed the Worker. The Worker was employed by Bowes at the time
he suffered an injury
while performing work at the Alcan’s work site.
accepted the Worker’s claim for compensation and has sought to recover the
compensation paid to the Worker from Bowes
through an indemnity created by
section 127 (3) of the Return to Work
has applied to strike out Alcan’s claim on the basis that the Work Health
Court does not have jurisdiction to hear an
application for indemnity under
section 127(3).
Work Health Court is created by the Work Health Administration Act and its
Court has the following jurisdiction:
(a)under the
to hear and determine:
(i) claims for compensation under
of that Act;
(ii) all other matters required or permitted by that Act to be
referred to the Court for determination;
(b) under the Work Health and Safety (National Uniform
Legislation) Act 2011to hear and determine:
(i) all applications made to the Court under that Act; and
(ii) all other matters required or permitted by that Act to be
dealt with by the Court;
(c)to determine all matters and questions incidental to, or
arising out of, matters before the Court;
(d) any other jurisdiction conferred on it under any Act
is Bowes’ contention that in relation to the present matter the Work
Health Court does not have jurisdiction because this
application is not a claim
for compensation under Part 5 of the Return to
Act, the issue of indemnity
between the principal contractor under
section 127
not a matter required or permitted by the
to be determined by
the Work Health Court
nor is it an
application which arises incidental to or arising out of matters before the
is trite law that a court of statute derives its jurisdiction from the statute
which creates it, further it is the long held view
that while a court of statute
does not have inferred powers it does have implied powers which are needed to
discharge its statutory
It is also trite that any interpretation of the Act ought to be considered in
light of the objects of that Act.
objects of the
are contained in
(a) to provide for the effective rehabilitation and
compensation of injured workers;
(b) to provide for prompt and effective management of the workplace
injuries in a manner that promotes and assists the return to work
for injured
workers as soon as practicable;
(c) to ensure that the scheme for the rehabilitation and compensation of
injured workers in the Territory:
(i) is fair, affordable, efficient and effective; and
(ii) provides adequate and just compensation to injured workers;
(iii) is balanced to ensure that the costs of workers compensation are
contained to reasonable levels for employers.
is a code in relation to the compensation of workers for work
injuries and is focussed on ensuring workers receive financial assistance
rehabilitation promptly and effectively. The
is beneficial
legislation and the Work Health Court is a specialist Court empowered to
adjudicate on disputes relating to compensation
for work injuries, among other
are no authorities either of this Court or the Supreme Court of the Northern
Territory which have considered the jurisdiction
of this Court to hear an
application for indemnity under
section 127(3).
parties referred to the decisions of the Supreme Court of the Northern Territory
in the matters of
Hopkins v QBE Insurance Ltd
[1991] NTSC 33 (Hopkins)
the more recent case of
Laminex Group Pty Ltd v Catford
[2021] NTSC 92
as the most relevant authorities on this issue.
his honour Justice
Martin considered the jurisdiction of the Work Health Court to adjudicate on the
issue of recovery under section
132 of the Work Health Act as it then was. The
factual matrix was the worker had made a claim against her employer for
compensation
and the employer had agreed to pay her that compensation. The
employer defaulted on that payment and the worker then pursued the
Insurer for
that amount payable in accordance with the Act and the Insurer failed to pay
that compensation. There had been no determination
by the Court of the amount
payable to the worker.
Honour analysed the jurisdiction of the Work Health
and came to the conclusion
“..There is a clear distinction between compensation
payable by an employer to a worker under Part V of the Act and the right
worker to seek recovery from an authorised insurer of a debt due and payable by
the insurer to the worker by the operation
of sections 132 and 133. In that
latter situation the worker is not pursuing the right to compensation under part
V or any matter
incidental to or arising out of a claim for compensation under
part V. The worker is, to the contrary seeking to recover from another
the authorised insurer, a debt created by Part VII of the statute. The
claims for compensation
under Part V and matters and questions incidental to or arising out of claims
for compensation under Part
V not claims for compensation and debt under the Act
and matters and questions incidental to or arising out of such claims. The
“incidental to” can add something liable to happen or
naturally appertaining to the claim for compensation (the Concise
Dictionary) to the Court’s jurisdiction. The nexus between a claim for
compensation under Part V and a claim against
the authorised insurer for a debt
arising from the operation of Part VII do not have sufficient nexus such that
the latter is incidental
to the former”.
the decision in
the Work Health Act has been replaced with the
which is the relevant Act in the present case. The
been reiterated in section 14 of the Work Health Administration Act and the
effect of those provisions are much the same.
William Sergeant v MPJ Enterprises and QBE insurance (Australia) Ltd
[2021] NTLC 017
Judge Neill of this court had cause to consider the
section 132
and applying the reasoning in
confirmed the Work Health Court
had no jurisdiction to entertain any enforcement application under
. In that matter his honour also
had cause to consider the effect of sections 26 and 27 of the Law reform
(Miscellaneous Provisions)Act
and concluded those provisions read in concert with section 14 (d) of the Work
Health Administration Act established jurisdiction
in the Work Health Court and
were an example of
“any other jurisdiction conferred on it
under any other Act”
the more recent decision of
Chief Justice
Grant considered the broader jurisdiction of the Work Health Court in the
context of whether Court had jurisdiction
to consider a claim by the Employer in
the form of a counterclaim and ruled that such a claim is capable of being
characterised as
arising from a claim for compensation as referred to in
. His honour was of the view
continues to regulate
both claim, cancellation and reduction procedures and the benefits available and
payable under the legislation.
Given the Work Health Court’s character and
constitution as a specialist tribunal created to determine and enforce the
and obligations arising under that Part , the jurisdiction “to hear
and determine claims for compensation “ is properly
construed to include
all matters arising out of a “claim” within the meaning of
And further that:
section 104
permits a person to commence a
proceedings for an order or ruling in respect of a matter or question incidental
to or arising out
of a claim for compensation under
That formulation is
broad enough to encompass either a separate application or a counterclaim by the
employer even if it were to
be accepted that
of Work Health
Administration Act is not”
submit a claim for debt under section 132 can be equated to a claim for
indemnity under section 127(3) for the purposes of the
Bowes submit in the present case the liability of the employer ( the principal
contractor) has been decided
by Allianz accepting liability for the claim on
behalf of Alcan
accordingly
there is no claim for compensation under Part V before the Court. It is argued
without “matters before the Court”
there is nothing to which an
incidental claim can attach or arise out of and therefore section 14(c) does not
confer jurisdiction
in the circumstances of the present claim.
submit, in applying the reasoning in
section 104
to Work Act
is broad enough to include claim under
section 127(3)
because such a
claim for indemnity arises out of the worker’s “claim” for
compensation rather than a “matter”
before the Court.
this point it is important to distinguish between
section 132
section 127
the Act. While both provisions are contained in the same part of the Act -
of the Act titled “Insurance”- claims for indemnity under
are not linked to insurance except to exclude a claim on the Nominal
Section 132
specifically refers to recovery from insurers.
requires the liability for the compensation claimed to have been either
agreed to or has been established according to the
before a claim for recovery
is enlivened. There is also a reference to the “Court” in
(2) & (3) which is defined as the Work Health
giving the “
Court” the power to determine applications regarding an extension of time
to pursue as claim under
section 132(1).
Any such application for extension of
time assumes that the right to make a claim under
section 132(1)
chrystallised. There is an additional question to pose in relation to the
operation of
section 132
and that is if the Work Health Court has specific power
to consider an extension of time to pursue claims under
section 132(1)
it then not have the jurisdiction to adjudicate on the claim proper? However
that is not a matter before this Court in
the present matter.
has the pre-condition that the worker has made an election to claim
against the principal contractor not the
subcontractor
. Once that
election is made it creates a claim for indemnity against any other person who
is liable to pay compensation to the
. There is no pre
condition that the liability to pay compensation to the worker has already been
settled by agreement or the under
the Act as there is in
section 132
- only that
there is a claim for compensation from the principal contractor and the worker
has exercised their election to proceed
against the principal contractor. It is
the claim for compensation that enlivens the claim for indemnity between the
principal contractor
and any other person who may be liable to pay compensation
once the principal contractor becomes liable under the
. There is no equivalent
time limit as set out in
section 132
the inference being the compensation
payable to the worker may not necessarily have been settled, either between the
parties or by
order of this Court.
is also prudent to consider the phrase “claim for compensation”.
“Compensation” is defined in the
means a benefit, or an amount paid or payable, under
this Act as the result of an injury to a worker and, in
sections 132
inclusive and
section 167
, includes:
(a) an amount in settlement of a claim for compensation; and
(b) costs payable to a worker by an employer in relation to a claim for
compensation.
“compensation” is not defined in Work Health Administration Act the
definition in the
must be imported because the reference to
“compensation” in section 14 of the Work Health Administration Act
is inextricably
linked to the Part V of the
reference to a “claim for compensation” in
(a) (i) the
Work Health Administration Act confers the jurisdiction of this Court in
relation to a “claim for compensation”
which must include a claim
for “an amount paid or payable” which, by definition, includes any
disputed claims for compensation
as well as any accepted claims (where there may
be a dispute about continuing compensation or treatment costs).
his honour concluded
The nexus between a claim for
compensation under Part V and a claim against the authorised insurer for a debt
arising from the operation
of Part VII do not have sufficient nexus such that
is incidental
to the former”.
his honour did not consider is the meaning of the additional words
“arising out of” which appear in both section
14(a)(c) of the Work
Health Administration Act and
section 104
of those provisions the jurisdiction is vested in the Court for matters arising
out of a matter before the Court
a claim for compensation.
the same dictionary referred to by his honour (Macquarie Dictionary)
“arising” means “come into being or action”.
that meaning to
section 14(a)(c)
would mean the court has jurisdiction to hear a
matter or question which has
come into being
out of a matter before the
Court. Applying that meaning to
section 104(1)
person may commence proceedings before the Court for an order or ruling in
respect of a matter or question incidental to
which has come into
out of a claim for compensation.
also referred the Court to my decision in
Reilly v HD Enterprises
trading as Humpty Doo Hardware
[2012] NTMC 3
and to the decision in
Consolidated Press Holdings Ltd v Maxwell Raymond Wheeler
[1999] NTSC 58.
In my view my decision in
Reilly v HD Enterprises
does not add
anything to the discussion on the issue of jurisdiction in relation to the
operation of
section 127
- the operation of
section 127
was not before the
Consolidated Press Holdings Ltd v Maxwell Raymond Wheeler
[1999] NTSC 58
Kearny J considered
section 127(1)
in the context of whether the section
included a right in the principal contractor to be indemnified by the Nominal
Insurer. His
Honour found it did not. Much of his honour’s judgement was
spent on what factors should be present to characterise someone
“principal contractor”. His Honour’s attention was not
directed to whether the Work Health Court had jurisdiction
to consider an
application under
section 127(3)
as the jurisdictional issue was not a ground of
appeal. This authority is of limited assistance to this Court. I do not accept
argument that his honour and the magistrate in this Court did not
“apparently had any concern that they were acting beyond
. They simply
may not have turned their minds to the issue.
if there is any merit to Alcan’s submission that the courts in
case had no concern about jurisdiction Bowes suggested
that case should be distinguished from the present case because in
case the court the Court had before it was the a
worker’s application for compensation, in which there was an argument
the respondent fell within the term “principal contractor”
and whether that application entitled the principal contractor
to seek indemnity
from the Nominal Insurer. In short there was a “matter before the
Court,”- the worker’s claim
for compensation, therefore jurisdiction
was not an issue because the facts of that case fell within
section 14(c).
was submitted the claim for indemnity in
Wheeler’s case
“incidental to or arising from” a “matter before the Court. In
the present case there is no “matter before
the Court”.
is missing from that submission is a recognition that
section 14(c)
is only one
source of jurisdiction. What of the operation of 14 (a) (ii) where the Court has
all other matters
required or
by that Act ( the
referred to the Court for determination”
section14(c) in conjunction with
section 104
must be considered whether
section 104
“permits” the principal
contractor to make an application to the Court for an order that they be
indemnified pursuant
section 127(3).
particular the question to be answered in the present case is whether a
principal contractor’s claim for indemnity from
another under
is a claim which “arises out of a claim for compensation” and
can form the basis of an application to the Court permitted
section 104(1)
. The answer must be yes - without a claim for
compensation there would be no basis for a claim for indemnity in other words
for indemnity comes into being when there is a claim for compensation
against the principal contractor under
section 127(1)
and in no other way.
Considering
all of the above I find this Court is invested with the jurisdiction to consider
an application by a principal contractor
for indemnity under
section 127(3)
whether or not that principal contractor has agreed or been ordered to pay
compensation to the worker or is merely subject to a claim
for compensation,
which has not been resolved by either agreement or court order. That
indemnity from
who is liable to pay compensation to the worker the section does not
limit the indemnity to the subcontractor who employed the worker
by using the
broader term “any person” instead of the “employer”.
“liability for compensation” referred to in
section 127(1)
inference be liability to the “worker” by their employer as
places the principal contractor in the place of the subcontractor
“as if the worker has been employed by the principal contractor”.
Section 127(2)
specifically places the principal contractor in the shoes of the
worker’s employer with all of the responsibilities and obligations
required of an employer toward an injured worker and contemplates a circumstance
where the principal contractor may seek to rely
on all of the defences
ordinarily available to the “employer”.
this Court is precluded from determining the issue of indemnity between
principal contractor and subcontractor then the Worker
could be subject to two
sets of proceedings in which some of the same issues stand to be decided by a
different court. The worker’s
entitlement to compensation would be
subject to consideration by two different courts and may result in two different
findings. This
would be contrary to the objects of the
ensure the scheme for compensation of workers is “efficient and
balanced to ensure that the costs of workers compensation are contained to
reasonable levels for
employers.”
Respondents application to strike out the Applicant’s claim is
will hear the parties on costs of the application.
Dated this 22nd
day of March 2022
Tanya Fong Lim
WORK HEALTH COURT JUDGE
A principal contractor who is
liable to pay compensation under this section is entitled to be indemnified by
any person who is liable
to pay compensation to the worker other than by virtue
of this section.
Section 14(a)
Section 14(a)(ii)
Consolidated Press Holdings Ltd
v Maxwell Raymond Wheeler [1992] NT SC per Mildren J at page 6
Hopkins v QBE Insurance Ltd
[1991 ]NTSC 33
Pages 10-16 of judgement
Paragraph 17 of His
Honour’s judgement
Such sections created a charge
on insurance monies payable under an insurance contract in certain
circumstances
Laminex Group Pty Ltd v
[2021] NTSC 92
Note this decision is
subject of appeal to the Full Court
See paragraphs 10 – 13
of the Statement of Claim in this proceedings
Section 132(2)
Which was not referred to in
Judge Martin’s deliberations in Hopkins Case.
section 127
Section127(3)
Section 127(2)
See paragraph 14 of
Alcan’s submissions
(c)(i) of the
Section 2(c)(iii)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (236 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter