URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCAT/2025/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:17:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Haque v Northern Territory of Australia [2025] NTCAT 7 (26 June 2025)
Haque v Northern Territory of Australia
DECISION NUMBER:
[2025] NTCAT 7
MD ARIFUL HAQUE
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION COMMISSIONER
MATTER TYPE:
Review Jurisdiction -
Anti-Discrimination Act 1992
2024-03890-CT
HEARING DATE:
HEARD ON THE PAPERS
DECISION OF:
RICHARD BRUXNER
DATE OF ORDERS:
26 JUNE 2025
APPEARANCES and REPRESENTATION (if any):
RESPONDENT:
MR VAN LINGEN
INTERVENOR:
REASONS FOR DECISION:
decision is about the effect of
Anti-Discrimination Act
(NT) [‘ADA’] - in particular, what that section means when
it says that a discrimination complaint ‘lapses’
circumstances. If a complaint has lapsed does that mean that there are no
circumstances in which the complaint can be
taken any further?
question has arisen in the following circumstances, which are not
controversial.
2022 the applicant Mr Haque made discrimination complaints to the
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner [‘the Commissioner’]
against the
Northern Territory (specifically its Department of Health) and ML Global Pty Ltd
trading as Millennium Security and Alarms
Services [‘MSA’].
complaints related to Mr Haque’s engagement as a security officer at Royal
Darwin Hospital. It is unnecessary, for the
purposes of this decision, to
consider the nature or merits of the complaints.
17 December 2024, after undertaking the processes required by the ADA (these
processes are considered in detail later in these
reasons), the Commissioner
made evaluation decisions regarding Mr Haque’s complaints.
Commissioner decided to refer the bulk of Mr Haque’s complaint against the
Northern Territory to NTCAT. The Commissioner
was satisfied that that complaint
met the standard imposed by the ADA for a referral to NTCAT, namely that it had
‘a reasonable
prospect of success at a hearing by [NTCAT]’ (see
section 86(1)
of the ADA).
Commissioner was not satisfied that Mr Haque’s complaint against MSA had a
reasonable prospect of success at a hearing by
17 December 2024 the Commissioner’s delegate sent emails to Mr Haque
notifying him of the evaluation decisions and attaching
those decisions. (On the
same day the delegate notified NTCAT that Mr Haque’s complaint against the
Northern Territory was
being referred to it.)
the covering email and the evaluation decision regarding Mr Haque’s
complaint against MSA were clearly to the effect that
the Commissioner had
decided not to refer that complaint to NTCAT. The evaluation decision set out
in detail the reasons the delegate
had decided that Mr Haque’s complaint
against MSA did not have a ‘reasonable prospect of success’ if
addition, both the covering email and the evaluation decision contained clear
advice that if Mr Haque wanted to pursue his complaint
against MSA he would need
to do so directly with NTCAT. The evaluation decision concluded with the
following advice to Mr Haque
(emphasis retained):
disagree with this decision you may self-refer your complaint to the Northern
Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(NTCAT). You have
from the date of receiving this decision to apply for this to
NTCAT. Please see
section 86(4)
of the Act for further information.
Please note you do not advise the ADC about a decision to self-refer the
complaint to NTCAT; you must make contact with NTCAT and
complete the steps it
NTCAT is contactable on AGD.ntcat@nt.gov.au or 1800 604 622 / (08) 8944 8720.
NTCAT is open every day over the Christmas period apart
from the public holidays
of Christmas Day, Boxing Day and New Year’s Day (25 December 2024, 26
December 2024 and 1 January
advice also included a footnote quoting
section 86(4)
of the ADA, which sets out
the requirement for a complainant to act within 21 days.
Haque was overseas on 17 December 2024; however, it is clear he had received
and considered the delegate’s emails by no later than 20 December
2024, when he had an email exchange with the delegate regarding
the non-referral
of his complaint against MSA. The delegate responded in terms reiterating that
if Mr Haque wanted to take that
complaint any further he would need to do so by
taking action in NTCAT (as well as emphasising the need for him to do so within
days of 17 December 2024).
is clear that Mr Haque did not take any action in NTCAT to pursue his complaint
against MSA within 21 days of 17 December 2024
(or, for that matter, within 21
days of 20 December 2024, by which time there can be no doubt that he was on
notice of the delegate’s
on 19 February 2025, Mr Haque requested by email that NTCAT add MSA as a party
to NTCAT proceeding 2024-3890-CT, which is
the proceeding concerning his
(referred) complaint against the Northern Territory.
email was as follows (emphasis retained):
‘I hope this message finds you well.
Please accept my sincere apologies for not raising this issue earlier.
Originally, I filed a case (C2023/00053), with the Anti-Discrimination
Commission against two separate respondents: Royal Darwin Hospital
Millennium Security and Alarm Services (MSA). However, MSA was not referred to
the Northern Territory Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (NTCAT).
I kindly request that you add MSA to the existing file as I believe their
actions are relevant to the case.
To support my request, I have attached two statutory declarations: one by
[name], which was previously submitted to the commission
and a new statutory
declaration by [name]. I believe these declarations will substantiate my claim
that MSA could have resolved my
issue but chose not to.
MSA's actions included:
Suspension of Portal Access
: They stopped all access to my work
portal without providing any reasonable explanation or formal termination.
. Refusal of Shift Offers:
While they offered shifts to others at
RDH, including those with beards, they denied me similar opportunities.
Exclusion from Shift Allocations
: Although MSA frequently called
people every three months for shifts, I was never contacted, despite not having
received any formal
notice of termination.
4. No response to Transfer Request:
Despite MSA's usual practice of
transferring employees from one worksite to another, they did not respond to
my request for a transfer following the incident.
I trust that these declarations and details will provide clarity on the
situation and demonstrate MSA's role in the matter.
Additionally, I have reviewed the summons form and would appreciate your
assistance with the application form for the summons. Specifically,
I would like
to request that [name], a member of the RDH Security Team (NTG employee) and
[name] an employee of MSA, be present on
the day of the hearing. Both
individuals have beards and to the best of my knowledge, continue to be employed
Thank you for your time and consideration.
I look forward to your guidance on the next steps.
Best regards,
Md Ariful Haque’
Haque’s email above was sent to NTCAT only; however, he re-sent it to
NTCAT and to the parties to proceeding 2024-3890-CT
on 20 February
Haque’s email appears initially to have been accepted by the tribunal as
an informal application to have MSA added as a party
to proceeding 2024-3890-CT.
In addition, he formalised the application by filing an ordinary application
dated 21 March 2025.
Northern Territory and the Commissioner each initially indicated a neutral
stance in relation to the application to join MSA as
a party to proceeding
2024-3890-CT. The Commissioner made additional submissions referring to
NTCAT’s power in
section 87B
of the ADA to add, substitute or remove a
party to a complaint that had been referred to it, as well as to
sections 86
and the fact Mr Haque had not ‘self-referred’ his complaint
against MSA to NTCAT within the 21 day period referred to
2024-3890-CT was allocated to me in mid-April 2025, for a hearing then scheduled
for late May 2025. The tribunal had not by
that time made any decision
regarding the application to join MSA as a party. Because I had concerns about
the application (and
its implications for the hearing date in late May 2025), I
conducted a directions hearing on 2 May 2025.
the directions hearing on 2 May 2025, I vacated the hearing date and made orders
as follows regarding Mr Haque’s application
to join MSA as a party to
proceeding 2024-3890-CT:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
7. Orders 8 to 11 below relate to the applicant’s application dated 21
March 2025 to
add ML Global Pty Ltd trading as Millennium Security and
Alarms Services (‘MSA’) as
a party to this proceeding
(‘the application’).
8. The further hearing of the application is adjourned pending consideration
by NTCAT of the question identified in order 9.
9. By no later than 16 May 2025 the respondent and the intervenor are to
NTCAT and to the applicant an electronic copy of written submissions
addressing the
question whether, having regard to
sections 86
Anti-Discrimination Act
, the applicant’s complaint made against MSA to the
Anti-Discrimination
Commissioner (being the complaint accepted by the Commissioner on 13 December
2022) can now be pursued by the applicant in NTCAT (‘the
question’).
10. By no later than 6 June 2025 the applicant is to provide to NTCAT and to
the respondent and the intervenor an electronic copy
of written submissions and
any evidence upon which he relies in relation to the question.
11. The proceeding is listed for further consideration on the papers on or
after Tuesday 10 June 2025.
THE TRIBUNAL NOTES THAT:
1. The application appears to give rise to an issue that arose, but was not
determined, in a past NTCAT proceeding (
Lechleitner v Lhere Artepe Aboriginal
Corporation & Ors
[2017] NTCAT 78).
2. The question whether the applicant’s complaint against MSA can now
be pursued in NTCAT depends upon whether, having regard
Anti-Discrimination Act 1992
, that complaint has ‘lapsed’
and, if so, whether the consequence is that the time for making the complaint
can or cannot
be extended under
Limitation Act 1981
In that respect the decision of the NT Supreme Court in Mamouzellos v Vatskalis
[2018] NTSC 57
may be relevant.
3. Although the parties’ submissions should involve consideration of
Limitation Act 1981
, there is no need at this stage for
consideration of whether grounds exist for an extension of time under
of that Act. In other words, the parties should confine their attention
Anti-Discrimination Act 1992
operates as
substantive or a procedural bar (in the sense discussed in
Mamouzellos v
Vatskalis & Ors
[2018] NTSC 57).
4. When the proceeding is considered on the papers on or after 10 June 2025,
tribunal will either make a decision regarding the question or make further
allowing MSA the opportunity to be heard regarding the question.
parties have since provided submissions as ordered.
the Northern Territory and the Commissioner submit in effect (and for various
reasons) that Mr Haque’s failure to comply
with the 21 day time limit in
section 86(4)
of the ADA means that it is no longer open to him to pursue his
discrimination complaint against MSA.
Haque, while acknowledging that he did not comply with
section 86(4)
that NTCAT should nevertheless allow him to pursue his complaint against MSA by
joining it as a respondent to proceeding
2024-3890-CT.
is clear from those submissions (and from submissions at the directions hearing
on 2 May 2025) that Mr Haque wishes to obtain redress
in NTCAT for grievances
against MSA that were the subject of his original complaint to the Commissioner.
In the circumstances - and
despite the fact that, on its face, Mr Haque’s
application seeks merely to add MSA as a party to proceeding 2024-3890-CT -
critical question is whether his discrimination complaint against MSA can still
be pursued in NTCAT. If it cannot, then joining
MSA as a party to proceeding
2024-3890-CT is unlikely to achieve anything. If it appears arguable that Mr
Haque can still pursue
his complaint against MSA, then further procedural steps
(in which MSA should be given an opportunity to be heard) are likely to
the reasons below, I have concluded that Mr Haque’s omission to
‘self-refer’ his complaint against MSA to NTCAT
within 21 days of
being notified of the Commissioner’s decision not to refer it was fatal to
that complaint.
The complaint against MSA has lapsed
the following discussion I have assumed in Mr Haque’s favour that his
email to the tribunal dated 19 February 2025 - when
he first raised with NTCAT
the matter of proceeding against MSA - could arguably be regarded as an
application under
section 86(4)
of the ADA to have his complaint against MSA
heard by NTCAT. That assumption - which seems to me consistent with
NTCAT’s focus
on matters of substance rather than form - would have
required further scrutiny if I had not concluded that Mr Haque’s complaint
against MSA can no longer be maintained.)
I have already noted, Mr Haque’s discrimination complaints against the
Northern Territory and MSA met with substantially
different outcomes when
evaluated by the Commissioner: the complaint against the Northern Territory was
referred to NTCAT; the complaint
against MSA was not.
Commissioner’s evaluation decisions were the culmination of an elaborate
set of procedures mandated by the ADA.
considered those procedures at some length in
Lechleitner v Lhere
Artepe Aboriginal Corporation & Ors
[2017] NTCAT 78
of the [ADA], comprising
sections 60
, deals with the resolution of
complaints about conduct prohibited by the Act.
identifies who may make a complaint about prohibited conduct and how
such a complaint is to be made (including requirements as to
the form of
complaint and the time within which it is to be made).
Commissioner] is required by
to accept or decline a complaint within
60 days of being made. The decision whether to accept or decline a complaint
must follow
an assessment by [the Commissioner].
does not identify
the criteria according to which a complaint is to be accepted or declined;
makes it clear that [the Commissioner] may at any time
decline a complaint reasonably believed to be frivolous or vexatious; trivial;
misconceived or lacking in substance; or one which fails to disclose any
prohibited conduct.
assessment contemplated by Division 1 does not involve detailed scrutiny or
investigation of a complaint; it is instead principally
directed to filtering
out complaints that are obviously unmeritorious. Nevertheless, the consequences
for a complainant whose complaint
is declined at this early stage are serious
section 66D
‘the complaint lapses and the complainant cannot
make another complaint in relation to the same conduct’.
of the [ADA] establishes a process for the conciliation of
complaints. Although
gives [the Commissioner] discretion to conduct a
conciliation at any time following the making of a complaint, in the usual
it will be complaints that have been accepted under Division 1 that
proceed to conciliation. [The Commissioner] has power to direct
a person to take
part in a conciliation. Failure by a complainant to comply with such a direction
can lead to an order dismissing
the complaint.
section 81(3)
if conciliation does not lead to the resolution of a complaint,
the complainant may request [the Commissioner] to ‘evaluate’
complaint. A request for evaluation must be made within 21 days of notice from
[the Commissioner] that the conciliation has ceased.
Subject to [the
Commissioner’s] discretion to extend the 21 day period, failure to request
an evaluation causes the complaint
Evaluations
are conducted under Division 4 of
of the [ADA].
of the [ADA] defines ‘evaluate’ as
, in relation to a complaint, means to
decide whether the complaint has a reasonable prospect of success at a hearing
by the Tribunal.
[the Commissioner] must evaluate a complaint if requested to do so
section 81(3).
[The Commissioner] has broad discretion as to the manner in
which the evaluation is to be conducted
(section 81(2))
and is also given
extensive powers, backed up by criminal sanctions, to obtain evidence - see
(documents) and
(witnesses).
of the [ADA] sets out the course a complaint may take once it has
been evaluated under Division 4.
section 86...
a complaint evaluated by [the Commissioner] as having a reasonable
prospect of success before NTCAT may be referred to NTCAT.
Alternatively,
if the Commissioner decides not to refer a complaint to NTCAT, the complainant
may apply to have the complaint heard
by NTCAT. According to
section 86(4)
complainant is required to make such an application within 21 days after
receiving written notice of the Commissioner’s
decision. Failure to make
the application within the 21 days is dealt with by
section 87...
cases where a complaint is referred to NTCAT under
section 86(1)
of the [ADA],
section 87A(1)
requires [the Commissioner] to provide a report to NTCAT within
60 days. The report is to include all information relating to the
complaint that
the Commissioner reasonably believes will be relevant for the hearing. In cases
where the complainant has applied
to NTCAT under
section 86(4)
, NTCAT may order
the Commissioner to provide such a report
(section 87A(2)).
of the [ADA] sets out NTCAT’s powers after hearing a complaint.
the above analysis it should be apparent that
of the [ADA] sets out the
path a complaint of prohibited conduct is intended to follow prior to reaching
NTCAT - from assessment,
to conciliation, to evaluation and, finally, to a
decision under
section 86(1).
Along that path there are several points at which
the complaint process may come to an end, often in circumstances where the
Anti-Discrimination Act
makes it clear that no further action in relation to the
complaint may be taken (because it ‘lapses’).
plain intention of the [ADA] is that complaints that reach NTCAT will have
received extensive attention and consideration by [the
Commissioner] (including
via delegates of the Commissioner). In the usual course, such a complaint will
have been the subject of
attempted resolution by way of conciliation followed by
extensive investigation for the purpose of a considered assessment of the
prospects the complaint would succeed at an NTCAT hearing.
is also plain, in my view, that the decision of [the Commissioner] whether or
not to refer a complaint to NTCAT represents the
point at which the
Commissioner’s role in the complaint process undergoes a fundamental
change. Apart from the provision of
a report under
section 87A
(the requirement
for which does not appear to me to entail any obligation on the part of the
Commissioner to undertake any further
investigation in relation to a complaint),
[the Commissioner] no longer has an active role; the further consideration of
the complaint,
and its ultimate resolution, becomes a matter for NTCAT.
a related vein, in cases where a complaint is neither the subject of a referral
section 86(1)
or an application under
section 86(4)
, the complaint lapses.
There is nothing in
Anti-Discrimination Act
to suggest that the
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner has any ongoing role in relation to a complaint
that has lapsed in this way
or that there is any basis upon which such a
complaint may be revived.
of the ADA (which I have not reproduced in the extract above) are as
by Tribunal
(1) After evaluating a complaint under
, the Commissioner may refer the complaint to the Tribunal if the
Commissioner believes the complaint has a reasonable prospect of
success at a
hearing by the Tribunal.
(2) The Commissioner must, within 28 days of deciding whether to refer the
complaint under subsection (1), give the complainant and
respondent to the
complaint written notice of:
(a) the decision; and
(b) reasons for the decision; and
(c) if the Commissioner decides not to refer the complaint – the fact that
the complainant may apply under subsection (4) to
have the complaint heard by
the Tribunal.
(3) If the Commissioner refers the complaint to the Tribunal, the
Commissioner must determine the parties to the complaint.
(4) If the Commissioner decides not to refer the complaint, the complainant
may, within 21 days after receiving the written notice,
apply to have the
complaint heard by the Tribunal.
not referred – similar complaints prohibited
(1) This section applies if:
(a) the Commissioner decides not to refer a complaint to the Tribunal; and
(b) the complainant has not applied to have the complaint heard by the Tribunal
within the time allowed by
section 86(4).
(2) The complaint lapses and the complainant may not make a further complaint in
relation to the same conduct.
decision in
Lechleitner
was mainly concerned with what, if any, ongoing
role the Commissioner had in relation to a complaint once an evaluation decision
had been made under
; however, the analysis in that decision is also
relevant to understanding the consequences for a complainant of the
Commissioner’s
decision whether or not to refer a complaint to
Importantly,
unless and until the Commissioner makes an evaluation decision in relation to a
complaint of discrimination under the
ADA, there is no way in which such a
complaint may come before NTCAT.
referral by the Commissioner (of a complaint
that is assessed as having a
reasonable prospect of success) or a self-referral by the complainant (of a
complaint that the Commissioner
has not assessed as having a reasonable prospect
of success).
the Commissioner decides to refer a complaint, NTCAT’s jurisdiction in
relation to that complaint is established by the fact
of the referral –
there is nothing more the complainant needs to do.
on the other hand, the Commissioner decides not to refer a complaint, NTCAT will
only obtain jurisdiction if the complainant applies
to have NTCAT hear the
key issue in the present proceeding is whether, in the case of a non-referred
complaint, the complainant must apply to have NTCAT
hear the complaint within
the 21 period in
section 86(4)
of the ADA.
section 87(2)
of the ADA seems clearly to have the effect that
compliance with the 21 day period is imperative. Consistently with the heading
for the section, which refers to ‘similar complaints’ being
‘prohibited’ in cases of non-referral,
section 87(2)
provides that a
failure to apply to NTCAT within the 21 day period specified in
section 86(4)
causes a non-referred complaint to ‘lapse’ and precludes any further
complaint about the conduct that led to the complaint.
is not defined in the ADA (or in the
Interpretation Act 1978
the Commissioner points out in submissions, the Macquarie Dictionary defines the
term as meaning “the termination
of a right or privilege through neglect
to exercise it or through failure of some contingency.”
conclusion that compliance with the 21 day timeframe is essential is wholly
consistent with section 86(4) of the ADA. Section 86(4)
is the sole pathway by
which NTCAT’s jurisdiction in relation to a non-referred complaint can be
invoked. The section permits
(‘may’) a complainant to do so within
21 days, but not otherwise.
a conclusion is also consistent with the broader scheme of the ADA. Although a
‘hard and fast’ 21 day time limit
for applying to NTCAT regarding a
non-referred complaint may seem strict, it must be remembered that once a
complaint is the subject
of an evaluation decision it has been through the
extensive procedures summarised in
Lechleitner
. In this respect, it is
fundamentally different from a complaint that is being aired for the first time.
Moreover, a complaint that
the Commissioner decides not to refer to NTCAT has,
necessarily, been assessed (following investigation and evaluation by officers
who may be taken to have intimate familiarity with the ADA) as not having
‘a reasonable prospect of success’. Viewed
in that light, it is
unsurprising that the ADA would provide a tightly constrained opportunity for a
complainant to take the matter
any further.
Limitation Act
does not assist Mr Haque
section 44 of the
Limitation Act 1981
(as relevant):
(1) Subject to this section, where this or
any other Act, or an instrument of a legislative or administrative character
or limits the time for:
(a) instituting an action;
(b) doing an act, or taking a step in an action; or
(c) doing an act or taking a step with a view to instituting an action,
a court may extend the time so prescribed or limited to such an extent, and
upon such terms, if any, as it thinks fit.
(2) A court may exercise the powers conferred by this section in respect of
an action that it:
(a) has jurisdiction to entertain; or
(b) would, if the action were not out of time, have jurisdiction to entertain.
(4) Where an extension of time is sought under this section in respect of the
commencement of an action, the action may be instituted
in the normal manner,
but the process by which it is instituted must be endorsed with a statement to
the effect that the plaintiff
seeks an extension of time pursuant to this
(5) Proceedings under this section may be determined by the court at any time
before or after the close of pleadings.
(6) This section does not:
(a) derogate from any other provision under which a court may extend or abridge
time prescribed or limited by an Act or an instrument
of a legislative or
administrative character; or
(b) affect a rule of law or equity under which a limitation period affecting a
right to bring an action may be extended or within
which an action may be
brought notwithstanding the expiration of the limitation period.
is well established that the power in section 44 of the LA to grant an extension
of time has no application to substantive, as
opposed to procedural, time
limits. In other words, if compliance with a time limit is properly seen as
being part and parcel of
of a cause of action, then
provisions such as section 44 do not permit a court to extend such a time
the reasons above, it is clear in my view that compliance with the 21 day time
limit in section 86(4) ADA is an essential component
of a complainant’s
right to invoke NTCAT’s jurisdiction in respect of a complaint that the
Commissioner has decided not
to refer to NTCAT. Section 86(4) both creates that
right and limits the circumstances in which it may be exercised. If the 21 day
period in section 86(4) is not complied with, then section 87 makes it clear
that the non-referred complaint
– there is no longer a
complaint that could be the subject of an NTCAT hearing.
21 day period in section 86(4) is therefore not a time limit of the type
referred to in section 44(1) of the LA. It is instead
a time limit of the type
considered by the Supreme Court in
Mamouzellos
v Vatskalis & Ors
[2018] NTSC 57
(per Southwood J at [38]-[43] referring to
[1999] HCA 61
(1999) 197 CLR 500)
namely ‘a condition which is of the
essence of a new right’.
conclusion makes it unnecessary to consider the question (raised in the
parties’ submissions) whether, in any event, NTCAT
is relevantly a
‘court’ that could grant an extension of time under section 44(4) of
Other provisions
remains to deal briefly with some other provisions that do not assist Mr
68 of the NTCATA provides the tribunal with a power to extend certain time
limits. It provides:
from time limits
(1) If this Act or the relevant Act
imposes a time limit for doing something in relation to a proceeding, the
Tribunal may extend
or shorten the time limit, if permitted to do so by the
(2) The Tribunal may do so even if the time for complying has expired.
section does not permit NTCAT to extend the 21 day period in section 86(4) of
the ADA, or to undo the consequences of non-compliance
specified in section 87.
As Southwood J noted in
Mamouzellos
[45] ... s 68 of the
Northern Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
is not concerned
with time limits which specify the time in which an application to the Tribunal
may be initiated or made. The words,
“for doing something in relation to a
proceeding”, contemplate that a proceeding has already been instituted and
foot. The definition of ‘proceeding’ in s 3 of the Act states
that, “proceeding means the hearing of a matter by
the Tribunal”.
Section 94 of the Act deals with the commencement of proceedings. Subsection
94(3) states that if the application
is for a review proceeding, the person must
file the application with the Registrar within 28 days after the relevant date.
94(6) is the only provision in the Act which grants the Tribunal a
power to extend time for making an application and the power to
extend time
granted by that section is confined to making an application for a review
proceeding...
the definition of ‘proceeding’ referred to in
Mamouzellos
no longer part of the NTCATA, this has no bearing on the authority of the
decision for present purposes. In any case, for the
reasons above, the 21 day
period in section 86(4) of the ADA is not properly seen as ‘a time limit
for doing something in relation
to a proceeding’ – it is something
that determines (and confines) the circumstances in which a proceeding may come
existence. To put the matter another way, once the 21 day period in
section 86(4) expired without Mr Haque self-referring his complaint
against MSA,
there could be no ‘proceeding’ for the purposes of the
related reasons, Mr Haque is not assisted by provisions of the ADA and NTCATA
that permit NTCAT to add parties to a proceeding.
87B of the ADA provides as
87B Parties to a
Despite section 86(3) and without limiting
section 128
Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2014
, the Tribunal may add,
substitute or remove a party to a complaint referred to it.
section 128
of the NTCATA:
may be joined as party
(1) The Tribunal may order that
a person be joined as a party to a proceeding if the Tribunal considers
(a) the person should be bound by, or have the benefit of, a decision of the
Tribunal in the proceeding; or
(b) the person's interests are affected by the proceeding; or
(c) it is desirable for any other reason for the person to be a party.
(2) The Tribunal may make an order under this section:
(a) on the application of any person or on its own initiative; and
(b) without the person whom it is proposed to join being heard on the matter.
power in section 87B of the ADA is confined to cases involving complaints
referred to NTCAT. If MSA were added as party under
section 87B it would not
alter the fact that the only proceeding before NTCAT is the proceeding arising
from the referred complaint
against the Northern Territory.
section 128
of the NTCATA is more broadly expressed than the power in
section 87B of the ADA; however, it does not alter the fact that Mr Haque
only obtain a remedy (for example compensation or an apology) for his
discrimination complaint against MSA by pursuing
complaint in NTCAT.
In other words, an order joining MSA as a party to proceeding 2024-3890-CT would
and could not have the effect
of reviving Mr Haque’s complaint against
MSA. Although NTCAT clearly has a broad discretion under
section 128
(particularly in light of
section 128(1)(c))
it would an exceptional step for
the tribunal to add a party to a proceeding (with all the expense and
inconvenience that entails)
in circumstances where the outcome of the proceeding
can have no bearing on the party’s legal interests (which is the case
Conclusion and orders
I have already noted, although Mr Haque’s actual application is for MSA to
be added as a party to proceeding 2024-3890-CT,
it is clear that his aim in
making that application is to pursue his complaint against MSA.
have concluded however that Mr Haque’s complaint against MSA has lapsed
and there are no available means by which it may be
my view, the fact his complaint against MSA has lapsed - with the consequence
that he no longer can obtain a remedy from MSA for
the discrimination he alleged
against it - means that there would be no point adding MSA as a party to
proceeding 2024-3890-CT.
will therefore make an order dismissing the application to add MSA as a party to
proceeding 2024-3890-CT.
should add that that order will be made on the basis of my assumption that Mr
Haque’s purpose in making the application was obtain a remedy against
MSA. Strictly speaking, it would remain open to him to
make a further
application on the basis that there is some other good reason why MSA should be
made a party to the complaint against
the Northern Territory – however, as
I have already observed, such an order would only be made in exceptional
circumstances,
and none presently seem apparent. )
will also order that proceeding 2024-3890-CT again be listed for
that regard, I note that Mr Haque’s email to NTCAT dated 19 February 2025
(but not his subsequently filed ordinary application)
also included a request to
have two individuals at the hearing. I am uncertain what, if any, steps have
been taken in respect of
that request. It would seem to me to be something that
could be pursued by means of witness summonses. I will include with my orders
note requesting the NTCAT Registry to make further contact with Mr Haque
regarding his request.
conclude by noting that Mr Haque may feel that this outcome is harsh. His email
to the Commissioner dated 20 December 2023 made
it clear that he was not
satisfied with the Commissioner’s decision not to refer his complaint
against MSA to NTCAT. Equally,
however, the Commissioner’s communications
with Mr Haque on and after 17 December 2024 made it clear that it was necessary
for him to ‘self-refer’ his complaint against MSA and to do so
within 21 days. In circumstances where the significant
legal consequences of
non-compliance with the 21 day time limit were not then clearly understood, it
would be unfair to criticise
the Commissioner’s office for not drawing
those consequences more explicitly to Mr Haque’s attention. Now that the
matter has been decided, I assume that the Commissioner’s advice to
complainants regarding non-referred complaints will be
Accordingly, I order as follows:
application to add ML Global Pty Ltd trading as Millennium Security and Alarms
Services as a party to proceeding 2024-3890-CT
is dismissed.
2024-3890-CT is to be re-listed for a one day hearing on a date to be fixed in
consultation with the parties.
and, I note as follows:
Registry is requested to contact the applicant regarding his request in an email
to NTCAT dated 19 February 2025 for two persons
(named in the email) to attend
at the hearing (see paragraph 61 of reasons for decision dated 26 June
26 June 2025
RICHARD BRUXNER
TRIBUNAL MEMBER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (35.9 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter