URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCCA/2024/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:18:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mason v The King [2024] NTCCA 13 (10 December 2024)
Mason v The King
[2024] NTCCA 13
PARTIES: MASON, Joshua
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: CA 5 of 2024 (22216553)
DELIVERED: 10 December 2024
HEARING DATE: 6 December 2024
JUDGMENT OF: Kelly, Brownhill & Burns JJ
CATCHWORDS:
SENTENCING – Appeals – Appeal against sentence – Manifest
excess – Whether sentence manifestly excessive –
Marked differences
between appellant’s sentences and comparative cases – Sentences
imposed plainly excessive –
Appeal allowed – Unnecessary to consider
other grounds – Leave to appeal on those grounds refused.
AB v The King
[2023] NTCCA 8
Edmond & Moreen v The Queen
[2017] NTCCA 9
Forrest v The Queen
[2017] NTCCA 5
(2017) 267 A Crim R 494
Western Australia
[2014] WASCA 144
, referred to.
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: I L Read SC with J Begbie
Respondent: L Babb SC with LJ Auld
Solicitors:
Appellant: Northern Territory Legal Aid Commission
Respondent: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 36
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Mason v The King
[2024] NTCCA 13
No. CA 5 of 2024 (22216553)
JOSHUA MASON
CORAM: KELLY, BROWNHILL & BURNS JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 10 December 2024)
appellant was 23 years old when he offended. He was sentenced to six
years’ imprisonment by the Supreme Court for one
count each of hit and
run, attempting to pervert or defeat the course of justice and improperly
interfering with a dead body or human
remains. The issues in the appeal are
whether the sentence was manifestly excessive or infected by specific error in
the misapplication
of principles applicable to double
punishment.
The offences
[2] Following
pleas of guilty, on 13 December 2023, the appellant was convicted of the
following charges:
(a) a count of hit and run, committed on 30 May 2022, contrary to
s 174FA(1) of the
Criminal Code 1983
(NT) (Count 1);
(b) a count of attempting to pervert or defeat the course of justice, committed
on 30 and 31 May 2022, contrary to s 109 of the
Criminal Code
(c) a count of improperly interfering with a dead body or human remains,
committed on 30 and 31 May 2022, contrary to s 140 of the
(‘Count 3’).
[3] The maximum
penalties for the offences are imprisonment for 10 years for Count 1,
imprisonment for 15 years for Count 2 and imprisonment
for two years for Count
The sentence
appellant was sentenced to a total effective sentence of imprisonment for six
years, as follows:
(a) three years for Count 1;
(b) five years for Count 2, with 1 year to be served cumulatively upon Count 1;
(c) one year for Count 3, to be served concurrently with the sentences for Count
ordered that the sentence be backdated to 1 June 2022 to take account of time in
custody, with a non-parole period of three
years and six
[6] Leave to
appeal on the ground of manifest excess was granted by a single Judge.
appellant also sought leave to appeal on two other grounds, namely
(a) the sentencing Judge erred by not approaching the sentencing difficulty of
double punishment correctly or sufficiently; and
(b) the sentencing Judge erred in finding that the offence of attempting to
pervert or defeat the course of justice was a ‘strikingly
serious example
of offending of that kind’.
[8] At the close
of submissions on the hearing, the appeal was allowed on the ground of manifest
excess and the appellant was resentenced.
[9] Leave in
relation to the other grounds was refused at the hearing.
indicated that we would publish our reasons. These are our
The offending
appellant was jointly charged and sentenced with his mother.
[12] Around six
weeks before the offending, the appellant’s driver’s licence was
suspended for having no remaining demerit
points. He was aware of that around
two weeks before the offending.
[13] On 30 May
2022, he went to a local pub, had one alcoholic drink and left at around 7.54pm
and drove home.
[14] At around
8pm, the deceased got off a bus on the side of the Stuart Highway and walked
towards her home. She was very intoxicated.
[15] At around
9pm, the deceased was walking down the Stuart Highway. She walked on the side of
the Highway closest to the median
strip, on or next to the white line running
along the edge of the northbound road, against the flow of traffic. A number of
passed her, two of which had to swerve to avoid hitting her. A witness said
he could barely see her.
[16] At 9.08pm,
the appellant arranged to collect a $50 bag of cannabis from a contact in
Palmerston. He left home and drove his car
northbound on the Stuart Highway. At
was in the lane
and towards the white line on the edge of the road. She was
struck by the front right corner of the appellant’s car and suffered
injuries. She died at the time of collision. Her body came to rest six and a
half metres from the side of the road in the median
strip. Her lower leg was
severed from her body and later located on the right lane some distance from her
body. The collision caused
damage to the car, with debris from the car (wing
mirror, fog light cover and head light assembly), and the deceased’s
and clothing being thrown onto the road and surrounding areas.
driving behind the appellant was struck to the bumper bar by the
appellant’s car. The appellant pulled over to the
side of the Highway and
The driver of the car behind
pulled up behind the appellant and got out. The
appellant ran past the driver with his phone to his ear, turned and said there
been a hit. He yelled to his mother to come to the location. The driver
asked where his mother was coming from and he told her. He
also told her he had
called Police. He ran down the middle of the Highway, waving his lit phone to
signal to other drivers to slow
down. He cleared some debris from the road.
[18] Another car
was driving down the Highway, saw the appellant waving his phone and pulled
over. He said to the occupants of that
car that there had been an accident and
appeared distressed. They asked if the appellant had called Police but he did
not respond.
He walked down the road waving his phone again. The driver of the
second car pulled up down the Highway where the driver of the first
the phone talking to her mother. The driver of the first car said
‘they’ had hit something but she was not
sure if it was a person or
an animal. She confirmed she was okay and the second car left the scene.
[19] After five
minutes, the appellant came back to the driver of the first car and had blood
running down his arm. She started to
clean his arm with tissues but he walked
off. The driver of the first car and the appellant searched the immediate area
but did not find anyone. The appellant retrieved a part of his
car’s bumper from under the first car and ran off.
appellant’s mother borrowed her daughter’s utility, saying her son
had hit a dog but she had no fuel in her own
car. She left the home at 9.25pm
and arrived at the scene a short time later. She parked a short distance from
the second car. The
driver of the first car asked if everything was okay and the
appellant’s mother told her they were fine and she could go. The
asked if the appellant’s mother had called Police and she told her she had
and repeated that the driver could go. The
driver of the first car left the
appellant and his mother searched around the scene for some time. They then both
drove to the appellant’s mother’s
house. The appellant parked in the
driveway and covered the front end of his car to conceal the damage. He told his
sister he had
hit a dog and the lady behind him hit it too. The
appellant’s mother said she would drop the appellant at a friend’s
house and they left in the utility.
[22] The above
is the offending the subject of Count 1. The following conduct is the offending
the subject of Counts 2 and 3.
appellant and his mother drove back to the scene, parked in the median strip,
located the deceased’s body, dragged
the body into the tray of the utility
and headed towards the appellant’s home, with the appellant’s mother
driving. They
decided to leave the body in bushland. The appellant’s
mother drove to where the road became dirt and the appellant then reversed
utility to the edge of the bush and dragged the deceased from the tray
approximately 20 metres into the bush. They used plant
material to conceal the
body. They left the scene and drove to the appellant’s house. They used a
watering can and the appellant’s
t-shirt to clean the blood out of the
tray. The appellant’s mother then went home.
[24] On 31 May
2022, the appellant’s neighbour gave him a lift towards where the body
was. During the drive, the appellant told
the neighbour he had hit a dog or a
wallaby and damaged his car. He was dropped off near where the body was, but was
seen by a friend’s
mother so purported to be visiting their house. He was
later driven home.
[25] Later that
day, the deceased’s leg was seen on the Highway and reported to Police.
Police investigated and found the debris
from the appellant’s car and the
deceased’s property, hair and flesh.
appellant had various discussions with people, lying to them about having struck
an animal in his car. He returned to his
friend’s house near where the
body was located. The appellant’s mother was told by her daughter that a
leg had been found
on the Stuart Highway. She called the appellant and they
spoke for about seven minutes.
[27] Later that
evening, the appellant borrowed his friend’s utility, drove to where the
body was located, loaded it into the
ute, drove to another location in bushland,
unloaded the body, dragged it into the bush and left it in some long grass. He
the utility to his friend and stayed at their home that night.
[28] On 1 June
2022, the appellant bought a car cover and used it to cover his car.
[29] Later that
day, the appellant’s mother told him Police had tried to contact her as
she was identified as a witness. She
told the appellant the car needed to be
gone today then she would call Police back. He said, ‘Ok’. He went
mother’s house, put the car cover over the car and went
[30] Police were
conducting patrols and saw the appellant’s car, attended the address and
told the appellant they were looking
for cars involved in the incident. He said
to them, ‘Yeah, it was me,’ and that he was on the Highway and hit
had looked for an hour and seen nothing. He was cautioned and told
them he did not know what he had hit. He was arrested. He said
he had seen a
dead kangaroo and had not seen anyone.
[31] Police
later arrested the appellant’s mother. She told them she had the
appellant’s car at her house and had picked
him up after he hit a
kangaroo. She was re-cautioned, told Police the appellant had called her after
he hit a kangaroo, they had
looked around and could not see anything then left.
Asked if she knew anything about a body, she admitted they did find the body,
put it in the back of the utility because the appellant panicked and talked her
into it. They took the body to scrubland at the end
of the road and that was all
she knew. She took investigators to the area and showed them where they had
disposed of the body. It
was not there. She denied moving the body.
appellant was told his mother was in custody and Police were searching the road.
The appellant made admissions, saying his
mother knew nothing about where the
body then was. He provided details of the location of the body and said he was
freaking out,
now his mother was involved and that both their lives were
destroyed. He cried and said, ‘She was in the middle of the road’.
[33] For two
hours, Police tried to locate the body based on the appellant’s
information without success.
appellant’s mother participated in an interview with Police and made
admissions to her role in the offending.
[35] Police
asked the appellant to take them to the location of the body and he agreed. He
made some admissions on the way there.
With his assistance, Police located the
[36] On 2 June
2022, the appellant participated in an interview with Police and made admissions
[37] The Police
crash investigation concluded that, at a speed limit of 100km per hour, the
collision was likely unavoidable. The
appellant’s actual speed was
[38] The post
mortem identified the cause of death as multiple blunt force injuries, with
acute alcohol intoxication contributing.
[39] It was an
agreed fact that the appellant’s and his mother’s conduct
constituted an indignity to the deceased’s
[40] Six victim
impact statements were received from members of the deceased’s family,
expressing grief at her death and indignity
and upset about the treatment of her
The appellant’s personal circumstances
Prior criminal history
appellant had a prior criminal record comprising seven convictions for driving,
committed between 2017 and 2022, including
two convictions for driving
unlicensed and one conviction for low range drink driving. All the punishments
imposed were fines.
sentencing Judge recorded that, at 23 years old at the time of the offending,
the appellant was ‘a young offender for
sentencing purposes’.
appellant, the middle child of three, was born in Darwin, moved with his family
to Adelaide, then relocated to Darwin when
he was 12. He had some behavioural
problems at school, and was teased and bullied. He suffered periods of rejection
from his family,
being asked to leave the family home on a number of occasions.
His father died suddenly when he was around 11 years old, which affected
significantly. He attempted suicide at age 14. He smoked cannabis daily from age
13 and drank alcohol from age 15, although was
not dependent on the latter.
[44] He had a
‘sound and consistent’ employment history, starting from when he was
character references were provided.
sentencing Judge found that the appellant’s prospects of rehabilitation
were reasonable, and the offender was unlikely
to offend again, at least in such
a serious way.
Plea and remorse
sentencing Judge found that the appellant had entered early pleas.
sentencing Judge also found that the appellant did not show remorse immediately,
and made some comments to Police indicating
an attitude of callousness and
victim-blaming. However, the sentencing Judge found it likely that the appellant
has developed remorse
Time in custody
[49] At the time
of sentencing, the appellant had spent over 18 months on remand.
[50] A report of
a psychiatrist noted that the appellant had difficulty coping with his offending
and incarceration, struggling with
insomnia, high levels of anxiety, depressed
mood, feelings of guilt, sadness and upset, including about his actions of being
responsible
for the death of the deceased and for involving his mother in the
concealment of the driving offence. He was prescribed anti-depressant
and described symptoms typical of post-traumatic stress disorder
(‘PTSD’). He often thought about the deceased
and her family, about
apologising to them and asking their forgiveness. He expressed remorse to the
psychiatrist.
psychiatrist expressed a strong opinion that the appellant meets the criteria
for PTSD. The sentencing Judge found that there
was no causal connection between
that diagnosis and the offending, but that the appellant’s PTSD placed him
at increased vulnerability
compared to other inmates without such disorder, and
would likely make a custodial sentence more onerous. The sentencing Judge also
found that the PTSD and psychological distress would be chronic, running the
course over many years, although the severity may decrease
sentencing Judge also found that the conditions in prison were ‘currently
harsh’, with evidence describing an
unprecedented higher prison population
and a restricted regime of out of cell time.
Post-custody
sentencing Judge found the appellant would most likely live in the rural area on
his release, and would need a driver’s
licence to be able to work and
engage in society.
Ground 2: Manifest excess
convenient to deal with Ground 2 first.
appellant contends that both the individual sentences on Counts 1 and 2, and the
total effective sentence, were manifestly
principles applicable to an appeal against sentence on the ground of manifest
excess are clear, and were conveniently described
Forrest v The Queen
[2017] NTCCA 5
(2017) 267 A Crim R 494
(at [63]-[64]) and
Edmond & Moreen v The
[2017] NTCCA 9
(at [4]). Those principles are:
(a) The sentence is not to be disturbed on appeal unless error is shown.
(b) The presumption is that there is no error.
(c) Appellate intervention is not justified simply because the sentence is
markedly different from sentences imposed in other cases.
(d) Intervention is warranted only where the difference is such that in all the
circumstances the appellate court concludes there
must have been some
misapplication of principle, even though where and how is not apparent from the
(e) Manifest excess does not depend upon attribution of specific error. The
relevant test is whether the sentence was unreasonable
or plainly unjust.
(f) It must be shown that the sentence was clearly, not just arguably,
(g) There is no one single correct sentence. There can be compliance with
appropriate sentencing principles notwithstanding there
may be differences of
judicial opinion concerning the result.
relevant considerations in such an appeal are the maximum penalty for the
offence; the place which the criminal conduct occupies
in the scale of
seriousness of offences of the type committed by the appellant; the standards of
sentencing customarily imposed for
the offence; and the personal circumstances
offending lies in the objective range of seriousness
sentencing Judge noted that the collision was unavoidable, and said the Court
would sentence on that basis.
sentencing Judge also noted that the failure to report the incident to Police
meant that whether the appellant was under
the influence of alcohol or drugs at
the time can never be tested.
appellant was not to be treated as someone under the influence at the time, but
the failure to report meant that the investigation
could not commence when it
should, and ‘the people with a real interest in the case, particularly the
family, are left with
questions’.
sentencing Judge noted that the appellant had told the driver of the first car
he had called Police, indicating he did not
want to make Police aware of the
traffic accident, he had awareness that Police ought to be called, and by the
time he left the scene,
he believed he had hit a person, but made no attempt to
call Police.
The sentencing Judge
found that the incident was unable to be investigated overnight and for the two
days that followed.
The appellant
had the means to call Police, and could have done so when he went back to his
mother’s house, but he concealed
his involvement by covering his car and
telling his sister he had hit a
sentencing Judge did note that, unlike many cases of hit and run, the appellant
did immediately stop at the scene, performed
a search, attempted to clear the
road of debris and warned other drivers to slow
sentencing Judge held that the failure to contact Police was a serious matter,
but ‘it is not in the higher levels
of driving cases of that
sentencing Judge noted the appellant’s explanation that he was scared and
that he considered his life was
Her Honour did not accept
his statement that he was about to contact Police when they arrived at his home,
saying all of his conduct
up to that point indicated he would not have done
Her Honour did accept that
the appellant was panicked, he told his mother he would kill himself if he got
sent to gaol, and he moved
the body because he freaked out and did not know what
to do, and his mother was freaking out because she knew where the body
sentencing Judge said that what the appellant did after the traffic accident was
far more serious than Count 1 and ‘a
strikingly serious example of
offending of that
sentencing Judge referred, again, to the appellant leaving his car at his
mother’s house and concealing the damage
with a cover. Her Honour then
referred to moving the body, covering it, cleaning out the utility and
discussing what to tell the
appellant’s sister, then moving the body so it
would not be found, purchasing a car cover and lying to a number of people to
achieve the outcome of concealing the body and therefore shielding himself from
any liability for the traffic
Her Honour also said
that the appellant bore the initial responsibility and then involved his mother
in pursuit of evading
responsibility.
sentencing Judge observed that moving the deceased’s body, twice, were
‘highly disrespectful of a deceased person
and their family’, and it
was hard to comprehend how two ordinary people could be ‘so insensitive
and callous’.
sentencing Judge characterised the offending as ‘morally
reprehensible’.
said ‘it was serious and deliberate conduct to move the body of a deceased
person’, and noted the overlap
between Count 2 and Count
Accepting that Count 2 was
‘moderated to a marginal degree’ because there was no significant
planning and the body was
moved in a state of panic, her Honour said ‘it
is serious for other reasons, and obviously
[68] As to the
offending in Count 1, s 174FA of the
Criminal Code
is comprised of
being the driver of a vehicle involved in an incident that results in the death
of, or serious harm to, a person,
and a failure to stop at the scene, to give
reasonable assistance to the person, or to notify a representative of the Police
as soon as reasonably practicable after the incident. The fault elements
are knowledge or recklessness as to whether the vehicle
is involved in an
incident and it results in the death of, or serious harm to, a person.
[69] Section
s 174FA prescribes a maximum penalty of imprisonment for 10 years if
the incident results in a death, and for seven years
if the incident results in
serious harm.
appellant’s offending involved a failure to notify Police at the time of
or shortly after the incident, with actual
knowledge that he had struck a
person, and lying to another witness about having done so, thereby precluding
her from doing the same.
If not before, upon his return to the scene later that
night, the appellant became aware that the person he had struck was deceased.
The gravamen of the offending in Count 1 was the delay in the investigation
which followed from the failure to notify Police, which
included that the
appellant could not be tested for alcohol or drug intoxication and, potentially,
the non-preservation of the scene,
which may have permitted an assessment of
excessive speed or other driving on the part of the appellant which contributed
[71] Considered
in that light, it is properly characterised as towards the lower end of the
range of seriousness for incidents involving
the death of a person. That is, it
is towards the lower end of the offending for which the maximum penalty is
imprisonment for 10
[72] At the
sentencing hearing, the prosecutor submitted that the offending in Count 2 was
objectively serious for a range of reasons:
(a) The accused had made a decision immediately after the incident and engaged
in a course of conduct that continued until 1 June
when he was arrested,
and over that time took a number of clear, active steps, including at the scene,
in an attempt to hide
(b) ‘It is obviously a serious circumstance to cover up the death of a
(c) Significant Police and other resources (forensics, pathologists and crash
investigators) went into uncovering the crime at significant
(d) Moral culpability was high for both the appellant and his mother. The
prosecutor said:
This is truly morally reprehensible conduct. But for the deceased’s leg
being left on the highway, there is a strong possibility,
in my submission, that
the offending would not have been discovered; that the deceased would have
become another missing person;
and that her family would have been left in the
intolerable position of just not knowing what had happened to her.
prosecutor concluded that the appellant’s offending was ‘towards the
higher end of the
[74] At the
sentencing hearing, Defence counsel accepted that this was callous and morally
reprehensible conduct, but urged that care
needed to be taken that the
understandable emotional aspect not overwhelm the
proceedings.
Defence counsel
also stressed the fact that the actual conduct the subject of Counts 2 and 3
overlapped entirely, while acknowledging
that the elements of the two offences
were different and that they captured different aspects of the criminality of
that conduct.
Because of this, Defence counsel contended, referring to the High
Court decision in
Pearce v The Queen
[1998] HCA 57
(1998) 194 CLR 610
, that there
should be a moderation of each of the sentences for those offences rather than
simply a consideration of concurrency
and cumulation. This submission was
largely accepted by the sentencing Judge, who
significant overlap in the conduct comprising Count 2 and [Count 3]. There will
need to be some adjustments to the individual
sentences and substantial
concurrency to reflect that.
apparent from the sentencing remarks and the sentence imposed for Count 2 that
the sentencing Judge accepted the prosecutor’s
assessment of the objective
seriousness of Count 2 as ‘towards the higher end of the scale’,
with the sentence of five
years after the discount of 20% for the plea moderated
or adjusted downward to reflect the overlap in the conduct comprising the
offences indicating a starting point in excess of 6 years and 3 months before
adjustment. The sentencing Judge described the
offending in Count 2 as
‘far more serious’ than Count 1 and ‘a strikingly serious
example of offending of that
[T]his is a
case where punishment, in a way that is just in all the circumstances and the
principle of general deterrence, must be
prioritised to reflect, as the
Sentencing Act
requires, the community’s disapproval of the
conduct. Moving a deceased person to conceal an offence and evade justice has
be denounced in the strongest terms.
[76] We do not
agree with that characterisation of the objective seriousness of the offending
in Count 2. It involved an ongoing course
of conduct over a period of some two
days, comprised of numerous acts directed to concealing his own criminal
liability for the hit
and run incident. It is accepted that those acts included
the callous and grotesque acts of removing the deceased’s body from
scene, concealing it in bushland, cleaning the traces of it from the utility,
and then moving and concealing it a second time.
It is accepted that those acts
involved indignity to the deceased’s body, and caused distress to her
[77] However,
having regard to the nature of the offending the subject of the other sentencing
cases which are considered below, we
do not accept the respondent’s
submission that this was ‘an extremely serious example’ of the
offence against s
Criminal Code
. In particular, we do not
consider it to be as serious as making multiple ongoing threats to kill or harm
a complainant of domestic
violence with the intention of preventing her from
giving evidence about the offending in court (see below).
[78] We note
that the sentencing Judge did not have the benefit of the tables of comparative
sentences that this Court has been referred
to, which has enabled an analysis of
the kinds of conduct seen in other instances of this type of offending, and
hence a more detailed
assessment of where this offending falls in the scale of
seriousness of offences against s 109 of the
Criminal Code
[79] We consider
that the offending in Count 2 is properly characterised as falling below the
mid-range of seriousness for such offending.
Court’s characterisation of the offending in Count 2 as less serious than
the assessment made by the sentencing Judge
should in no way be seen as
minimising or undervaluing the seriousness of the clearly devastating impact
this offending has had on
the family members of the deceased, or as disagreeing
with the following remarks made by the sentencing Judge, which we
[appellant and his mother] thought they were moving the body of someone who no
one would notice was missing, they badly miscalculated.
Did they think they
could move the body and no one would notice? If so, that was a distorted view of
the deceased and her circumstances.
The deceased was a much loved and admired mother, sister, aunty and member of
a large extended family. Much of the grief of the family,
expressed both through
the written victim impact statements, including the two statements read at the
time the pleas were taken,
is direct to the grief and loss that might be
expected with the death of a loved one.
The grief was deepened substantially due to the [appellant and his mother]
moving the deceased’s body, not once but, in the
case of [the appellant],
twice. Those actions were an attempt to pervert the course of justice and were
highly disrespectful of a
deceased person and their family.
Sentences imposed for hit and run offences and pervert the course of
justice offences
starting point for the appellant's contention was that, before the stated
discount of 20% for the guilty plea, the sentence
on Count 2 was imprisonment
for six years and three months, and the appellant’s total effective
sentence was imprisonment for
a period of seven years and six months for a 23
year old, with no serious offending history, who suffered PTSD as a consequence
the offending. The appellant sought to demonstrate that this sentence was
manifestly excessive by reference to the sentences imposed
in other cases in
which mostly older offenders had committed s 174FA and s 109 offending
and received significantly lower sentences
to imprisonment.
appellant provided two tables of comparative sentences imposed by the Supreme
Court for each offence.
[83] The first
table extracted 22 cases involving hit and run resulting in death determined
between January 2010 and November 2022.
for a single count. The other half involved sentences for more than one offence,
some including
dangerous driving causing death or other driving offences.
[84] A rational
comparison between sentences requires the conversion of all sentences to the
sentence before any discount given for
the plea. This is necessary because the
discount for the plea is discretionary and no rate was uniformly applied in the
the table. In the reasons that follow, all references to sentences
identified in the table are to the sentence before the discount
for the plea.
Where no discount was stated in the sentencing remarks, for the purpose of the
analysis the discount is assumed to
have been 25%. A rational comparison between
sentences also requires acknowledgement of the number and nature of other
offences for
which the total sentence was imposed.
[85] Before the
discount for the plea, the appellant’s sentence for Count 1 was three
years and nine months.
sentences set out in the first table ranged from home detention for 12 months to
imprisonment for five years and four months,
before the discount for the
[87] Of the 22
sentences in the first table, 10 of them exceeded the appellant’s sentence
(including two aggregate sentences
for an offence of dangerous driving causing
death as well as the hit and run offence) and 11 of them were less than the
appellant’s
apparent that the appellant’s sentence on Count 1 sits within the range of
sentences imposed by the Court for this
offence, albeit towards the high end of
such sentences. The first table does not demonstrate that the appellant’s
on Count 1 was manifestly excessive. However, the contribution of its
length to the total effective sentence is noted for the purposes
conclusion as to manifest excess reached below.
[89] Of the 28
sentences in the second table, they range from imprisonment for six months to
imprisonment for five years and 10 months.
The appellant’s sentence of six
years and three months is five months longer than the longest sentence imposed.
[90] The highest
sentence imposed was imprisonment for five years and 10
That offender was 29
years old and had priors for drug and dishonest offending. The offending
involved charges for aggravated assault
and causing serious harm, in two
separate incidents, against the victim who was his domestic partner. He was
served with a domestic
violence order protecting the victim. Whilst on remand,
over a period of months, in breach of the domestic violence order, the offender
made a large number of phone calls to the victim and others, telling her to drop
the charges, give false evidence and not to speak
to Police or lawyers. During
the calls, the offender threatened to bash the victim, to maim and to kill her,
and referred to previous
assaults against her. The offender made calls to other
people threatening to bash, seriously injure, stab and disable the victim,
the intention that the messages would be passed on to her. When, in accordance
with the offender’s instructions, the victim
did not appear in court, a
warrant was issued for her arrest and the offender pleaded guilty to a lesser
charge. That outcome was
due to difficulties getting the victim to testify. This
offending was characterised by the sentencing Judge as falling in the mid-range
of seriousness for such offending.
[91] We consider
that offending to be far more serious than the appellant’s offending,
given that it involved ‘detailed,
credible and chilling’ threats,
made more credible due to the offender’s violent history, and that those
threats had
the desired effect on the victim, and ultimately on the course of
the administration of justice.
[92] The second
highest sentence imposed was imprisonment for five
The offender was 35 years
old with an extensive criminal history of violence, including prior assaults
against the victim, his domestic
partner, and other offending, comprising some
18 pages. The offending involved making 158 calls from gaol to the victim of
five assaults,
demanding that she disclose what she had told Police, pressuring
her to withhold evidence or present evidence favourable to the offender,
drop the charges, and discouraging her from appearing in court. The sentencing
Judge considered that the offender had been
largely successful in his perverting
the course of justice.
[93] Again, this
extensive ongoing conduct of threatening a victim of domestic violence not to
give evidence against the perpetrator
in order to avoid justice for those crimes
is a far more serious example of offending against s 109 than the
appellant’s.
[94] The third
highest sentence was imprisonment for four years and four
The offender was 59
years old and had priors for supplying kava committed 11 years and nine years
prior to this offending. The offender
was employed as an Aboriginal liaison
officer with the Northern Territory Police. He agreed to sell kava within the
community where
he worked. Over months, he informed his supplier of Police
movements and road blocks by using the information he had access to in
and also misinformed Police about his supplier’s movements so as to lead
them away from his supplier.
[95] Again, we
consider this abuse of a position of responsibility and trust, which impeded the
detection by Police of the offender’s
involvement in ongoing kava supply
in a remote community over the course of months, to be more serious than the
appellant’s
[96] The second
table reveals that, of the 28 sentences referred to:
(a) three of them were sentences of less than one year;
(b) 12 of them (or around 43%) were between one year and up to two years; and
(c) 11 of them (or almost 40%) were between two years and up to four years and
four months.
[97] The second
table also reveals sentences for offending which is somewhat akin to the
appellant’s.
[98] In one
the brother of the 37 year
old offender had reversed over a pedestrian then fled the scene, without
rendering assistance. Later that
night, the brother went to the offender’s
take responsibility for the hit and run by claiming to be the driver. The
offender agreed and, after receiving payment, falsely reported
to Police that he
was the driver. Police later became aware that the offender’s brother was
the driver, at which point the
offender admitted his offending. The sentencing
Judge held that this did not fall into the more serious category of such
including because the perversion of justice was not brought to
ultimate fruition. The sentence imposed was imprisonment for two years,
suspended after serving 18 months.
[99] In the
co-offender’s case,
year old offender was the one who reversed his car into the pedestrian, knocking
her over. He knew he had done so. She lay
on the ground, suffering wounds to her
elbow and calf requiring stitches, and he drove off. He went to see his family,
who told him
to go to the Police. Instead, he convinced his brother, on payment
as referred to above, to tell Police he was the driver and the
offender was a
passenger. The brother agreed, reported to Police and was arrested, and the
offender signed a statutory declaration
that he had been a passenger and had
advised the brother to report to Police. The sentence imposed was imprisonment
for one year
and nine months, suspended after nine months.
[100] In another
the co-offender was a
Police officer who had been drinking, was intoxicated, then drove a Police
vehicle, crashing it into a monument
and causing some $10,000 damage to the
vehicle. He drove it home and called the offender, also a Police officer, with
whom the co-offender
had been drinking that night. The co-offender reported the
matter and was told he would need to be breathalysed. The co-offender
a reluctant neighbour to take the breath test, which was done in front of the
offender. The offender and co-offender then
signed statutory declarations
stating the co-offender’s breath test had given a zero reading. They later
confessed to falsely
declaring the results. The sentence imposed was
imprisonment for three years, with 12 months home detention. The same sentence
imposed for the
co-offender.
[101] In another
the 38 year old offender
had physically assaulted the victim, who was consequently lying on the floor, a
witness suggested calling
an ambulance, the offender made veiled threats to the
witness saying he would report the witness for drugs if she called an ambulance,
and the offender knew the victim was badly hurt. The victim remained on the
floor over a period of hours, as the offender remained
at the residence to make
sure the witness did not call an ambulance or Police. The next morning, the
witness decided to call Police
and an ambulance and the offender attempted to
dissuade her from doing so, again making veiled threats. An ambulance was called
morning. The offender prevented an ambulance being called to avoid arrest
for the assault. The offender had mental health conditions
that would make
custody more onerous, and reasonable prospects of rehabilitation. The sentence
imposed for the s 109 offence was
imprisonment for one year.
[102] In another
two offenders who had
assaulted and neglected a two year old child, who had sustained a broken leg
whilst being locked in a room
for hours at one of the offender’s
workplaces, conspired to give a false account of what had occurred to hospital
staff about
how the victim came to be injured. After a mandatory report was made
to Territory Families and Police, the offenders continued to
claim that the
victim had fallen from his bed onto the floor. The sentence imposed was
imprisonment for 10 months for the s 109 offence.
[103] These
sentences are all markedly below the sentence imposed on the appellant, and
involve offending which is more serious or,
at least as serious as, that of the
appellant, but lack the grotesque element of dealing with a dead body, which
, substantially elevate the seriousness of the offending.
That element was the subject of the separate charge, for which the appellant
received a sentence of imprisonment for 12 months to be served concurrently with
the sentence on Count 1.
[104] Of the 28
sentences in the second table, only two offenders were the same age or younger
than the appellant. Those two offenders
received sentences of imprisonment for
(for a 22 year old
whose offending involving attempting to persuade a person charged with drug
offending to retract their statement
to Police) and imprisonment for one year
and four months
(for a 23 year
old whose offending involved conspiring with his partner to falsely explain to
Police why he had been driving when
his driver’s licence had been
suspended, which false statements were made by both the offender and his partner
at the trial).
[105] Finally,
there is the appellant’s co-offender, his mother. She was sentenced at the
same time as the appellant to imprisonment
for two years and eight months,
before the 25% discount for the guilty plea, suspended after 12
Conclusion regarding manifest excess
[106] We adopt,
without repeating, the observations of this Court in
AB v The King
(at [99]-[102]) regarding the principles relating to comparison with
other sentences imposed by the Court for similar offending.
[107] In the
application of those principles to the present case, the sentence for Count 2 of
six years and three months before the
discount is markedly different from other
sentences imposed in other cases of attempting to pervert or defeat the course
of justice.
That, of itself, does not justify appellate intervention. However,
the marked difference which we have described between the appellant’s
sentence and those in the other cases are such that there must have been some
misapplication of principle, even though where and
how is not apparent from the
appellant’s offending the subject of Count 2 is nowhere near the most
serious of the offending in the 28 cases identified
in the second table; the
appellant had a minimal criminal history; and the appellant was one of the
youngest offenders in those cases.
Despite those relativities, the
appellant’s sentence higher than any other sentence imposed for that
[109] Further,
the appellant’s total effective sentence before the discount of seven
years and six months was imposed on a 23
year old offender, with a limited
criminal record, reasonable prospects of rehabilitation and a diagnosis of PTSD
associated with
the offending, which made his time in custody more onerous than
a person without that condition.
[110] There was
also a marked disparity between the length of the sentence imposed on the
appellant and those imposed on other offenders
in the comparative cases which
bore the closest similarity to the objective seriousness of the
appellant’s offending and his
personal circumstances.
process of comparison demonstrates that the appellant’s total effective
sentence and the individual sentence for
Count 2 were plainly excessive and
Ground 2 is made out.
conclusion in relation to Ground 2 makes it unnecessary to consider the other
grounds relied on by the appellant. For this
reason, leave to appeal on those
grounds was refused.
Disposition and resentence
[113] We make
the following orders:
appeal is allowed on Ground 2.
as to the convictions imposed on each Count, which are affirmed, the sentence
imposed by the sentencing Judge is set aside.
a 25% discount for the guilty pleas and remorse, the appellant is re-sentenced
to a total effective sentence of imprisonment
for three years, as
(a) two years and six months for Count 2;
(b) one year for Count 1, with six months to be cumulative on the sentence for
Count 2; and
(c) one year for Count 3, with the sentence on Count 3 to be served concurrently
with the sentence on Count 2.
sentence is backdated to 1 June 2022, and suspended immediately.
operational period of one year and six months from today is fixed for the
purposes of
Sentencing Act 1995
_______________________
Counts 1 and 2 were charged on an
indictment dated 1 August 2023. Count 3 was charged on complaint dated 4 August
2023 and transmitted
to the Supreme Court.
What follows comes from the
sentencing Judge’s sentencing remarks (‘Sentencing Remarks’),
Edmond & Moreen v The
[2017] NTCCA 9
per Grant CJ and Hiley J, citing
Western Australia
[2014] WASCA 144
per Mazza JA (Martin CJ and Buss
JA agreeing).
Sentencing Remarks, p 8.
Ibid, p 10.
Ibid, p 15.
Ibid, p 15.
Ibid, p 10.
Ibid, p 11.
Transcript, 4 December 2023,
Transcript, 4 December 2023,
Transcript, 4 December 2023,
Transcript, 4 December 2023,
Transcript, 4 December 2023,
pp 20-21, 24.
Sentencing Remarks, p 10.
Sentencing Remarks, p 7.
Putting to one side the
aggregate sentence of seven years and six months for dangerous driving causing
death and the hit and run:
21 December 2016, Kelly J.
, 17 April 2019,
, 10 March 2020,
Garrawurra,
2 July 2020,
, 2 October 2020,
, 31 July 2019,
, 31 May 2022,
Southwood J.
, 31 May 2022,
Southwood J.
, 24 July 2023,
, 13 July 2023, Burns
, 22 February
2016, Southwood J.
, 11 November
2014, Barr J.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (268 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter