URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTSC/2025/73.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:22:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gibson v Northern Territory of Australia [2025] NTSC 73 (7 October 2025)
Gibson v Northern Territory of Australia
[2025] NTSC 73
PARTIES: GIBSON, Adele
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
TITLE OF COURT: SUPREME COURT OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: 2024-00341-SC
DELIVERED: 7 October 2025
HEARING DATE: 25 September 2025
JUDGMENT OF: Smyth A/AsJ
CATCHWORDS:
Evidence – Application for witness to give evidence by audiovisual link
– Considerations when determining whether application
Efficient use of judicial and administrative resources – Any other matter
the Court considers appropriate –
Court to be satisfied that it is in the
interests of justice for evidence to be given by audiovisual link –
Potential detriment
to effectiveness of cross-examination and ability to assess
credit a determining factor in the circumstances of the proceeding –
application dismissed.
Evidence Act 1939
Supreme Court Rules 1984
(NT), Rule 63.18
[2021] NTSC 1
Tetra Pak Marketing Ltd v Musashi Pty
[2000] FCA 1261
Campaign Master (UK) Ltd v Forty Two International
Pty Ltd (No. 3)
[2009] FCA 1306
(2009) 181 FCR 152
ACN 117 641 004 Pty Ltd (in liq) v
S&P Global, Inc (No.5)
[2025] FCA 687
Southernwood v Brambles
Limited (No.2)
[2022] FCA 973
Reliance Financial Services Aust Pty Ltd v
[2022] NSWSC 1061
Mulberry Capital Management Pty Ltd v Shen
[2022] NSWSC 1023
R v Early (No. 4)
[2023] NSWSC 505
Liu v Option
Funds Management Limited
[2022] FCA 444
Al Muderis v Nine Network
Australia Pty Limited (No 5)
[2025] FCA 908
Rooney v AGL Limited
[2020] FCA 942
Hulme v Hulme
[2023] NSWSC 299
Magjarraj v
Asteron Life Limited
[2009] NSWSC 1433
; referred to.
REPRESENTATION:
Plaintiff: K Sibley
Defendant: H Baddeley SC
Solicitors:
Plaintiff: Piper Grimster Jones
Defendant: Hutton McCarthy
Judgment category classification: B
Judgment ID Number: Smy2512
Number of pages: 30
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Gibson v Northern Territory of Australia
[2025] NTSC
No. 2024-00341-SC
ADELE GIBSON
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
CORAM: SMYTH A/AsJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 7 October 2025)
Plaintiff makes application, on summons dated 28 July 2025, to give evidence in
her upcoming trial via audio-visual link (AVL).
The application is made
pursuant to
Evidence Act 1939
proceeding relates to allegations of medical negligence by the Plaintiff against
the Defendant. The proceeding was originally
commenced in the Local Court on 14
July 2023 and subsequently transferred to the Supreme Court on 7 February 2025.
The Plaintiff
is a 65 year old woman who claims damages arising from negligent
medical treatment and care by the Defendant. In particular, the
Plaintiff’s claim relates to treatment and care prior to and following a
left-sided trochanteric bursa injection procedure
at the Royal Darwin Hospital
in early 2020, resulting in sustained temporary neuropraxia affecting the whole
of her left leg which,
in turn, caused the Plaintiff to sustain an injury to her
left hip after she fell from her hospital bed. The Plaintiff claims that
Defendant’s negligence resulted in a sequela hip injury and later a total
hip replacement.
description of the pleadings is necessary in order to put the matter in context.
In the Plaintiff’s amended statement
of claim, the Plaintiff claims that
(a) Defendant (or its employees) failed to advise the Plaintiff of the risk of
neuropraxia, which the Plaintiff suffered;
(b) Defendant failed to take steps to identify the presence of the neuropraxia
and to prevent the Plaintiff from being injured, by
reason of it, within the
course of her post-operative care and discharge. In particular, as a result of
those failures in post-operative
care, the Plaintiff fell from her hospital bed
and had subsequent difficulties standing and walking, which was observed by
staff, but nonetheless was discharged a short time after with no
follow-up care offered. The Plaintiff’s claim also involves
her account
of interaction with staff of the Pain Services Clinic on the same and subsequent
days, who she claims failed to address
her concerns about her injury and to
offer a follow-up review by a medical practitioner (until some weeks after).
[4] Apart from a
physical injury, the Plaintiff also claims a mental injury as a result of the
failure to provide proper treatment.
Plaintiff seeks damages including from a reduced capacity to earn (from teaching
music), medical expenses and permanent impairment.
Defendant, by its amended defence, and by various denials and particulars
thereto, takes issue in respect to the Plaintiff’s
prior musculoskeletal
conditions, including those specifically affecting her hips, and her prior
mental health issues. The Defendant
takes issue with the Plaintiff’s
employment history and capacity to earn. The Defendant takes issue with the
events surrounding
the alleged fall from the hospital bed and offers of support
which were provided to the Plaintiff. The Defendant takes issue with
Plaintiff’s alleged accounts of communication with the Pain Services
Clinic and with medical staff of the Defendant.
proceeding had previously been listed for trial commencing in June 2025 but is
now listed to commence in less than three weeks,
on 27 October 2025, for five
days duration before Huntingford J. Leave has already been granted for expert
witnesses (four for the
Plaintiff and three for the
to give evidence by AVL
at trial. However, all other lay-witnesses are expected to give evidence in
person (including those called
by the Defendant), subject to this application by
the Plaintiff.
Giving Evidence by AVL
Section 49E
Evidence Act 1939
(NT) provides that the Court may make an order
directing that a person give evidence by communication link from any place
or outside of the Territory. Before doing so, the Court must be
satisfied that the necessary facilities are available or can be
reasonably be
made available.
Additionally, the
Court is to have regard to a number of matters, which relevantly for this
application include:
(a) the efficient use of available judicial and administrative resources;
(b) any other matters that the entity considers
appropriate.
application under
Evidence Act 1939
(NT) was most recently
dealt with, albeit in the context of a criminal proceeding before a jury in
Brownhill J, in respect to
s 49E(5)(e)
, rightly observed that there was somewhat
of a dichotomy in the authorities as to whether evidence given by AVL is
inferior to, or
less effective than, or deprives a cross-examiner of forensic
benefits available in, evidence given in person in the court, and if
the persuasive burden lies in the determination of such
applications.
After a review of
the competing authorities such as
Tetra Pak Marketing Ltd v Musashi Pty
Campaign Master
(UK) Ltd v Forty Two International Pty Ltd (No.
her Honour stated
clear that the nature and scope of the evidence the witness is to give, whether
it is likely to be in contest, whether
the credit or reliability of the witness
will be in issue and, if so, whether the use of an AVL will be likely to affect
ability to assess those matters, are factors to be considered
by the Court in making the necessary determination. Matters personal
witness such as incapacity or illness, and travel and accommodation expenses
associated with bringing the witness to court
may also need to be weighed in the
exercise of the discretion. Further, the giving of evidence must be practical;
for example, evidence
by AVL would not be practical if the witness will be asked
to mark or annotate a document, and this cannot be done with the available
facilities.”
[10] It would
seem to me that, even at times immediately preceding the COVID-19 pandemic,
technology had progressed sufficiently for
the Courts to be less wary of
evidence given by AVL, and that is particularly more so given the post-COVID
period with further development
of technology in the years
Further, from a review
of the relevant decisions, the personal preference of the particular trial judge
plays a role, including
whether she or he (particularly in respect to judge only
civil proceedings) is comfortable receiving evidence (and assessing credit)
That of course does not
mean the fundamental considerations should be ignored, including the potential
deprivation of a cross-examiner
of the traditional forensic element in exchanges
during cross-examination.
[11] In respect
Evidence Act 1939
(NT) and the requirement of
“other matters the Court considers appropriate,” the over-riding
consideration is what is
considered by the Court to be in the best interests in
the administration of justice, including to ensure that justice is done as
between the parties. I acknowledge that the Courts have outlined a
non-exhaustive list of factors which may be relevant, including:
the employment
commitments of an overseas witness, whether credibility of the witness is in
issue, and whether the witness’
evidence will be centrally important and
whether the use of the AVL may frustrate or delay the management of documents in
cross-examination.
Southernwood
, the Applicant sought an order allowing lay witness
testimony of two witnesses in the USA to be given by video link. One witness
refused to travel to Australia and was not compellable. The choice, in respect
to that witness, was between hearing his evidence
via AVL or not at all. The
other witness had indicated that work commitments were impediments to travelling
to Australia although
there was no evidence that she had refused to travel. In
determining the application, the Court refused the application on the basis
the Applicant’s arguments, although not without force, were outweighed by
other factors which included:
(a) the preference for testimony to be given in court, principally for the Court
to have the best opportunity to accurately and fairly
assess the reliability of
the witnesses’ evidence, and that the Court may be hindered in that
assessment by hearing evidence
(b) the witnesses’ evidence was significant to the dispute – the
evidence was contentious, and cross-examination was
likely to be lengthy and
involve consideration of numerous documents and include issues as to credit;
(c) cross-examination in cases involving numerous documents, including on issues
of credit, is less effective via AVL than in Court,
providing a disadvantage to
the cross-examining party;
(d) the advantage to the witness to give evidence from the comfort of a location
other than the Court, freed from the solemnity of
the occasion which being in
Court carries;
(e) the preference of the trial judge.
S&P Global, Inc
, a witness sought to give evidence from the USA. The
witness refused to travel to Australia on the basis of fears for the security
her employment, and that she was not compellable. The Court was faced with the
prospect of the witness giving evidence, or not
at all, in circumstances where
the trial was less than a fortnight away and it was unknown as to how the
witness’ evidence,
if given by AVL, would play out. In
, Shariff J granted the order sought on the basis that the interests
of justice would be served if the witness’ evidence was
given via AVL. In
doing so, Shariff J took into account the effect on the calling party if the
evidence was not given. In respect
to the issue of possible prejudice to the
cross-examiner, or difficulties with the Court assessing the evidence, or
technological
issues, the Court left open the possibility of revoking leave to
give evidence during the trial if such difficulties arose.
, Brownhill J allowed the application for 18 of the 32 Crown
witnesses to give evidence via AVL. In allowing the application, Brownhill
held that the evidence of the eighteen witnesses would likely be corroborative
of other evidence given in person by the two co-accused
and five other
witnesses, and would be confined in its subject matter and likely to be short in
duration. The detriment to the effectiveness
of cross-examination and the
jury’s ability to assess credit was held to be negligible.
Reliance Financial Services Aust Pty Ltd v
the application was
made for the Defendant to give evidence from Lebanon. The evidence was that the
Defendant was permanently living
in Lebanon, who was the sole carer for his
elderly father, was concerned about contracting COVID-19 due to travel (by him
it to his father, during the pandemic), and his sole income was a
small business in Lebanon. His evidence was significant and his
credit was in
issue. In respect to the unfairness brought about by not appearing in person for
cross-examination, Henry J recognised
that “even when credit has been a
significant issue in proceedings, it has not necessarily been less effective or
than evidence given in
However, to
address that unfairness, Henry J agreed to allow the Plaintiff’s key
witness to also give evidence via AVL to
“level the playing field.”
Additionally, Henry J noted that the necessary AVL facilities were available as
the Defendant
had given evidence that: he would access AVL facilities at a
business class lounge in an international hotel in Beirut, with high
cable based internet, and that he would have access to split computer screens,
an on-site technician, a separate computer
with an electronic court book, a
hard-copy could book if needed and printing facilities for additional documents
as needed during
the course of the hearing. Additionally, Henry J was prepared
to revoke the order for an AVL during evidence if the Court was satisfied
continuing to give evidence would be unfair to the Plaintiff. A similar
approach was also adopted in
Mulberry Capital Management Pty Ltd v
, an application was made for a witness, Mr Huo, who was resident
in Beijing and who could not speak English, to give evidence. Mr
difficulties in appearing stemmed from a possible prohibition by the Chinese
government against him leaving China, and
the risks of contracting COVID-19 as a
result of travel. Mr Hou’s credit was in issue (there were serious
allegations against
him), a translator would be required and there was a risk
that the hearing would be protracted because of technical difficulties.
for a translator affected the issue of the forensic advantage to cross
examination in person. To level the playing field
a key witness for the
Defendant was permitted to give evidence remotely. The Court held that there
was little merit in the issue
of government travel restrictions, but the
prospect of contracting COVID-19, given Mr Huo’s medical issues, was a
consideration. Similarly, the Court reserved the right to revoke or
modify the orders should the witness’ evidence be perceived
Early (No. 4)
application was made by the Crown for a key witness, in a murder trial, to give
evidence to the trial held in Sydney from Bundaberg
in Queensland.
Notwithstanding initial contradictory medical evidence, given by the
witness’ treating doctor via a police
officer, a letter was tendered by
the witness’ doctor who was called and cross-examined thoroughly. The
doctor gave evidence
that the witness, who was 74 years old, was fit to travel
the 2.5 hours by plane and that it was not unsafe for him to do so,
notwithstanding
that the witness suffered from ischemic heart disease and
osteoarthritis affecting his ankle and mobility. Notwithstanding that,
doctor did not recommended travel on the basis that it would pose a risk to the
witness’ health, and “that given
the issues, the common sense
approach” was to allow the witness to give evidence by AVL. After
weighing the competing authorities,
including in the context of the criminal
proceedings, the Court refused the application on the basis that the witness was
an important
Crown witness, and that his proposed evidence was an important
plank in the Crown case and was hotly contested. Although the witness’
medical conditions requiring him to travel to Sydney would involve
inconvenience, he was fit to travel and it was not in the interests
that he give evidence by way of AVL.
Option Funds Management
an application was
made for Mr Zhu (the Second Plaintiff) to give evidence from China. The Second
Plaintiff’s medical condition
was taken into account. However, other
issues were relevant, including the fact that his evidence was unlikely to be
lengthy or controversial
and that an interpreter would be required. His
evidence was allowed by AVL.
Muderis v Nine Network Australia Pty Limited (No
an application was made
for three witnesses to give evidence via AVL. Two witnesses were overseas and
therefore the complication
arose as to their compellability, although health
reasons were also considered. One witness, however, was in Australia and
was given that she had a diagnosis of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
(PTSD), depression and anxiety, and had previous suicidal ideation.
Further, her
psychologist had expressed serious concerns about her giving evidence in Court,
stating that it would be best option
for her mental health to give evidence via
AVL. That witness’ proposed evidence was contentious. The application
was allowed
by the Court on the basis that the Court was satisfied that the
witness’ wellbeing would be significantly harmed should she
be called to
give evidence in person, and that notwithstanding the more “relaxed”
nature of giving evidence via AVL,
she was to give evidence from a
lawyers’ office, in the presence of lawyers, which was sufficiently both
formal and foreign
such that the gravity of giving evidence would not be
[20] As noted
above, the cases turn on very specific factual circumstances and on certain
factors which influence the exercise of
the Court’s discretion. As stated
, “those factors are neither exhaustive nor
prescriptive and the discretion under s 47A(1) is a broad one in which the
determining
consideration is the interests of justice in the particular facts
and circumstances of the case. It involves a balancing exercise
as to what will
best serve the administration of justice, doing so consistently with maintaining
justice between the
Plaintiff’s Application and Submissions
Plaintiff relies on her affidavit made on 25 June 2025, and on her solicitor
Cameron Jones’ affidavits made on 15 September
2025 and 24 September 2025.
The application to give evidence is made on two bases. Originally, the
application was made primarily
on the basis of the care of her son, Tony, and the inconvenience and possible
consequences which would follow if she had to leave
him to travel to Darwin.
Since that evidence was filed, the application was made on the additional basis
that the Plaintiff is inhibited
from travelling to Darwin to give evidence for
her own medical reasons.
Plaintiff resides on Russell Island in Queensland, southwest of Brisbane,
situated between the mainland and the southern
part of North Stradbroke Island.
A ferry is required to get to the mainland. Presumably, although not in
evidence, any trip from
Russell Island, using the ferry, can still be done by
car. Any trip to Darwin would require travel time to Darwin, time in Darwin,
and in a return journey.
[23] It was
Plaintiff’s evidence, given by Mr
that if the order sought
was granted, a private conference room with secure and adequate Wi-Fi connection
had been booked at the
Redlands Community Centre for the Plaintiff to give
evidence. However, following evidence of the Plaintiff’s deteriorating
medical condition, it was the evidence that such a room would be difficult to
attend and alternatively a private conference room
at Bay Ability in Redlands
Bay, which had secure and adequate Wi-Fi, and is closer to the Plaintiff’s
the Plaintiff’s solicitor gave evidence
that a solicitor from their office could be made available at the AVL location
court documentation to the Plaintiff as required. Other than
reference to the name of the facility, adequate Wi-Fi and the attendance
Plaintiff’s solicitor at that location, no further evidence was given as
to the proposed location from where the Plaintiff
was to give her evidence. It
was originally submitted that the technology was available and that problems
associated with the giving
of evidence via AVL may be alleviated by the use of a
court book, a joint tender bundle and/or other technology such as document
Plaintiff’s evidence in respect to the first aspect of the application can
be summarised as follows:
(a) The Plaintiff is the full-time carer for her adult son, Tony, who is
terminally ill with a serious and rare condition known as
Pure Red Cell
(b) Tony has required a number of treatments, including blood transfusions and
chemotherapy. Tony has experienced multiple medical
crises and hospitalisations
over the past 12 months, including needing emergency treatment;
(c) Tony is also severely autistic and nonverbal and, when hospitalised, he
needs the constant presence of at least one parent to
(d) Tony’s father, Kevin, and the Plaintiff are joint legal guardians and
substitute decision makers for Tony. However, due
to Kevin’s age (74), his
hearing loss and difficulty coping with Tony’s care, the Plaintiff bears
the primary responsibility
for making urgent decisions about Tony’s
(e) The Plaintiff does not have any extended family or other support systems
available to her. If she was unavailable, Tony would
be at immediate and
serious risk of harm due to his complex needs and reliance on the Plaintiff for
both emotional support and medical
(f) The Plaintiff provides constant care for Kevin and Tony;
(g) Tony receives daily National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS)-funded
supports from a local agency, although they are not authorised
or trained to
make decisions regarding medications, medical care or emergencies;
(h) The Plaintiff also manages her own health issues, such as chronic pain in
her neck and shoulders, limited mobility, and PTSD.
[25] The second
aspect of the application can be summarised as
(a) On 10 September 2025, the Plaintiff attended her treating neurosurgeon, Dr
Tollesson, who recommended she undergo an anterior
lumbar interbody fusion at
two levels, which could take place in late September or early October 2025. At
that time, the Plaintiff
was also awaiting the outcome of certain tests,
including CT scan of spine, bone density scan and EOS imaging scan of the spine,
before finalising any decision to proceed with surgery. Dr Tollesson provided a
letter dated 12 September 2024, addressed to “whom
it may concern,”
which stated “I advise that Adele is unable to travel long distances as
this will inflict more pain
and cause further injuries to her back. Adele will
require back surgery in the near future.” Her next appointment was 23
September 2025;
(b) By letter from Dr Tollesson to the Plaintiff’s general practitioner,
Dr Waters, dated 19 September, Dr Tollesson stated
“she has now developed
severe low back pain and sciatica which is disturbing her. As you know I
operated on her for cervical
radiculopathy successfully on 2 August 2023 with an
ACDF on C5/C6. She has had a known degenerative disc disease at L4/L5 and L5/S1
and this has been playing up giving her severe low back pain and sciatica.
Conservative treatment has not been effective. The most
recent scan was done on
24 April 2025 showing indeed a disc protrusion at L5/S1 and L4/L5. She feels
that her pain is out of control
and she wishes potentially to have surgery if
possible... She may be a good candidate for an anterior interbody fusion at
L5/S1 as I explained to her today;”
(c) On 23 September 2025, the Plaintiff’s solicitor, Mr Jones, spoke to Dr
Tollesson regarding the Plaintiff’s proposed
back surgery;
(d) The Plaintiff has disc pathology at L4/5 and L5/S1. The most serious
pathology is L5/S1. The pathology causes constant pain
in her back with
radiation into both legs. As a consequence, the Plaintiff requires anterior
interbody fusion at L4/5 and L5/S1.
Surgery is planned for November 2025. The
pain interferes with the Plaintiff’s mobility and restricts the
Plaintiff’s
ability to travel due to the pain in her back and legs. If
required to travel, the Plaintiff would likely need morphine-based pain
medication, which is likely to impair the Plaintiff’s focus and ability to
function clearly;
(e) In order for the Plaintiff to travel to Darwin, she would be required to
drive from her home to the ferry terminal on Russell
Island, travel by ferry to
the mainland, drive from the ferry to the airport (this would take 3 hours),
walk from the drop off point
to airline check-in, walk through the airport,
board the plan, fly to Darwin (3.5 hrs flight approximately), traverse Darwin
collect luggage, arrange transport to her accommodation (a total
journey of about 8-9 hours);
(f) The Plaintiff would need to move around the plane to relieve pain in her
(g) A supporting letter from Ms Rutherford, the Plaintiff’s treating
psychologist, was provided. Ms Rutherford comments on
the pain and mobility
limitations as noted above. Ms Rutherford further states it would not be
suitable for the Plaintiff to attend
Court in Darwin because to do so may
require her to engage with medical support in Darwin and, given her history,
that may trigger
significant psychological distress and compromise her ability
to participate meaningfully in the proceedings. Ms Rutherford also
comments on
the Plaintiff’s carer responsibilities for Tony. She concludes that
“given these multifactorial barriers-medical,
psychological and
caregiving, it is my strong clinical recommendation that Ms Gibson be permitted
to participate in court proceedings
via telehealth or video link. This will
enable equitable access to justice while safeguarding her health and ability to
care for her son.”
Rutherford did not appear to state that actually giving evidence in Darwin would
cause the Plaintiff further psychological
injury, but rather, that may trigger
significant psychological distress, if she engaged with medical support whilst
in Darwin, given
experiences.
[27] In respect
to other matters, on the evidence provided in medical records, annexed to Mr
Jones 24 September 2025 affidavit, the
Plaintiff has had significant medical
issues over the last approximately 10 years including: a spinal fusion in 2023
(by Dr Tollesson),
a right shoulder reconstruction in 2022, a left hip
replacement in 2020 and two top rib excision in 2018.
[28] On the
basis of the Plaintiff’s evidence, it was submitted that, in determining
whether to grant leave to appear by AVL,
the Court needed to balance what was
fair to the parties. The Plaintiff submitted that, although it had been
recognised that the
best course was to have
evidence, that
alternatives are available, and with improvements in technology, AVL did not
present the detriment to parties that
it once did. The Plaintiff submitted that
any prejudice the Defendant may suffer could be ameliorated by taking alternate
provisions,
such as having a solicitor available to assist and the provision of
electronic court books containing relevant documents.
Defendant’s Submissions
Defendant opposes the Plaintiff’s application. The Defendant relies on
the affidavit of Thomas Alexander Hutton made
25 September 2025. The grounds on
which the application was opposed in submissions include:
(a) An apparent shift in focus by the Plaintiff from the original reasons for
the application (i.e. her son’s care) to the
current reason (her own
condition), which the Defendant says is indicative of the acknowledgement that
the original grounds for the
application were weak. Those weaknesses, it was
submitted, were amplified by no further reasons given as to why the
Plaintiff’s
husband could not care for Tony (along with the NDIS carers),
following the original submissions filed. Further, the Defendant pointed
apparent undermining of the Plaintiff’s original concerns, in respect to
Tony’s care, should she be admitted to
hospital for a period for surgery
in the near future. Additionally, the Defendant submitted that the Plaintiff
was attempting, using
multiple excuses, to avoid the pressure, scrutiny and
seriousness of giving evidence in person at Court;
(b) That following subsequent tests and procedures, the Plaintiff’s
condition is not as severe as first alluded to in Dr Tollesson’s
12 September 2025 (i.e. that she was unable to travel long distances due to pain
and because it would cause her further
injury to her back). Rather, it was
submitted that the recent evidence from Dr Tollesson (via phone call with Mr
Jones) was that
the Plaintiff was able to travel (presumably to Darwin for
trial) but that she would need morphine-based pain medication, which is
to impair her ability to focus and function clearly, and that she will need to
move around on the plane due to her limited
(c) That the delay in surgery, now not likely until after the trial, was an
indication that the Plaintiff’s back condition
was not as serious as
originally thought. Additionally, it was submitted that the Plaintiff had
deliberately elected to delay surgery
until after the trial in an attempt to
avoid having to give evidence in person. The latter submission was not made
(d) The evidence in respect to the Plaintiff’s condition was wholly
unsatisfactory. No further report from Dr Tollesson was
provided. Rather, the
contents of a conversation between Dr Tollesson and Mr Jones was relied on, and
this was inconsistent with
an earlier advice of Dr Tollesson on 12 September
2025 which was left unexplained;
(e) Evidence from the Plaintiff that she had recently and frequently travelled
to Brisbane and its surrounds for various recent medical
appointments from her
The Defendant submitted that,
if the Plaintiff was capable of such travel, she
was capable of travel to Darwin including on plane where she can move about;
(f) That the Plaintiff is no stranger to taking strong pain medication as
evidenced by her medical history, and in the past such
medication had assisted
her from travelling rather than prohibiting her from travelling;
(g) The letter from Ms Rutherford, psychologist, stated nothing more than had
been known for years in respect to the Plaintiff’s
physical and mental
conditions. Ms Rutherford’s opinions as to what is ethical were
irrelevant, and considerations as to discomfort/inconvenience,
or what was
ethical, do not displace the fundamental requirement for a fair trial and cross
examination. Further, it was submitted
that Ms Rutherford’s opinions were
beyond her expertise and appear to take the form of submissions advocating for
the Plaintiff;
(h) The Plaintiff is the central witness in the proceeding and her credibility
is squarely in issue, as are her alleged mental and
physical conditions. She
will be subject to lengthy and very intensive document cross-examination likely
to take around 2 days (assuming
she is present in person). It was submitted
that it would be highly advantageous to her, and prejudicial to the Defendant,
was allowed to avoid the pressure and solemnity of giving evidence from
the witness box in person. It was submitted that, as an
Applicant for the
orders, the Plaintiff had failed to discharge the onus in establishing that it
was in the interests of justice
that she be permitted to give evidence via AVL.
Disposition
[30] In respect
Evidence Act 1939
(NT), if the order is made, evidence
will be given from a private conference room at Bay Ability in Redlands Bay,
which has been
booked with secure and adequate Wi-Fi. There is no further
evidence given about the proposed location other than the address being
metropolitan Brisbane, and there is little reason to doubt that the internet
facilities would not be sufficient for Court purposes.
The Plaintiff is not
giving evidence from overseas (such as the USA, Lebanon or Beijing) or a remote
location in the Northern Territory.
[31] In respect
s 49E(5)(d)
Evidence Act 1939
(NT), there were no specific
submissions in respect to whether making the order would promote (or not) the
efficient use of available
judicial and administrative resources. I cannot see
that using AVL for one witness, albeit the primary witness, would necessarily
a detriment to judicial or administrative resources. One possible detriment is
that the witness’ evidence could take longer
via AVL, which would cause
the trial to take longer than it ordinarily would, possibly causing it to be
adjourned part-heard and
resulting in the unnecessary use of judicial and Court
resources. That is speculative, as much depends on how the evidence plays
at trial. Alternatively, if the Plaintiff appeared in person, her evidence
could be delayed by the need for short comfort breaks,
which may also delay the
trial. This consideration is neutral.
[32] The primary
consideration is 49E(5)(e) of the
Evidence Act 1939
(NT), namely
“other matters that the Court considers appropriate.” That is, what
will best serve the administration
of justice, doing so consistently with
maintaining justice between the parties? The determination of that question is
a balancing
[33] On the
Plaintiff’s evidence, I do not accept that she is medically incapable of
travelling to Darwin. The most recent
medical evidence indicates that her
ability to travel may be restricted by pain, which could be managed with pain
relief. In short,
the Plaintiff could travel to Darwin, a trip that would
likely take 8-9 hours door-to-door, it would be inconvenient, possibly painful
(and she would need pain relief) and her ability to focus and her attention may
be affected. To what degree the pain relief would
affect the Plaintiff’s
ability to give evidence at trial is not clear. It would have been preferable
to have received a more
comprehensive report or letter from Dr Tollesson, who
was no doubt aware of the possibility of the Plaintiff’s need to travel
Darwin for trial, rather than to have information relayed via a telephone
conversation with the Plaintiff’s solicitor, leaving
some aspects
unsatisfactorily unresolved.
The Plaintiff’s evidence is that adequate steps can be taken to ensure
that a solicitor is present at the AVL location to
assist with locating
documents that she may be referred to in cross-examination, facilitated by an
electronic court book. In respect
to the original issue of care for the
Plaintiff’s son, Tony, as I understood the evidence, around the clock care
is provided
no evidence as to alternate arrangements which could be made to care for him in
the Plaintiff’s absence, even given
the limitation of the
Plaintiff’s husband, other than a statement that there are no extended
family or other support systems
I note that should
the Plaintiff receive back surgery in the near future, accommodation would need
to be made for Tony’s care
whilst she was absent in hospital in any event.
I have considered the issue of Tony’s care as a factor, and that an
from the Plaintiff’s home would not be preferable given the
uncertainties relating to Tony’s care including the remote
possibility of
urgent care being needed.
[34] On the
Defendant’s case, its primary issue is that it will be deprived of a
forensic advantage by having the Plaintiff
give evidence by AVL particularly
when issues of credit are in play. That factor cannot be easily ignored. The
assessment of credibility
could be facilitated by appropriate AVL accommodations
(i.e. computer monitor on the judge’s bench). I acknowledge that,
a judge may be satisfied with assessing a witness’ credibility
via AVL, it would nevertheless deprive cross examining counsel
“cadence and chemistry – both as between bar and bench, and bar and
witness box – that personify well
run causes. Those are traditional
forensic benefits of which litigants ought not too lightly be
I accept that,
as a general proposition, it would ordinarily be preferable for oral evidence to
be given in person in court. The
Court is generally best assisted by being able
to observe a witness in person when they give evidence, particularly when the
of the witness may be relevant in assessing their credibility and the
reliability of their evidence.
[35] As for
document-heavy cross-examination, my experience is that even in person
document-heavy cross-examination does not necessarily
operate perfectly whilst
witnesses take time to find pages in hardcopy court books. Nevertheless, in
person evidence, with reference
to a hardcopy court book, reduces the risk of
unanticipated breakdowns in technology with its flow-on effects. Given the
in technology, electronic court books can be produced, loaded on the
computer from which the witness is using to give evidence from,
and screens
shared (or alternatively, cross-examining counsel can bring up the document and
share his/her screen with the witness,
which should make the document appear on
the witness’ computer screen). Anticipated difficulties which may be
posed by document-heavy
cross-examination via AVL can be addressed if proper
preparations are made. However, that leaves the risk of unanticipated
difficulties
and the loss of any forensic advantage.
[36] In short,
on one side of the scales I have a Plaintiff, a key witness, whose credit will
be in issue, who likely will be cross-examined
for two days (including via
documents), who is capable of travelling to Darwin, albeit at some personal
discomfort and inconvenience
(including in respect to the care of her son), and
a Defendant who does not wish to lose the forensic advantage that giving
in person provides, in a case where credit is hotly contested. On the
other side, I have a Plaintiff who would no doubt suffer inconvenience
(including in respect to risks of care to her son), discomfort by travelling,
where her evidence could be, to some degree, practically
given by AVL. The
matter is finally balanced.
[37] In my view,
weighing up the competing interests in this application, I am of the view that
the Plaintiff should give evidence
in person at trial. I have given the matter
considerable thought, and I have not reached my decision easily. The matter is
balanced between ensuring fairness to the Plaintiff and to the
Defendant. However, in the circumstances of this proceeding, the
interest of
justice is best served by requiring the Plaintiff to give evidence in person.
The Defendant should not be denied the
forensic advantage of cross-examination
in person, nor should the Court be derived of the opportunity to assess the
Plaintiff’s
evidence in person, as will be the case with the other
lay-witnesses.
considerations do not, in my opinion, outweigh the competing considerations
raised by the Plaintiff. I note that certain accommodations
may still be made by
the Court in respect to the Plaintiff’s evidence (ie. providing rest
breaks, or allowing a break in the
event that urgent care issues arise in
respect to the Plaintiff’s son). Those are matters which I assume can be
raised with
the trial judge at the commencement of the trial. The
Plaintiff’s application is therefore dismissed. In respect to costs,
see no reason why the ordinary rule under
Supreme Court
(NT), should not apply. However, should any party wish to make
written submissions on costs they may do so within 14 days of the
delivery of
this decision, and the issue will be considered on the papers, otherwise
shall apply.
[38] I therefore
make the following orders:
Plaintiff’s application, on summons dated 28 July 2025, is dismissed.
to the receipt of any written submissions by the parties on costs within 14 days
of these orders (which will then be reserved
and considered on the papers),
costs will be costs in the proceeding, pursuant to
Court Rules 1987
-------------------------------------
By order of Kelly J on 9 May
(NT) provides that evidence must not be given by audiovisual link
unless both relevant places are equipped with audiovisual link
facilities that
enable relevant parties at both ends of the link to see and hear all appropriate
S 49E(5)(a)
Evidence Act
(NT) apply predominantly to criminal proceedings.
The note to
s 49E(5)(e)
Evidence Act 1939
(NT) includes the example “Any special needs of
the defendant, including the impact of any intellectual or physical disability,
mental illness or the need for a support person.”
[2021] NTSC 1
Southernwood v Brambles Limited (No.2)
[2022] FCA 973
Southernwood)
Tetra Pak Marketing Ltd v
Musashi Pty Ltd
[2000] FCA 1261.
Campaign Master (UK) Ltd v
Forty Two International Pty Ltd (No. 3)
[2009] FCA 1306
(2009) 181 FCR 152.
ACN 117 641 004 Pty Ltd
(in liq) v S&P Global, Inc (No.5)
[2025] FCA 687
[2025] NSWCCA 62
. Although granted much of what occurred during the Covid pandemic was
imposed upon the courts by matters of necessity due to lockdowns
restrictions on gatherings. See
at [18-19];
Southernwood
Campaign Master (UK) Ltd v
Forty Two International Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2009] FCA 1306
(2009) 181 FCR 152
Reliance Financial Services
Aust Pty Ltd v Assaf
[2022] NSWSC 1061
Mulberry Capital Management
Pty Ltd v Shen
[2022] NSWSC 1023
R v Early (No. 4)
Liu v Option Funds
Management Limited
[2022] FCA 444.
Al Muderis v Nine Network
Australia Pty Limited (No 5)
[2025] FCA 908
Southernwood
at [43]-[44].
I say primarily because
reference was also made to the Plaintiff’s own health conditions.
By affidavit made 15
September 2025 and affidavit of 24 September 2025.
On affidavit of the
Plaintiff’s solicitor Mr Jones, on information and belief, as to what he
was told by the Plaintiff by
telephone on 11 September 2025 (Jones Affidavit of
15 September 2025), and subsequently in a conversation between Mr Jones and Dr
Tollesson on 23 September 2025 (Jones Affidavit of 24 September 2025).
Unlike the situation in
Hulme v Hulme
Magjarraj v Asteron Life Limited
and other cases in the context of medical reasons for
adjournments, although in this case the evidence was not necessarily a cryptic
written statement, the Courts have made clear the need for the preference
(usually) of an explanation, on oath, from the medical
practitioner of the
illness and the reasons for the litigant’s inability to attend Court.
See paragraphs [107] and [152]
of the affidavit of Adele Gibson made 4 June 2024 filed in the proceeding.
Affidavit of Adele
Gibson made 25 June 2025 at paragraph [3g].
Rooney v AGL
Limited (No.2)
[2020] FCA 942
Some of whom will likely give
evidence contrary to the Plaintiff’s.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (274 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter