URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTLC/2023/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:20:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rigby v Mohammad Paul Corpus [2023] NTLC 6 (24 March 2023)
Rigby v Mohammad Paul Corpus
[2023] NTLC 6
PARTIES: Kerry Rigby
Mohammad Paul Corpus
TITLE OF COURT: LOCAL COURT
FILE NO(s): 22130865
DELIVERED ON: 24 March 2023
DELIVERED AT: Darwin
HEARING DATE(s): 23 November 2022 and 6, 7 & 17 March 2023
DECISION OF: Greg Macdonald
CATCHWORDS:
Firearms Act 1997
Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act 1976
Territory Parks and Wildlife Conservation By-Laws 1984 – By-law 14 –
firearms - parks and reserves.
Judiciary Act 1903
Firearms Act 1997
Territory Parks and Wildlife
Conservation Act 1976
Summary Offences Act 1923
Territory Parks and Wildlife Conservation By-Laws 1984
Crown Lands Act 1992
Native Title Act 1993
Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976
Parks and Reserves (Framework for the Future) Act 2003
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
Criminal Code Act 1983
Fisheries Act 1988
Police Administration Act 1978
Interpretation Act 1978
He Kaw Teh v The Queen
[1985] HCA 43
(1985) 157 CLR 523
[2023] NTSC 20
Domican v The Queen
(1992) 173 CLR
Chamberlain v R (No 2)
[1984] HCA 7
(1984) 153 CLR 521
Shepherd v The
[1990] HCA 56
(1990) 170 CLR 573
Jaeger-Steigenberger v O’Neill
[2011] NTSC 42
Grosvenor v The Queen
[2014] NTCCA 5
[2014] NTSC 54
Campbell v Arnold
(1982) 13 NTR
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v CQW17
[2018] FCAFC
Hammond v Lavender
(1976) 50 ALJR 728
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant: Mr C Teng
Defendant: Self
Solicitors:
Complainant: ODPP
Defendant: Self
Decision category classification: B
Decision ID number:
2023 NTLC 6
Number of paragraphs: 34
IN THE LOCAL COURT
AT DARWIN IN THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY OF
No. 22130865
Kerry Rigby
Mohammad Paul Corpus
REASONS FOR DECISION
(Delivered 24 March 2023)
JUDGE MACDONALD
The Charges and Hearing
23 November 2022, Mohamad Paul Corpus (the Defendant) entered ‘no
plea’ to 11 charges brought by the Complainant. The
Court accepted those
‘pleas’ as of not guilty. The hearing took place that date, and
briefly on 2 February 2023, then
on 6 and 7 March 2023.
charges arose following a goose hunting incident which took place on
8 September 2021 in a rural area known as Fogg Dam and Lambell’s
Lagoon, approximately 70km south-east of Darwin.
was apparent from the outset that the Defendant questioned the Court’s
That position was
compounded by the Defendant’s choice to represent himself, and not engage
any lawyer for advice or appearance.
The Defendant’s lack of legal
training did not assist the efficient hearing and determination of the
proceedings, however the
prosecutor on behalf of the DPP sought at all stages to
ensure transparency and that the proceedings were conducted as fairly as
should be noted that, due to snippets in evidence of witnesses, various comments
by the Defendant from the bar table and some limited
questions put by him in
cross-examination, some prospects existed for defence issues to be raised to an
evidentiary threshold. For
example, it appeared that the Defendant believed the
other person he accompanied on the hunting expedition held a shooter’s
There may have also been
possible evidence concerning proximity to and supervision given by that person
to the Defendant shortly
prior to the officers referred to below encountering
the Defendant, for the purpose of
Firearms Act 1997
Possible issues concerning
identification, and permission to hunt given to the Defendant by a traditional
owner for the relevant
area also existed, albeit those issues generally became
irrelevant.
11 contested charges alleged contraventions of the
Territory Parks and
Wildlife Conservation Act 1976
(NT) (TPWCA),
Territory Parks and Wildlife
Conservation By-Laws 1984
(TPWC By-laws) and the
Firearms Act 1997
(NT) on 8 September 2021. By the conclusion of the hearing only three charges
remained, being alleged contraventions of
and TPWC By-law 14(1)(a). Each charge entailed possession of a firearm
as an essential element, with the contravention of the By-law
also requiring the
status of the relevant land to be a “
park or reserve
(Reserve) under the TPWCA.
summary, on 8 September 2021 numerous members of NT Police and conservation
officers under the TPWCA were at the Fogg Dam viewing
platform, engaged in a
joint operation following information having been received that people were
shooting geese in the Lambell’s
Lagoon Conservation Reserve
They heard shots fired
sometime after 6pm, then entered and drove four vehicles to the area from which
the shots had been heard,
which was at least 10 minutes’ drive from their
original location. Close to the area believed to be where the shots emanated
from, the vehicles diverged into two groups of two, with the vehicles containing
Officers Lunney, Manning, Jackson and McLachlan
travelling along one side of a
swamp, and the remaining two vehicles the other side.
arriving at the area of the shots, the named officers came across a man walking
out of a swamp with a shotgun broken over his left
shoulder and at least one
magpie goose in their right-hand. An interaction took place between the officers
and the man with the shotgun
and goose, at which time the firearm and a total of
three geese were confiscated. Following refusing to state his name or provide
any identification, the man departed the area on foot. The officers then
proceeded to the other side of the swamp and spoke to a
to the allegations, evidence, and the Defendant’s stance to the
proceedings, six main issues arose for determination. Some
of those entailed
subsidiary issues, which are also discussed below. The primary issues
(i) Was it the Defendant who the officers encountered on 8 September 2021?
(ii) Was the Defendant within a relevant Reserve on that date?
(iii) Was the Defendant in possession of a firearm without a licence to do
(iv) Was the Defendant carrying a firearm in a Reserve without a permit?
(v) Did the Defendant refuse or fail to provide his name and address when
requested to do so?
(vi) If yes to (iii), (iv) or (v), is any defence made out on any charge?
Evidence and Findings
three counts which remained by the end of the hearing were counts one, two and
ten, being; unlicensed possession of a firearm,
carry a firearm in a Reserve
without a permit and, lastly, while in possession of a firearm, failure to
provide name and address
to a member of the Police Force. Those charges were
alleged as contraventions of
Firearms Act
By-Law 14(1) (a) of the TPWC
23 September 2022, relevant oral evidence was heard from conservation officers
Emma Jackson and David McLachlan.
On 6 March 2023, Parks and Wildlife Permit Officer Janet McLennan and Sergeant
Michael Lunney gave evidence. Relevant documentary
evidence tendered through
various witnesses included four aerial photographs of the Fogg Dam and Black
Jungle/Lambell’s Lagoon
Conservation Reserves (with superimposed Reserve
boundaries cartographically drawn in
Crown Lease in Perpetuity
02516 registered 21 March 2018 in favour of the Conservation Land Corporation,
photographs of the shotgun
seized on 8 September 2021, and a certificate issued
section 104A
Firearms Act
in respect of the Defendant.
the Defendant’s reluctance to engage in the proceeding through
cross-examination of witnesses or adducing or giving
any evidence (other than to
confirm his First Nations heritage), he apparently conceded presence and the
alleged interaction with
the officers on 8 September
A range of admissible and
inadmissible evidence concerning identification existed, as did potential for
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation) Act
(ENULA) to be
raised. The accepted caution at common law in relation to the unreliability of
identification evidence would also have
Regardless of the
possible disadvantage to his case, the Defendant’s concession assisted in
expediting determination of the
the first issue, I find that the first man encountered by officers on 8
September 2021 and now subject to the charges on file 2130865
was the Defendant,
Mohammad Paul Corpus.
relation to the second issue, I am satisfied through exhibits P2, P4, P8 and P10
that the officers believed they encountered the
Defendant in the general
vicinity of the LLCR. Although Sgt Lunney marked the location of where he first
encountered the Defendant
on Exhibit P10 as being within the Black Jungle
Conservation Reserve, I consider that was simply an error in reading the aerial
photographs
and superimposed boundaries. Officers Jackson and McLachlan were
intimately familiar with the geographic features of the relevant
their evidence was that they were inside the LLCR when they encountered the
Defendant with a shotgun and geese. I find
their evidence comprising locations
hand-marked in red on exhibits P1 and P2 (becoming exhibits P7 and P8) to be
accurate depictions,
including due to the specifics of conservation officer
McLachlan’s evidence.
conclusion, however, does not amount to conclusive evidence that the Defendant
was within a Reserve at the relevant time.
P4, being a Crown Lease in Perpetuity (CLP) granted 21 March 2018 in respect of
five ‘Sections of Hundred of the Guy’,
includes a “Locality
Diagram” for each of the Sections. By examination of the aerial
photographs comprising exhibits
P8 and P10 in conjunction with the Locality
Diagrams on the CLP, I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that part of the
area marked
as “Black Jungle/Lambell’s Lagoon Conservation
Reserve” on exhibits P8 and P10 includes Section 1772 Hundred of
However, simple vesting of an area of land in the Conservation Land Corporation
does confer on it the status of a Reserve.
Sections 12
of the TPWCA provides the
process by which land becomes a Reserve, essentially by Gazettal of an Executive
declaration of the Administrator.
The only evidence of any Gazettal before the
court is exhibit P11, which gave notice of the Minister having determined that
areas, including Section 1772, were to be granted under
Crown Lands Act
as a CLP to the Corporation. The grant of any legal
interest in land to the Corporation does not also effect the establishment of
that land as a Reserve, and there is no evidence of any Administrator’s
declaration before the court.
to their evidence of knowledge of the area and environs, I find it proven that
the Defendant was situated where officers Jackson
and McLachlan marked as
locations on what became P7 and P8. However, proof to the necessary standard is
also necessary of the status
of Reserve for the purpose of count
proof would have been readily adduced by tender of any Gazettal published
notifying an Administrator’s declaration of the
LLCR, which presumably
would include precise details of the extent of the Reserve. As matters stand,
the Court is left with the prospect
of inferring both that the LLCR has been
established in accordance with
of the TPWCA and that the cartographic
green lines drawn on the aerial photographs which became exhibits P7 to P10
inclusive are
accurate and truly follow the boundaries of the
note the principles and restrictions which apply to proof beyond reasonable
doubt by inference, particularly in relation to the
elements of any offence, and
perhaps to facts on which guilt on an element may be
Having regard to the
extent of the direct evidence from witnesses and through documents exhibited, I
consider no reasonable or rational
inferences or hypotheses are available other
than that the land on which the Defendant was found is lawfully established as
and that the green cartographic lines are accurately or correctly
relation to the first inference, it is not reasonably possible that the Parks
and Wildlife Commission would be conducting itself
in the way it has if the LLCR
did not legally exist.
relation to the second inference, I note the footer of the ‘maps’
comprising the relevant exhibits includes reference
to data sources, including
the Agency most competent in
find there is no reasonable doubt that the Defendant was, on 8 September 2021
when confronted by the officers referred to and found
in possession of a
shotgun, present on the LLCR.
presence on the LLCR and the nature of the offending alleged had potential to
cause other issues to arise. Six of the 11 charges
brought on file 22130865 were
directed to the “
protected wildlife
” provisions of Territory
legislation, including in the context of a Reserve, the permit system, and other
regulatory matters
in relation to hunting
In the circumstances,
including due to evidence given by conservation officers concerning assertions
made by the Defendant on 8 September
2021, issues concerning First Nation rights
through the
Native Title Act 1993
Aboriginal Land Rights
(Northern Territory) Act 1976
(Cth) attended those
Issues concerning
contractual and other rights which may exist through Divisions three and four of
Part three of the TPWCA and the
Parks and Reserves (Framework for the Future)
(NT) would also have required consideration.
for one or more reasons of which the court is ignorant, on 7 March 2023 the six
charges in relation to protected animals
and wildlife were withdrawn.
Consequently, it became unnecessary for the prosecution to tender any Joint
Management Plan or Joint
Management Agreement relating to the LLCR contemplated
by the Territory legislation referred
third issue for determination is whether the Defendant’s possession of the
firearm was without a licence. Despite that no
body worn footage of either Sgt
Lunney or the other attending member of NT Police was tendered, on the basis of
the oral and documentary
evidence adduced at hearing, there is no reasonable
doubt that the Defendant intended to be and was in possession of firearm in
on 8 September 2021. The crucial aspects of the third issue are, first,
whether the Defendant held any relevant licence under the
Firearms Act
Second, if not, whether there is any defence in the Defendant’s
circumstances?
Certificate under
Firearms Act
became Exhibit P5.
Due to the terms of
of that Act and of the
Certificate, and Parliament’s intent in passing s 104A, I am
satisfied to the necessary standard that
the Defendant was not authorised by a
licence under the
Firearms Act
to possess the
A bundle of PDF copy
documents printed from an NT Police database was also sought to be tendered
through Sgt Lunney, but marked
That bundle sought to prove
that in June 2020 a delegate of the Commissioner revoked a firearms licence held
at that time by the
Defendant, which proposition is consistent with Sgt
Lunney’s oral evidence. I decline to receive the documents into evidence
for two reasons. First, the content relies on information indirectly supplied by
a person in circumstances where identification may
be assumed to be a real
issue. Secondly, the operation and intent of
precludes the bundle
falling within the business records
However, I accept Sgt
Lunney’s oral evidence that the Defendant’s firearms licence had
been revoked prior to 8 September
to the length of time between when the officers heard shots at Fogg Dam and when
they arrived at the location of the Defendant
and his hunting companion, had the
Defendant or his companion given evidence concerning “
in the company
of, and under the supervision of
”, a defence under
Firearms Act
may have been
However, accepting Sgt
Lunney’s oral evidence that the Defendant’s licence had been revoked
prior to 8 September 2021,
(d) renders that defence
inapplicable.
it was also contended by the Defendant in submissions that the NT Supreme Court
authorities of
Campbell v Arnold
Talbot v Malogorski
excuse the requirement to hold a firearms licence in the
circumstances.
Although that
position raises some of the issues touched on in paragraphs [20] and [21], and
accepting that the Defendant was on
the LLCR at the time, the Defendant’s
reticence to give evidence and the lack of evidence from any recognised
traditional owner
rendered the possible issues unable to be properly considered
or determined.
some analogies, the decision in
(supra) is distinguishable from
the subject issues, with the interaction here being between Territory laws of a
different management
and regulatory scheme and Commonwealth
More relevantly, unlike in
this matter, there was evidence from Appellant Mr Talbot of traditional rights
and use, and customary
law. The decision in
(supra) is more apt
to the potential issues in this proceeding, the relevant charge in that matter
being against the
Firearms Act 1997
. The defence there was conferred by
of the same Act, by reference to “
another law in force in the
”. Although there is now no such defence expressed in the
Firearms Act
, some aspects of s 29(1) of the
Criminal Code Act
may be to similar
However, the decision
relied on accepted evidence that Appellant Mr Campbell
was a member of the language group which had traditional or customary
responsibility
for the land on which the act complained of
fourth issue, concerning carrying a firearm in the LLCR without a permit
contrary to TPWC By-law 14, has parallels with the third.
That includes due to s
122 of the TPWCA, which provides;
Traditional
use of land and water by Aboriginals
(1) Nothing in or
under this Act limits the right of Aboriginals who have traditionally used an
area of land or water from continuing
to use that area in accordance with
Aboriginal tradition for hunting, food gathering (otherwise than for the purpose
of sale) and
for ceremonial and religious purposes.
(2) The operation and effect of this Act is subject to the
Native Title
of the Commonwealth.
By-laws are made under the TPWCA and by definition are part of the Act, such
that the By-laws are subject to the operation and
effect of s 122, which
preserves use of a Reserve in accordance with Aboriginal
The prosecution
evidence at hearing was that; ‘
If you’re a traditional owner
[a Reserve]
then you don’t need to have a permit
which appears consistent with s 122 of the
Despite that a material
difference may exist between traditional
Aboriginal tradition
”, there was no evidence before the
court from the prosecution or the Defendant concerning either of those aspects,
the Defendant might avail himself of the exception provided by s 122.
I am therefore satisfied to the necessary standard that the
contravened By-law 14.
fifth issue for determination relates to count ten, being an alleged failure by
the Defendant to provide his name and address
when requested to do so by a
member of the police force in contravention of
Firearms Act
With one important difference,
is of similar effect to
Police Administration Act 1978
empowers an
officer to require a person to provide their “
”, with the proscription of paragraph (a) giving rise to
criminal liability being that the person must not “
refuse or fail to
comply with the
requirement
is noted that “
” may sometimes be given disjunctive
effect, but that the starting point will be its usual meaning as a coordinating
conjunction.
Section 95(a)
refers to “
the requirement
”, which is consistent with a
conjunctive interpretation by the noun identifying a
Lunney certainly asked the Defendant for his name and, at the least, also his
”. Body worn footage may have allayed any doubt held
concerning whether a specific request for the Defendant’s address
Clearly a person may be
validly charged and convicted under
for failure to provide either their
name or address, because not providing both on request would constitute a
failure to comply with
the requirement
”. However, I consider
a person cannot be guilty of the charge unless and until they have been asked
for each of their name
am not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that an essential element to count ten
has been proven.
relation to the sixth issue, possible defences to counts one and two have been
dealt with at paragraphs [24] to [26] and [28] above.
No defence to those counts
is made out.
Defendant is guilty of counts 1 and 2, and not guilty of count
This appeared to be on the
basis of the exception “
other than the aboriginal race
contained in s 51(xxvi) of the Commonwealth
Constitution
until 1967, which was
repealed by referendum, and some authorities and legislated provisions I
concluded to be irrelevant. Had any
real constitutional issue, including under
Constitution
, been raised at the outset or by the evidence, notices
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) would have been directed for
The High Court made
He Kaw Teh v The Queen
[1985] HCA 43
(1985) 157 CLR 523
at 593 that (for
offences other than of ‘absolute liability’) the defence of
‘honest and reasonable mistake’
needs only be raised to an
evidential threshold, following which the Crown must disprove beyond reasonable
At least ten minutes
elapsed between the shots fired by the Defendant or his hunting companion and
the arrival of the officers on
the scene. The issue could only have been
exhaustively pursued through evidence from a Mr Newell, who the prosecution
summonsed to
attend, but did not seek a warrant in respect
Some suggestion in the oral
evidence of officers concerning a ‘Sovereign’ issue also arose. The
decision of
Cole v Rigby
[2023] NTSC 20
, noting the authorities cited by
in paragraph [5], was then provided to the
That included NT
Police members Michael Lunney and Michelle Manning, and conservation officers
Emma Jackson and David McLachlan,
Mr Newell, who did not attend
the hearing – see footnote 3
Withdrawal of 6 of the
other 8 charges on file 22130865 and the legal complexities involved is referred
to at [20] and [21] below.
Withdrawn counts 9 and 11 also entailed some nuances
concerning the interaction of
The court accepted those
officers held necessary appointment under s92 of the TPWCA, so also held the
powers of a member of police
via s 95 of that
Those documents became
exhibits P7, P8, P9 and P10, and include Northern Territory Government and Parks
and Wildlife Commission logos
at the top, and at their foot; "
Map produced by
Parks and Wildlife Commission of the Northern Territory, 20/10/2021
is, the documents were made up after the incident of 8 September 2021 giving
rise to the charges alleged, and their provenance
was not the subject of any
precise oral evidence.
Transcript – page 69
Domican v The Queen
(1992) 173 CLR 555
at 561 and the extensive authority
which followed
Transcript pp
I also note the
evidence of P&WC permits officer Janet McLennan that traditional owners did
not need a permit. That potentially
raised issues touched on in paragraphs [20]
and [21] below. However, although of First Nations heritage, the Defendant did
evidence of being a traditional owner (or a person who had been granted
permission in accordance with Aboriginal
tradition).
Noting that the
relevant location of the Defendant on 8 September 2021 is marked quite closely
to what the officers understood to
be the boundary of the LLCR.
Chamberlain v R (No 2)
[1984] HCA 7
(1984) 153 CLR 521
Shepherd v The Queen
[1990] HCA 56
(1990) 170 CLR 573
Jaeger-Steigenberger v O’Neill
[2011] NTSC 42
Grosvenor v The Queen
[2014] NTCCA 5
I note the difference
between a “
possibility or hypothesis, and that the Parks and Wildlife Commission is an
emanation of the Crown. It is inconceivable that
the Commission would manage and
operate a Reserve where the land in fact had not been lawfully declared, and
more so that it would
be party to prosecuting charges reliant on Reserve status
were it aware that element was not satisfied.
The Department of
Infrastructure, Planning and Logistics, but also noting that the documents may
well have been compiled on 20 October
2021 specifically for the purpose of the
criminal proceedings. On its face, the photo-maps are admissible under s153 of
and presumed to be
Sections 9, 12(1A),
22, 23, 25AJ and 122 (and Part 6) of the TPWCA and the
Parks and Reserves
(Framework for the Future) Act 2003
(NT), including schedule
Through terms of the
legislated provisions at footnote 18. One of the people recognised by the
Commission as a traditional owner
was summoned by the DPP to give evidence,
however that evidence was not ultimately led. See
Talbot v Malogorski
[2014] NTSC 54
and authorities cited therein concerning the complexities such
interactive issues present, including s 71 and s 74 of
Production of those
Instruments could have been compelled by the Defendant under Part 4.6 of the
ENULA or by Summons to Produce,
however his stance to the proceeding and
self-represented status were impediments. Those possibilities do not obviate the
prosecutorial
is no need to resort to s 69 of the ENULA concerning business records
(subsection (3) of which probably precludes it in any
event). I consider s 52 of
the ENULA also supports the admission of
evidence’ rule and other common law principles of proof have been
abolished by s 51 of the ENULA.
That is despite that
neither of 2 letters constituting crucial documentation included any advice to
the addressee that they had a
right of appeal under
, which they should have.
Noting that a Defendant
bears an onus of proof to the standard of balance of probability, but that
satisfaction or otherwise would
be determined having regard to the evidence of
the parties as a whole.
Campbell v Arnold
(1982) 13 NTR 7
Talbot v Malogorski
(NT) and the Barramundi Management Fishery Plan
Sections 29(1)
(b) and (d) of the Code.
Interpretation Act 1978
(NT) provides “
includes a statutory instrument under the Act in which the
expression occurs
”, with the definitions of “
instrument of a legislative or administrative
subordinate legislation
Permit officer
McLennan on 6 March 2023.
Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976
common law holder
Title Act 1993
The difference being that s 134 empowers a request for name or address, or both
if the member sees fit.
Further potential criminal liability is separately established through
and (c) for giving a false name or giving an incomplete or partial
Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection v CQW17
[2018] FCAFC 110
Interpretation in Australia 9
, D Pearce at 2.48 to
The penal nature of
the provision militates against interpolating the word "either" and the effect
of the conjunctive interpretation
cannot be altered by
Interpretation Act 1978
Which likely existed,
but which was not tendered into
Court’s decision in
Hammond v Lavender
(1976) 50 ALJR 728
example of application of strict compliance with legislated prescription
concerning requests.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (199 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter