URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCCA/2022/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:18:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hampton v The Queen [2022] NTCCA 7 (19 November 2024)
Hampton v The Queen
[2022] NTCCA 7
PARTIES: HAMPTON, Ralph
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: CCA 10 of 2021 (22024586)
DELIVERED: 1 April 2022
HEARING DATE: 7 February 2022
JUDGMENT OF: Kelly, Blokland and Brownhill JJ
CATCHWORDS:
CRIME – Appeals – Appeal against conviction – Unreasonable
Appellant found guilty of sexual intercourse without consent following trial
by jury – Whether one or more irregularities in
conduct of trial comprised
a miscarriage of justice – Cross-examination of accused, and address by
the Crown, about whether
complainant and witness were upset with him not a
miscarriage of justice – Questions did not amount to asking accused to
a motive to lie, but to matters within the accused’s knowledge
– Cross-examination of accused about accused exercising
right to silence
not a miscarriage of justice – While an impropriety and the answer was
inadmissible, in the context of the
trial as a whole, it did not raise a
realistic possibility that it affected the basis on which the jury reached its
verdict of guilt
– Cross-examination of accused about whether he had told
his lawyer things in respect of which the complainant and a witness
cross-examined a miscarriage of justice – Answers inadmissible as subject
to legal professional privilege –
Accused not informed of right to refuse
to answer – Jury not directed as to accused’s right to silence and
inadmissibility
of answers – Application of proviso in s 411(2) of
Criminal Code
– Court not able to be satisfied of
appellant’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt – Appeal allowed and new
trial ordered.
Hofer v The Queen
[2021] HCA 36
(2021) 95 ALJR 937
Petty v The Queen
The Queen v Reeves
(1992) 29 NSWLR 109
Attorney-General for the Northern Territory v Maurice
[1986] HCA 80
(1986) 161 CLR
Banksia Mortgages Ltd v Crocker
[2010] NSWSC 535
[2004] NTCCA 1
(2004) 14 NTLR 164
BD v The Queen (No 2)
(2017) 40 NTLR
Benecke v National Australia Bank
(1993) 35 NSWLR 110
Birks v The Queen
(1990) 19 NSWLR 677
Callander v The Queen
[2004] NTCCA 5
(2004) 185 FLR 38
Craig v The Queen
[2018] HCA 13
(2018) 264 CLR 202
of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v Kinghorn
[2020] NSWCCA 48
DSE (Holdings)
Pty Ltd v Intertan Inc
[2003] FCA 384
(2003) 127 FCR 499
Douglass v The Queen
[2012] HCA 34
(2012) 86 ALJR 1086
Dyers v The Queen
[2002] HCA 45
(2002) 210 CLR 285
Constructions Pty Ltd v Say-Dee Pty Ltd
(2007) 230 CLR 89
[2020] HCA 40
(2020) 94 ALJR 1037
Glencore International AG v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2019] HCA 26
(2019) 265 CLR 646
; Hamilton (a pseudonym) v The
[2021] HCA 33
(2021) 95 ALJR 894
Hofer v The Queen
[2019] NSWCCA
Kalbasi v Western Australia
[2018] HCA 7
(2018) 264 CLR 62
[1985] HCA 66
(1985) 159 CLR 507
Libke v The Queen
[2007] HCA 30
(2007) 230 CLR
; Llewellyn v The Queen
[2011] NSWCCA 66
; MLW v The Queen
[2022] NTCCA 2
Nguyen v The Queen
(2020) 269 CLR 299;
[2006] HCA 9
(2006) 80 ALJR 614
Orreal v The Queen
[2021] HCA 44
v The Queen
(1998) 193 CLR 1
Parsons v The Queen
[2016] VSCA 17
Pell v The Queen
[2020] HCA 12
(2020) 268 CLR 123
Perish v The Queen
Sanchez v The Queen
[2009] NSWCCA 171
The Queen v
(2016) 258 CLR 308
The Queen v E
(1996) 39 NSWLR 450
The Queen v Eaton
[2005] QCA 191
The Queen v F
(1995) 83 A Crim R
The Queen v Matthews
(unreported, NSWCCA, 28 May 1996);
[1989] SASC 1628
(1989) 54 SASR 17
The Queen v Stafford
[2009] QCA 407
The Queen v T
[1999] QCA 376
The Queen v Uhrig
(unreported,
NSWCCA, 24 Oct 1996);
TP v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 166
Weiss v The
[2005] HCA 81
(2005) 224 CLR 300
Wilde v The Queen
[1988] HCA 6
(1988) 164 CLR 365
referred to.
Criminal Code
(NT) s 127, 192(3), 410, 411(1),
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: N Redmond
Respondent: V Engel with C Ingles
Solicitors:
Appellant: Northern Territory Legal Aid Commission
Respondent: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 64
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Hampton v The Queen
[2022] NTCCA 7
CCA 10 of 2021 (22024586)
RALPH HAMPTON
CORAM: KELLY, BLOKLAND and BROWNHILL JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 1 April 2022)
appellant was charged with one count of sexual intercourse (digital/vaginal)
without consent, contrary to s 192(3) of the
Criminal Code
Criminal Code
’). The charge related to a child
(‘the complainant’) who was 13 years old at the time. An alternative
sexual intercourse with a person under the age of 16 years, contrary
to s 127 of the
Criminal Code
, was put before the jury following a
jury question about whether a child can consent to sexual intercourse. The jury,
by unanimous
verdict, found the appellant guilty of the principal charge of
sexual intercourse without consent.
common ground that the appellant was the grandfather of the complainant and she
called him ‘Pop’. He lived
in a caravan on the property where the
complainant lived in the house. The complainant and her friend, DK, were in the
appellant’s
caravan at the time of the alleged offending.
[3] The Crown
case was that the complainant and DK consumed alcohol and cannabis that evening,
provided to them by the appellant,
or at least obtained and consumed with his
acquiescence. While they were in his caravan, they were listening to him tell
them stories.
The complainant moved to the appellant’s bed because she was
cold and there was a heater over the bed. After some time, the
penetrated her vagina digitally without her consent. In her pre-recorded
interview with police, the complainant said:
So me and my friend
[DK] were sitting in the caravan at the back and we was telling stories with Pop
and um I started getting cold
cause we had the caravan window open so I jumped
in next to Pop while my friend [DK] was on the couch and because he had the
on top of the bed where he was. Hmm and he started to touch me in
inappropriate spots and I froze and didn’t know what to do
looked at my friend [DK] and when I got up I asked if she was awake and she said
no and pretended she was asleep and it
continued for about ten minutes maybe. Um
then I got up and I told my friend [DK] I was, about, let’s go inside, so
up and we went inside. I went and had a bath and I almost fell asleep and
then when I got out I felt a bit sick because of what had
happened so I just
laid on the ground then my friend [DK] came
[4] The alleged
offending occurred on a Saturday night and a complaint was first made to a
school counsellor on the first school day
three days later, with both the
complainant and DK present.
[5] The Crown
called the complainant, DK, the complainant’s aunt who was at the home
caring for the complainant while her parents
were away, and the adult grandson
of the appellant who also lived at the home and was there at the time of the
alleged offending.
(The evidence of both the complainant and DK included child
forensic interviews with police.) The Crown also led complaint evidence
complainant’s mother, DK’s adult foster sister and respite carer,
and a school counsellor. The defence called
the appellant’s adult
granddaughter, TS, initially as a character witness, and the appellant gave
evidence himself. He directly
denied the alleged conduct.
principles: miscarriage of justice
appellant was granted leave to appeal out of time against that conviction on
three grounds, which are addressed below.
[7] This is an
appeal against the findings of guilt brought pursuant to s 410 of the
Criminal Code
. By s 411(1) and (2) of the
Criminal Code
appeals must be allowed if the Court is of the opinion that the verdict of the
jury should be set aside (relevantly) if there
was a miscarriage of justice,
unless the Court is of the opinion that no substantial miscarriage of justice
has occurred.
principles governing appeals on this ground of appeal were recently reviewed by
this Court in
We need not repeat that
review, but we repeat the conclusion (at [33]) that, to establish a miscarriage
of justice arising from material
irregularity in a trial, the appellant must
show a realistic possibility that the identified procedural irregularity
affected the
basis on which the jury reached its verdict of guilt, in the
context of the trial as a whole. It is only if that threshold is met
appellate court is required to go on to consider the proviso and answer the
quite distinct question of whether it is satisfied
that no substantial
miscarriage of justice actually occurred.
Cross-examination and address about appellant’s inability to identify a
motive for the complainant to lie
What happened at trial
cross-examination of the appellant, after the appellant denied a series of
questions detailing the alleged conduct, the following
...[The complainant] got up and said to [DK],
‘Let’s go inside?’?---She got up, she was still sitting on the
of the bed.
And she said ‘Let’s go inside’ didn’t she?---Yeah
we’ll go inside because it’s too cold out here.
She just said ‘Let’s go inside’?---No.
Okay. When you were asking the girls to leave, this is on your evidence,
you say they were leaving, you weren’t growling at
the girls were
There was no reason for them to think that they were in trouble from
you?---No. I was just telling them to go in.
And there was no reason for them to be upset with you that late at night
was there?---No.
prosecutor’s closing address to the jury included the
As to how it came about you’re going to have to
consider [the appellant’s] evidence as well as the two girls.
the end [the appellant] said that there was no reason for the girls to be angry
And if you think if they had been asking for alcohol or taking alcohol,
whichever version you want and he’s allowing them to
drink it and to smoke
it and that’s something that they were going along with or doing, then
they’ve not got a grudge
against him for anything. He’s allowed
them, you know, to do the sneaky things. Mum’s not home. So there
seem to be any animosity between him or the two girls on that
The appeal ground
[11] This ground
asserts that a miscarriage of justice occurred because the cross-examination
italicised above was cross-examination
of an accused to show that the accused
was not aware of any motive for the complainant to lie, which is impermissible
the High Court in
Palmer v The
principles: cross-examination of accused about witness’s motive to
, the plurality of the High Court held (at [7]) that a
complainant
may be asked about whether they have a motive to lie, as a
motive to lie is a fact that may be proved to impeach the complainant’s
credit, and evidence may be given by other witnesses about events from which
such a motive may be inferred. On the other hand, that
knowledge of any fact from which a motive of a complainant to lie might be
inferred is generally irrelevant, the lack of knowledge
simply meaning that the
accused’s evidence cannot assist in determining whether the complainant
has a motive to lie. To generally
cross-examine an accused to show that they
have no knowledge of any fact from which to infer the complainant has a motive
would be to focus the jury’s attention on irrelevancies, especially
when the case is an ‘oath against oath’ case.
The plurality approved
(at [11]) previously stated rationales (set out at [8]) for this view, including
the following.
(a) Just as the law does not require the Crown in a criminal trial to prove a
motive for the criminal conduct of the accused, the
law does not require the
accused to prove a motive for the making of false accusations by a
complainant.
(b) Where there is no direct evidence of an actual motive to lie, nor evidence
from which a specific motive to lie could reasonably
be inferred, to ask
‘Why would they lie?’ is to invite the jury to speculate on what
might be possible motives for lying
and assess their likelihood, which is not to
try the case on the evidence but to speculate concerning unproven
(c) It is unfair to an accused to be expected to see into the mind of the
complainant, and be held accountable for failing to discern
whatever motive
there might be for a false story.
(d) The effect of the question, ‘Why would they lie?’, is to
reverse the onus of proof, to an extent, by implying that,
unless the jury is
satisfied by the accused that the witness has a motive to lie, they should
accept the complainant’s evidence
[13] Similarly
as to the last point, the plurality held (at [9]) that, if the credibility which
the jury would otherwise attribute
to the complainant’s account is
strengthened by an accused’s inability to furnish evidence of a motive for
a complainant
to lie, the standard of proof is to that extent diminished.
plurality added (at [8]), however, that if the facts from which an inference of
motive might be drawn are facts that the
accused would know if they existed,
their lack of knowledge could be elicited to disprove those facts. Furthermore,
the plurality
accepted (at [10]-[11]) that the principle against general
cross-examination of an accused to the effect of, ‘Why would they
lie?’ did not exclude arguments being put to the jury, by either counsel
or the judge, relating to the validity of the motive
to lie which has been
asserted in relation to a witness in the particular
It follows from those two
propositions that there is nothing improper in making submissions about the
accused’s lack of knowledge
might be drawn, if they are facts that the accused would know if they
[15] After a
statement of the principles, the plurality went on to consider (at [11]-[13])
the effect of the cross-examination which
had occurred in breach of those
principles (including the timing and context of the questions) and the effect of
the trial judge’s
directions to the jury (which the plurality held were
essentially instructions on the issues for determination and the onus and
of proof of guilt). The plurality concluded that the directions were
incapable of neutralising the prejudicial effect of the cross-examination
questions because, ‘[h]aving acknowledged that he could offer no reason to
impeach the credit of [the complainant] who had
been showing her disbelief in
his denials in evidence in chief, his protestations of innocence may well have
rung hollow in the jury’s
ears’. The plurality concluded that asking
the questions in the circumstances of the case occasioned a miscarriage of
[16] It can be
seen from this conclusion that whether there has been a miscarriage of justice
depends upon the effect of the questions,
and any directions made by the trial
judge, in the context of the trial as a whole.
[17] In summary,
it is not a material irregularity to ask an accused about facts from which an
inference of motive might be drawn
if they are facts that the accused would know
if they existed, and to make submissions to the jury about the validity of any
motive to lie. It is a material irregularity in the conduct of a
trial, at least in an ‘oath against oath’ case, to
ask an accused
whether they know of any fact from which it may be inferred that the complainant
had a motive to lie. Such a material
irregularity may give rise to a miscarriage
of justice, depending upon the effect of the questions and any directions given
trial judge, in the context of the trial as a
Consideration
Nature of the questions
[18] Counsel for
the appellant argued that the prosecutor cross-examined the accused on whether
there was any reason for the complainant
to think that she was in trouble from
him or for her to be upset with him, which amounted to cross-examination on
whether the accused
could identify facts from which it could be inferred that
the complainant had a motive to lie, in breach of the prohibition in
[19] As counsel
for the appellant accepted, the questions asked in cross-examination were not
expressly framed as questions asking
why the complainant would lie, or
suggesting that the accused was not aware of any reason why she would lie.
[20] As counsel
for the respondent submitted, the first question was expressly anchored to the
time the accused asked the girls to
leave the caravan. By its reference to
‘that late at night’, the third question was also anchored to that
time. So ‘sandwiched’,
the second question was implicitly but
equally anchored to that time, which was confirmed by the accused’s
answer, as it showed
that he understood the question that way. In that sense,
the questions were not general questions asking if the accused could identify
any facts from which it might be inferred that the complainant had a motive to
[21] As counsel
for the respondent submitted, the first question was confined to what the
accused had done – whether he was
‘growling at’ the girls when
they were leaving. Similarly, by its reference to ‘in trouble
’, the second question was about what the accused had done –
whether he had done something which indicated to the girls
they were in trouble.
These were matters that the accused would know if they existed.
understood, the first two questions were not of a form which offends the
principle in
. Rather, they fell within the exception to that
principle identified in paragraph
[23] The third
question was of a more general form, despite its link to the time the girls were
leaving the caravan. Its nature and
purpose, and whether it invited the improper
reasoning identified in
, needs to be further considered in
Context of the questions
questions were asked after defence counsel had cross-examined the complainant
and DK about the appellant’s refusal
to take them to TS’s house, and
to McDonald’s, that night, where they wanted to meet up with friends or
boyfriends, and
whether they were ‘a bit angry’ with him for
The complainant denied
being angry as to the former and, as to the latter, the complainant’s
answer was, ‘Not really’.
questions were also asked after TS had given evidence in the defence case about
the complainant’s behaviour (smoking
cannabis and sneaking TS’s
cannabis, drinking alcohol, talking to boys on her phone and having a boyfriend)
and the potential
for the appellant to ‘growl her’ about such
questions were also asked after the appellant gave evidence-in-chief that the
girls wanted to go to McDonald’s that
night but he did not take them
because, every time he does, the complainant wants to go to TS’s house and
stay because ‘the
boyfriends will be there’ or will ‘rock
[27] In that
overall context, and within the context of the three questions themselves, the
third question was, in effect, asking
the appellant whether he had, on the night
in question, done anything which would have caused the girls to be upset with
the possibility thereof had been raised by the defence. So
understood, it fell squarely within the exception to the principle in
. It asked the appellant about facts from which an inference of
motive might be drawn that the accused would know about if they existed.
third question was no different, in that respect, from the other two
Purpose of the questions
[28] Given the
context referred to above, the purpose of the questions was clearly to address
what had been raised by defence counsel
on the appellant’s behalf, namely,
the possibility that the complainant and DK were angry or upset with the accused
for the reasons identified, and the consequent possible inference
that they had a motive to lie.
[29] Counsel for
the respondent relied on the following passage from
The Queen v
However the
question of motive for a false complaint should not be regarded as territory
which a Crown prosecutor may not enter. In
most if not all trials of this nature
the critical question is whether the complainant is telling the truth. In any
such trial, and
particularly when the contest is between the complainant’s
version and a defence version which says nothing improper happened,
corroboration and disproof are lacking, it is almost inevitable that counsel and
for that matter the jury will seriously
consider whether any motive exists for
bringing a false complaint. When it is shown that such a motive is likely, other
things being
equal this is likely to be the basis upon which a jury will
entertain a reasonable doubt concerning the complainant’s veracity
will therefore acquit. It is commonplace for defence counsel to canvass such
issues. I consider that defence counsel did so,
albeit discreetly, in the
present case.
In such a situation there is nothing improper in the Crown prosecutor
attempting to counter such suggestions and to demonstrate and
ultimately submit
that the complainant did
have such a motive, or by any reasonable
argument to endeavour to refute defence suggestions to the contrary. What the
not do, and what the court must ensure does not happen, is to permit
the impression to be gained that the defence has any onus of
showing that there
was a particular reason for the complainant not telling the truth; or that at
the end of the day the absence of
any perceived reason for a false complaint
strengthens the suggestion that the complainant must be telling the truth...
[30] Counsel for
the appellant argued that these observations were made in the abstract, whereas
the questioning in that case and
the prosecutor’s closing address led to
the appeal against conviction being allowed, and they were similar to the
and address here.
[31] In that
case (set out at [39]), the prosecutor put to the appellant that nothing had
happened to make the complainant dislike
him; that he could not think of any
reason why the complainant would make up ‘these terrible lies’ about
him; and that
it was his evidence that someone had got her to do that to him. In
closing (set out at [41]), the prosecutor submitted to the jury
that there was
no motive suggested for the complainant to lie other than ‘some fanciful
product’ of defence counsel’s
imagination; asked why the complainant
would persist with the allegation; and said, ‘It might show the
desperation that has
to be gone to, to try and say, why on earth did this girl
go through with this if it wasn’t true.’ Chesterman J (with
McMurdo P and Thomas JA agreed) held (at [42]) that the implication in the
prosecutor’s questions, and his argument to
the jury, that the
complainant’s evidence gained credibility because the appellant could not
supply a motive for inventing
the complaint, were impermissible. In response to
an argument that the prosecutor’s actions were a response to the defence
probing the complainant in respect of motive, Chesterman J held (at [50]) that
an attempt by defence to establish a motive would
permit a prosecutor to respond
by evidence and address the jury with respect to the suggested motives for a
dishonest complaint but
not, as was done in that case, to embark upon the
separate task of inviting the jury to believe the complainant because the
could not give evidence of motive.
[32] We agree
with the submission of counsel for the appellant that it is permissible to
protect the complainant’s credit by
cross-examination of the appellant
a motive can
be inferred, but it is impermissible to bolster the
complainant’s credit by cross-examination of the appellant or submissions
to the jury which invite the jury to believe the complainant because the accused
could not give evidence of motive. The former is
what we consider occurred in
[33] Counsel for
the appellant conceded that the first question, about whether the accused had
‘growled at’ the girls,
would be a legitimate question eliciting
admissible evidence if, from the accused’s earlier evidence, it might be
inference that he had ‘growled at’ the girls, and so was
suggesting a motive to lie on their behalf. It was accepted
that the form of the
first question involved what the accused did and observed, and so might fall
within the exception to the principle
. It is not apparent to us
why the question would only be legitimate if it appeared
accused’s evidence
that he was suggesting the complainant had a motive
to lie. We do not see why the exception in
cannot operate if the
suggestion of a motive to lie came from another witness’s evidence, or
even from the accused’s
counsel’s cross-examination of another
witness, including the complainant. So much is apparent from the decision in
The Queen v T
. What is necessary is some evidence or questioning on the
part of the accused which raises the possibility of an inference that the
complainant has a motive to lie, and that the accused is asked about facts,
related to the basis of that possible inference, that
the accused would know if
they existed, i.e. what the accused did or did not do, or observed or did not
[34] In our
view, the second and third questions, properly understood in their terms and
their context, are no different in effect
from the first
Prosecutor’s closing statement
[35] Counsel for
the appellant argued that the prosecutor’s address, which was not specific
to the potential motives raised
with the complainant by defence counsel, both
confirmed the impermissible thrust of the cross-examination questions and
the likelihood that the jury would engage in the impermissible
reasoning of bolstering the complainant’s credibility because
appellant could not identify a motive for her to lie.
[36] While the
specific subjects put to the complainant and DK (not taking them to TS’s
house or McDonald’s that night)
were not referred to, the
prosecutor’s closing was not a submission that the appellant had been
unable to identify a motive
for the complainant to lie, it was simply a
submission that the appellant’s evidence was that there was no motive in
of anger towards him, and there was no motive in the form of animosity
towards him, on the night. That submission did not say or
imply that the
appellant could not explain why the complainant would lie, or that his inability
to explain weakened his evidence
or strengthened hers. Further, the evidence
from the complainant, DK and the appellant about the specific matters raised by
counsel would have been fresh in the jury’s
Judge’s directions
[37] The trial
Judge gave the usual directions to the jury as to the onus of proof, that the
accused did not have to give evidence,
and that there was no onus on the accused
to prove anything, and told the jury that the fact that the accused gave
evidence did not
change any of
However, those directions
did not mention what was to be made of the fact that the appellant’s
evidence was that there was
no anger or animosity towards him. If there had been
impermissible cross-examination and closing address, these directions would
have adequately addressed the
impropriety.
Given our view as
set out above, there was no impropriety to address.
[38] It follows
from the above that the appellant has not demonstrated a realistic possibility
that the cross-examination of the appellant,
as set out in paragraph
above, and the prosecutor’s
closing address, as set out in paragraph
above, affected the basis on which the
jury reached its verdict of guilt. Accordingly, it did not give rise to a
miscarriage of justice.
This ground is not made out.
Admission of evidence about accused exercising his right to silence
What happened at trial
examination-in-chief of the police officer in charge of the investigation, the
following evidence was elicited:
And then later that day, [the
appellant] was arrested, is that right?---Yes, he was arrested that evening.
And he was arrested at his address and taken to the police station?---Yes he
But you did not arrest him, is that right?---No, I did not arrest him.
When he was in custody, did you speak to him?---I did. I spoke to him just
after he’d arrived at the police watchhouse.
And you offered for him to participate in a record of interview, is that
right?---I did offer that, and he declined.
Now you also arranged for some DNA samples to be taken from [the appellant],
is that right?---That’s
submission was made by either party at the trial about the italicised evidence.
Nor was any direction given to the jury by
the trial judge about
The appeal ground
appellant argued that the italicised questioning elicited irrelevant evidence
because there was no issue arising in the case
the appellant’s arrest or the taking of his DNA. The appellant argued that
the eliciting of
the evidence about his declining an interview was a material
irregularity giving rise to a miscarriage of justice because it infringed
right to silence in that it impugned the credibility of his evidence by
suggesting that he could have told his story earlier,
and had not done so. The
inference was that he had waited until all the evidence in the trial unfolded
and then made up his version
of events to fit the evidence as much as
Legal principles: the accused’s right to
and (2) of the
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
’) provide that evidence that a party failed or
refused to answer questions or to respond to a representation put or made to
them by an investigating official who at that time was performing functions in
connection with the investigation of the commission
or possible commission of an
offence is not admissible if it can only be used to draw an inference
unfavourable to them. The term
‘inference’ is defined to include an
inference of consciousness of guilt or an inference relevant to a party’s
credibility
There is an exception to inadmissibility where the
party’s failure or refusal to answer the question or respond to the
representation
is a fact in issue in the proceeding
v The Queen
the High Court
held that an accused’s right to silence means it should not be suggested
that the accused’s exercise of
that right to silence about a defence
raised at the trial provides a basis for inferring that the defence is a new
invention or is
rendered suspect or unacceptable. The Court also held (at 101)
that the denial of the credibility of the ‘late’ defence
explanation by reason of the accused’s earlier silence is just a way of
drawing an adverse inference against the accused
by reason of their exercise of
the right to silence, and such an erosion of the fundamental right should not be
Queen v Reeves
South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal held as follows:
], the High Court was concerned to emphasise that a
suspected person’s right of silence (‘a fundamental rule of the
law’) must not be eroded or rendered valueless by permitting his
exercise of that right to be used as a basis for inferring
guilt, or a
consciousness of guilt. But that case did
lay down any rule of
universal application that evidence may not be given of questions asked and of
the answers given where that
evidence discloses that the accused has exercised
his right of silence.
The High Court did say in [
] that the Crown should not lead
evidence that, when charged, an accused person made no reply, but that is
because, by reason of the
legal processes involved, there could never be any
relevance of that fact to any issue in the case. However, the fact that the
investigating
police officers put the prosecution’s version of the facts
to the accused and gave him this opportunity to answer them and
to give his own
account of the events in question falls into a different category.
A necessary consequence of an accused’s right of silence is that the
Crown often has no knowledge of the issues which are going
to be raised by him
at the trial. The Crown must lead all of its evidence upon every issue which it
ought reasonably have foreseen
may arise. ... I think that it may safely be said
that it ought reasonably to be foreseen that the fairness of the conduct of the
investigating police officers may be criticised and in a way of which the Crown
will not necessarily be forewarned (as it usually
should) in accordance with
Browne v Dunn
(1893) 6 R 67 during its case in chief. It seems to me
then, that the fact that such questions were asked of the accused is therefore
usually admissible in order to meet (at least in part) such anticipated
criticism, and in my view that fact was admissible in the
present case. Once the
fact that the questions were asked is found to be admissible, the nature of the
answers given must necessarily
also be admissible – even if it discloses
that the accused exercised his right to silence – for otherwise a very
impression may be conveyed, and one which would usually be
detrimental to the accused. The third ground of appeal must therefore
However, where such evidence is given which discloses that the accused has
exercised his right of silence, a direction should invariably
as soon as the evidence is given and, if necessary, again in the summing up
– to make it clear to the jury
that the accused had a fundamental right to
remain silent and that his exercise of that right must not lead to any
conclusion by
them that he was guilty. [citations omitted]
[45] The grounds
of appeal in
relevant to the present case were a complaint that
the prosecution elicited evidence from an investigating officer that, when
after his arrest, the appellant said nothing about the incident
giving rise to the charged offence, and that, during questioning,
the appellant
was most unco-operative; and a complaint that the trial judge failed to give any
direction to the jury in relation
to the appellant’s exercise of his right
to silence. The evidence was said to be inadmissible in reliance on the decision
The Court (at
allowed the appeal and
quashed the conviction, holding that there was no doubt that ‘the jury is
likely to have concluded that
the appellant had not disclosed to the police that
account which he was putting forward at the trial ... because it was an
afterthought
... [which] is the very conclusion which they were not permitted to
reach from the exercise of his right to silence’. The Court
also held (at
115) that no direction had been given ‘to make it clear to the jury that
the accused had a fundamental right
to remain silent and that his exercise of
that right must not lead to any conclusion by them that he was guilty’.
v The Queen
this Court held
that evidence of the accused being asked a question by interviewing police
officers and a period of silence thereafter
had no probative value, and was
irrelevant and inadmissible. That decision was made without reference to the
decision in
Callander v The Queen
this Court held (after reference to
) that evidence about the
accused failing to participate in a third interview with police, which was led
by the prosecution at the
behest of counsel for the accused at the trial, was
admissible to explain why police did not follow up the investigation and give
the accused an opportunity to answer the allegations after he had had an
opportunity to consider the matter, something which favoured
the accused and did
no harm to the Crown. In
, the Court observed (at [21]) that
was an instance where evidence that a person had declined to
answer questions could be led in evidence, not to prove that the accused
guilty mind, but where there was some other legitimate purpose to the evidence,
for example, to forestall a suggestion that
the investigation had been unfairly
carried out.
was not concerned with that aspect of
in which the New South Wales
Court said that it ought reasonably to be foreseen that the fairness of the
conduct of the investigating
police officers may be criticised and that
questioning of the accused to meet that anticipated criticism is usually
admissible.
[49] It was
concerned only with that aspect of the decision which related to whether a
direction by the trial judge was required.
, there was a
clear purpose for evidence to be led of the accused exercising his right to
silence. It enabled the accused to put a
number of matters before the
[50] It may be
noted that in
the Court simply accepted that it was generally to
be reasonably anticipated by the prosecution that the fairness of the
investigation
may be put in issue, and so, generally speaking, evidence that the
accused had been offered the opportunity to answer questions would
legitimate purpose outside of adverse inferences about the accused’s
credibility. The Court made no reference to submissions
on that proposition and
gave no analysis of the type of criticism to be expected, generally speaking, or
how such a question might
be relevant to such anticipated criticism.
should not be seen as derogating from the general principle expounded in
that the denial of the credibility of the ‘late’
defence or explanation by reason of the accused’s earlier silence
a way of drawing an adverse inference against the accused by reason of the
accused exercising the right to silence, and that
such an erosion of the
fundamental right should not be permitted. For this kind of questioning to be
permissible, there must be some
real basis for supposing that the integrity of
the police investigation will be an issue in the proceeding in a way that would
a question about offering the defendant an opportunity to take part in an
interview genuinely relevant.
, this Court held (at [23]) that
was not to be
seen as laying down any hard and fast rule that a direction of the kind
suggested in
is necessary where evidence of the accused’s
exercise of the right to silence is
The Court held as
In most cases where evidence of this kind is led it would
be wise, if not necessary, to follow the practice suggested, but in this
do not believe it was necessary. It was plain that the Crown was not relying on
the appellant’s lack of cooperation
as any admission of guilt. Neither
side mentioned the matter in final addresses. The possibility that the jury may
have drawn an
adverse inference against the accused is too remote.
appellant relied on the decision of the High Court in
Orreal v The
for the proposition
that where irrelevant evidence is admitted a jury should be unequivocally
directed to disregard it. In that case,
the High Court allowed an appeal from a
decision of the Queensland Court of Appeal. The Court of Appeal held that a
miscarriage of
justice had occurred, but no substantial miscarriage of justice
had occurred, and dismissed the appeal from conviction on three counts
indecent dealing with a child and two counts of rape. In the appeal to the High
Court, the only issue was whether a substantial
miscarriage of justice had
occurred. The miscarriage of justice occurred because evidence had been admitted
(with the consent of
defence counsel) that both the appellant and the
complainant had tested positive for the presence of the herpes simplex virus
1, a genital infection. Because the complainant gave evidence that she had
had a single sexual encounter in the past, and the expert
evidence was that it
could not be said when either the appellant or the complainant contracted the
virus, or from whom they acquired
it, the evidence could not rationally affect
the probability of the existence of a fact in issue in the
However, both the
prosecutor and the trial judge had referred to the evidence in closing and
summing up: the prosecutor said the
evidence had little weight but it was a
matter for the jury, with their life experience, as to what they made of it; and
judge pointed out that the evidence did not establish when the
appellant and complainant had contracted the virus or from whom, but
jury were to take that evidence into account along with all the other evidence.
Kiefel CJ and Keane J held (at [21]) that
the jury should have been told in
unequivocal terms to disregard the evidence because, not only was it
inadmissible, it was also
prejudicial to the appellant because it gave rise to a
significant possibility that the evidence could be misused by the jury to
support acceptance of the complainant’s account. Gordon, Steward and
Gleeson JJ held (at [44]) that it was not difficult to
envisage one or more
jurors using ‘life experience’ to conclude that the evidence
supported the complainant’s version
of events or that it dispelled doubts
that they might otherwise have held about her version, which was enhanced by the
the evidence and the attention given to it in the trial.
[54] It is plain
that it was not the mere fact that the evidence was inadmissible that led the
Court to conclude there was a substantial
miscarriage of justice; it was that
fact coupled with the prejudicial effect of the evidence in the context of the
trial, as established
by the nature and content of the evidence, its emphasis
amongst the other evidence, the prosecutor’s address and the judge’s
summing up.
[55] A failure
to object to a question does not make admissible any inadmissible evidence given
in answer. A failure to object to
the admissibility of evidence may, however,
preclude a finding that the admission of the evidence resulted in a miscarriage
where defence counsel decided not to object because of some forensic
advantage. In
, Kiefel CJ and Keane J observed (at [16])
Save for exceptional cases, in our system of justice, parties
are bound by the conduct of their counsel, who exercise a wide discretion
deciding matters such as what evidence to lead or have
It is usually only
when an appellate court is persuaded that no rational forensic justification can
be discerned for counsel’s
decision that consideration will be given to
whether it gave rise to a miscarriage of
[56] A similar
observation may be made about defence counsel’s failure to seek a
direction from the trial judge. In
The Queen v
the arresting officer
had given evidence that the accused had contacted his legal adviser and then
declined to be interviewed, and
the accused had given evidence-in-chief that he
declined to take part in a record of interview. It was argued that the trial
failure to direct the jury about this evidence gave rise to a
miscarriage of justice. In dismissing this ground of appeal, Jerrard
(McPherson JA and Philippides J agreeing) held (at [20]) that ‘certainly
if asked’ the learned trial judge ought to
have given the jury a direction
as described in cases like
, but where a judge is not so asked, the
critical question is whether a miscarriage of justice has resulted from the
absence of a
direction. Jerrard JA added that:
Whether that
direction should have been requested in the circumstances is a question to which
the answer is not quite as categorical
as the cited cases suggest, and it
required an exercise of judgment by [the respondent’s] trial counsel.
Having the trial judge
give the direction would emphasise a matter that might
otherwise have appeared of no moment at all in the trial. Choosing to let
matter rest was a justifiable forensic decision, and [counsel for the
respondent] had failed to establish that there was a reasonable
possibility that
the judge not giving such a direction might have affected the verdict.
[57] As this
Court acknowledged in
the fact that no
direction is sought about a matter can support a conclusion that a direction was
not required in the context of
Consideration
appellant argued that the italicised question set out in paragraph
above was inadmissible pursuant to
or on the basis of the decision in
The appellant argued that there was nothing on the facts of the Crown’s
case to raise the possibility that the fairness of
the police investigation was
relevant to a fact in issue. The respondent argued, in reliance on the decision
, that, when the question was asked, it was then reasonably
foreseeable that the fairness of the police investigation may be criticised
the defence and the fact that the appellant was offered the opportunity to give
his version of events was therefore admissible
to meet that anticipated
criticism, even though, as the trial transpired, the fairness of the police
investigation was not in issue.
The respondent’s submission simply
asserted that when the question was asked, it was reasonably foreseeable that
the fairness
of the police investigation may be criticised. The respondent did
not say why that was reasonably foreseeable, or specify what aspect
police investigation it was reasonably foreseeable might be criticised so as to
render the question about offering an opportunity
to take part in a police
interview (and the police officer’s answer) relevant to that issue.
respondent submitted that whether the police investigation generally, or any
aspect of it, will be criticised by the defence
will be unknown to the
prosecutor (in the absence of an earlier indication by defence) unless and until
there is objection on the
basis of relevance to questions put by the prosecutor
prosecutor and the court that the investigation is not in issue, the prosecutor
can desist from eliciting that evidence because it
then becomes clear that it is
not relevant to any issue in the
However, it is for the
party seeking to adduce evidence to establish its relevance. Hence, it cannot be
right that the defence has
to object to put the Crown on notice that the police
investigation will not be criticised. This would be contrary to the principles
outlined in
officer in charge volunteered that the appellant declined the opportunity of a
recorded interview. It is difficult to see
how that fact was relevant to any
reasonably foreseeable criticism of the police investigation. None has been
identified by the respondent.
This was not evidence that investigating police
officers put the prosecution’s version of events to the accused and gave
the opportunity to give his own account, which the Court in
distinguished from evidence that, when charged, an accused person made no reply.
As the appellant’s declining to participate
in a recorded interview was
not shown to be relevant to any reasonably foreseeable criticism of the police
investigation, it would
fall within
only be used to draw an adverse inference against the accused; there is no other
use to which it could be put. Accordingly,
that evidence was inadmissible.
[61] However, as
was made clear in
, it is not merely the admission of inadmissible
evidence that raises the need for a direction, but its capacity to prejudice the
accused. The fact that the evidence elicited was inadmissible is not sufficient
to demonstrate a miscarriage of justice.
objection was made to the question and no direction was sought by defence
counsel, either at the time the evidence was given,
or for the purposes of the
trial judge’s summing up. The appellant argued that objection to the
question could not be taken
because it would have appeared to the jury that the
appellant ‘had something to hide’. Regardless, the question remains
whether a direction from the trial judge was required. As is clear from the
authorities referred to above, there is no ‘hard
and fast rule’ that
a direction, either at the time the evidence is given or in the trial
judge’s summing up, is necessary
to avoid a miscarriage of justice.
respondent argued, in reliance on
, that defence counsel’s
failure to seek a direction was likely based on a forensic decision that it was
unnecessary in circumstances
where the appellant gave evidence at the trial.
[64] That the
appellant gave evidence at trial does not address the particular adverse
inference the appellant argued that the jury
would draw, namely, that he
remained silent until the close of the Crown’s case and then gave his
evidence, tailoring it (by
way of recent invention) to accommodate the evidence
the jury had already heard.
[65] In all of
the circumstances of this trial, we do not consider there to be any realistic
possibility that the jury reasoned that
the evidence the appellant gave in his
evidence at trial was a recent invention because he had declined to participate
in a recorded
interview with investigating police. No submission was made to
that effect by the prosecutor; indeed, nothing at all was said by
either party
officer in charge in the context of
his evidence-in-chief about all of the steps
in his investigation, including arranging to interview the complainant and speak
various witnesses, for the complainant to have a medical examination, taking
DNA samples from the appellant and the clothing worn
by the complainant on the
night, taking photographs of the residence and the forensic examination of the
appellant’s phones.
That suspects are invariably questioned by police is
widely known, including to persons who may become members of a
[66] In his
summing up, the trial judge directed the jury that ‘the accused did not
have to give evidence and he could have
exercised his right to silence’,
allowing counsel to make submissions on the evidence as it fell in the Crown
case, but instead
he gave evidence, subjected himself to lengthy and testing
cross-examination by the prosecutor, and they might consider that fact
his credit.
[67] As this
Court concluded in
, we consider that it would have been
prudent, perhaps even preferable, for a direction to be given specifically
instructing the jury
that the appellant had a fundamental right to silence, and
that they could not draw from the fact of his having exercised it any
adverse to his credibility or favourable to the credibility of the complainant.
However, it was plain that the Crown was
not relying on the appellant’s
failure to participate in a recorded interview as any basis for the drawing of
an adverse inference
against the appellant, and the possibility that the jury
may have done so is too remote.
[68] It follows
from the above that the appellant has not demonstrated a realistic possibility
that the admission of the evidence
from the officer in charge, and/or the trial
judge’s failure to direct the jury about that evidence, affected the basis
which the jury reached its verdict of guilt. It did not give rise to a
miscarriage of justice. This ground is not made out.
Admission of evidence about communications between the accused and his
What happened at trial
[69] During
the cross-examination of the appellant, the following exchanges
So up until about one o’clock you were happy for
them to be there [in the caravan]?---They was there, right, but I was trying
tell them to go – go inside and the girlfriend - - -
[DK]?---[DK], she kept on asking [the complainant] ‘let’s go
inside, it’s cold’, and she’s always jumping
complainant] you all right’, and - - -
Did you – so did you tell your lawyer that [DK] kept doing
that?---Yep.
You told your lawyer that [DK] kept saying she wanted to go inside because
she was cold?---Go inside because she’s
Right, and did you do anything about [the complainant buying two bags of
cannabis]?---No, because [DK], she said ‘Oh we always
smoke’ and I
said well you mob show – tell the one’s who’s aunty is looking
after yous, you mob tell her,
they dodged her.
Did you tell your lawyer that [DK] said to you, ‘We always smoke
ganja’?---No.
Why not?---Didn’t even think of
Now, did you see the girls smoking the cannabis that night?---Yeah.
And you let them do that?---Yeah. Because they said they was allowed to.
We’re talking about a 13-year-old girl?---Yeah.
And a 14-year-old girl?---Yeah. [The complainant] said she wanted to do it
because she’s always doing it at [TS’s] place,
or out - - -
Did you tell your lawyer that?---No.
Why not?---Well, I didn’t come up to that yet.
You told your lawyer that the girls were smoking and drinking though in
your caravan?---Yeah.
Did you not? So why didn’t you tell them or tell her that
she’d smoked before at [TS’s]?---Well, she has always
smoked around
[TS’s], everywhere we go.
She even stole a few of [C’s] smokes
and I told her, ‘Don’t ever smoke [C’s] smokes because
ice and it might be mixed.’ So she just chucked it –
chucked it on the ground.
So [the complainant] had a drink at [TS’s] place?---[TS’s] place.
And she said that hers is stronger than what she’s
How long were you at [TS’s]?---We was only there for about five, ten
minutes. We pulled up and they ran inside. [The complainant]
ran inside.
Did you tell your lawyer that she was drinking at [TS’s]
place?---No.
Why not?---Because I wasn’t even thinking of it.
It’s not true, is it?---It’s true.
You’re making it up?---Because she – her boyfriend told her
that [the complainant] just had a drink out of your
I’m asking you he – that particular morning you’re saying
he was drinking?---Yeah, I’m sure of it.
And did you tell your lawyer that he was drinking that morning?---I think
I told my lawyer that he was drinking, or he was
And you spoke to [the complainant], telling her to go back into the
house?---I told her to go back inside, and same time I pulled
the plug [for the
heater] out.
Right. I’m going to suggest to you that you didn’t pull the plug
for the heater out, that it stayed on, that’s -
- -?---No, I pulled it
out. Because that’s why [the complainant] got up and said, ‘Oh
it’s too cold I’m going
So [the complainant]- - -?---The heater wasn’t on.
- - -said it was too cold, and went inside?---Yeah.
Did you tell your lawyer that she said those words?---I’m sure I
said that she said it was
submission was made by either party about the italicised evidence. Nor was any
direction given to the jury by the trial judge
questions above will be referred to in the remainder of these reasons as
‘the impugned questions’.
The appeal ground
appellant argued the appellant’s evidence about communications between the
appellant and his lawyer was subject to
legal professional privilege pursuant to
and inadmissible in the absence of any
warning by the trial judge that the appellant did not have to answer the
impugned questions
as they were privileged communications, could not be objected
to without prejudicing the appellant’s credibility, were improperly
by the prosecutor, and gave rise to a miscarriage of justice because the
evidence suggested to the jury that defence counsel’s
cross-examine the complainant and DK consistently with those matters meant the
appellant’s evidence about them was
a recent invention, thereby thus
damaging his credibility.
Legal principles –
Cross-examination about communications between the accused and counsel
Glencore International AG v Federal Commissioner of
the High Court
observed (at [21]) that legal professional privilege has been described as a
right which is fundamental to persons
and to our legal system, which shows that
it is not merely an aspect of curial procedure or a mere rule of evidence, but a
substantive
right founded upon a matter of public interest. The Court observed
(at [23]) that it is well settled that legal professional privilege
is a rule of
substantive law, and held (at [27]-[29]) as follows:
The rational
for the rule was stated in
Grant v Downs
. It is that the rule promotes
the public interest because it ‘assists and enhances the administration of
justice by facilitating
the representation of clients by legal advisers’.
By keeping secret their communications, the client is encouraged to retain
lawyer and to make full and frank disclosure of all relevant circumstances to
the lawyer. ... A similar rationale for the privilege
has been accepted by the
Privy Council and the House of Lords where the descriptor ‘the rule of law
rationale’ was accepted.
It was recognised in
Grant v Downs
that there was another, more
general, public interest which legal professional privilege did not promote.
That public interest lies
in the fair conduct of litigation, which requires that
all relevant ... evidence be available. But the public interest which supports
the privilege is paramount to the more general public interest. In the provision
of the privilege the law has struck the balance
between two competing public
interests. Consequently, once the privilege is found to exist, no more is
required for effect to be
given to it. In that sense it may be described as
absolute. [
citations omitted
Section 118
provides that evidence is not to be adduced if, on objection
by a client,
the court finds
that adducing the evidence would result in disclosure of (relevantly) a
confidential communication
between the client and a lawyer, for the dominant purpose of the lawyer
providing legal advice to the client. By
, evidence that must not be
adduced in a proceeding is not admissible in the proceeding.
reference to ‘on objection by a client’ requires objection to be
taken by the client, or the lawyer acting on
behalf of the client, to the
adducing of the evidence because it would result in disclosure of the
confidential communication.
Section 132
provides that, if it appears to the court that a witness or
a party may have grounds for making an application or objection under
(relevantly)
, the court must satisfy itself (in the absence of the
jury if there is one) that the witness or party is aware of the effect of
deal with ‘loss’ of the privilege.
Relevantly,
provides that
does not prevent the adducing
of evidence if the client or party concerned has acted in a way that is
inconsistent with the client
or party objecting to the adducing of the evidence
because it would result in a disclosure of the kind referred to in
v The Queen
the applicant
appealed from his conviction on nine counts of sexual intercourse without
consent. One of the grounds of appeal was
that there was a miscarriage of
justice as a result of the Crown prosecutor asking impermissible questions and
making improper comments
when cross-examining the applicant. Essentially, the
complaint was that the prosecutor had impermissibly suggested, expressly and
impliedly, that the applicant was lying in his evidence about eight identified
matters because his counsel had not put those matters
to the relevant
complainant or to police in cross-examination. The questions were largely of the
form: ‘Did you hear that put
to [the witness] at any stage?’ twice
followed by the question, ‘Are you just making things up as you go
or something similar. In closing, the prosecutor referred to two
matters that were not put to the relevant complainant for her comment
submitted, in relation to one of those matters, that the jury would accept her
evidence about the matter. The trial judge made
no mention of the questioning in
summing up.
majority, the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal held that there was no
miscarriage of justice. Fagan J (with whom Fullerton
J agreed) set out (at
[125]) some principles which had been extracted from authorities by Garling J in
Llewellyn v The Queen
(a) Where a defence counsel has failed to put something to a prosecution
witness in cross-examination, it may be legitimate, depending
circumstances of the case, to draw appropriate conclusions from that failure.
(b) To suggest that the only appropriate conclusion to be drawn is that the
accused’s evidence should be disbelieved, perhaps
as a recent invention or
as part of an attack on the credibility of the accused, is a process of
reasoning that is fraught with danger
and must be approached with caution.
(c) There could be many reasons why a defence counsel chose to conduct
cross-examination in a particular way.
(d) Before a prosecutor makes such a suggestion, either in cross-examination of
the accused or in summing up to the jury, the prosecutor
must have a proper
basis for it.
(e) Except in the rarest of cases and only where a proper basis exists,
cross-examination of the accused in this manner is highly
and unfairly
prejudicial to the accused, with the potential to undermine the requirements of
a fair trial.
(f) If a prosecutor embarks on this type of cross-examination without a proper
basis, the trial judge must give clear directions
to the jury as to the range of
possible explanations for a failure by defence counsel to put something to a
prosecution witness.
[79] Fagan J
held (at [126]) that where cross-examination of this nature has taken place
without a proper basis, there will not necessarily
be a miscarriage of justice.
The effect upon the trial may depend upon the relative importance of the matter
that was not put to
a Crown witness.
[80] Fagan J
held (at [130]) that the impugned cross-examination was only a fragment of what
would have been required to convey to
the jury an implication of recent
invention because it was not followed by any invitation to the jury to reason
that, because matters
were not put to Crown witnesses, therefore the accused
must have fabricated them, and (at [132]) that the jury could not have taken
from the cross-examination any more than that the Crown was critical of defence
counsel’s lack of thoroughness in questioning
the complainants. Fagan J
also held (at [188]) that the reasoning from lack of questioning to fabricated
evidence is not intuitive
and would not suggest itself to the jury from the
‘insignificant’ lines of cross-examination.
appellant appealed to the High Court. In
Hofer v The
the High Court upheld
the appeal, concluding that there was a miscarriage of justice. The
held (at [32]) that
the reasoning behind cross-examination of this kind starts with the fact that a
matter is not put by defence
counsel; it assumes that the reason for the
omission is that counsel was unaware of the matter and that counsel was unaware
the accused had not given an account of it in his or her instructions;
and the conclusion reached is that the accused must now be
making the evidence
up. The plurality held (at [33]) that there may be many explanations for the
omission which do not reflect upon
the credibility of the accused, including
defence counsel misunderstanding instructions, forensic pressures resulting in
in framing questions, and defence counsel choosing not to advance
certain matters upon which they had instructions because they were
unlikely to
assist the defence.
plurality held (at [34]-[37]) as follows:
Where there remains a
number of possible explanations as to why a matter was not put to a witness,
there is no proper basis for a
line of questioning directed to impugning the
credit of an accused. Except in the clearest of cases, where there are clear
indications
of recent invention, an accused person should not be subjected to
this kind of questioning. The potential for prejudice to an accused
Proceeding on the basis of a mere assumption as to lack of instructions is
likely to be productive of further unfairness in the course
cross-examination. The assumption will inevitably lead to impermissible
questions of the accused, put expressly or arising
implicitly, as to the actual
instructions he or she gave. An accused person faced with questioning of this
kind is likely to feel
obliged to attempt to explain by reference to the
instructions he or she in fact gave when in reality the accused carries no such
onus. Questioning of this kind may result in the need for counsel or the
solicitor for the defence having to disclose those instructions.
circumstance which should not arise.
A trial judge should be alert to the problems associated with
cross-examination. They should be raised with counsel at an early point.
the cross-examination has occurred, it will be necessary for the trial judge to
warn the jury about any assumption made by
the cross-examiner, to draw attention
to the possible reasons why the matter has not been put and to direct the jury
as to whether
any inferences are available.
plurality referred (at [38]) to the Court of Criminal Appeal’s
consideration that a miscarriage will not inevitably
follow where there has been
no basis for a cross-examination of this kind and stated that their Honours
‘correctly observed
that consideration must be given to its effect on the
plurality concluded (at [42]) that the cross-examination in the case implied
that the appellant was obliged to provide an
explanation as to why matters had
not been put to the complainants, suggesting he had information which he had not
given to counsel
by way of instructions, and the attack on the appellant’s
credit by assertions of recent invention was based upon an assumption
not warranted, all of which was highly prejudicial to the appellant. The
plurality held (at [44]) that it ‘is a sufficient
departure from the
process of a criminal trial that a highly prejudicial cross-examination of the
accused as to credit proceeded
upon an unfounded assumption’. The
assumption was shown by evidence to be wrong because the appellant had
instructed defence
counsel as to those matters and counsel had decided not to
pursue them. The plurality held (at [45]) that it could not be inferred
jury would not attach any importance to the cross-examination because there were
a number of matters identified as not having
been put to the complainants; the
requirement for the appellant to acknowledge that was ‘persistent’;
the questions clearly
required the appellant to provide some sort of
explanation, which would have been confirmed when he attempted to do so; and the
of the questioning, that the appellant should not be believed, was put
beyond doubt when, in relation to two of the matters, the
prosecutor alleged the
appellant had made up his evidence during the cross-examination. The plurality
held that it did not matter
that there was no submission in the
prosecutor’s closing address about the process of reasoning because, by
the questions,
the prosecutor had effectively invited the jury to reject the
appellant’s evidence as not credible.
[84] Finally,
the plurality held (at [47]) that the prejudice to the appellant was not
addressed, as it should have been, by the trial
judge’s directions putting
the omissions in perspective, discounting any assumption as to why they occurred
by reference to
other possibilities and warning the jury about drawing any
inference on the basis of a mere assumption.
Consideration
parties to this appeal accepted, at least implicitly, that the impugned
questions related to evidence given by the appellant
evidence-in-chief or cross-examination) which had not been put to the
complainant or DK in cross-examination by defence
counsel. It was not in dispute
that the purpose of the impugned questions was to impugn the credit of the
appellant by suggesting
that the appellant’s evidence had been recently
Form of the impugned questions – not the same as
respondent distinguished the decision in
on the basis that the
impugned questions were not of the same form as those considered in
. The appellant was not asked whether various matters were put to
the Crown witnesses. The appellant was asked whether he told his
lawyer about
some of the things he said in his evidence.
questioning in this case left unstated the fact that a matter was not put by
defence counsel, and targeted the assumptions
unfounded, that defence counsel was unaware of the matter because the appellant
had not given an account of it in his instructions.
[88] If the
answer to the question, ‘Did you tell your lawyer about that?’ is
‘Yes,’ then the assumption is
shown to be false and the path of
reasoning cannot be followed. If the answer to the question is,
‘No,’ then the assumption
is shown to be true. The conclusion that
the appellant is not credible is either not available (where the answer is
or founded on the fact (not the assumption) that the
appellant did not disclose the matter to his counsel, thereby eliminating all
the other possible explanations for the failure to put the matter and leaving
only the inference that the appellant’s evidence
on the point was a recent
invention. That could be said to provide the ‘proper basis’ for a
line of questioning directed
to impugning the credit of the appellant.
[89] However,
the means employed to target the assumptions emphasised as unfounded in
was to seek to elicit evidence which would result in disclosure of
a privileged confidential communication made between the client
Birks v The
Lusher AJ held (at
701) that the primary and basic rule of all litigation, civil and criminal, is
that the client’s instructions
to his legal advisers are privileged, and
he can freely and properly reveal all to his legal advisers without fear of
or penalty, and that as cross-examination of an accused by the Crown
as to his instructions to counsel sought to elicit inadmissible
evidence, any
objection to the questions would have been upheld and they should not have been
put. His Honour also held that the
questions were unfair because they would
force an objection embarrassing to the defence and the implications of which a
not understand, or else cause counsel to seek instructions and advise
the accused, then in the witness box, and then possibly take
an embarrassing
objection. While these observations related to legal professional privilege
under the common law,
does not deny their force
or equal application here.
respondent argued that the observations of Lusher AJ were not adopted by the
other members of the Court in
. So much may be accepted. That does
not deny their force or equal application here. We note that the other members
of the Court found
a miscarriage of justice to have occurred, essentially due to
defence counsel’s incompetence in the conduct of the trial, including
taking no action as it was put to the accused that he had not instructed his
counsel about certain matters, when in fact, he
Impermissible questions by reference to
[91] As set out
above, the plurality in
referred (at [35]) to the prospect of
‘impermissible questions of the accused ... as to the instructions he or
to counsel, noting that an accused person is likely to feel
obliged to attempt to explain by reference to the instructions he or
she in fact
gave, when in reality the accused carries no such onus, and the prospect that
such questions may result in the need for
defence counsel or the solicitor to
disclose their instructions. The plurality said this is a circumstance which
should not arise.
The respondent
argued that these observations were
obiter dicta
because no such
questions were asked in the case before the Court. There are two answers to that
submission. Firstly, these observations
were an extension of the
plurality’s reasoning to its conclusion that the appellant should not have
been subjected to questioning
to a Crown witness. They were part of the
ratio decidendi
. Secondly, even
if these observations were
obiter dicta
, considered
majority of the High Court is at least persuasive for an intermediate court of
appeal such as this one, and clearly binding
if it is based on long-established
[92] In our
view, to attempt to avoid the ‘obvious prejudice’ to an accused of
proceeding on unfounded assumptions and
render the case one in which there are
‘clear indications of recent invention’ by seeking to elicit
evidence which is
privileged, objectionable and, in the absence of waiver of
legal professional privilege, inadmissible, is not a proper course, for
reasons set out below.
Waiver of legal professional
effort to reconcile various authorities in which questioning of the accused
to a Crown witness, including as
to instructions given to counsel, has been held not to give rise to a
miscarriage of justice,
respondent argued that such questioning is permissible because legal
professional privilege can be waived, and is waived when
an accused’s
counsel cross-examines a complainant about the complainant’s version of
events and then gives evidence themselves
communications between the accused and their lawyer about those events
admissible and properly
the subject of cross-examination by the Crown. It was
argued that there can never be a ‘proper basis’ for such questioning
if legal professional privilege is not waived by the accused in this way. The
respondent argued that, so far as the respondent could
ascertain, the question
of waiver of legal professional privilege in this context has not been fully
argued before any court.
provides that
does not prevent the
adducing of evidence disclosing confidential communications between client and
lawyer if the client has ‘acted
in a way that is inconsistent with the
client...objecting to the adducing of the evidence because it would result in a
disclosure’
of those confidential communications.
[95] The only
conduct the respondent pointed to which was said to be inconsistent with
objecting to the adducing of the evidence was
defence counsel cross-examining
the complainant and DK about the alleged offending, and then giving evidence
himself about those
allegations. This was argued to constitute an implied waiver
of legal professional privilege in the communications between the appellant
his lawyers in relation to both the matters upon which there was
cross-examination and the matters upon which there was not (as
to the latter, on
the basis that partial disclosure generally has the effect of waiver of the
communications in their
). That submission
cannot be accepted. No authority was referred to in which it has been held that
cross-examination of a complainant
on behalf of an accused constituted a waiver
of legal professional privilege in all, or any, communications between the
accused and
their lawyer. The closest the authorities come is the observation in
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v
(at [154]) in which
the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal observed that a client who gives
evidence about the instructions
they gave to their lawyers waives privilege over
that communication, but such a waiver does not arise from denying, or not
accusations made against
A client giving evidence
accused’s counsel cross-examining
a complainant about alleged offending
and the accused then giving evidence about those allegations is an entirely
different thing.
proposition put by the respondent would effectively render legal professional
privilege in criminal matters where the accused
decides to give evidence
nugatory. It cuts across the tenor of the well-established importance of this
fundamental rule and the rationale
for its existence as set out in paragraph
Cases with a
proper basis will be rare
[97] As to the
submission that, if legal professional privilege is not understood to be waived
in these circumstances, permitting
the Crown to ask questions about whether the
accused told their lawyer about a matter, there would never be a ‘proper
for questions or submissions about recent invention arising from a
failure to cross-examine a Crown witness, two points may be made.
Firstly, an
example of where there may be a proper basis to infer from a failure to
cross-examine a Crown witness on a matter that
the accused’s evidence is
recent invention is where the accused gave a recorded interview or statement to
police in which they
also failed to mention the matter. Secondly, as the
observations that such reasoning is fraught and to be approached with caution
suggest, instances in which there is a proper basis for this kind of questioning
will be relatively rare. Such cross-examination
of an accused cannot be expected
to be legitimately undertaken in every case in the ordinary course.
[98] We reject
the respondent’s argument that legal professional privilege in
communications between the appellant and his lawyer
was waived by defence
counsel’s cross-examination of the complainant and DK and the appellant
giving evidence about the allegations.
Consequently, the impugned questions
sought to elicit inadmissible evidence and were for that reason
impermissible.
An irregularity giving rise to a miscarriage of
impugned questions, coupled with the trial judge’s failure to satisfy
himself, as required by
that the appellant was
aware of the effect of
and his capacity to object to answering the
questions, meant there was irregularity in the conduct of the trial.
cross-examination of the appellant by the prosecution, adopting the language of
the plurality in
(at [42]), departed from the standards of a trial
to which an accused is entitled and the standards of fairness which must attend
it, noting the prosecutorial obligation to afford
The impugned questions
sought to attack the appellant’s credibility in the process either forcing
the appellant to disclose
the privileged communications between himself and his
counsel, without the required
warning that he had a right to object
to doing so, or compelling defence counsel to make an embarrassing objection
(suggesting the
appellant had something to hide) or seek the opportunity to give
advice and obtain instructions whilst the appellant was in the witness
impugned questions sought to create a proper basis for the attack on credibility
by eliciting evidence which was, subject
to the appellant’s capacity to
waive privilege, inadmissible.
respondent argued that the impugned questions did not seek disclosure of the
legal advice given to the appellant and were
limited to the fact of whether a
particular subject matter had been communicated or not. There are two responses
to that submission.
Firstly, the privilege is not confined to the legal advice
passing from the lawyer to the client; it extends (consistently with its
rationale) to all confidential communications between lawyer and client made for
the dominant purpose of obtaining legal advice.
That clearly encompasses the
instructions given by the client to the lawyer as to the alleged offending and
the surrounding circumstances.
Secondly, such questioning gave rise to the
possibility of defence counsel or the appellant’s solicitor having to
those instructions. As the plurality observed in
a circumstance which should not arise.
impugned questions, on seven different
required the appellant
to explain the failure of his counsel to cross-examine Crown witnesses, although
this was unstated, by reference
to the instructions he in fact gave to his
(at [35]), the plurality held that, in reality, an
accused carries no such onus. Three times, the impugned questions pressed him
explain why he had not given those instructions. The purpose of the impugned
questions was put beyond doubt when the prosecutor
put to the appellant that
what he had said was not true and that he was making his evidence up. There was
no need for the prosecutor
to have referred to this evidence and described the
process of reasoning to cause unfair prejudice to the appellant when the
had, by the impugned questions, effectively invited the jury to
reject the appellant’s evidence as not credible.
respondent argued that, because of the answers the appellant gave, which largely
confirmed that he had told his lawyer about
the matters, any prejudice to the
accused was minimal.
[104] Of the
seven matters in respect of which the impugned questions were asked, the
appellant’s answers were clearly affirmative
in relation to three, clearly
negative in relation to three, and somewhat equivocal in relation to one
(‘I think’). It
was in response to one of the three negative answers
that the prosecutor put to the appellant that he was making up his evidence.
prosecutor’s cross-examination of the appellant was relatively short
(occupying some 16 pages of transcript). The questions
inside from the caravan because it was cold were given little emphasis in the
prosecutor’s closing
but presumably were
relevant as a possible explanation for the girls leaving the caravan other than
the alleged offending. The importance
of the questions about the girls smoking
cannabis and drinking, both that night and on other occasions, is explained in
part by the
final portion of
cross-examination,
that the appellant had facilitated or at least allowed the girls to get
intoxicated on the night because it was his intention
to take advantage of one
of them, and in part by the prosecutor’s closing address as regards the
element of consent and the
appellant’s knowledge, recklessness or
indifference to lack of consent. In that portion of the closing address, the
submitted that there was an obvious power imbalance between the
appellant and the complainant (so she may have submitted, not consented),
was likely affected by the alcohol and cannabis (so she may not have been
capable of consenting).
three negative answers to the impugned questions related to the girls’
experience with alcohol and drugs. The impugned
questions which, by their
negative response, raised most starkly the appellant’s credibility were
relevant to those elements
of the offence. They were not peripheral matters.
[105] In the
context of what was, essentially, an ‘oath against oath’ case, there
was clearly a realistic possibility
that the basis on which the jury reached its
verdict, namely a finding that the appellant’s evidence so lacked
credibility
that it did not raise a reasonable doubt, was affected by the
impugned questions . The trial judge did not give any direction to
the jury to
the effect that they should disregard the inadmissible evidence elicited by the
impugned questions, and that they should
not use it to reason that the
appellant’s evidence on these points was of recent invention, thereby
affecting his credibility.
[106] For the
above reasons, the appellant has demonstrated a realistic possibility that the
impugned questions, coupled with the
trial judge’s failures to satisfy
himself that the appellant was aware of his capacity to object to them and to
give any direction
to the jury about the inadmissible evidence, affected the
basis on which the jury reached its verdict of guilt. They gave rise to
miscarriage of justice. This ground is made out.
Application of
the proviso
[107] Having
found that there was a miscarriage of justice, this Court retains a residual
discretion not to overturn the conviction
if it considers that no substantial
miscarriage of justice has actually occurred. The respondent invited the Court
to exercise the
discretion.
Legal principles: no substantial
miscarriage of justice
[108] While
there is no single universally applicable description of what constitutes
‘no substantial miscarriage of justice’,
an appellate court is
precluded from concluding that no substantial miscarriage of justice actually
occurred unless the court itself
is persuaded that the evidence properly
admitted at trial established guilt beyond reasonable
The court must consider
the whole of the record of the trial and the nature and effect of the error
which gives rise to the miscarriage
of justice in the particular
[109] In cases
which turn on contested credibility, the nature and effect of the error may
render an appellate court unable to assess
whether guilt was proved beyond
reasonable doubt due to the natural limitations that exist in the case of any
appellate court proceeding
wholly or substantially on the
Those limitations
acknowledge that the assessment of the credibility of a witness on the basis of
evidence given in the witness box
in the context of the trial is the function of
the jury, not the appellate
In such cases, regardless
of the apparent strength of the prosecution case, the appellate court cannot be
satisfied that guilt has
, the High Court concluded that it was not possible for the
appellate court to assess whether guilt was proved beyond reasonable doubt
it was wrong to conclude there was no substantial miscarriage of justice)
because inadmissible evidence prejudicial to the appellant
had been received in
a case where proof of guilt was wholly dependent on acceptance of the
complainant’s evidence, the prosecutor
had argued that the jury could make
use of it to support the complainant’s version of events, and the trial
judge had directed
the jury to use it ‘as they saw fit’.
, the High Court concluded that it was possible in that case for the
appellate court to assess whether guilt was proved beyond reasonable
it was right to conclude there was no substantial miscarriage of justice)
because, despite the highly prejudicial cross-examination
of the appellant as to
his credit which proceeded upon a wrong assumption, and despite the prosecutor
effectively (by the cross-examination)
inviting the jury to reject the
appellant’s evidence as not credible, the evidence of the appellant on a
crucial issue (an
element of the offending) ‘was so obviously false that
it carried no weight at all’. In determining whether the appellant’s
evidence on this crucial issue ‘might reasonably possibly be
the plurality held
(at [58]) that his evidence together with the evidence that was common ground
between the parties ‘inevitably
leads to the conclusion that the
appellant’s evidence was so glaringly improbable that it could not give
rise to a reasonable
doubt as to his guilt’. The plurality distinguished
(at [61]-[64]) the case before it from a case which turns on the jury’s
preference for the evidence of one witness over another witness, i.e. where the
appellate court is required to seek to resolve a
conflict between oath and oath,
where the resolution of the contest must affect the reliability of the
jury’s verdict. The
plurality held (at [68]) that, in the case of the
evidence given by the appellant, any reasonable jury would have regarded the
appellant’s
evidence on the crucial issue as ‘bordering on
summary, in cases which turn on contested issues of credibility (i.e.,
‘oath against oath’ cases), unless the
appellant’s evidence
was so glaringly improbable that it could not reasonably possibly be true and so
could not give rise to
a reasonable doubt as to his guilt, it will generally not
be possible for the appellate court to be satisfied of the appellant’s
guilt beyond reasonable doubt, with the consequence that the appellate court
cannot conclude that a substantial miscarriage of justice
did not actually occur
from an irregularity in the trial which gave rise to a miscarriage of
[113] If the
appellate court can be satisfied of the appellant’s guilt beyond
reasonable doubt, it is still necessary for the
appellate court to consider
whether there has been a significant denial of procedural fairness at trial
which makes it proper to
allow the appeal and order a new
This occurs where the
miscarriage of justice amounts to ‘a serious breach of the presuppositions
of the trial’.
v The Queen
, the plurality
(Brennan, Dawson and Toohey JJ) said:
The proviso has no application
where an irregularity has occurred which is such a departure from the essential
requirements of the
law that it goes to the root of the proceedings. If that has
occurred, then it can be said, without considering the effect of the
irregularity upon the jury’s verdict, that the accused has not had a
proper trial and that there has been a substantial miscarriage
of justice.
Errors of that kind may be so radical or fundamental that by their very nature
they exclude the application of the proviso.
[114] Subsequently,
Weiss v The Queen
this concept of ‘an irregularity ... which is such a departure from the
essential requirements of law that it goes to the root
of the proceeding’
was expressed as ‘such a serious breach of the presuppositions of the
trial as to deny the application
of the common form criminal appeal provision
with its proviso’, and this expression was taken up by the High Court in
[115] An example
of such an irregularity is where counsel’s ineptitude is so extreme as to
constitute a denial of due process
to the client, and examples of that are
where, for no valid reason, counsel fails to cross-examine material witnesses,
or does not
address the
, the High Court held (at [74]) that the failure of defence counsel
to stop the improper cross-examination of the appellant and the
suggestions of recent invention (even though the appellant
those rare cases where there had been a denial
of the presuppositions of the
Satisfaction of the accused’s guilt
concluded above, the miscarriage of justice comprised the prosecution eliciting
inadmissible evidence (subject to the appellant’s
right to waive legal
professional privilege) without the trial judge being satisfied that the
appellant was aware of his right to
object to answering the questions, which
effectively put to the jury that the appellant’s evidence was of recent
and so he was not a credible witness, and without any direction to the
jury to address that evidence.
[118] In his
evidence at the trial, the appellant admitted no more than that the complainant
laid down beside him on the bed in the
caravan and remained there for 30
He otherwise denied the
offending, and denied touching the complainant at
His evidence about the
alleged offending was not so glaringly improbable that it could not reasonably
possibly be true. The case
turned on the preference of the jury for the
complainant’s and DK’s evidence over the appellant’s.
[119] In her
child forensic interview, which was received as part of her evidence-in-chief,
DK told police that she was asleep in
the caravan after the complainant had
moved to the bed with the appellant, she was woken up by hearing the complainant
DK was half asleep, DK woke up again and the caravan was
moving, DK did not know exactly what the appellant was doing, but she peeked
from the blanket to see and ‘couldn’t really see properly’ and
it was ‘hard to see where they were facing
and he was about to go on top
of her something like that’, DK saw the complainant facing up then the
complainant looked directly
at her and asked if DK was awake, DK said she was
not, ‘and then it continued again’, the complainant and the
spoke about whether DK was awake, DK went under her blanket again and
‘then he did it to her again’, then the complainant
got up and asked
DK to go inside, which they did.
She said the blanket was over the appellant and DK so all she saw was the
movement of the blanket,
was ‘really fast’.
In cross-examination, DK volunteered that she could not really see that much (in
response to a question whether both the appellant
and the complainant had their
own blankets) and agreed she could not really see properly, adding ‘but
the way that the blanket
was moving underneath was – to think that [the
appellant] was laying on his side and [the complainant] was facing up. So I
could kind of picture it out just, the way they were
[120] While
DK’s evidence may be corroborative of the complainant’s evidence,
this is essentially an ‘oath against
oath’ case. DK did not see the
appellant engage in digital / vaginal penetration of the complainant. The
complainant said he
did. The appellant said he did not. The case turns on issues
of contested credibility, the miscarriage of justice went to issues
credibility and, regardless of apparent strength of the prosecution case by
virtue of the corroboration by DK, this Court cannot
be satisfied that guilt has
been proved beyond reasonable doubt.
A failure of
[121] Although
unnecessary to decide because we are unable to be satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt of the guilt of the appellant,
we conclude that the impugned questioning
of the appellant in this case and the failure of the trial judge to be satisfied
as required
, not corrected by any direction to
the jury, does not render this case one of those rare cases where there has been
such a departure
from the essential requirements of the law that it goes to the
root of the proceeding, in other words, a denial of the presuppositions
[122] Because of
the nature of the miscarriage of justice involved, and because this case turned
on contested issues of credibility,
this Court cannot be satisfied that guilt
was proved beyond reasonable doubt. Consequently, this Court cannot find that no
substantial
miscarriage of justice actually occurred. The residual discretion in
the proviso is not enlivened. The appeal will be allowed and
the conviction
Power to grant a new trial
[123] Section
411(3) of the
Criminal Code
provides that, subject to the special
provisions of Div 2 of Part X, the Court shall, if it allows an appeal against a
guilt, quash the finding of guilt and direct a judgment and verdict
of acquittal to be entered. Section 413 of the
Criminal Code
that, on an appeal against a finding of guilt on indictment, the Court may,
either of its own motion or on the application
of the appellant, order a new
trial in such manner as it thinks fit if the Court considers that a miscarriage
of justice has occurred
and that, having regard to all the circumstances, such
miscarriage of justice can be more adequately remedied by an order for a new
trial than by any other order that the Court is empowered to make.
[124] The onus
rests on the Crown to satisfy the Court that a new trial is the most appropriate
The considerations
relevant to the determination include such matters as whether a significant part
of the sentence has been served,
the expense and length of a new trial, the
length of time between the alleged offence and the new trial, and the impact of
trial on the accused, witnesses and others affected by the prosecution and
the events giving rise to
appellant was sentenced on 14 May 2021 to imprisonment for five years, backdated
to 19 March 2021. The sentence was suspended
after the appellant had served two
years and eight months, with an operational period of two years and four months
from the date
of release. Aside from a requirement to be of good behaviour for
the operational period, no conditions applied to the suspension.
The appellant
was granted bail on 12 October 2021. He has therefore served about six
months and three weeks of the sentence of imprisonment.
[126] The trial
took five days. A new trial may be expected to take around the same time.
evidence of the complainant and DK given at the trial was recorded. There is no
reason to think that, at any new trial,
those witnesses would have to give
evidence beyond that which was recorded at the trial. The other six Crown
witnesses could expect
to be called to give evidence at a new trial.
evidence which would likely be led at any new trial of this matter would be
capable of sustaining a guilty verdict, and
the Crown’s case is relatively
strong given the corroborating evidence of DK and the relatively early complaint
evidence. The
offence of sexual intercourse without consent, with a child aged
13 years old, is extremely serious. The allegations involve an abuse
of trust by
the appellant as the grandfather of the complainant. It cannot be described as
at the low end of the scale of seriousness
for this type of
The alleged offending
occurred on 1 August 2020, some 18 months
[129] The Court
is required to determine the most appropriate remedy and that determination is
informed in large degree by constitutional
and structural considerations, in
particular the public interest in the due prosecution and conviction of
It is in the interest
of the public that persons who are guilty of serious crimes be brought to
justice and not escape it merely
because of some technical blunder by the
prosecutor and/or the judge in the conduct of the
Where the evidence might
conceivably sustain a conviction, an order of acquittal would constitute a
judicial determination of the
proceedings against the appellant rather than a
trial by jury, in circumstances where it is not held that the evidence adduced
trial required the jury to acquit the
If a new trial is
ordered, it is then a matter for the prosecuting authorities to decide whether
to proceed with a new trial having
regard to the strength of the Crown case, the
fact that the appellant has already served some time in custody, and other
issues relating
to the conduct of a new trial.
[130] Whether
guilt was established beyond reasonable doubt in this case was very much a jury
the evidence is
capable of sustaining a conviction and, in such cases, something more than
adverse consequences for the appellant
[131] Consequently,
the most adequate remedy in this case is an order for a new
Disposition
[132] The appeal
is allowed, the conviction of the appellant is quashed and a new trial is
___________________________
Transcript of interview, p 3:
Appeal Book (‘AB’) 5.
MLW v The Queen
, [26]-[33] per Grant CJ, Southwood and Brownhill JJ.
Transcript, p 139: AB
Transcript, p 156: AB
Palmer v The Queen
The Queen v F
A Crim R 502
at 511-512 per Gleeson CJ.
The Queen v E
at 464 per Sperling J.
The Queen v Uhrig
(unreported, NSWCCA, 24 Oct 1996, pp15-16) per Hunt CJ at CL.
Quoting with approval from
The Queen v Uhrig
(unreported, NSWCCA, 24 Oct 1996, pp15-16) per Hunt CJ
at CL. It was noted that in many cases where the evidence of that witness
vital to the Crown case, it would be appropriate for the judge to direct the
jury that, even if they reject the motive to lie
put forward by the accused,
that does not mean that the witness is necessarily telling the truth, and to
emphasise that the Crown
must still satisfy them that the witness is telling the
Transcript, pp 12-13: AB
39-40 (complainant) and Transcript, p 21: AB 88.
Transcript, pp 100-102: AB
191-193 (evidence-in-chief) and Transcript, pp 104-106: AB 195-197
(cross-examination).
Transcript, p 121: AB
[1999] QCA 376
Thomas JA (McMurdo P agreeing).
Transcript, pp 2, 6-7: AB
283, 287-288.
See, for example,
at [47]-[48] per Chesterman J (McMurdo P and Thomas JA agreeing).
Transcript, pp 96-97: AB
Petty v The Queen
’) at 99 per Mason CJ, Deane, Toohey and
The Queen v Reeves
(1992) 29 NSWLR 109
’) per Hunt CJ at CL
(Mahoney JA and Badgery-Parker J agreeing).
See also at 112 per Mahoney
Barr v The Queen
[2004] NTCCA 1
14 NTLR 164
per Martin (BR) CJ (Angel and Mildren JJ agreeing).
Callander v The Queen
[2004] NTCCA 5
(2004) 185 FLR 38
’) at [21]-[22]] per Angel,
Mildren and Riley JJ.
Sanchez v The
[2009] NSWCCA 171
The Queen v Matthews
(unreported,
NSWCCA, 28 May 1996) at 3 per Badgery-Parker J (Cole JA and Sperling J
Orreal v The Queen
[2021] HCA 44
At [21] per Kiefel CJ and Keane
J. See also at [26] per Gordon, Steward and Gleeson JJ, repeating the conclusion
of the Court of
Appeal that the evidence was irrelevant and inadmissible.
Nudd v The Queen
[2006] HCA 9
(2006) 80 ALJR 614
The Queen v Baden-Clay
(2016) 258 CLR 308
Hamilton (a pseudonym) v The Queen
[2021] HCA 33
(2021) 95 ALJR 894
Craig v The Queen
[2018] HCA 13
(2018) 264 CLR 202
The Queen v Eaton
MLW v The Queen
GBF v The Queen
[2020] HCA 40
(2020) 94 ALJR 1037
In response to a question from
the Bench about eliciting such evidence when it would not be relevant, the
respondent referred the
Court to the decision of the New South Wales Court of
Criminal Appeal in
Perish v The Queen
[2016] NSWCCA 89
those paragraphs, the Court was dealing with the proposition that the words
‘not admissible’ in the New South Wales
equivalent of the
mean ‘not admissible over objection’. The proposition
was not pressed by the respondent as any basis for an argument
that evidence
which could only be used to draw an adverse inference against the appellant
within s 89(2) of the
was only inadmissible if defence counsel
objected to its receipt. This Court did not hear argument from both parties
referred to in
or its application to
s 89 of the
. The argument does not arise in this appeal given
the conclusion we have reached below.
Nguyen v The Queen
(2020) 269 CLR 299 at [40] per Kiefel CJ, Bell, Gageler, Keane and Gordon
Transcript, p 6: AB
Transcript, p 124: AB
Transcript, pp 125-126: AB
126-217. This passage was not referred to in the appellant’s ground, but
is of the same nature as
the other passages complained about.
Transcript, pp 127-128: AB
Transcript, p 128: AB 219.
This passage was not referred to in the appellant’s ground, but is of the
same nature as the other
passages complained about.
Transcript, p 131: AB
Transcript, p 138: AB
Glencore International AG v
Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2019] HCA 26
(2019) 265 CLR 646.
The term ‘client’
is defined by s 117(1) to include a person who engages a lawyer to provide
legal services.
The term ‘confidential
communication’ is defined by s 117(1) to mean a communication made in
such circumstances that,
when it was made, the person who made it or the person
to whom it was made was under an express or implied obligation not to disclose
its contents, whether or not the obligation arises under the law.
Hofer v The Queen
NSWCCA 244.
Llewellyn v The Queen
[2011] NSWCCA 66
Hofer v The Queen
[2021] HCA 36
95 ALJR 937
Kiefel CJ, Keane and Gleeson JJ
(Gageler J agreeing; Gordon J agreeing on this point).
Most of these explanations were
found in the reasons of King CJ in
The Queen v Manunta
[1989] SASC 1628
(1989) 54 SASR 17.
Another such explanation was that the matter might simply have been
overlooked.
Birks v The Queen
19 NSWLR 677
Noted at 684-685.
The plurality also referred (at
[46]) to the decision in
, describing it as ‘cross-examination
of this kind’ and stating that the accused in
cross-examined as to the instructions he had given when his counsel had failed
to put certain matters to the complainant.
Farah Constructions Pty Ltd
v Say-Dee Pty Ltd
(2007) 230 CLR 89
at [134] per Gleeson CJ, Gummow,
Callinan, Heydon and Crennan JJ.
See, for example,
[2012] VSCA 166
Parsons v The Queen
[2016] VSCA 17.
Attorney-General
for the Northern Territory v Maurice
[1986] HCA 80
(1986) 161 CLR 475
at 488 per Mason and
Brennan JJ, and
Banksia Mortgages Ltd v Crocker
[2010] NSWSC 535.
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Cth) v Kinghorn
[2020] NSWCCA 48.
Benecke v National
Australia Bank
(1993) 35 NSWLR 110
, and relying on
DSE (Holdings) Pty Ltd
v Intertan Inc
[2003] FCA 384
(2003) 127 FCR 499
per Allsop J.
Libke v The Queen
[2007] HCA 30
(2007) 230 CLR 559
(1) DK kept saying she wanted
to go inside because she was cold (Transcript, p 124: AB 215); (2) DK said:
‘We always smoke
gunja’ (Transcript, p126: AB 217); (3) The
complainant always smoked cannabis at TS’s place (Transcript, p 127:
(4) The girls were smoking and drinking in the caravan (Transcript,
p 128: AB 219); (5) The complainant had a drink at TS’s
(Transcript, p 128: AB 219); (6) SW was drinking the next morning
(Transcript, p 131: AB 222); (7) The complainant said it
was too cold in
the caravan and went inside (Transcript, p 138: AB 229).
Transcript, p 154, AB
Transcript, p 140: AB
Transcript, p 160: AB
at [41] per
Gordon, Steward and Gleeson JJ, and at [20] per Kiefel CJ and Keane J.
Ibid at [20] per Kiefel CJ and
Keane J. See also at [41] per Gordon, Steward and Gleeson JJ.
Ibid at [41] per Gordon,
Steward and Gleeson JJ, and at [20] per Kiefel CJ and Keane J, citing
v Western Australia
[2018] HCA 7
(2018) 264 CLR 62
Ibid at [41] per Gordon,
Steward and Gleeson JJ, citing
Pell v The Queen
[2020] HCA 12
(2020) 268 CLR 123
, and at [22] per Kiefel CJ and Keane J.
at [60], citing
Kalbasi v Western Australia
[2018] HCA 7
(2018) 264 CLR 62
at [57], citing
Douglass v The Queen
[2012] HCA 34
(2012) 86 ALJR 1086
Liberato v The
[1985] HCA 66
(1985) 159 CLR 507
at [51] and [54],
Weiss v The Queen
[2005] HCA 81
(2005) 224 CLR 300
Ibid at [72], citing
[2005] HCA 81
(2005) 224 CLR 300
Wilde v The Queen
[1988] HCA 6
164 CLR 365
Weiss v The Queen
[2005] HCA 81
224 CLR 300
Ibid at [73].
Transcript, pp 138, 139:
AB 228, 229.
Transcript, pp 121, 139:
AB 212, 229.
Transcript, p 5: AB
Transcript, p 26: AB
Transcript, p 27: AB
Transcript, p 23: AB
BD v The Queen (No 2)
(2017) 40 NTLR 50
’) at [4] per Grant CJ, Kelly and Barr
at [8]. There, the
alleged offending had taken place five years before the determination of the
Ibid at [10].
Dyers v The Queen
[2002] HCA 45
(2002) 210 CLR 285
per Gaudron and Hayne JJ, cited in
The Queen v Stafford
[2009] QCA 407
per Keane JA (Fraser JA agreeing), cited in
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (589 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter