URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCAT/2025/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:17:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Blue Energy (Wiso) Pty Ltd & Wiso Oil Pty Ltd v Hughes Holdings and Investments No.600 Pty Ltd [2025] NTCAT 14 (30 October 2025)
Blue Energy (Wiso) Pty Ltd & Wiso Oil Pty Ltd v Hughes Holdings and
Investments No.600 Pty Ltd
DECISION NUMBER:
[2025] NTCAT 14
BLUE ENERGY (WISO) PTY LTD
1ST APPLICANT
WISO OIL PTY LTD
2ND APPLICANT
HUGHES HOLDINGS AND INVESTMENTS NO.600 PTY LTD
MATTER TYPE:
Original Jurisdiction -
Petroleum Act 1984
2024-00765-CT, 2024-00766-CT
HEARING DATE:
15 OCTOBER 2025
DECISION OF:
LESLIE MCCRIMMON
DATE OF ORDERS:
30 OCTOBER 2025
APPEARANCES and REPRESENTATION (if any):
RESPONDENT:
REASONS FOR DECISION:
Holdings and Investments No.600 Pty Ltd (the ‘Respondent’) holds
pastoral leases over two properties, Inverway
Station and Riveren Staton, in the
Northern Territory. Wiso Oil Pty Ltd is the holder of Petroleum Exploration
Permit 200 (the ‘Petroleum
Interest’) over Inverway Station and
Riveren Station. Blue Energy (Wiso) Pty Ltd is authorised by Wiso Oil Pty Ltd to
operator of the Petroleum Interest. In this decision, Blue Energy (Wiso)
Pty Ltd and Wiso Oil Pty Ltd shall be collectively referred
‘Applicants’.
Access Agreements (‘LAA’) over both Inverway Station and Riveren
Station have been negotiated and, by order of the
Supreme Court of the Northern
Territory in
Wiso Oil Pty Ltd & Blue Energy (Wiso) Pty Ltd v Hughes
Investments
[2025] NTSC 2, have been executed and lodged with the relevant
Minister. The Respondent seeks its reasonable legal costs necessarily
by the Respondent in connection with participating in the LAA negotiations
pursuant to regulation 17(1)(b) of the
Petroleum Regulations 2020
‘Pet Regs’), and its reasonable costs of participating in an
Alternate Dispute Resolution (‘ADR’) process
under Part 4, Division
4 of the Pet Regs.
quantum of costs sought to be recovered by the Respondent is $49,500 in relation
to Inverway Station and $16,500 in relation to
Riveren Station. The Applicants
refused to pay the costs and seek a determination from the Tribunal as to the
costs owing under either
regulation 17 or 28 of the Pet
Background facts
Respondents purchased Inverway Station and Riveren Station from Lavington Pty
Ltd and HPPL Services Pty Ltd in April 2022. Prior
to the purchase, Lavington
Pty Ltd had been in negotiations with the Applicants for a LAA.
the negotiations between the Applicants and the Lavington Pty Ltd over the LAA
were well advanced at the time of the sale of
Inverway Station and Riveren
Station to the Respondent is evidenced by an email from Stephen Skinner on
behalf of Lavington Pty Ltd
to a representative of the Respondent dated 4 April
2022. The email states, inter alia:
Over several months, Lavington
Pty Ltd has been in negotiations with Blue Energy Limited as to the contents of
a land access and compensation
deed relating to Inverway Pastoral Station.
Attached is the final form of the draft agreed between Blue Energy (Wiso) Pty
Oil Pty Ltd and Lavington Pty Ltd relating to Inverway Pastoral
Station. This document could also be used for Riveren Pastoral Station.
Given that a sale and purchase of the pastoral stations was imminent,
Lavington did not enter into the agreement but finalised it
with a view to
offering it to the purchaser of the pastoral stations. However, Lavington has no
objection to your client entering
into the agreement with Blue Energy with
appropriate modifications.
Applicants, pursuant to regulation 15(1) of the Pet Regs, issued negotiation
notices in relation to the LAA. The negotiation notice
relating to Inverway
Station was issued on 2 May 2023, and that relating to Riveren Station was
issued on 1 December 2023.
Correspondence
between the parties indicates that, by 10 October 2023, negotiations as to the
terms of the Inverway Station LAA had
concluded. In an email from the
Respondent’s lawyers to the Applicants’ lawyers dated
10 October 2023, it was noted:
We confirm LAA for Inverway
Station has been provided to Hughes and we are awaiting provision of
Hughes’ executed counterpart
Subsequent to receipt of the executed LAA counterpart from Hughes, we will
revert to Blue Energy to arrange for full execution.
We are continuing to await instructions from Hughes in relation to secondary
LAA proposed for Hughes’ Riveren Station. We will
revert to Blue Energy
once we are in receipt of Hughes’ instructions in respect of same.
an email dated 14 November 2023, lawyers for the Applicants forwarded to the
Respondent’s legal representatives a draft LAA
for Riveren Station. In the
email, it was noted that the LAA terms were identical to those in the Inverway
Station LAA.
15 January 2024, the Respondent’s lawyers sent two emails to the
Applicants’ lawyers, one of which related to Inverway
Station and the
other to Riveren Station. In relation to what is set out below, the two emails
are identical.
Land Access Agreement
We confirm that our Office is in receipt of Hughes’ executed LAA
counterpart for this Matter.
Notwithstanding, Hughes requires Blue Energy’s commitment to attend to
reimbursement of Hughes’ reasonable and necessarily
incurred legal costs
in this Matter prior to Hughes exchanging their executed LAA counterpart with
Blue Energy.
As Blue Energy would be aware, clause 5.5 of the LAA states Blue Energy
agrees to pay Hughes’ costs and expenses of the kind
referred to in
regulation 17
Petroleum Regulations 2020
Regulation 17
provides the interest holder (Blue Energy) must pay the
reasonable legal costs necessarily incurred by the designated person (Hughes)
connection with participating in the negotiation of the LAA.
to the emails were Emanate Legal Tax Invoice No 14285 relating to Inverway
Station in the sum of $49,500 inclusive of GST
and Emanate Legal Tax Invoice No
14286 relating to Riveren Station in the sum of $16,500 inclusive of GST. The
Respondent stipulated
that executed LAAs would be provided to the Applicants
only when the Applicants paid, or committed to pay, the above-noted
Wiso Oil Pty Ltd & Blue Energy (Wiso) Pty Ltd v Hughes
Investments
[2025] NTSC 2 Blokland J, in reference to Invoice No 14285,
found that:
The invoice is vague, refers to ‘steps’ and
‘professional fees’ and likely did not comply with the requirements
under the Regulations to provide evidence of reasonable costs necessarily
of the Pet Regs provides that a request for the payment of reasonable
legal or accounting costs necessarily incurred by the Respondent
in connection
with participating in negotiations with the Applicants for a LAA must be in
(regulation 17(3)(a))
and “provide reasonable details and evidence
of the costs that are being claimed”
(regulation 17(3)(b)).
Invoice No 14285 nor Invoice No 14286 satisfied the requirements of
J concluded that the actions of the Respondent in refusing to provide the
executed LAAs for Inverway Station and Riveren
Station until such time as its
costs were paid appeared obstructive and were not made in good
The [Respondent’s] conduct undermines the operation of
the Act and Regulations to the extent that the only conclusion to be
that it is not taking the steps required in good faith. The conduct appears
obstructive. The Act requires all parties to
act in good faith. The issue of
costs is extraneous to the consensus arrived over the access agreements and
costs are treated as
such in the
regulations.
24 June 2024, the Respondents provided to the Applicants an itemisation of the
costs claimed in relation to both Inverway Station
and Riveren
With respect to Inverway
Station, the time period for which costs were claimed was 4 April 2022 to 22
March 2024 and the amount claimed
was $38,650 (excluding GST). In relation to
Riveren Station, the time period for which costs were claimed was 12 September
22 March 2024, and the amount claimed was $24,031 (excluding GST). It is
not clear why these amounts differed from the amounts initially
claimed by the
Respondent in its earlier invoices.
Onus of proof
question arose at the hearing regarding which party bears the onus of proof when
costs under regulation 17 or 28 of the Pet Regs
are in issue. Reference to the
relevant authorities provides an answer.
“if a person thinks that he has a claim against another person ... the
duty is on him to establish that
In other words,
“the legal burden of proving all facts essential to their claim normally
rests upon the plaintiff in a civil
suit and the prosecutor in civil
proceedings”.
It follows,
therefore, that the legal burden of proving that the costs proffered by the
Respondent did not satisfy the criteria in
regulation 17(1)(a) or 28(1)(a) of
the Pet Regs was on the Applicant.
the legal burden is on the Applicants to prove its case that the legal costs, or
a portion of such costs, incurred by the Respondent
did not meet the criteria in
regulations 17(1)(a) or 28(1)(a) of the Pet Regs, the Respondent has an
evidential burden to satisfy
the requirements of regulations 17(3) and 28(3).
The requirement on the Applicants to pay the reasonable costs of the Respondent
in the circumstances stipulated in regulations 17 and 28 do not arise until such
time as the Respondent satisfies the evidential
onus stipulated in regulations
17(3) and 28(3).
Momcilovic v The Queen
(2011) 245 CLR 1
at [665], Bell J
An evidential burden is not an “onus of
disproof”. An evidential burden does no more than oblige a party to show
there is sufficient evidence to raise an issue as to the existence (or
non-existence) of a fact.
the context of these proceedings, the existence of a fact is the statutory
requirement on the Applicants to pay the Respondent’s
reasonable legal
costs incurred in the circumstances stipulated in regulations 17(1)(a) or
28(1)(a) of the Pet Regs. Until such time
as the Respondent provided to the
Applicants “reasonable details and evidence of the costs that are being
the Applicants were
under no obligation, pursuant to regulations 17(2) or 28(2), to pay any of the
Respondent’s legal costs.
Such details were not provided to the Applicants
until 24 June 2024. Once such details were provided, the evidential burden
to the Applicants to prove that such costs did not fall within the
criteria in regulations 17(1)(a) or
Consideration
40(1)(d) of the Pet Regs provides that the Tribunal may deal with an application
by the Applicants as to whether any costs
claimed by the Respondent under the
Access Agreement provisions in Part 4 are “reasonable or were necessarily
‘reasonable legal ... costs necessarily incurred’ used in both
regulations 17(1)(a) and 28(1)(a) of the Pet
Regs is not defined in the
Petroleum Act 1984
or the Pet Regs. Reference, therefore, must be made to
relevant case law.
Bropho v Human Rights & Equal Opportunity Commission
[2004] FCAFC 16
(2004) 135 FCR
, French J (as his Honour then was) considered the concept of reasonableness
in the context of
section 18D
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth). After considering the definitions of ‘reasonable’ in the
Shorter Oxford English Dictionary
, his Honour noted at
A thing is done “reasonably” in one of the
protected activities in paras (a), (b) and (c) of
if it bears a rational
relationship to that activity and is not disproportionate to what is necessary
to carry it out. It imports
an objective judgment. In this context that means a
judgment independent of that which the actor thinks is reasonable. It does allow
the possibility that there may be more than one way of doing things
“reasonably”. The judgment required in applying the
section, is
whether the thing done was done “reasonably” not whether it could
have been done more reasonably or in a
different way more acceptable to the
the observations of French J arose in a different statutory context, his
Honour’s approach to a determination of the question
of reasonableness
assists the Tribunal in determining whether legal costs under
regulations 17
of the Pet Regs were “reasonable legal ... costs necessarily
Clayton Utz v Ceccon Transport Pty Ltd
(2023) 380 FLR 249, the Supreme
Court of the Northern Territory considered an appeal from a determination of a
costs assessment application
Legal Professions Act 2006
Brownhill J, at [13], enumerated the considerations of a cost assessor when
assessing legal costs.
In conducting an assessment of legal costs,
the cost assessor must consider: (a) whether or not it was reasonable to carry
work to which the legal costs relate; (b) whether or not the work was
carried out in a reasonable way; (c) the fairness and reasonableness
amount of legal costs in relation to the work except to the extent that ss 339
or 340 apply to any disputed costs.
Tribunal’s approach to a determination of the reasonableness of legal
costs incurred in the circumstances addressed in regulations
17 and 28 of the
Pet Regs differs from that of a cost assessor in that the Tribunal does not have
before it the entirety of the Respondent’s
file. It does have, however,
experience with the relevant legislation and the drafting of
the parties’ evidence
and submissions, and the Respondent’s “reasonable details and
evidence of the costs that
are being claimed” in compliance with
regulations 17(3)(b) and 28(3)(b) of the Pet Regs. With this caveat, the
considerations
enumerated by Brownhill J informs the Tribunal’s approach
to its task under regulation 40(1)(d) of the Pet Regs.
addition to what has been noted in
Clayton Utz
, also relevant to a
determination of reasonableness under regulations 17 and 28 of the Pet Regs is
the fact that the matters in dispute
were relatively complex and the statutory
regime for negotiating a LAA was relatively new. The fact that both pastoralists
legal representatives were faced with a compulsory statutory
requirement to enter into a LAA under what, for them, may be a novel
legislative
regime is a relevant consideration.
Regulation 28
consideration of regulation 28 arises only in connection with Inverway Station.
Regulation 28(1)(a) of the Pet Regs provides that
the Applicants must pay the
reasonable legal costs incurred by the Respondent in connection with
participating in an ADR process
under Part 4, Division 4 of the Pet Regs. While
a mediation was scheduled between the parties in relation to the Inverway
LAA, it was adjourned.
the details of legal costs incurred in relation to Inverway Station provided to
the Applicants by the Respondent on 24 June 2024,
the following entries relate
to the proposed
Hourly rate
Perusal of email correspondence from mediator
Perusal of email correspondence from mediator
Perusal of mediation agreement
Perusal of email correspondence from Applicants’ solicitor
Undertaking preparation for mediation (including review of LAA, drafting
mediation statement of positions/discussion with clients)
$3,990 (ex GST)
contest at the hearing was whether regulations 17 and 28 of the Pet Regs allowed
for indemnity costs to be awarded or, alternatively,
costs on the Supreme Court
of the Northern Territory scale. The simple answer is that the regulations
require that the legal costs
must be reasonable and necessarily incurred in
connection with participating in the negotiation of a LAA (regulation 17) or an
process relating to a LAA (regulation 28). In determining what is reasonable
and necessarily incurred in these circumstances reference
will be made to the
case law, as discussed above. Additionally, reference may be made to the
relevant Supreme Court scale as an indicator
of what the Supreme Court considers
appropriate costs.
first with the hourly rate of the Respondent’s lawyer, Mr Taylor, the
Tribunal was advised that, as at the date of the
hearing, Mr Taylor had been
admitted to practice law for 12 years. At the time the costs related to the ADR
process occurred, Mr
Taylor would have had at least 10 years post-admission
experience.
to the relevant practice direction issued by the Supreme Court of the Northern
Territory at the time the work was performed
indicates that the rate per unit
appendix to Order 63 of the
Supreme Court Rules
for a solicitor of at
least 10 years’ experience was $39.00 per
which equates to $390 per
hour. The Tribunal takes notice of the fact that costs on the Supreme Court
scale are generally lower than
the legal costs actually incurred by a client.
is the Tribunal’s view that, while at the upper end of what may be
considered a reasonable hourly rate for a solicitor of
at least 10 years
post-admission experience engaged in the negotiation of a LAA, the $700 per hour
charged by Mr Taylor was reasonable
for the legal work he was required to carry
out. The same can be said of the rates charged by Mr Taylor’s
associates who worked
on the matter. Further, the Tribunal finds no fault with
the steps taken by Mr Taylor, or the time spent, in preparing for the mediation.
The sum of $3,990 claimed by the Respondent is a reasonable cost necessarily
incurred in connection with participating in an ADR
process under Part 4,
Division 4 of the Pet Regs.
Regulation 17 – Inverway
Applicants submit that the legal costs provided by the Respondent relating to
the negotiation of the LAA for Inverway Station
were “grossly excessive
and were not necessarily
for a number of
reasons, including:
itemised costs include amounts for numerous emails that were perused or sent by
the Respondent’s solicitors for reasons
which were unexplained;
32.2. charges
are made for the period in which the Supreme Court held that the Respondent was
not acting in good faith;
32.3. the time
charged by Mr Taylor for perusing, advising or drafting the LAA was excessive
given that the LAA ultimately signed
by the Respondent was first drafted by the
Applicants.
purpose of regulation 17(1) of the Pet Regs is to compensate the Respondent for
the reasonable costs of participating in the compulsory
negotiation with the
Applicants for a LAA. Such costs may consist of legal or accounting costs
(regulation 17(1)(a)) or the cost
of engaging a suitably qualified person to
provide advice or reports on a relevant matter (regulation 17(1)(b)). It is only
the recovery
of reasonable legal costs that are in issue in this
proceeding.
correspondence between the parties indicates, as has been noted above at [7],
that negotiations relating to the substance of the
Inverway Station LAA
concluded on 10 October 2023. After this date, the Respondent submits that it
should be reimbursed for legal
fees in the sum of $2,875 for: perusing email
correspondence from the Applicants, a mediator, and their client; drafting email
correspondence
to the Applicants, a mediator and their client; and for a
telephone conversation with their client.
light of the court’s findings in
Wiso Oil Pty Ltd & Blue Energy
(Wiso) Pty Ltd v Hughes Investments
[2025] NTSC 2 discussed above, and the
fact that the correspondence indicates that the terms of the LAA had been
negotiated by 10
October 2023, the legal costs claimed by the Respondent after
10 October 2023 are not reasonable legal costs necessarily incurred
connection with the negotiation of a LAA. Consequently, such costs are not
recoverable under regulation 17(1) of the Pet Regs.
at issue in the proceeding was the date in which the negotiations relating to
the Inverway Station LAA commenced. The first item
in the Respondent’s
cost details is from 4 April 2022, being a perusal of email correspondence from
Stephen Skinner, the representative
of Lavington Pty Ltd. On the same date, time
is charged for the perusal of the draft LAA received from Mr Skinner which has
discussed above.
Applicants submit that negotiations for a LAA commenced when the Applicants
served on the Respondent a notice of the Applicants’
intention to obtain
an access agreement pursuant to regulation 15 of the Pet Regs. In relation to
Inverway Station, such notice was
given on 2 May
4 April 2022 and 2 May 2023, extensive correspondence passed between the
Applicants and the Respondent. In addition, it is
evident from the
Respondent’s cost details that, during this period, the Respondent’s
lawyers were perusing drafts of
a LAA and were engaged in drafting a LAA
(discussed in detail below). Finally, the Applicants acknowledged that the
negotiated draft
of the Inverway Station LAA was based largely on the draft the
Applicants negotiated with Lavington Pty Ltd.
is clear in the circumstances of the Inverway Station proceeding that
negotiations between the parties in connection with participating
negotiation of the Inverway Station LAA commenced on 4 April 2022. The
Respondent is entitled to its reasonable legal costs
necessarily incurred in
connection with its participation in such negotiation.
respect to such negotiation, issue was taken by the Applicants with the amount
of time spent by the Respondent’s lawyers
in reading correspondence from
the Applicants, and in drafting correspondence to the Applicants and to their
client. This issue is
without merit.
fact is that negotiations for a LAA generates a significant amount of
correspondence between the lawyers for the parties, and
between the lawyers and
their clients. When correspondence is received from the Applicants in relation
to the LAA, the Respondent
is entitled to the legal costs incurred in reviewing
such correspondence, provided the time spent on the activity is reasonable.
Further, if such correspondence raises a matter which requires advice to the
client, the Respondent is entitled to the legal costs
incurred in generating
such advice, again subject to the caveat that the time spent on the activity is
reasonable.
review of the Respondent’s costs details indicates that the time spent on
reviewing correspondence was usually 0.10 unit.
This is the minimum unit of time
that could be charged. When correspondence to either the Applicants or the
client was drafted, more
time was charged but, again, there is nothing in the
Respondent’s cost details to indicate that such time spent was
unreasonable.
the Applicants submitted that the Inverway Station LAA ultimately negotiated
between the parties was substantially the same
as the LAA negotiated between the
Applicants and Lavington Pty Ltd. Consequently, the Applicants submitted, the
time spent by the
Respondent’s lawyers in drafting a LAA were not
reasonable legal costs necessarily incurred within the meaning of regulation
17(1)(a) of the Pet Regs. The costs in issue are as
Hourly rate
Drafting LAA
Drafting LAA
Drafting LAA
evidence of the Respondent at the hearing was that, notwithstanding that it had
been provided with a draft LAA by Lavington Pty
Ltd when it purchased Inverway
Station, it drafted its own LAA. The reasons why the Respondent deemed it
necessary to undertake such
work was not given in evidence to the Tribunal.
Ultimately, the Respondent agreed to a LAA based on the draft LAA provided to it
by Lavington Pty Ltd with amendments negotiated by the parties.
drafting of a LAA by the Respondent, in the circumstances of this proceeding,
was disproportionate to what was necessary to carry
out the finalisation of an
Inverway Station LAA.
drafting of a LAA was not a legal cost necessarily incurred by the Respondent in
connection with participating in the negotiation.
Such costs do not fall within
regulation 17(1)(a) of the Pet Regs and are not recoverable from the
Applicants.
Conclusion – Inverway Station
the $38,650 claimed from the Applicants by the Respondent for reasonable legal
costs necessarily incurred in connection with
participating in the negotiation
of the Inverway Station LAA, the amount of $11,275 should be deducted,
$2,875, being
the costs incurred after the terms of the Inverway Station LAA were finalised;
$8,400, being
the costs incurred by the Respondent in drafting a LAA.
follows, therefore, that the Applicant, pursuant to regulations 17(1)(a) and
28(1)(a) of the Pet Regs, must pay to the Respondent
the sum of $27,375
(excluding GST). With GST added, the amount owing is $30,112.50. Of this amount,
$4,389 is payable pursuant to
regulation 28(1)(a) of the Pet Regs, and
$25,723.50 is payable pursuant to regulation 17(1)(a) of the Pet
Regulation 17 – Riveren Station
concluded the negotiations relating to the content of the Inverway Station LAA,
the Applicants forwarded to the Respondent
on 14 November 2023 a draft of the
Riveren Station LAA. Subject to some minor amendments, the content of the
Riveren Station LAA
mirrored that of the Inverway Station LAA.
15 January 2024, as has been noted above, the Respondent advised the Applicants
that the Riveren Station LAA had been executed.
This notwithstanding, the
Respondent claims legal costs in the sum of $1,824 for the perusal and drafting
of correspondence after
this date. Based on the reasoning noted at [35] above,
this sum is not recoverable pursuant to regulation 17(1)(a) of the Pet
is also noted that the hourly rate charged for the Respondent’s lawyers
working on the Riveren Station LAA matter were greater
than the rates charged in
relation to the negotiation of the Inverway Station LAA. For example, the rate
Mr Taylor charged for perusing
correspondence from the Applicant’s
solicitors on 29 September 2023 was $700 per hour. On the same day in relation
to the Riveren
Station negotiation, Mr Taylor’s hourly rate was $912 per
hour. At the hearing, Mr Taylor advised that the discrepancy in the
hourly rates
charged was because a new legal cost agreement, with increased hourly rates, was
entered into between the Respondent
and the Respondent’s solicitors in
relation to the negotiation of the Riveren Station LAA.
it is open for a lawyer and client to agree to higher hourly rates for services
provided on the same day but relating to different
matters, it is not reasonable
to expect that a third party which has a statutory obligation to pay the
Respondent’s reasonable
legal costs should have to pay the higher fees
charged. At [31] above it was noted that the rate of $700 per hour for a lawyer
Mr Taylor’s experience was at the upper end of what might be considered
reasonable in the Northern Territory. The rate of $912
per hour is not
reasonable. Consequently, the fees recoverable should be calculated based on the
fees charged in the Inverway Station
negotiation. This applies equally to the
rates charged by the associates of Mr Taylor working on the matter.
Applicants also take issue with the fact that Mr Taylor charged the following
amounts for perusal of the draft Riveren LAA, advising
his client and
undertaking amendments to the
Hourly rate
Perusal of draft LAA and advice to client
Perusal of draft LAA and advice to client
Undertaking amendments to the LAA
Undertaking amendments to the LAA
Applicants submit that the substance of the Riveren LAA negotiated between the
parties was essentially identical to that negotiated
for access to Inverway
Station. Consequently, they submit, it cannot be said that the legal fees
charged by Mr Taylor were reasonable
legal costs necessarily incurred by the
Respondent in connection with participating in the negotiation within the
meaning of regulation
17(1)(a) of the Pet Regs.
was reasonable for Mr Taylor to review the draft Riveren LAA provided by the
Applicants and provide advice to his client on 14
November 2023. Likewise, it
was reasonable for Mr Taylor to undertake the finalisation of the Riveren LAA
for execution on 22 November
2023. Based on an hourly rate of $700, the
Respondent is entitled to be reimbursed the sum of $3,500 for the work done on
14 November
2023 and $700 for the work done on 22 November 2023.
considerations apply to the work done on 16 and 20 November 2023. The final
Riveren LAA negotiated between the parties was
substantially the same as that
negotiated for Inverway Station. The amount Mr Taylor charged for perusing, and
undertaking amendments
to, the LAA were disproportionate to what was necessary
to carry out the finalisation of the Riveren Station
The legal costs arising
from this work were not costs necessarily incurred by the Respondent in
connection with participating in
the negotiation.
same applies to Mr Taylor’s charge for perusing the draft of the Riveren
LAA and advising his client on 4 December 2023.
Mr Taylor, as has been noted
above, finalised the Riveren LAA for execution on 22 November 2023 therefore it
is difficult to see
how a three-hour charge for work done on 4 December
2023 can be considered reasonable legal costs necessarily incurred.
Consequently,
such costs are not recoverable pursuant to regulation 17(1)(a) of
the Pet Regs.
conclusion, the following legal costs incurred by the Respondent do not fall
within regulation 17(1)(a) of the Pet
Hourly rate
Post 15/01/2024
Undertaking amendments to the LAA
Perusal of draft LAA and advice to Client
Undertaking amendments to the LAA
Perusal of draft LAA and advice to Client
Conclusion – Riveren Station
the sum noted in [57] is deducted, and the remaining legal work is calculated on
the basis of the hourly rates charged in the
negotiation of the Inverway Station
LAA, the Respondent’s reasonable legal costs necessarily incurred in
connection with the
negotiation of the Riveren Station LAA are $7,215. When GST
is included the amount is $7,936.50.
Walter letter dated 29
August 2025
Respondent instructed a lawyer and costs assessor, Mr Glenn Walter, to review
the Respondent’s legal costs and provide his
opinion on the reasonableness
of such costs. Mr Walter concluded that the reasonable legal costs of the
Respondent were $62,681.20.
the Tribunal accepts that Mr Walter is an experienced cost assessor in
Queensland, it is noted that Mr Walter was not provided
Respondent’s complete file. In fact, the documents to which Mr Walter had
access in formulating his opinion were not
as extensive as those before the
Tribunal. Finally, there was no evidence before the Tribunal that Mr Walter had
any experience in
the negotiation and drafting of LAAs pursuant to the
Petroleum Act 1984
or the Pet Regs.
Consequently,
no weight was placed by the Tribunal on Mr Walter’s opinion.
Regulations
of the Pet Regs require the Tribunal to assess whether the legal costs
sought to be recovered from the interest holder were reasonable
and necessarily
incurred by the designated person in connection with participating in a
negotiation or an ADR process. This task,
as the above analysis indicates,
involves more than assessing whether the legal costs incurred comply with the
relevant provisions
Legal Profession Act 2007
relation to the negotiation of the Inverway Station LAA, the Applicants,
pursuant to
regulations 17(1)(a)
(1)(a) of the Pet Regs, must pay to the
Respondent the sum of $30,112.50 (including GST). In relation to the negotiation
of the Riveren
Station LAA, the Applicants, pursuant to
regulation 17(1)(a)
the Pet Regs, must pay to the Respondent the sum of $7,936.50 (including GST).
In total, the sum owing by the Applicants to the
Respondent is $38,049.00
(including GST).
parties asked to be heard on the question of costs of these proceedings. No
order for costs is made at this time as there may
be matters relevant to the
question of costs of which the Tribunal is not aware. Should either party still
wish to be heard on the
question of costs, they shall have 28 days from the date
of the orders arising from this decision to bring an Ordinary Application
Accordingly, the Tribunal orders that:
Tribunal file number 2024-00765-CT, Blue Energy (Wiso) Pty Ltd and Wiso Oil Pty
Ltd collectively must pay, pursuant to
regulation 17(1)(a)
Regulations 2020
, the sum of $25,723.50 to Hughes Holdings and Investments
No.600 Pty Ltd by no later than 30 days from the date of this
Tribunal file number 2024-00765-CT, Blue Energy (Wiso) Pty Ltd and Wiso Oil Pty
Ltd collectively must pay, pursuant to
regulation 28(1)(a)
Regulations 2020
, the sum of $4,389.00 to Hughes Holdings and Investments
No.600 Pty Ltd by no later than 30 days from the date of this
Tribunal file number 2024-00766-CT, Blue Energy (Wiso) Pty Ltd and Wiso Oil Pty
Ltd collectively must pay, pursuant to
regulation 17(1)(a)
Regulations 2020
, the sum of $7,936.50 to Hughes Holdings and Investments
No.600 Pty Ltd by no later than 30 days from the date of this
28 days from the date of this order either party has leave to bring an Ordinary
Application for the costs of these proceedings.
30 OCTOBER 2025
LESLIE MCCRIMMON
TRIBUNAL MEMBER
Petroleum Regulations
, reg 28(1)(a).
Oil Pty Ltd & Blue Energy (Wiso) Pty Ltd v Hughes Investments
NTSC 2, [48].
Declaration of Bradly Steven Torgan dated 30 June 2025,
Dickson v Minister of
[1953] 1 QB 228
Australian ed, LexisNexis Butterworths, 2020),
Regulations 2020
, reg 17(3)(b) and reg 28(3)(b).
Petroleum Regulations
, reg 40(1)(d).
Sweetpea Petroleum Pty Ltd v
Rallen Australia Pty Ltd
[2022] NTCAT
Supreme Court of the
Northern Territory Practice Direction No 4 of 2022.
Applicant’s
Submissions in Reply dated 17 September 2025, [6].
Wiso Oil Pty Ltd &
Blue Energy (Wiso) Pty Ltd v Hughes Investments
[2025] NTSC 2, [35].
Bropho v Human Rights
& Equal Opportunity Commission
[2004] FCAFC 16
(2004) 135 FCR 105
Bropho v Human Rights
& Equal Opportunity Commission
[2004] FCAFC 16
(2004) 135 FCR 105
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (35.9 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter