URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTADComm/2000/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:16:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Garovic, Sue v Dave Mudge & Pinecot Pty Ltd [2000] NTADComm 1 (16 September 2000)
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION
NORTHERN TERRITORY
COMPLAINANT:
RESPONDENTS:
MR DAVE MUDGE (1
RESPONDENT)
PINECOT PTY LTD (2
RESPONDENT)
MR TOM STODULKA
COMMISSIONER
COUNSEL ASSISTING:
MR COLIN McDONALD
DATE OF DECISION:
15 SEPTEMBER 2000
1. This decision concerns two issues. The first issue is whether the second
respondent can be held to be primarily liable for alleged
prohibited conduct of
its employees under section 27 of the
Anti Discrimination Act
Act”). The second issue is whether the second respondent can be held to
be vicariously liable for alleged contraventions
of the Act by its employee, the
first respondent.
2. The complaint against the first and second respondents was lodged on 4
November 1998. This complaint was accepted by the delegate
on 26 November 1998.
Subsequently, the complaint was investigated. On 10 November 1999 the delegate
made a ‘prima facie’
decision. On 24 March 2000 the complaint was
referred to me for hearing.
3. On 11 May 2000, at the request of the parties, I directed that the issue of
whether or not the second respondent can be held to
be vicariously liable for an
alleged contravention of the Act by the first respondent be determined by me
prior to a full hearing
of the complaint under section 83 of the Act. The issue
for resolution goes to my jurisdiction under the Act and will impact upon
whether the second respondent can be a respondent to the complaint and
potentially have orders directed against it.
4. On 11 May 2000 I also gave leave to the parties to be represented before me
by legal practitioners pursuant to section 95 of the
Act. In my opinion, the
importance of the issue concerning the exercise of my jurisdiction under the Act
justified the granting
5. On 26 July 2000 in Alice Springs I heard counsel and received their
submissions on the questions of primary liability and whether
I had jurisdiction
under the Act to hold the second respondent vicariously liable for an alleged
contravention of the Act by the
first respondent. Oral submissions of the
parties were made in addition to quite detailed written submissions filed with
the Registrar
of the Commission prior to the hearing date. Mr Kim Kilvington
appeared on behalf of the complainant and Mr Nick Angelopoulos appeared
second respondent. Mr Colin McDonald QC appeared as counsel assisting the
Commission. Mr McDonald QC gave oral submissions
summarising a written outline
of submissions he provided to the parties and the Commission on 26 July 2000.
There was no appearance
on behalf of the first respondent, although he was
notified of the time and date for submissions and given full opportunity to put
any submissions he wished to make on the issue.
6. At the hearing on 26 July 2000, the parties were agreed that, for the
purposes of this decision, I could accept that the first
respondent was an
employee of the second respondent at all material times. I also accept that the
second respondent is a corporate
body. Otherwise, I make no other finding of
fact as there has been no evidence called nor have other facts been agreed
7. I thank counsel for their helpful submissions and proceed to deal with the
difficult issue of vicarious liability under the Act.
The helpful role played
by all counsel in this matter highlights that in appropriate cases (which
include a case like this dealing
with jurisdictional aspects of the Commission),
it is desirable for the Commission to have the assistance of
8. The issue of whether there is vicarious liability of employers for alleged
contraventions of the Act by employers has arisen before
in cases in this
Commission. I note that the previous Commissioner has held that there is
vicarious liability under the Act. However,
I accept the submission of Mr
McDonald QC that I should approach the issue afresh and not in any way consider
myself bound by earlier
decisions of the Commission on this point. I proceed to
deal with the issue unconstrained by earlier rulings of previous
Commissioners.
9. I turn to consider the submissions made by the parties and counsel
10. At the outset, it is significant to note, as I do, that there is no express
provision in the Act dealing with vicarious liability.
I now summarise the
submissions put to me by the parties and counsel assisting
Submissions of the complainant
11. The complainant argues that the second respondent is liable for the acts of
the first respondent in two ways. The first way
Mr Kilvington seeks to sheet
that it “caused”
or “assisted” the first respondent
contrary to sub-section 27(I) of the Act. In the alternative, the complainant
the second respondent is vicariously liable for the acts of the first
respondent on the proper construction of the Act.
12. In his oral submissions on 26 July 2000, Mr Kilvington indicated that he was
making broader submissions than those contained
in his written outline. As I
understood him, Mr Kilvington sought to extend his arguments in relation to the
alleged primary liability
(what he called “extended primary” or
“secondary liability”) for acts of discrimination and of sexual
even where the employee does not have a management or directing role
in the affairs of the company which were discussed in cases
Supermarkets Ltd v Natrass
[1971] UKHL 1
[1972] AC 153
(Engineering) Co Ltd v T J Graham & Son Ltd
(1957) IQ 13
advancing this proposition, Mr Kilvington submitted that he was relying upon the
decision of the Equal Opportunity Tribunal of
New South Wales in
Ltd and Anor
(1988) EDC 92-229
at p77,167. Mr Kilvington submitted that if
the second respondent fell on the facts “within one of the categories
”, then its liability was established. I assume
those categories Mr Kilvington referred to are those set out at p77,173 of
judgement where the New South Wales Equal Opportunity Tribunal was referring to
the personal duties and obligations of employers
Discrimination Act
1977 (NSW). Mr Kilvington foreshadowed (at p7 of the
transcript of hearing) that the complainant would be intending to rely upon
least two of the categories referred to when the matter is determined after a
full hearing of the facts. It is unnecessary for
me to canvass this last
mentioned aspect in advance of having any evidence before me. I refrain from
making any findings on this
point and whether the decision of
be applied in the manner Mr Kilvington submits.
13. Be that as it may, the main thrust of Mr Kilvington’s primary
liability argument rested on the provisions of section 27
of the Act. He
submitted that the second respondent can be said to have “caused”
the alleged discrimination on the proper
construction of the section. Mr
Kilvington submitted that there was an implied duty arising on the second
respondent under the Act
to take all reasonable steps to prevent discrimination.
Mr Kilvington submits that unless there is such an implied obligation on
employer, the Act cannot achieve its purpose or objects. He also submitted that
the true meaning of the word “cause”
in section 27 of the Act took
it beyond accessory liability and the word contemplated an extended primary
liability or what Mr Kilvington
called secondary liability for breach of implied
duties of employers.
14. Mr Kilvington also sought to rely upon two cases which dealt with the issue
of vicarious liability, namely, the decision of Judge
Plumrose (Australia) Limited
(1989) EOC 92
256 and the decision of
Commissioner Lawrie in
Romelo v Darwin Port Authority and Others
1999 delivered on 21 July 1999, both of which accepted there was vicarious
liability of employers.
15. Mr Kilvington finally submitted that there was nothing in the Attorney
General’s Second Reading Speech which indicated
the purpose of the Act in
respect of the issue of vicarious liability and that the speech was
“neutral on the issue”
(see transcript page 10)
Submissions of the second respondent
16. Mr Angelopoulos, in very clear and persuasive submissions, sought to strike
out the claim against the second respondent. He
submitted that having regard to
the complainant’s complaint at its highest on the materials and accepting
everything she says
as true, I cannot find the second respondent either
primarily liable under section 27 of the Act or the Act generally nor can I hold
the second respondent vicariously liable.
17. Mr Angelopoulos submitted, in effect, that in the absence of any express
provision imposing vicarious liability, I should not
hold that vicarious
liability exists under the Act. He traversed, in his comprehensive written
submissions, the various State and
Commonwealth jurisdictions and the express
provisions dealing with vicarious liability in anti-discrimination
legislation.
18. Mr Angelopoulos submitted that neither of the cases referred to by Mr
Kilvington,
was helpful in the resolution of the
issues at hand. In particular, he points to the lack of analytical detail in
Judge Duggan’s
judgement and cautions me not to be swayed by any
“bland statement” there appearing concerning vicarious liability.
Mr Angelopoulos says Judge Duggan’s judgement contains no analysis
supporting this statement. He also seeks to distinguish
this case from
on the facts. Mr Angelopoulos submits that in
managers were party to the alleged discrimination and were aware of it. He says
this case is quite different from
. Again, as I have sought to
emphasise, because I have made no factual findings I will not be seeking to draw
any factual comparisons
at this stage with any facts in the numerous cases
referred to by counsel.
19. Mr Angelopoulos submits that section 27 of the Act is an accessory
liability provision and is narrower than its interstate counterparts.
especially contrasts the material wording in the section 27(I) (“cause,
instruct, induce, incite, assist or promote”)
with section 52 of the N.S.W
Act which provides a broader accessory liability provision with the inclusion of
the word “permit”.
In his written submissions, Mr Angelopoulos
summarises his submission on the question of whether the second respondent could
held to be primarily liable under section 27 of the Act. He relies upon the
natural meaning of each of the words “cause, instruct,
induce, incite,
assist or promote” and submits that none is sufficient in themselves to
hold an employer liable for the conduct
of an employee, unless the employer was
aware of and participated directly, indirectly or tacitly
in the alleged
contraventions.
20. Mr Angelopoulos also emphasises the lack of any express provision
imposing liability on employers for the contraventions of the
Act by their
employees. He counters any allegations of unfairness thereby arising if
consideration is given to:-
(a) the express provisions of employer liability for the conduct of their
employees appearing in other legislation of a like nature;
(b) the failure to include such a provision in the Act;
(c) the inclusion of an accessory liability provision;
(d) the deeming provisions in section 4 of the Act which are not extended
to employers for conduct of employees.
Thus, so Mr Angelopoulos argues, simply because there are a number of
remedies directed against employers in the Act, it is not sufficient
to hold the
employer liable for the conduct of his or her employee. These express
provisions are designed to impose obligations
when the employer is liable
through the accessory provision or the
Tesco Supermarkets
case principle
for the conduct of an employee.
21. Mr Angelopoulos made carefully crafted submissions as to why there was
not vicarious
liability under the Act. He sought to confine the
authority of
to the jurisdiction of New South Wales. He also drew
my attention to the two elements which must exist for there to be vicarious
liability. These are:-
(a) an act done in the course of employment; and
(b) the acts of the employee when attributed to the employer constitute
tortious conduct.
Mr Angelopoulos emphasises that vicarious liability is essentially a common law
22. Mr Angelopoulos developed the argument and sought to make the point that in
his capacity as a handyman the alleged contraventions
by the first respondent
were not within the scope of his employment. He submitted, the alleged acts of
the first respondent were
a frolic or detour of his own. Thus, in the
circumstances,
Mr Angelopoulos argues the alleged conduct of the first
respondent cannot be said to arise in the course of employment. I do not
propose to address this factual aspect of his submission as there are no facts
established by me to make any findings at this stage.
23. Mr Angelopoulos then made a significant submission , namely, that this case
before the Commission does not concern a tortious
case. It concerns a case
arising out of an alleged breach of statute, being the Act. He submits that
discrimination law in Australia
has no common law roots. Even if the Act
creates statutory torts, as
held for New South Wales, it must be
remembered that the tort is statutory in nature and does not derive from the
common law. Hence,
so Mr Angelopoulos’ argument goes, it would be wrong
to import principles of vicarious liability into the Act and thereby import
common law principles into a scheme of rights and obligations whose existence is
purely statutory in nature. In short, he submits
there is no basis for
importing the common law principles of vicarious liability into a purely
statutory scheme.
24. Mr Angelopous made similar submissions as to why the common law principles
of non delegable duties should not be incorporated
into the statutory scheme
(see paragraph 17 of his written submissions).
25. In relation to the question of what assistance I might draw from extrinsic
materials, Mr Angelopoulos, inter alia, points out
in his written submissions in
reply at paragraph 2.22 that there was a significant consultative process
engaged in by the Government
prior to the Act passing in the Legislative
Assembly and a number of amendments were made to incorporate the suggestions
community. He makes the point that this consultation notwithstanding
there is no comment or statement as to the liability of employers
conduct of their employees in the Second Reading Speech. He refers to the
Northern Territory of Australia, Legislative Assembly,
Sixth Assembly, First
Session, Parliamentary Record, Thursday 1 October 1992, 6521-6531. He submits
that, if anything the debate
in the Legislative Assembly assists me to draw the
inference that there was a deliberate intention not to provide for vicarious
liability in the Act.
Submissions of Counsel Assisting
26. I propose to summarise the submissions of Mr McDonald QC. Mr McDonald QC
submitted that whether corporate bodies, like the second
respondent, can be
found to be primarily liable under section 27 of the Act is to be determined on
a case by case basis.
27. Mr McDonald QC agreed with Mr Angelopoulos that the provisions of section 27
are narrower than the provisions of section 52 of
the NSW Act. He submits the
words “cause” and “assist” should be interpreted in
accordance with their ordinary
and current meaning. He further submits that the
interpretation of the complainant takes the word “cause” beyond its
ordinary and natural meaning in the context of section 27 of the Act. He asks
that I not go beyond the stipulated words set out
in section 27 of the Act nor
give those words any strained meaning. He notes that facts are yet to be found,
but for the Commission
to find, after having all the evidence that the second
respondent “caused” the alleged acts of the first respondent,
nexus needs to be established between the second respondent, its conduct and its
state of knowledge and the first respondent.
28. Mr McDonald QC submits, contrary to the submissions of Mr Angelopoulos, that
although there is no express provision in the Act,
an employer can be found to
be vicariously liable. He makes this submission based upon his reading of the
Act as a whole and when
considering its scope and objects.
29. Mr McDonald QC submits that the weight of authority favours the proposition
that an anti-discrimination piece of legislation,
like the Act, creates a
statutory tort. He submits that the ordinary principles of tort law ought apply
to an employer which is
a corporate body and such an employer can be liable for
acts of discrimination by employees where those acts are carried out in the
course of employment.
30. Mr McDonald QC submits that the structure of the Act supports the view that
liability under the Act extends to vicarious liability.
31. In paragraphs 52-55 of his written submissions, Mr McDonald QC refers to the
Hansard record and an apparent attempt by the members
of the opposition to have
a vicarious liability clause inserted in the Act. The terms of the clause were
not dissimilar to the vicarious
liability provisions in the
Commonwealth
Racial Discrimination Act
. This attempt was rejected by the Government.
The debate on the issue seems to have not elicited a clear intent of what the
intended by way of vicarious liability.
32. Mr McDonald QC referred me to a passage in Hansard at pages 6715 to 6716,
where the Attorney General, Mr Stone said: “As
the Chief Minister said,
the appropriate course would be to come back after a period and argue that these
things should be addressed
by subsequent amendments. Members opposite should
accept the legislation in that spirit. Irrespective of what they say, we will
not change our minds on vicarious responsibility. We have weighed it very
33. In the final analysis, Mr McDonald QC submitted that the parliamentary
debates and extensive material did not throw “decisive
light” on the
intended provisions. They do not assist me in the interpretation exercise under
section 62B
Interpretation Act
34. This completed the submissions. It is convenient before addressing the two
main issues that I give my answers concerning the
utility of extrinsic materials
in this case.
35. Having read through the Legislative Assembly debates and the Second Reading
Speech of the Attorney General, I am of the view
that I am not assisted by way
of extrinsic material as to the intended purpose of the legislature concerning
its intention regarding
whether there is or is not vicarious liability under the
Act. There is no sufficiently clear statement of any intended purpose regarding
vicarious liability. I am not prepared to nor should I guess the Legislatures
intent from these extrinsic materials for the purpose
section 62B
Interpretation Act
I do not consider that the Hansard helps confirm the
meaning of any provision or the ordinary meaning conveyed by the text of the
provisions. Thus, I do not consider the extrinsic materials are of assistance
to me in all the circumstances.
36. Accordingly, I propose to consider the provisions of the Act as a whole and
seek to discern the intended purpose from it in accordance
with the proper,
purposive approach to statutory interpretation.
Act applies to Corporations
37. It is appropriate that I address first the corporate nature of the second
respondent and whether the Act applies to it. The
Act refers to and applies to
“a person” when it refers to prohibitions from engaging in
discriminatory acts or conduct:
see for example, sections 19 and 22 of the
38. I do not consider there is any doubt that the Act covers and includes a body
corporate. Section 19 of the Northern Territory
Interpretation Act
it quite clear that where a piece of Northern Territory legislation refers to
“a person” this includes a body corporate.
There is nothing in the
provisions of the Act to rebut the prima facie rule that the reference to
“a person” includes
a body corporate such as the second respondent.
Indeed, when the Act is read as a whole it seems clear the Legislature intended
that “a person” includes a corporate body.
Purposive Approach to Statutory Interpretation
39. I accept that I am bound to adopt a purposive approach to the interpretation
of the Act. This is made clear by the provisions
sections 62A
Interpretation Act
and Justice of Appeal, McHugh’s dissenting
judgement in
Kingston v Keprose Pty Ltd
(1787) NSW LR 404
, 421-424 (His
Honour’s dissent was on another issue and not on the issue of the correct
principles to apply in statutory interpretation);
Mills v Meeking
[1990] HCA 6
169 CLR 214
, 223, 235, 242-243 and in
Newcastle City Council v. GIO General
[1997] HCA 53
(1997) 191 CLR 85
, 109-110. I also bear in mind what the High Court
Project Blue Sky Inc. v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
72 ALJR 841
to 855 and the passage referred to paragraph 30 of Mr McDonald
QC’s written submissions.
40. Having acknowledged that I am bound to adopt a purposive approach to the
construction of the Act, it is also important for me
to note that the Act
contains an objects provision. Section 3 of the Act
(a) to promote recognition and acceptance within the community of the principle
of the right to equality of opportunity of persons
regardless of an
(b) to eliminate discrimination against persons on the ground of race, sex,
sexuality, age, marital status, pregnancy, parenthood,
breastfeeding,
impairment, trade union or employer association, religious belief or activity,
political opinion, affiliation or activity,
irrelevant medical record or
irrelevant criminal record in the area of work, accommodation or education or in
the provision of goods,
services and facilities, in the activities of clubs or
in insurance and superannuation; and
(c) to eliminate sexual harassment.
I will consider the significance of this objects clause later in these reasons.
I next deal with Mr Kilvington’s submissions
concerning extended primary
liability under section 27 of the Act.
Primary Liability
41. Section 27 of the Act provides:
“(1) A person shall not cause, instruct, induce, incite, assist or promote
another person to contravene this Act.
(2) A person who causes, instructs, induces, incites, assists or promotes
another person to contravene this Act is jointly and severally
liable with the
other person for the contravention of this
42. Section 27 is headed “Prohibition of Aiding Contravention of
Act”. I note that by sub-section 55(3) of the
Interpretation Act
the headings to sections are not part of the Act. So, in my construction of
section 27 of the Act, I do not take this section heading
into account nor have
I allowed it to influence my interpretation in any way.
43. It is readily apparent from the wording of subsection 27(I) of the Act that
it is intended to be a provision where direct liability
is imposed upon a person
who is an accessory to another person contravening the Act. There is a clear
correlation between the words
“a person” where first appearing in
section 27(I) of the Act and the subsequent words “another person”.
A plain reading of the subsection leads to the comfortable conclusion that
section 27 was intended to be an accessory liability
44. The operative words in subsection 27(I) of the Act have not become terms of
art or acquired a particular legal meaning. I propose
therefore, to read the
words in their ordinary and natural meaning. It is permissible to and I do
refer to the Macquarie Dictionary
meanings of the words cited by Mr Angelopoulos
at paragraph 13.4 of his written submissions. In particular, in respect of the
“cause” I take it to mean: ”to be the cause of; to bring
I take it to mean
“to give support, help or aid to in some undertaking or effort; to be
associated with as an assistant; to
give aid or help.”
45. However, Mr Kilvington sought to extend the meaning of the words
“cause” and “assist” in subsection 27(I)
of the Act. He
submitted that the words should be interpreted broadly or liberally. He submits
that an employer is jointly and
severally liable with the primary offender if
the employer has “caused” or “assisted” the
contraventions
of the Act by failing to put in place proper and reasonable
systems and safeguards designed to prevent, inter alia, sexual harassment
workplace. He drew my attention to the objects clause of the Act and the
potential unfairness in arriving at a less liberal
interpretation.
46. I reject Mr Kilvington’s argument. I do not believe the natural and
ordinary meaning of the words “cause”
and “assist” allow
me to so construe those words in subsection 27(I) of the Act. I do not accept
that the proper and
ordinary meaning of the words “cause” and
“assist”, where appearing, are a sufficient warrant for me to hold
that an employer can be liable for the conduct of an employee except where the
employer in some way participated directly or indirectly
or tacitly with the
alleged contravention. There must be some material nexus between the employer
and the person alleged in the
section. I do not consider that the words can be
extended to embrace the meaning contended for by Mr
Kilvington.
47. It is my view that the construction which Mr Kilvington seeks to put on the
word “cause” or “assist”
stretches impermissibly the
natural and ordinary meaning of the words. I do not consider the word
“cause” in section
27 of the Act embraces or includes a failure to
put in place safeguards and systems at work designed to prevent sexual
or other prohibited behaviour. I do not consider this was the
intended meaning of the word “cause” or “assist”
section 27 of the Act when read in its proper textual context or its context in
48. I do not consider the wording of section 27 of the Act creates in the
employer an active duty to ensure sexual harassment does
not occur in the work
place. I do not consider that an employer can, within the meaning of section 27
of the Act, be said to bring
by failing to have a safeguard system for prevention of prohibited conduct in
place. If the word “permit” were present in the section (which it
is not) then, this argument advanced by Mr Kilvington
would have greater
49. I also reject the construction argument that section 27 of the Act creates a
duty analogous to the non delegable duty at common
law owed by employers to
employees. This would be far too strained an interpretation to give to the
section and I would not be carrying
out what I perceive to be the purpose of
section 27. The purpose of section 27 of the Act was to bring about accessory
of a person where the natural and ordinary meaning of the words of the
section are satisfied.
Vicarious Liability
50. As I have already noted, there is no express provision dealing with
vicarious liability under the Act. The Northern Territory
would seem to be
unique in not having such a provision in the state and territory jurisdictions
of Australia. The question is whether,
when the Act is read as a whole and I
adopt a purposive approach to statutory interpretation, there was intended to be
liability imposed under the Act.
51. I consider the specific objects clause of the Act to be very important in
looking for an answer to the question. The objects
clause sets out the clear
purposes the Legislature sought to achieve under the Act. Amongst the objects
intended to be achieved
by the Act was the elimination of sexual harassment. I
accept that if there were no vicarious liability under the Act there would
significant gap in the range of protection provided to victims under the Act.
The Legislature’s objects to
discrimination and sexual
harassment could be frustrated if there is no vicarious liability under the
52. I also consider it important to consider that the Act applies to companies.
I have already found that it does. Overall, I am
persuaded that the liability
imposed under the Act extends to employers of employees who commit acts in
contravention of the Act.
53. It is helpful to consider the structure of the Act. Section 19 thereof
provides the prohibition, will contain exemptions, on
the basis of an attribute
in specified areas of activity. Similarly, section 20(I) of the Act provides
that discrimination includes:
(a) Any distinction, restriction, exclusion or preference made on the basis of
an attribute that has the effect of nullifying or
impairing equality of
opportunity; and
(b) harassment on the basis of an attribute.
54. Section 22 deals expressly with sexual harassment and section 23 of the Act
deals with victimisation. There is also provision
in Division 2 of Part 3 of
the Act (specifically, section 24 of the Act) for failing or refusing to
accommodate a special need that
a person has because of an
55. Part 4 Division 2 of the Act sets out the areas of activity where
discrimination is prohibited. Section 28 of the Act provides
that the Act
applies to prohibited conduct in the areas of:
(a) education;
(c) accommodation;
(d) goods, services and facilities;
(e) clubs; and
(f) insurance and superannuation.
56. In the area of work, the Act is framed to impose a prohibition on “a
person”: see subsection 31(I) of the Act.
Section 32 of the Act
“An organisation of workers, employers or people who carry on an industry,
profession, trade or business ...”
from discriminating in determining who may join the organisation and the terms
on which they may join.
57. Section 34 of the Act prohibits discrimination in the area of introducing
people to employment.
58. The Act provides for certain exemptions from discrimination. The exemptions
apply to “a person”: see Part V of
59. Division 4 of the Act deals with prohibiting discrimination in
accommodation. Again, the prohibition is on “a person”.
provides for discrimination in the supply of goods, services and facilities.
The prohibition is on “a person”.
60. Likewise, section 46 deals with discrimination by clubs, management
committees of clubs or club members. Section 48 of the Act
discrimination in the area of insurance and superannuation. Again, the
prohibitions in the provision of insurance and
superannuation are in respect of
“a person”.
61. The contents of the Act itself, reinforce the provisions of
Interpretation Act
that the prohibitions were intended to apply to
bodies corporate as well as natural persons. Thus, complaints can be made in
of companies as well as natural persons. Given that corporate bodies
only act through their servants and agents, I consider it anomalous
ordinary principles of vicarious liability would not apply under the Act given
the extensive range of prohibitions covered
by the Act and the areas, including
the workplace, where such prohibitions were intended to apply. The objects of
the Act would
not be advanced if there were no application of the principles of
vicarious liability in the prohibition sections of the Act.
62. This view is supported further by the contents of the various penalty
provisions under the Act. For example, section 79 of the
Act deals with the
penalty for failing to comply with a direction to attend a conciliation
proceeding. The penalty provision specifically
recognises and treats separately
bodies corporate (a fine of $5,000) and a natural person (a $1,000
63. The provisions of section 88 of the Act provide for what a Commissioner can
do at the end of a hearing. If a complaint is substantiated,
a respondent to a
complaint may be required to employ, reinstate or re-employ a person or to
promote or move a person to a position
within a specified time. It seems to me
strange and unintended by the Legislature to provide for an employer to do any
actions where a complaint is substantiated unless the employer,
including corporate employers, can be made a respondent to a complaint
reason of the conduct of its employees.
64. There are other penalty provisions in the Act which expressly refer to both
corporate bodies and natural persons in terms of
the penalties that can be
imposed. These provisions include subsections 92(5), 98(2), 99(2), 100(3) and
101(3) and section 104 of
the Act. These penalty provisions help confirm the
intent of the Legislature that it did intend for there to be vicarious liability
under the Act.
65. The text of the Act suggests to me that it was intended there be vicarious
liability under the Act.
66. I now seek to consider the conceptual issues raised in submissions to see if
they support the inference I have drawn from the
structure of the Act. There is
no authority binding on me on the point, but the balance of authority does
suggest quite strongly
that the civil right of action created under the Act is
that of a statutory tort.
67. In an obiter statement of opinion in
Australian Postal Commission v Dao
(1985) 3 NSWLR 565
, Justice McHugh, when sitting in the New South
Wales Court of Appeal, was of the opinion that an action under the
Anti-Discrimination Act
of NSW was an action in tort: see page 604,
letter G of the judgement. His Honour cited in support of this opinion
Halsbury, 4
edition, volume 45, paragraph 1201 at page 558. The
passage referred to by his Honour at paragraph 1201
“Those civil rights of action which are available for the recovery of
unliquidated damages by persons who have sustained injury
or loss from acts,
statements or omissions of others in breach of duty or contravention of right
imposed or conferred by law rather
than by agreement are rights of action in
It seems to me that the civil right of action provided to complainants in
section 88 of the Act fits within this passage.
68. Justice McHugh was not alone in coming to this conclusion as to the nature
of the civil right created by a piece of anti-discrimination
legislation like
New South Wales
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
. Justice Lee, an
experienced Supreme Court judge, in
Allders International Pty Ltd v Anstee
(1986) EOC 92-157
followed what Justice McHugh said in
Australian Postal Commission v Dao
(supra). At p76,556 of the reported
judgement, Justice Lee concluded in respect of the
Anti-Discrimination
“It seems to me that there are sound reasons for treating an action under
the Act as an action in tort...”
Earlier in his reasons he referred to the
Sex Discrimination Act
(UK) section 66(1) as permitting a claim alleging discrimination to be
“made the subject of civil proceedings in like
manner as any other claim
in tort or (in Scotland) in reparation of statutory duty”. Justice Lee
also referred to the definition
of a tort provided in Strouds Judicial
Dictionary 4
edition, page 2,789 as:
“...an act or omission giving rise, in virtue of the common law
(supra) the New South Wales Equal Opportunity Tribunal
concluded as to the legal classification of the civil right vested in victims
unlawful discrimination in the following terms at p77,173:
“The trend of authorities is by no means clear but, on balance, appears to
favour the proposition that the Act creates a statutory
70. I am inclined to follow this line of authority for the purposes of the Act.
On the balance of authority, it is my opinion that
the correct legal
classification given to the civil right vested in victims of unlawful
discrimination is that it is a statutory
71. Despite Mr Angelopoulos’ argument to the contrary, I consider that
where a complainant establishes liability in “a
person” under the
Act the principles of vicarious liability apply as a matter of logic and
principle. This conclusion would
be consistent with the approach in the general
law of tort. Contrary to the submissions put to me on behalf of the second
respondent,
I do not draw a distinction that the statutory torts created by the
Act, having statutory roots, do not allow the logical and consistent
application
of the principles of vicarious liability. I follow the general approach
established in
Australian Postal Commission v DAO
International Pty Ltd v Anstee & Others
(supra) and
M v R Pty Ltd
(supra) at pp 77, 172-77, 173) and I consider that an employer, including a
corporate employer, can be held to be vicariously liable
72. I note that this conclusion is consistent with the finding of Judge Duggan
Kordos v Plumrose (Australia) Limited
(1989) EOC 92-256
77,513 and the conclusion of Commissioner Lawrie in
Romelo v Darwin Port
Authority and others
(supra). In
, at the time of judgement,
there was no vicarious liability section in the Commonwealth
Discrimination Act
. To that extent it is somewhat confirmatory of my
approach in request of the Act. Although, I accept Mr Angelopoulos’
that there is a paucity of reasoning in the
leading to the conclusion that there was vicarious liability. I was not
influenced by the
73. I was referred to the “Guidelines for Preventing Sexual Harassment in
the Workplace” published by the Northern Territory
Chamber of Commerce
Inc. I allowed the tender of the document against the objection of Mr
Angelopoulos. Upon reflection, Mr Angelopoulos’
objection was a proper
one. These guidelines provide no assistance to me as a document which can be
taken into account in reaching
the conclusions I have.
74. Therefore, I consider that the second respondent is capable of being held
vicariously liable under the Act. It remains to be
seen at the continuation of
the hearing, when the facts are presented by the parties whether or not the
second respondent is vicariously
liable for the alleged acts of the first
respondent.
75. I will hear the parties upon any further directions that should be
76. It is appropriate that a date be set for the hearing of the facts and
further submissions of the parties. It is desirable this
matter proceed as soon
as possible and I am prepared to accommodate the parties as much as I
TOM STODULKA
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (106 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter