URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTRTCmr/2015/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:22:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Youngs -v- Katona & Katona -v- Youngs [2015] NTRTCmr 16 (13 March 2015)
REASONS FOR THE ORDER OF THE COMMISSIONER OF TENANCIES
INQUIRY – 28 January and 5 March 2015
KYLIE YOUNGS (‘TENANT’)
YVONNE DEBORAH KATONA (‘LANDLORD’)
RT1415-0469
YVONNE DEBORAH KATONA
KYLIE YOUNGS
RT1415-0346
is a determination of an application by the tenant made on 2 December 2014 and
an application by the landlord made 10 February
2015 in respect of premises
being 5/59 Noltenius Circuit, Gray in the Northern Territory of Australia
(‘the premises’).
The Inquiry was conducted on 28 January and 5
March 2015.
Procedural history
proceedings commenced when the tenant made an application for compensation under
section 122 of the
Residential Tenancies Act
(“the Act) for loss
and damage arising from the alleged failure of the landlord to maintain the
premises in a reasonable state
tenant also challenged the validity of a number of Notices served on her by the
landlord, including the RT08 Notice of Landlord’s
Intention to Retain
Security Deposit (“RT08 Notice”).
tenant’s application was listed for hearing on 28 January 2015. Ms Amanda
Porter of One Real Estate appeared on behalf of
the landlord and the tenant
represented herself although sought to be represented by a person (Ms Alakiotis)
who was not a legal
practitioner from the Darwin Community Legal Service.
the hearing the landlord sought an adjournment to allow more time to prepare for
the Inquiry.
that point I indicated that I would reserve the decision on whether or not to
allow the tenant to be represented by a third party
and the landlord’s
request for an adjournment until I made some observations about the
application.
the basis of the material before me, I found there is a tenancy agreement within
the meaning of and subject to the provisions of
the Act on the following
Commencement Date: 03 June 2013
Ended: 1 June 2014
Rent: $460 per week payable fortnightly in advance
Security Deposit $ 1,840.00
the basis of the documentation before me at the Inquiry I advised that my
preliminary view was that the RT08 Notice appeared not
to comply with the
requirements of section 112(5) of the Act and as such was likely to be invalid.
went on to note that if I were to find this to be the case it would be highly
likely that the landlord would then seek to pursue
a claim for compensation
under section 122 for the items that were the subject of the invalidated RT08
this in mind I formed the view that the proper course of action, given these
circumstances, was for both the tenant’s application
landlord’s application (if any) to be dealt with at the same time.
then foreshadowed that I was proposing to make a number of Orders and sought the
parties’ feedback on these. Neither party
objected to the orders proposed
and the following orders were made on 28 January 2015 in matter RT1415-0346:
hearing is adjourned.
entire amount of the security deposit and the withheld portion of the rent paid
in advance totalling $2,286.43 are to be returned
to the agent’s trust
account to be held in trust for the tenant.
Landlord is to submit any claim for compensation pursuant to section 122 of the
Residential Tenancies Act
by no later than 9.30am on Wednesday, 11
February 2015.
to be relisted for hearing at a future date to be advised.
the resumed hearing on 5 March 2015 Ms Porter again appeared for the landlord.
The tenant initially represented herself and again
sought to have Ms Alakiotis
of the Darwin Community Legal Service represent her.
Alakiotis attested that she was a legal student. Ms Porter objected to the
tenant’s request to have Ms Alakiotis represent
her. Section 148(2)(d) of
the Act provides that a party to an inquiry
be represented by a
person who is not a legal practitioner where all parties do not agree if:
“(d) the Commissioner is satisfied that the party is unable
to present the party’s case properly without assistance.”
formed the view that the tenant was articulate and a native English speaker who
was capable of presenting her own case without assistance.
I disallowed her
application to be represented by Ms Alakiotis although I did indicate that if I
perceived at any time during the
hearing that the tenant was having difficulties
I would reconsider my decision.
evidence before the Inquiry in respect of the tenant’s application
consisted of the oral evidence of the tenant and of Ms
Porter and the following
documentary material (kept on the Commissioner of Tenancies file numbered
RT1415-0346 (“the file”):
the material
submitted by the tenant prior to the hearing on 28 January 2015 in support of
the application; and
the material
submitted by Ms Porter prior to the hearing on 28 January 2015 in opposition to
the application.
evidence before the Inquiry in respect of the landlord’s application
consisted of the oral evidence of Ms Porter and of
the tenant and the following
documentary material (kept on the Commissioner of Tenancies file numbered
RT1415-0469 (“the file”):
the material
submitted by the landlord prior to the hearing on 5 March 2015 in support of the
application; and
the material
submitted by the tenant prior to the hearing on 5 March 2015 in opposition to
the application.
The tenant’s claim for
compensation
tenant is seeking compensation under section 122 totalling $7,530.36 made up of
various elements that are dealt with in the below
paragraphs.
tenant’s claim for compensation rests, in part, on arguing that a number
of procedural actions undertaken by the landlord
under the Act were not carried
out in accordance with the requirements of the Act and are therefore invalid. I
will deal with each
matter in turn before analysing each element of the
tenant’s claim.
Validity of RT08 Notice
find that this Notice
comply with the requirements of section
112(5)(c) or (d) of the Act in that the necessary receipts, invoices or other
documents were
not attached to the Notice when it was served on the tenant.
landlord has since lodged an application for compensation under section 122 of
Validity of RT05 Notice to Terminate Tenancy
Notice is served on a tenant under section 90 of the Act and provides 14
days’ notice before the fixed term expires under
a fixed term tenancy
agreement that the tenancy will terminate when the fixed term expires.
Notice must comply with the requirements of section 101 of the Act in that it
must contain the address of the premises, the date
when vacant possession is to
be given up (which is the date specified in the agreement) and the grounds for
termination (which is
the end of the fixed term). The Notice must also be
addressed to the tenant and signed by the landlord.
Notice is to be served in accordance with section 154 of the Act which requires
that the notice should be served at the tenant’s
last known residence or
postal address.
Notice in question was dated 12 May 2014 and the accompanying affidavit of
service states that it was posted to the tenant’s
residential address at
4.30pm on 12 May 2104 and emailed to the tenant at 6.01pm on the same day. The
Notice stipulated vacant possession
as being required on 1 June 2014 (which is
the expiry date under the tenancy agreement).
tenant in a Statutory Declaration dated 18 December 2014 provided in support of
her application, has at paragraph 5, attested
that she received the Notice via
email on or around 21 May 2014. The tenant indicted at the Inquiry that her
email account had been
‘shut out’ by a third party that she was in a
domestic dispute with and she only gained back access to her email account
this date. She stated that she had not received the mailed version of the
landlord was not to know of the tenant’s domestic circumstances and acted
in accordance with the Act in relation to the
serving of the Notice. In fact
they have gone beyond what the Act requires in that the Notice was sent by both
post and email.
the basis of the evidence I find that the RT05 Notice
complies with
the requirements of the Act and that the landlord was entitled to take back
vacant possession of the property on 1 June 2014.
Porter having had no contact from the tenant up to that point had no reason to
believe the tenant would not have vacated the property
on and from that date so
was entitled to enter the property for the purpose of carrying out the outgoing
inspection on 2 June 2014
as advised to the tenant in writing.
is no dispute that the tenant had vacated by this date in any
Validity of the Incoming and Outgoing Condition
tenant asserts that as she was not present when the incoming and outgoing
condition inspections were undertaken the reports arising
from these inspections
are invalid.
relation to the Incoming Condition Report the tenant stated at the Inquiry that
she was provided with a copy of this report at
the office of the
landlord’s agent and was asked to sign and initial each page of the
report. The report was signed and dated
by the tenant on 3 June 2013 (the date
the tenancy commenced).
evidence was provided by either party as to why the tenant was not present for
the incoming inspection nor what the tenant was
advised in relation to her
rights under section 26 of the Act.
cannot overcome the fact that the tenant has signed and initialled each page of
the report and therefore by inference has accepted
the report without
modification. I find the incoming tenancy report
to be valid
relation to the Outgoing Condition Report I note that the date and time for this
inspection was clearly stated in a letter from
Ms Porter to the tenant that was
attached to the RTO5 Notice. Ms Porter also stated that this was followed up
with a reminder email
sent to the tenant on 28 May 2014 and a reminder phone
call made to the tenant’s mobile phone on 30 May 2014.
detailed at paragraph [25] the tenant advised that she received the RT05 Notice
(and therefore the accompanying letter) via email
on 21 May 2014.
tenant stated at the Inquiry that as a result of the domestic problems
previously mentioned in paragraph [25] she had to obtain
a new mobile phone. She
advised the landlord’s agent of her new phone number and the agent
acknowledged that the new number
had been recorded on the tenant’s file as
her new contact number. The tenant indicated that the voice mail of 30 May 2014
to the new number which was only temporary. She did not advise the agent of
this at the time she provided the new number nor did
she advise them
subsequently that the old number was again her contact her number.
this knowledge it is unreasonable of the tenant to assume that the agent would
be expected to call both numbers.
any event it is somewhat of a moot point given the fact that there was no doubt
that the tenant had received advice regarding the
inspection well in advance of
the specified date.
tenant made no attempt to contact Ms Porter to advise that this date/time was
inconvenient and to organise a more convenient date/time.
the other hand the evidence clearly supports the fact that Ms Porter has done
her best to contact the tenant in advance of the
inspection date/time on several
this basis I find that it was reasonable in the circumstances for Ms Porter to
proceed to undertake the inspection on the scheduled
date/time in the absence of
the tenant.
if I am wrong in regards to the validity of both reports, in practical terms in
assessing the landlord’s claim for compensation,
all this means is that
other evidence, such as the photographs taken by Ms Porter during the final
inspection, any relevant provisions
of the tenancy agreement, the written
statements provided by the parties and the oral evidence from the parties, may
be taken into
account as evidence of the condition of the premises at the end of
the tenancy.
Return of rent paid in advance ($1.409.65)
43 of the Act deals with the requirements of the landlord to return to the
tenant any rent paid in advance when a tenancy
is terminated before the end of a
period for which rent has been paid. The section is reproduced
43 Repayment of rent paid
(1) If rent is paid in advance and the tenancy is terminated before the
end of the period for which rent has been paid, the landlord
must, as soon as
reasonably possible, refund to the tenant the appropriate proportion of the
amount paid as rent in advance.
Maximum penalty: 20 penalty units.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to rent, or a part of rent,
paid in advance that may be applied towards other liabilities
of the tenant to
the landlord in accordance with this Act.
(3) The Commissioner may, on the application of the tenant, order the
landlord to refund to the tenant the proportion of the amount
paid as rent in
advance (not being money for which the tenant is liable under this Act to pay to
the landlord as rent or otherwise)
that the Commissioner thinks fit.
43(2) provides the circumstances in which rent paid in advance may be withheld.
is no dispute that at the time of vacating the property upon the end of the
tenancy on 1 June 2014, the tenant had made a rent
payment on or about 4 June
2014 which resulted in her having overpaid her rent by an amount of
evidence of Ms Porter at the Inquiry and supported in the documentary evidence
provided by Ms Porter in response to the tenant’s
application was that the
tenant phoned her on 3 June 2014 and a discussion took place regarding the
outgoing inspection items that
required rectification. Ms Porter attests that in
this phone call the tenant provided verbal approval to allow Ms Porter to
to rectify the items and pay for them from the security deposit and if
this wasn’t sufficient to cover all items, to use the
overpaid rent to
cover the residual.
have no reason to doubt Ms Porter’s evidence or the content of the
documentary evidence that supports her view.
tenant indicated at the Inquiry that she was shocked by the amount withheld from
the security deposit. She further indicated that
during the 3 June 2014 phone
call she had only ever authorised the withholding of funds for specific items.
She felt strongly aggrieved
that she was not offered an opportunity to make good
the other items herself.
an email to Ms Porter on 6 June 2014 in which she expresses her frustration at
not being given an opportunity to rectify the items
highlighted in the outgoing
inspection report she states:
“I give permission for you to
use the bond to do the pest spray and fix the locks and ceiling.”
the Inquiry the tenant stated that there was no question she was responsible for
rectifying the damage to the ceiling, replacing
the damaged curtains (although
she strongly objects to the cost associated with this in the landlord’s
claim for damages) and
for the pest spray. There is a discrepancy between the
tenant’s evidence at the Inquiry and the email of 6 June 2014.
Nevertheless
on the basis of the evidence before me I find that the tenant is more likely
than not to have provided the landlord with
permission to retain the rent paid
in advance to satisfy any claims made in excess of the security deposit. This
action was permitted
under section 43(2) of the Act.
reconciliation of amounts withheld (totalling $3,249.65 comprising $1,840.00
security deposit and $1,409.65 rent paid in advance)
and funds deducted
(totalling $2,286.43) was provided to the tenant by Ms Porter in an email dated
19 June 2014. The surplus of $963.22
was ultimately returned to the tenant.
net impact of my decisions in relation to the claim by the tenant and counter
claim by the landlord ultimately deal with this
Compensation due to inability to use shower properly as a
result of low water pressure ($2,150.00)
tenancy commenced on 3 June 2013 and this matter was reported on 21 August 2013
to the previous Property Manager (the tenant indicated
at the Inquiry that Ms
Porter was the third Property Manager she had during her time in the premises).
tenant indicated at the Inquiry that the water flow at the time of notifying the
issue was sufficient to allow for showering but
it got progressively worse over
time to the extent that it was near impossible to use the shower. She also
indicated that the issue
of low water pressure was only a problem with the
shower and not with any other taps throughout the property.
Porter indicated that she was not aware of the problem and it was not drawn to
her attention during the routine in inspection undertaken
in February 2014. She
advised that the agency’s usual practice in advising about an upcoming
inspection was to advise the tenant
in writing and to include a
‘maintenance form’ with the letter which allowed the tenant to
indicate any maintenance requirements
in writing.
the issue of the shower’s water pressure was undoubtedly an inconvenience
I cannot accept that if the problem was as
significant as the tenant claimed
during the Inquiry that she would not have followed up with Ms Porter to have
the matter attended
to as a matter of some urgency.
cannot be satisfied on the basis of the evidence before me that the landlord has
failed to act with reasonable diligence to have
the defect repaired.
would have found otherwise had I been provided with evidence that the tenant had
raised the issue on more than one occasion.
tenant’s claim for compensation in respect of this matter
Compensation due to faulty hot water system
($645.00) and refund of excess electricity ($360.00)
leak in the hot water system was never reported by the tenant to the landlord.
It was common ground that this leak was first detected
on or about 27 February
2014 by Ms Porter during a routine inspection of the property. There is evidence
that Ms Porter raised a
Job Order for repairs to the system following the
inspection (there is some doubt as to the exact date of this order) and the
was followed up by Ms Porter on 5 March 2014.
Porter advised that the plumber who attended provided a quote on 13 March 2014
and advised the landlord that as the leak was small
and the system old, it would
be better to replace the entire system than try and affect a repair. The
landlord took the view that
it was better to undertake this work when the
premises was vacant rather than attempt to do so while there was a tenant in the
and cause unnecessary inconvenience to the tenant during these works.
As such, the work was not carried out during the term of Ms
note an entry on page 8 of the OCR made by Ms Porter as
“dirty marks from HWS leaking”
Porter confirmed at the Inquiry that the entry was made because there were marks
visible from the leak. This would seem to suggest
that the leak was perhaps a
little more than minor and was certainly sustained enough to leave visible
tenant’s claim is twofold. In addition to seeking compensation for
inaction by the landlord to repair the fault, the tenant
is also seeking
reimbursement of what she considers to be electricity paid in excess of what she
would normally have had to pay.
claim is based on the argument that the hot water leak meant that the system was
recharging with water quicker than normal and
as such she has incurred higher
electricity charges as the system was heating the water more frequently.
tenant provided her electricity billing history to support her view that her
electricity costs increased markedly in the period
following the discovery of
the leak. The history is:
2013 Quarter - $278.17
2013 Quarter - $444.28
2014 Quarter - $647.49
2014 Quarter - $806.00
is somewhat difficult to draw the conclusion that the leak was the sole
contributor to the escalation in the tenant’s electricity
costs noting
that there was a 5% tariff increase on 1 January 2014 and the wet season does
not officially end until 1 April each
year (the wet season being a traditionally
high usage period due to the heat/humidity).
is common ground that there was a defect and Ms Porter has conceded that a
decision was taken by the landlord on the plumber's
advice not to fix it while
the tenant was in occupation of the premises.
assume the leak in itself doesn't mean that the tenant went without hot water
and therefore I am not persuaded by her claim for
compensation of $645.00.
do however think she has a valid argument that she suffered some loss, albeit
minor, in terms of increased electricity cost.
will allow an amount as compensation as there is some loss but I am not
persuaded that the tenant’s method of calculating
it is sound.
Power and Water Corporation publish fact sheets to assist their customers manage
their energy consumption. One such fact sheet
you can make a real difference”
provides information on the average
costs in cents per hour to operate some common household appliances. A hot water
system is said
to cost 13.4 cents per hour (as at 1 January 2015) to
am prepared to allow a discount factor of 25% for excess power usage for the hot
water system over the course of the 13 weeks from
the time the leak was
discovered to when the tenancy ended.
calculate this as follows:
13.4 cents per hour x 2,184 hours =
$292.66 * 25% = $73.16
therefore allow an amount of
by way of compensation for higher
electricity usage associated with the leaking hot water
Refund of rent for period 2 -16 June 2014
element appears to be double counting as this amount relates to the rent paid in
Return of full security deposit ($1,840.00)
element is dealt with in the context of the landlord’s application for
compensation under section 122 of the Act.
Compensation for
distress and disappointment ($500.00)
Porter at the Inquiry attested to her efforts to contact the tenant and the lack
of response from the tenant. This is recorded
in the document titled
& Conversation Diary
provided by Ms Porter in her response to the
tenant’s application.
breakdown in communication between the parties was clearly as a result of the
actions of both parties and not due to the sole
actions of one.
diminishing the tenant’s genuine feelings of distress in relation to the
way her tenancy in the property ended and the
undoubtable level of antipathy
between Ms Porter and herself, on the basis of the evidence before me I am
unable to find that the
tenant has suffered physical inconvenience to a level
that would warrant compensation for distress and disappointment.
am not convinced that the tenant has failed to receive proper treatment at the
hands of Ms Porter and has therefore suffered distress
and disappointment.
tenant’s claim for compensation in respect of this matter
The landlord’s claim for
compensation
landlord is seeking compensation under section 122 totalling $2,286.43 made up
of various elements that are dealt with in the
below paragraphs.
Costs for cleaning services- $645.00
am satisfied on the basis of comparing the incoming and outgoing condition
reports and the accompanying photos, the supplied invoice
and the oral evidence
of the parties, that this item is properly claimed and should be allowed in full
Costs for gardening service-
am not satisfied on the basis of comparing the incoming and outgoing condition
reports and the accompanying photos, the supplied
invoice and the oral evidence
of the parties, that this item is properly claimed and should be allowed in
full. The claim is
not allowed
Pest treatment -
element of the claim is not in dispute by the tenant and as such is allowed in
Costs for general repairs -
element is made up of two components:
ceiling which is not in dispute by the tenant and is therefore allowed in full
installation of curtains and brackets totaling $437.50 which is disputed by the
tenant and is dealt with in the below paragraphs.
tenant disputes the claim that the curtain brackets needed to be replaced and
whilst does not argue that she is responsible for
replacing the curtains with
curtains of a like standard, she argues that the price paid for the quality of
the curtains that have
been installed is excessive. In effect the price does not
reflect quality and the curtains have certainly not been replaced with
like-for-like.
the absence of evidence to support either parties' views about the cost for the
replacement curtains being fair and reasonable
and representing like-for-like
replacement I have applied a discount (depreciation) factor for fair wear and
tear noting that the
ICR shows the curtains as being new at the commencement of
the tenancy.
2014 Guide for Rental Property Owners
issued by the Australian Taxation
Office shows an effective life of 6 years for curtains. This represents annual
straight line deprecation
of the purchase
price. The tenancy was for 52 weeks.
such I have discounted the landlord’s claim for replacement curtains by
therefore allow a partial claim of
Costs for replacement of damaged or missing lights-
tenant argues that one of the oyster lights was damaged by a contractor that
installed a new split system airconditioning unit
after she had commenced the
tenancy of the property. She stated at the Inquiry that she had been reported
this to the landlord’s
Porter stated that she had no knowledge of this having occurred and the tenancy
file does not have a record of the tenant having
advised that this had occurred.
I can only assume that the change in Property Managers may have something to do
have no reason to dispute the tenant’s version of events.
the absence of an itemized break down of costs I am discounting the
landlord’s claim by a notional amount of $35.00 to reflect
preexisting damage..
therefore allow a partial claim of
Key cutting - $14.00
the inquiry I noted that this item was included in the original RT08 Notice but
has not been included in the landlord’s
application for compensation.
on the documentary evidence before me this item relates to the cutting of two
keys that were missing and does not appear to
be in dispute.
have therefore incorporated this amount in my final decision given that it was
not disputed. This element is allowed in full –
Summary and Orders
The RT08 Notice
issued by the landlord to the tenant is invalid as it did not comply with the
provisions of the Act;
The RT05 Notice
issued by the landlord to the tenant complies with all relevant provisions of
the Act and as such is valid; and
The Incoming and
Outgoing Inspection Reports prepared by the landlord satisfy the requirements of
the Act and as such are both valid.
following financial summary is provided:
Security Deposit
Rent Paid in Advance
Less: Refund Already Made to Tenant
Balance Held in Trust
Landlord's Claim
Cleaning - allowed in full
Garden Maintenance - not allowed
Pest Control - not in dispute
Repairs to Ceiling - not in dispute
Repairs to Curtains - partially allowed
Replacement Light Covers and Bulbs - partially allowed
Key Cutting - not in dispute
Balance Held in Trust
Tenant's Claim
Return of Rent Paid in Advance
Low Water Pressure in Shower - not allowed
Faulty Hot Water System - allowed
Refund of Rent
Return of Full Security Deposit
Compensation for Distress and Disappointment
To be remitted to the tenant
Accordingly,
I order that:
Respondent in matter number RT1415-0346 is to pay the Applicant $73.16 in
compensation pursuant to section 122 of the Act.
Respondent in matter number RT1415-0469 is liable to pay the Applicant
compensation pursuant to section 122 of the Act in the
amount of $2,068.54.
the basis of the order for compensation made in Order 2 above, the Applicant is
entitled to retain $2,068.54 from the funds held
in trust in respect of the
Respondent’s security deposit and rent paid in advance in satisfaction of
compensation awarded under
Applicant is to return the balance of $217.89 held in trust to the Respondent.
Dated this Friday, 13 March 2015
Andrew Macrides
Delegate of the
Commissioner of Tenancies
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (263 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter