URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCCA/2024/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:18:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ER v The King [2024] NTCCA 11 (21 October 2024)
ER v The King
[2024] NTCCA 11
PARTIES: ER
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: CA 13 of 2023 (21829253, 21844278)
DELIVERED: 21 October 2024
HEARING DATE: 8 July 2024
JUDGMENT OF: Brownhill, Huntingford and Reeves JJ
CATCHWORDS:
CRIMINAL LAW – Appeals – Application for leave to appeal –
Appeal against conviction
CRIMINAL LAW – Appeals – Appeal against conviction –
Failure to direct the jury as to implied admission –
Whether a miscarriage
of justice occurred – No implied admission found to have been made where
there was an express denial
by the Accused – Rational forensic
justification existed for trial counsel not seeking a direction –
Direction to the
jury not necessary – Leave to appal granted –
Appeal dismissed
CRIMINAL LAW – Appeals – Appeal against conviction –
Whether prosecutor’s closing address undermined the onus
and standard of
proof – Whether prosecutor’s closing address caused a miscarriage of
justice – Whether the address
and trial Judge’s summing up deflected
the jury from its task to decide whether the prosecution proved the elements of
offence beyond reasonable doubt – The closing address and summing up
did not deflect the jury from its proper task –
No miscarriage of justice
effected – Leave to appeal granted – Appeal dismissed
CRIMINAL LAW – Appeals – Appeal against conviction –
Whether trial Judge failed to give proper
direction –
Trial Judge’s use of a
direction – Whether summing up
contained the essential components of a
direction – No
further re-direction sought by trial counsel – Trial Judge properly
conveyed the essential components of
Liberato direction
Judge’s direction did not give rise to a miscarriage of justice
–Leave to appeal granted – Appeal
Barca v The Queen
[1975] HCA 42
(1975) 133 CLR 82
Craig v The Queen
[2018] HCA 13
264 CLR 202
De Silva v The Queen
[2019] HCA 48
(2019) 268 CLR 57
Douglass v The
[2012] HCA 34
(2012) 86 ALJR 1086
Green v The Queen
[1971] HCA 55
(1971) 126 CLR 28
Hargraves v The Queen
[2011] HCA 44
(2011) 245 CLR 257
HCF v The Queen
[2023] HCA 35
97 ALJR 978
Hewitt v The King
[2021] NSWCCA 227
MLW v The Queen
[2022] NTCCA 2
Murray v The Queen
(2002) 211 CLR 19
Orreal v The
[2021] HCA 44
(2021) 274 CLR 630
The Queen v BEC
[2023] QCA 154
Queen v Calides
(1983) 34 SASR 355
The Queen v Lavery
(2013) 229 A
The Queen v MMJ
[2006] VSCA 226
(2006) 166 A Crim R 501
Thomas v The
[1960] HCA 2
(1960) 102 CLR 584
Weiss v The Queen
[2005] HCA 81
(2005) 224 CLR 300
Zhou v The Queen
[2021] NSWCCA 278
referred to.
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: B Lodge
Respondent: L Babb SC with L Auld
Solicitors:
Applicant: Shaw Legal & Advisory
Respondent: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 56
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
ER v The King
[2024] NTCCA 11
CA 13 of 2023 (21829253, 21844278)
CORAM: BROWNHILL, HUNTINGFORD and REEVES JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 21 October 2024)
applicant was charged with nine counts relating to sexual activity with two
children under the age of 16, BH and AT. Following
a trial by jury, the
applicant was found guilty of:
(a) three counts (counts 1, 3 and 9) of aggravated indecent dealing with a child
under the age of 16, contrary to s 132(2)(a) and
Criminal Code
(b) two counts (counts 2 and 7) of aggravated sexual intercourse with a child
under the age of 16, contrary to s 127(1) and (3) of
(c) three counts (counts 4, 5 and 6) of sexual intercourse without consent,
contrary to s 192(3) of the
Criminal Code
(d) one count (count 8) of aggravated unlawful assault, contrary to
s 188(1) of the
Criminal Code
[2] All of the
aggravated counts involved the circumstance of aggravation that the child was
under the age of 10 years. All of the
counts bar count 9 related to the
applicant was sentenced to a total effective term of imprisonment of 17 years
and one month, with a non-parole period of 12
applicant applied for an extension of time within which to appeal and for leave
to appeal against his conviction. The applicant
was granted the extension of
time but refused leave to appeal by a single Judge of this Court. The applicant
then sought that the
application be heard by a full bench of this Court pursuant
to s 429(2) of the
Criminal Code
[5] By the time
of the hearing, there were three proposed grounds of appeal, namely:
(a) The trial Judge failed to direct the jury as to the use that could be made
of an implied admission made by the applicant (ground
(b) The prosecutor’s closing address undermined the onus and standard of
proof by submitting to the jury that they could accept
the complainants’
evidence by rejecting the suggestions they were being dishonest or were
unreliable, thereby causing a miscarriage
of justice (ground 2).
(c) The trial Judge failed to give a proper
(ground 3).
respondent argued that none of the proposed grounds of appeal had any merit and
leave to appeal should be refused, or if granted,
the appeal should be
applicant and the complainants’ mother (‘mother’) commenced a
relationship when AT was about seven years
old, BH was about five years old, and
the mother’s third child, FH, was about four years old.
[8] Around a
year later, the applicant, the mother and the three children began living
together. During the next few years, the applicant
and the mother had two more
children together.
[9] On 1 July
2018, BH told the mother that every time she (the mother) left BH with the
applicant, and every time he was in her (BH’s)
bed, he was touching her
vagina and anus.
[10] The mother
immediately confronted the applicant and demanded that he leave the house. The
applicant left and Police were called.
Ground 1 related to what is said to be
the Crown’s reliance upon an implied admission made by the applicant
during that confrontation.
[11] BH gave
evidence that the offending against her occurred on three separate occasions
when she was eight or nine years old. Counts
1 and 2 involved the applicant
placing BH’s hand on his penis, digitally penetrating BH’s anus,
then having penile/anal
intercourse with her. Counts 3 to 7 involved the
applicant placing BH’s hand on his penis, forcing BH to engage in
digitally penetrating BH’s anus, having penile/anal intercourse
with her and engaging in cunnilingus with her. Count 8 involved
the applicant
touching BH’s vaginal and anal areas over her clothing.
[12] AT gave
evidence that the offending against her, count 9, occurred when she was eight or
nine years old. It involved the applicant
touching her vagina over her clothing
and exposing his erect penis to her. She also gave evidence of an uncharged act
which occurred
when the family was on holiday in Queensland involving the
applicant touching her vaginal area over her clothing.
[13] The Crown
relied on the uncharged act and the charged acts as tendency evidence
establishing the applicant’s tendencies
to have a sexual interest in his
prepubescent stepdaughters and to sexually assault them.
[14] In addition
to the complainants’ evidence, the mother gave evidence of BH’s
complaint and the confrontation, and
two friends of AT gave complaint evidence.
The applicant’s case
applicant gave evidence denying the charges. He said he spent little time at the
family home during the period of the charged
offending, stating he was often
away at work or with a friend. He also gave evidence about the confrontation
with the mother.
[16] In his
closing address, the applicant’s counsel said it was not the defence case
that the complainants had got together
and concocted ‘some sort of
story’ or that they had been coached by the mother. Reliance was placed on
the high standard
of proof, the limited opportunity to commit the alleged
offending, the applicant’s clear denials of any offending, aspects
complainants’ evidence that made it unreliable, and the possibility that
another male had engaged in sexual conduct
principles: miscarriage of justice and failure to give directions
is an appeal against the findings of guilt brought pursuant to s 410 of the
Criminal Code
. By s 411(1) and (2) of the
Criminal Code
appeals must be allowed if the Court is of the opinion that the verdict of the
jury should be set aside (relevantly) if there
was a miscarriage of justice,
unless the Court is of the opinion that no substantial miscarriage of justice
has occurred.
this Court held (at
[28]-[33]) that to establish a miscarriage of justice arising from a material
irregularity in the trial, the
appellant must show a realistic possibility that
the identified procedural irregularity affected the basis on which the jury
its verdict of guilty, in the context of the trial as a whole. It is
only if that threshold is met that the appellate court is required
to go on to
consider the proviso and answer the quite distinct question of whether it is
satisfied that no substantial miscarriage
of justice actually occurred.
recently, in
the High Court has put
the test somewhat differently. Gageler CJ, Gleeson and Jagot JJ referred (at
[2]) to the decision of Beech-Jones
CJ at CL in
in which his Honour
provided a ‘convenient summary concerning those errors or irregularities
that will amount to a miscarriage
of justice’ in the context of a
statutory provision like s 411(1) of the
Criminal Code
Honours noted, with apparent approval, the observations made by his Honour in
as follows:
[I]f the error or irregularity ‘is
properly characterised as a “failure to observe the requirements of the
criminal process
in a fundamental respect” then it would follow that the
conviction would not stand regardless of any assessment of its potential
on the trial’, but otherwise there is no miscarriage unless the error or
irregularity is ‘prejudicial in the sense
that there was a “real
chance” that it affected the jury’s verdict ... or
“realistically [could] have affected
the verdict of guilt” ... or
“had the capacity for practical injustice” or was “capable of
affecting the
result of the trial”.
majority pointed out (at [3]) that the focus of his Honour’s observations
was miscarriage of justice, not the common form proviso referring
to ‘no substantial miscarriage of justice’.
[21] Difficulties
in the application of the various formulations of the miscarriage of justice
test and the proviso that have been
articulated by the High Court since
v The Queen
were identified by
Edelman and Steward JJ in
(at [75]-[83]). We were told by counsel for
the applicant that those difficulties may be addressed in an appeal listed for
before seven members of the High Court later this
applicant’s position was that, if this Court were satisfied that any one
of the errors asserted in the proposed appeal
grounds had been made, it would be
satisfied both that there was a failure to observe the requirements of the
criminal process in
a fundamental respect and that the error or irregularity was
prejudicial in the sense described in
respondent argued that there was no error or irregularity and, even if there
was, none of the asserted errors or irregularities
are such as to amount to a
miscarriage of justice and, even if they were, they do not amount to a
substantial miscarriage of justice
with the effect that the proviso would
respondent also argued that, on an appeal from conviction on the basis of a
failure to give a direction where counsel for
the accused did not seek the
direction at trial, the Court will not be satisfied that the failure constitutes
a miscarriage of justice
unless satisfied there was no objectively discernible
forensic advantage in not seeking the direction. Reliance was placed on the
decisions of the High Court in
Orreal v The
Craig v The
, the respondent accepted, in the High Court, that there had been a
miscarriage of justice at the trial by the admission of irrelevant
the jury that they could use the evidence
along with all the other evidence in
the case. The High Court held, contrary to the conclusion of the Court of
Appeal, that, because
the inadmissible evidence could have affected the
jury’s assessment of the complainant’s credibility, a substantial
miscarriage
of justice had occurred. In the court below, there had been an
additional ground relating to the failure of the defence counsel at
object to the admission of the inadmissible evidence. The Court of Appeal had
found that defence counsel decided not to
object because there was a forensic
advantage for the defence in not doing so, and concluded that the appellant
should be bound by
his counsel’s forensic choices, with the effect that no
miscarriage of justice could arise. Kiefel CJ and Keane J observed
that there was no doubt about the correctness of the Court of Appeal’s
decision on this basis. Their Honours observed
that, save for exceptional cases,
in our system of justice, parties are bound by the conduct of their counsel, who
exercise a wide
discretion in deciding matters such as what evidence to lead or
have excluded.
It is usually only
when an appellate court is persuaded that no rational forensic justification can
be discerned for counsel’s
decision that consideration will be given to
whether it gave rise to a miscarriage of
Their Honours added (at
[18]) that a forensic choice on the part of counsel to not object to the
admission of particular irrelevant
evidence would preclude the occurrence of a
miscarriage of justice.
, the appellant had been incorrectly advised by his trial counsel
that if he gave evidence at the trial, he would be cross-examined
criminal history, but it was not found that, if he had not been given that
incorrect advice, he would have given evidence
at the trial. The High Court
dismissed his appeal on the basis that there was no miscarriage of justice where
the evidence did not
establish that the trial would have been conducted
differently had the incorrect advice not been given. In describing the
appellant’s
submissions to the High Court, the Court observed (at [23]) as
The appellant’s complaint is with the application of
an objective test drawn from the judgments in
to the Court of
Appeal’s determination that the incorrect advice did not occasion a
miscarriage of justice. As the appellant
observes, the analysis in
is concerned with challenges to forensic judgments that are within
counsel’s remit. The objective test that
holds is to be
applied to the determination of challenges of that kind takes into account the
wide discretion conferred on counsel
under our adversarial system of criminal
A necessary consequence
of that discretion is that the accused will generally be bound by
counsel’s forensic choices. It is
only where the appellate court is
persuaded that no rational forensic justification can be discerned for a
challenged decision that
consideration will turn to whether its making
constituted a miscarriage of justice.
neither of these cases concerned the failure of counsel to seek a particular
direction about the use to which the jury
may put certain evidence, or the way
in which the jury is to reason upon the evidence, we accept that, ordinarily, it
is only when
an appellate court is persuaded that no rational forensic
justification can be discerned for counsel’s decision not to seek
direction that consideration will be given to whether it gave rise to a
miscarriage of justice.
[28] Further, it
is well settled that the failure of competent counsel to seek a particular
direction in relation to evidence from
the trial Judge, or to seek a
re-direction or clarification of a direction given by the trial Judge, is a
relevant consideration
in determining whether the absence of a direction or an
asserted misdirection comprises a miscarriage of
ground 1 – Failure to direct the jury about admissions
What happened at trial
[29] The mother
gave evidence that she was sitting outside the home when BH made the complaint
to her about the applicant offending
The mother went inside and
confronted the applicant. Her evidence was as
‘You, you need to get out of my house now. Get out. Get out of my
house’. And I just kept repeating myself. I
said ‘I’m calling
the police’ and I just kept repeating myself and he was saying, ‘Why
what’s going
on? What happened? What’s going on?’ And I said,
‘You need to get out of my house, get out of my house’.
kept repeating myself. I said ‘I’m calling the police.’ And
then we made it to the living room, the
front door and I was standing in front
of the door inside the house. So the door was behind me. [BH] was standing
behind me against
a wall, next to the door and I just kept looking at him going
‘Get out of my house’. And he said, ‘What’s
on?’ and then he looked past me and he said ‘What’s going on
And that’s when I said, ‘So you are mucking around
with my kids.
You need to get out.’ And I sweared [sic] at him,
‘Get the fuck out of my house, fuck off out of my house.’ And
he walked out, no so he was – he was sitting on the couch and was
buttoning up his shirt and I said ‘
You’re muckin’ around
with my kids
’ and he said, ‘No I’m not. Someone’s
talking shit in their ears, someone putting ideas into their head. Someone
talking shit to me.’ And I turned to [BH], I said, ‘Is anyone
talkin’ shit to you?’ And she said ‘No’.
You are doing shit, you’re the one doing shit to children.
You’re a sick cunt, get out of my house’. And he was buttoning up
his shirt and he then he went like that and he said,
‘Well do something
heart’. And that’s what
he was doing.
I yelled ‘Get out, get out, get out, get out, get out, get out.’
I just keep repeating and he went out and I locked the
door and I called the
applicant’s evidence-in-chief about this confrontation was as
[the mother] just told me to get out, told me to get out, so I jumped up,
‘What’s going on? What’s going
on?’. Then she approached
[BH] and I approached and I said, ‘What’s going on?’ And
that’s when [the
mother] turned around and told me, ‘You been
playing around with her.’ And that’s when I said – I
scream or nothing, I just told her, ‘Grab a knife and stab me
if you think I did it’. I couldn’t scream because
my heart was
getting crushed. I couldn’t do anything. Just to walk outside and she told
me to get outside.
cross-examination, the applicant said that the mother was telling him he was
touching ‘the kid’ and was ‘raving
on about that, how [he]
touched the kids’, and he said to her ‘well grab the knife and stab
me if you think I did
cross-examination, the prosecutor put to the applicant that he knew exactly why
he was being kicked out of the house, essentially
because he was responsible for
the sexual abuse of the
complainants.
The applicant
denied that. There was then the following
protest your innocence? Did you say repeatedly, ‘I didn’t do it, I
don’t understand what you’re talking
actually put to you by [the mother] that you had been mucking around with her
kids?---I didn’t - -
Did you repeatedly deny that you had done anything?---What do you mean
repeated? What? Like what?
You’d just been accused of sexually abusing your
step-children?---Yep.
Your response is to say, effectively, that someone’s been putting shit
in their ears and then, ‘Stab me. Go on, do something
That was your response, wasn’t it?---No, that wasn’t my
It wasn’t?---Nuh.
What did you do?---She got it all wrong. I didn’t say, ‘Stab
me’. I just said, ‘Here, stab me if you think
– if you think I did it’.
[The applicant denied the alleged offending.]
...[Y]ou knew exactly why you were being kicked out of that house on that
day. You knew because you were responsible for the sexual
abuse of two of [the
mother’s] daughters?---No sir.
And that was a reason why despite the imminent breakdown of your four-year
relationship, the extent of your denials of the accusations
[was] limited to one
statement about someone putting shit in their ears and saying stab me? Anything
to say about that?---What have
I got to say?
[33] In his
closing address, the prosecutor said the following about this
in their room. His partner walks in and tells
him to get out. Get out of the
house, get out of the house, repeatedly, get out. He’s saying what’s
going on? She’s
not telling him anything other than saying, get out of the
house. There is [BH], [FH] and the two young children in the house at
He then does eventually go out of the room, walk towards the living room
where [the mother] is standing near the door telling him
to get out. [BH] was
behind her. He then asks her what’s going on. At that point in time, what
does he know? He knows that
his partner of four years is kicking him out of the
house, effectively ending their relations; that she has talked about calling
cops. That was her evidence. ...
He knows that it is of a level that is serious enough to warrant him being
kicked out of his home, ending a relationship, but also
he looks to a 9 year old girl and he says ‘What’s up? What’s
going on, [BH]?’ Why?
What positive expectation, what basis could he have
to suggest that, well hang on, she’s not going to tell me, but my 9 year
old stepdaughter is going to be informed enough about the breakdown of our
relationship to inform me why I’m being kicked out
of my home.
And then yes, at one point he says, someone’s been putting shit in
their ears, or words to that effect. This is after he has
just been told that
there is an allegation of him sexually interfering with his stepdaughters
– stepdaughter. Partner of four
years, breakdown in relationship, kicking
out of your own home and you limit your response to, ‘Well someone’s
shit in their ears’ and then the whole ‘Stab me. Do
something about it. Do it, stab me in the heart.’ You will
recall [the
mother’s] evidence about that. Matter for you whether or not that is what
you would consider to be consistent with
being confronted by that type of
allegation, or would you go to extraordinary lengths to deny it? It is a matter
Even if you do not have those concerns with his reaction, if you do not see
any issues that arise from how he reacted, then you are
still left with what the
fundamental proposition is, that I said a very long time ago. This case comes
down to one simple proposition
and that is whether or not you are satisfied on
the evidence that both [BH] and [AT] told the truth when they spoke to police
when they were cross-examined.
[34] In his
closing address, the applicant’s counsel referred to the mother’s
evidence of this confrontation, then referred
to the applicant’s evidence,
saying ‘[i]n some ways it is much the
Reference was made
to the applicant’s evidence that the only reason he deferred to BH was
because the mother had deferred to
her, approaching her first. Reference was
made to the applicant’s evidence that he admits he asked BH what was going
on. Counsel
then said the
this mountain or this evil question about why his relationship is ending or
because he has been found out because the mother
has deferred to the child. He
has been asking what is going on. He has been told to leave the house. As a
result, well, ‘What’s
going on, [BH]?]
That is those two bits of evidence, [the mother] ... or [the applicant]. How
do you differentiate or separate them? How can you be
sure one of them is right
and one of them is wrong? If you cannot, then you do not know which way it
happened. Then you might put
that piece of evidence to one side because you are
only going to use the evidence that you find compelling, or that you agree with
and the evidence that goes to the elements of the offence if each of those
pieces of evidence is proven beyond reasonable doubt.
[35] In summing
up, the trial Judge summarised the evidence of the mother and the applicant
counsel suggested that the jury should
have different interpretations of the applicant’s reaction, with the
prosecutor asking
rhetorically why he asked BH about it and what possible reason
he could have for thinking she might know why his partner was ordering
of the house, and suggesting that the jury should infer that he knew because he
knew he had been doing things to BH, whereas
the Defence said the reason he
turned to BH was because the mother first did
The trial Judge told the
jury it is a matter for them what they make of those matters.
[36] The trial
Judge did not give any direction about the use to be made of the evidence about
the applicant’s response to the
mother’s allegation that he had been
‘mucking around with’ or ‘doing shit to’ the
applicant’s trial counsel did not seek any such
The proposed appeal ground
[38] As set out
above, proposed appeal ground 1 is that the trial Judge failed to direct the
jury as to the use that could be made
of the applicant’s implied
Consideration
The scope of the proposed appeal ground
applicant argued that the applicant’s conduct in response to the
confrontation that he was ‘mucking around with’
the kids and
‘doing shit to the children’ was deployed by the prosecutor as an
implied admission of the allegation of
sexual misconduct against the
complainants because his response was suggested to be other than what would be
expected of an innocent
person. Consequently, it was argued that a direction
should have been given to the jury about the use the jury could make of this
understood the proposed appeal ground, no issue was taken with the trial
Judge’s direction about the evidence that,
in response to the mother
ordering him out of the house, the applicant turned to BH and asked her what was
going on, which was the
subject of a submission by the prosecutor effectively
that the applicant did so because he knew of BH’s complaint about his
sexual misconduct against her. The focus of the proposed appeal ground was the
absence of a direction about the evidence as to the
applicant’s reaction
to the mother’s statements to him about ‘mucking around with’
and ‘doing shit
to’ the children.
Accused denied the
mother’s allegations – no implied admission
the mother’s evidence and the applicant’s, the applicant
did not remain silent in the face of the mother’s allegations,
expressly denied them. The mother’s evidence was that she said:
‘You’re mucking round with my kids’ and
he said: ‘No
I’m not, someone’s talking shit in their ears, putting ideas into
their head’. The applicant’s
evidence was that she said: ‘You
been playing around with her’ and he said: ‘Grab a knife and stab me
in the heart
if you think I did it’. On both versions of the conversation,
the applicant denied the mother’s allegations that the
applicant was
sexually offending against the complainants.
[42] At the end
of the day, the prosecutor’s cross-examination of the applicant and
closing address in this case went no higher
than that the jury could find that
the applicant’s response to the mother’s allegations was not as
emphatic a denial
as an innocent person might make in the circumstances. There
was no question whether the applicant heard and understood the mother’s
allegations. There was no question whether the applicant denied them. Those two
matters make completely unnecessary much of the direction
now said by the
applicant to have been necessary to avoid a miscarriage of justice. There was an
issue about whether he said ‘What
are you going to do about it? Do
something about it’, but nothing was made, in this appeal by counsel for
the applicant, about
those words in particular, no doubt because those words had
no prominence in either party’s closing address at the trial and
prosecutor’s closing was to the effect just noted (i.e., it was not an
emphatic denial).
[43] In any
event, what the jury might make of the applicant’s response to the
mother’s allegations was really a matter
of common sense in that, if the
jury did not regard the applicant’s response (a denial which the
prosecutor submitted was not
sufficiently emphatic) as an acceptance of his
guilt, then self-evidently they would not use it as
We consider that the
evidence about the applicant’s response to the allegations made by the
mother is such that there was no
perceptible risk that, unless a warning about
it was given, the jury would attribute to it a significance or weight which they
not if the warning were
That makes unnecessary
the remainder of the direction now said by the applicant to have been necessary
to avoid a miscarriage of
applicant argued that the requirement for a direction about admissions arose
from the decisions in
Barca v The
The Queen v
The Queen v
The applicant argued
that, in any case where an implied admission is relied on, whether the admission
is by silence or otherwise,
the jury should be given directions as to how the
evidence can be used, particularly that they can use a statement by another
in the presence of the accused as evidence of the truth of what was
stated if satisfied the accused has, by speech, silence or conduct,
admitted its
, Gibbs, Stephen and Mason JJ held (at 107) that it is trite law
that a statement made in the presence of a party is only evidence
against them
of the truth of the matter asserted if they have in some way admitted its truth.
If an accused person denies the truth
of a statement when it is made and there
is nothing in his conduct and demeanour from which the jury, notwithstanding the
could infer that they acknowledged its truth in whole or in part, it
would accord with the accepted practice to exclude the statement
altogether. In
any case, where evidence is admitted of statements made in the presence of an
accused it is ‘in general desirable’
that the judge should explain
to the jury that they can only use the statements as evidence of the truth of
what was stated if they
are satisfied that the accused has by his speech,
silence or conduct admitted their truth.
decision in
did not turn on the absence of such a direction, and
Gibbs, Stephen and Mason JJ noted (at 108) that it was not necessary to consider
the effect of the failure to give a direction as to the effect of the evidence
because they had ruled
for other reasons that the conviction could not stand. It is clear from this
that their Honours were not laying
down a principle that, in any case where an
implied admission is relied on, a failure to direct the jury that they can only
evidence if satisfied the accused has, by his speech, silence or
conduct, admitted their truth comprises a miscarriage of justice.
with that proposition, the Court of Criminal Appeal of New South Wales recently
Hewitt v The
that the authorities
do not establish that a direction that the jury cannot act on statements by the
accused as proof of guilt unless
satisfied he intended to acknowledge by them
that he committed the alleged offending, and that the statements were true and
for some innocent reason, is required as a matter of law in every case
in which there is a dispute about whether an admission was
truthful and
applicant relied heavily on
The Queen v BEC
. In that case, the Queensland
Court of Appeal found that there had been a miscarriage of justice from a
failure to give directions
to the jury about the use to be made of an implied
admission said to have been made by the accused to the complainant’s
The complainant’s mother had given evidence that, amongst the
complainant’s clothing brought back from a two day trip
alone on a boat
with the appellant, she found some of the complainant’s underwear on which
there appeared to be ejaculate,
got angry and said to the appellant: ‘If I
didn’t know any better, I would swear [the complainant] was getting
to which the appellant looked at her oddly and walked out of the
house. The appellant had given evidence denying that he had ejaculated
near the complainant during the boat trip, and that the complainant’s
mother said to him: ‘Look at this festy underwear.’
cross-examined, he admitted she showed him some underwear and he heard the
complainant’s mother say something about: ‘If
I didn’t know
better, [the complainant was] having sex’, but he was distracted. He
admitted that he looked at the complainant’s
mother quite oddly, and there
was a reason why he looked at her oddly. He denied the reason was because he
felt that he was ‘caught
out’, saying that he thought it was a
‘hygiene issue’, it was not ‘abnormal’ and he
‘just crinkled
up his nose’. Defence counsel made no submission
referred to the complainant’s mother’s evidence about the underwear,
and the appellant walking away when she confronted
him, and said that two counts
involved penile/vaginal intercourse. The trial Judge’s summing up referred
to the complainant’s
mother’s evidence about the underwear and about
confronting the appellant, with his reaction being ‘to simply walk
and stated that ‘that, in part, supports the
complainant’s testimony’. After they retired, the jury asked a
because multiple witnesses had confirmed its existence, even
though the object
was absent. The Court took this to be a question about the underwear, which the
mother had thrown away.
Queen v BEC
, Livesy AJA (Callaghan J agreeing) began his reasons (at
[63]-[64]) by saying that some directions and warnings given by trial Judges
given because of the risk that juries may be ignorant about the dangers
associated with certain kinds of evidence, and one such
kind of case is evidence
which is capable of being regarded as a form of express or implied admission of
guilt by an accused. His
Honour said such evidence can take many forms,
including the failure by the accused to deny an accusation made to or in the
of the accused. His Honour referred (at [65]) to admissions of guilt in
those cases where ‘if innocence existed, an unequivocal
or a qualified
denial would ... be expected’. His Honour quoted (at [66]) the passage
referred to above. His Honour then referred (at [67]-[81]) to
numerous authorities he described as relating to evidence capable of
considered an ‘implied admission by silence’, including
Of those, only the
latter authority had the result that the appeal against conviction was allowed
for a failure to give directions
as to the use the jury could have made of the
Queen v MMJ
concerned evidence that a witness had asked the accused if he
was having, or had had, a sexual relationship with the complainant,
to which the
accused said nothing. In that case, because of the generality of the question,
Ashley JA (Buchanan JA agreeing) doubted
(at [85]) that the evidence could have
been used by the jury as anything other than evidence of the relationship
between the accused
and the complainant, and held that the jury should have been
so instructed. Ashley JA went on to say that there was at least need
instruction as to the manner in which the jury should deal with the evidence in
the context of a possible adoptive admission.
It was noted that it was evidence
the prosecutor had ‘highlighted, at times in extravagant language, both at
the outset and
towards the end of his final address’. In particular,
Ashley JA held (at [92]) that the prosecutor had dealt with the evidence
final address as if it could be used in direct proof of the charged offences,
when that was not so. Further, Ashley JA held
(at [97]) the prosecutor had
‘made the evidence a focal point of his address’ and the trial Judge
had said nothing at
all about it.
Queen v BEC
, Livesey AJ observed as follows (at [87]):
which went unanswered by the accused
, may or may not be associated with a
real risk that the jury could use that evidence as in some way implicating the
accused in the
offending alleged. Each case must necessarily depend on its own
facts and circumstances, particularly the matters in issue and precisely
is contended was said to or in the presence of the accused. Where the statement
made to or in the presence of the accused
is clearly referable to the
allegations made against the accused ... the trier of fact might well regard
any failure by the accused to respond with a denial
as a matter of some
significance. Indeed, the more stark the statement or accusation made to the
accused, the more significant will
be the evidence concerning any response made
by the accused, even if little is made of the issue in addresses. [emphasis
[51] His Honour
went on to say (at [96]):
As the cases which have been discussed
show, there are a number of features associated with cases involving
appears to be an admission by silence
which may not immediately be apparent
to a jury. Whilst this kind of evidence might be thought to be straight forward,
raising inferences
which can be determined by a combination of ‘common
sense’ and the collective life experience of the jury, there is a
risk that important issues may be overlooked, such as whether the appellant
heard and understood all that was said by the complainant’s
[emphasis added]
[52] The major
point of distinction between
The Queen v BEC
and the authorities there
referred to and the present case is that here, as we have concluded above, the
applicant expressly denied
the mother’s allegations.
[53] No doubt
because of that distinction between
The Queen v BEC
and the present case,
the applicant submitted that this case was akin to
The Queen v BEC
The Queen v MMJ
because, the final time the accusation was put to him,
the applicant did not say anything and walked out of the house.
[54] We do not
accept this submission. It does not accord with either the mother’s
evidence or the applicant’s. They both
said that the accused referred to
her stabbing him in the heart before he walked out of the house. This was not a
case involving
evidence capable of being considered an ‘implied admission
by silence’. Nor was it a case in which, as Livesey AJ found
Queen v BEC
(at [100]), there was a risk that the jury reasoned that the
applicant’s reaction represented evidence, independent of the
complainants’, which supported a finding the applicant had committed the
alleged offending because they used the evidence as
probative of guilt without
first considering whether the applicant’s version of the confrontation
should be preferred or remained
a reasonable possibility, as well as without
considering whether they were satisfied that the applicant heard and understood
that was said and should have responded to the mother. Unlike that
situation, the evidence from both the mother and the applicant
in this case was
that the applicant denied that he had been sexually offending against the
complainants.
[55] Another
point of distinction between the present case and
The Queen v BEC
The Queen v BEC
between the evidence about the underwear being
stained with semen, a matter which the jury had clearly found important given
question, and the appellant’s reaction to the confrontation about
the presence of semen on the underwear. Livesey AJ held (at
[97]) that it was
necessary, in the circumstances of that case, that the jury be given assistance
when undertaking their fact finding
in relation to those linked issues.
[56] Another
point of distinction along similar lines relates to the prominence (or
otherwise) of the evidence in the Crown case.
Unlike the prominence of the
evidence in the prosecutor’s address in
The Queen v MMJ
evidence about the applicant’s response to the mother’s allegations
took up less than half a page of transcript
in over 11 pages of transcript of
cross-examination, and only one paragraph in a closing address exceeding 120
paragraphs, was not
expressed in colourful language and was by no means a focal
point of the prosecutor’s closing address.
[57] Further,
also unlike
The Queen v BEC
, the trial Judge in this case did not do what
the trial Judge had done in that case. Livesey AJ noted (at [93]-[94]) that the
Judge had ‘taken the matter a step further’ than the
prosecutor’s closing address by connecting, in the summing
condition of the complainant’s underwear with the appellant’s
reaction to the complainant’s mother’s
statement, such that both the
condition of the underwear
the appellant’s reaction (silence
and an ‘odd look’ then walking out of the house) were to be treated
by the jury
as supporting the complainant’s testimony. Nothing of that
nature occurred here.
A rational forensic justification for not
seeking a direction
respondent argued, on the basis of the observations in
set out above, that there was no warrant for this Court to consider
whether there had been a miscarriage of justice because there
was a clear
tactical reason why no direction was sought, namely that it may have highlighted
the mother’s evidence about the
applicant saying effectively ‘what
are you going to do about it?’ and ‘do something about it’.
The applicant
eschewed this as a tactical reason not to seek a direction and
argued that the mother’s evidence was ‘front and centre’
the trial because the mother was cross-examined about the confrontation, the
applicant gave evidence about the confrontation and
had been cross-examined
recited’ by the trial
[59] We consider
that a rational forensic justification for counsel’s failure to seek a
direction about this evidence can be
discerned, namely to avoid highlighting
that the mother’s evidence about the applicant saying ‘what are you
do about it?’ and ‘do something about it’ could
readily be understood as an admission of the truth of the mother’s
allegation that he was sexually abusing the children. The applicant’s
submissions on this appeal did not focus specifically
on the mother’s
evidence that the accused said the words ‘what are you going to do about
it?’ and ‘do something
those words was a potential issue of fact arising in the trial, but neither the
nor the applicant’s trial counsel put it to the jury, as is
apparent from the following:
(a) In cross-examination, the mother was asked what the applicant said about
stabbing him in the heart. She said that the applicant
said: ‘What are you
going to do about it? Well, what are you going to do about it? Do something
or stab me in the chest’ and he was hitting
his chest and screaming to stab him in the heart, do something. She denied he
‘You might as well stab me in the heart’. She repeated:
‘Do something about it’ and said ‘Are you going
to do anything
this stage he was calm, not screaming,
she repeated her evidence about what he
(b) In evidence-in-chief, the applicant gave evidence that he said to the
mother: ‘Grab a knife and stab me if you think I
(c) In cross-examination, the applicant said the mother told him he was touching
the kid and he told her: ‘Well grab the knife
and stab me if you think I
did this’. The applicant denied that he said to her: ‘Go on, do
something about it?’,
repeating the evidence he gave in
evidence-in-chief.
(d) In his closing address, the transcript of which goes for almost
18 pages, the prosecutor repeated the mother’s evidence
accused said: ‘Do something about it. Do it, stab me in the heart’
but made the brief submissions set out above,
which did not highlight this as
any form of admission of guilt.
(e) In the summing up, the trial Judge did not make any mention of the
mother’s evidence that the accused said: ‘Well
what are you going to
do about it? Do something about it.’
[60] We reject
the applicant’s submission that the mother’s evidence about the
accused’s response to her allegations
was ‘front and centre’
at the trial. The applicant’s trial counsel’s failure to seek the
direction, now said
to be necessary to avoid a miscarriage of justice, about the
evidence of the applicant’s conduct being used as an admission
could be explained by a tactical forensic decision to avoid highlighting that,
if the jury accepted the mother’s evidence
statements to the effect that she should ‘do something about it’
could readily be construed as
admissions of the truth of her allegations. This
is supported by the applicant’s trial counsel’s closing address,
referred specifically to the evidence of the applicant turning to BH when
told by the mother to leave the house, said there were
differences between the
evidence of the applicant and the mother about what was said, but said nothing
at all about those differences
or about the rest of the evidence of the
confrontation, particularly the accused’s response to the mother’s
allegations
that he was sexually abusing the complainants.
applicant argued that it is very unlikely that trial counsel turned his mind to
the possible need for a direction which would
have limited the circumstances in
which the evidence could be used to the clear advantage of the applicant, but
decided not to because
it would highlight the use of the evidence as an
admission of guilt.
[62] That there
is a possibility, even a strong possibility, that trial counsel simply did not
turn their mind to whether to seek
a direction is not the test. We must be
persuaded that no rational forensic justification can be discerned for trial
failure to seek a direction. Here, a rational forensic
justification can be discerned for not seeking a direction about the
applicant’s
conduct in response to the mother’s allegations as
admissions of guilt. On the basis of the observations in
set out above, that finding would obviate the need to consider
whether the failure to give a direction gave rise to a miscarriage
of justice.
Nevertheless, as we have already held, the direction now pressed by the
applicant was not necessary in the circumstances
of this case. The possibility
that the need for a direction did not cross experienced trial counsel’s
mind supports that conclusion
and confirms that the evidence about the
applicant’s response to the mother’s allegations of sexual abuse did
not feature
heavily in the trial and was, relatively speaking, of no real
significance.
[63] For all of
the above reasons, we are not persuaded that a direction about the use the jury
could make of the evidence about the
applicant’s response to the
mother’s allegations of sexual offending against the complainants was
necessary, or that
the failure to give one comprised a miscarriage of justice.
[64] Given that
full argument was heard in relation to this ground of appeal, we will grant
leave to appeal on this proposed ground.
However, the ground of appeal is not
Proposed ground 2 – Prosecutor’s closing
invited impermissible reasoning to guilt
What happened at trial
prosecutor’s closing address included the
this case comes down to one very simple proposition and that is are you
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt of the evidence
that is put before you.
whether they’re telling the truth.
So, that consideration leads to three propositions, I would suggest. The
first is that you are satisfied that each of those complainants
told the truth
and that you are satisfied of it, beyond reasonable doubt, in the context of
everything that you have heard, they
told the truth. So, that is the first
proposition. These are competing propositions.
The second is that they’re honest, but mistaken; that they may be
unreliable. Now here, I’m not talking about that peripheral
things that don’t matter. What I’m suggesting is, on their account
of the actual offences themselves, are
they telling the truth or could they just
be mistaken about what happened.
[Submission that the type of conduct alleged by each complainant could not be
misrepresented, jumbled or misunderstood.]
That then leaves that the complainants could be dishonest, that they’re
lying about their account. ... So, that final third
proposition can be split, I
would suggest perhaps into two subcategories, two branches from that. The first
is that they were coached
to lie. That their mother sat them down and somehow
calculated a plan and took them through their evidence and what to say. ...
[Submission that coaching children to do a presentation is difficult, that
the complainants were interviewed and cross-examined at
length, that coaching
the complainants to give their evidence in that way is implausible, and that
there was no issue in the relationship
between the applicant and the mother
which would explain her coaching the complainants to lie about these
allegations.]
So, coached, no and so you put that to one side. And that leaves the ...
complainants concocting the story themselves, making a decision
to come forward,
to tell their mother on 1 July and then to come into the police station, ... go
through that process and all based
on a fabrication.
Well, the likelihood of that is really, ultimately, what you are here for
today. Because if that is not the case, if you don’t
accept that, then you
look back and what you’re left with is the proposition that these
complainants are telling the truth.
So, they’re the three competing propositions and why I’m
ultimately going to suggest to you, once we have gone through
that evidence, you
will come to the conclusion, the only real conclusion open in this case, that
they are telling the truth and that
the accused is guilty of sexually abusing
his two stepdaughters.
Even if you do not have those concerns with [the applicant’s] reaction
[to the confrontation], if you do not see any issues
that arise from how he
acted, then you are still left with what the fundamental proposition is, that I
said a very long time ago.
This case comes down to one simple proposition and
that is whether or not you are satisfied on the evidence that both [BH] and [AT]
told the truth when they spoke to police and when they were cross-examined.
If after all of the evidence you have a doubt based on reason, you have a
rational doubt, then of course you are obliged to act on
that, give the benefit
of the doubt to the accused and acquit.
[66] In summing
up, the trial Judge
prosecutor], for the Crown, reminded you that he continues to bear the onus of
proving beyond reasonable doubt that [the applicant]
is guilty of the offences
he has been charged with and that that, essentially, means that you must be
satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that, depending on the charge you are
considering, [BH] or [AT] is telling the truth and that the evidence is
substantially
Now, [the prosecutor] submitted to you that, as a matter of logic, there were
three possibilities. Given that the last one had two
sub possibilities, I think
it ended up being four. Those possibilities, he suggested to you were these:
[BH] and [AT] are telling the truth and their evidence is substantially
accurate, ie the things that they told you about really happened.
Second possibility, they are telling the truth; that is to say they are doing
their best to tell you the truth, but they are mistaken.
Thirdly, they are not telling you the truth. They are lying. And if they are
lying, he identified two, I guess you would call them
sub possibilities: (a)
they were coached by someone to give false evidence, or (b) they made a decision
by themselves to concoct
Now, [the prosecutor] submitted you could safely reject all but the first
possibility. [The prosecutor’s submissions were summarised.]
applicant’s trial counsel took no issue with the prosecutor’s
closing address, or with the trial Judge’s
summary of it. In his closing
address, trial counsel for the applicant submitted that the jury would agree
that each of the complainants,
the mother and the accused honestly believed and
were doing their best to tell the truth, they could not all be telling the truth
and giving a factually accurate account, a witness can be honest but unreliable,
and it was not suggested by the applicant that the
complainants had jointly
concocted a story or had been coached by the mother, a person accused of such
charges can only defend themselves
by saying they did not do it, the applicant
is innocent until the Crown proves each and every element of the offences, the
gave evidence and clearly and strongly denied the charges, it was not
being said he had no opportunity at all to commit the offending,
but any such
opportunity was only for very short periods of time, if the jury do not know
which version was right and which was wrong,
the evidence should be put to one
side as not sufficiently compelling, there were issues with the accuracy and
reliability of both
complainants’ evidence, there were inconsistencies and
BH’s evidence in cross-examination was confusing whereas the
evidence was clear, BH’s evidence was not coached and the
jury would have trouble considering it fabricated, but something
happened to BH
and it was possible, on the basis of her evidence in cross-examination, that
someone else had done it, all of which
would lead to reasonable doubt that it
was the applicant who did those things to her, and AT’s evidence was not
and came after much attention had been given to BH after she first
proposed appeal ground
[68] As set out
above, proposed appeal ground 2 is that the prosecutor’s closing address
caused a miscarriage of justice, by
undermining the onus and standard of proof
by submitting to the jury that they could accept the complainants’
evidence by rejecting
the suggestions they were being dishonest or
unreliable.
Consideration
applicant argued that, in this part of the closing address, the prosecutor
invited the jury to reason to guilt in an impermissible
way, namely telling the
jury they did not need to make positive findings that the complainants were
credible and reliable witnesses,
and instead telling them they could act on the
complainants’ accounts and convict the applicant by rejecting the
suggestions
they were lying or being unreliable. It was said that the closing
address deflected the jury from its fundamental task of deciding
whether the
prosecution proved the elements of the charged offences beyond reasonable doubt.
It was also said to be a reversal of
the onus of proof to suggest the jury could
accept a complainant’s evidence by rejecting the applicant’s case
were lying or unreliable. It was submitted that ‘rejection of
the idea that the complainants were unreliable or lying says
nothing about
whether the prosecution had proven beyond reasonable doubt that they were
credible’. It was also said that, by
repeating the prosecutor’s
submissions, the trial Judge ‘reinforced’ the ‘problematic
submission’ made
by the prosecutor.
applicant argued that the onus of proof was reversed if the jury were to reason
to guilt using the three competing or mutually
exclusive propositions because
they required the jury to reason from the assumption, contrary to the
presumption of innocence, that
the complainants were telling the truth (the
first proposition), to look for reasons why the complainants’ evidence was
reliable because they were mistaken or lying (the second and third
propositions), to eliminate those reasons, and to return to, and
confirm, the
proposition that they were telling the truth, with the consequence that they
must find the accused guilty. The proper
path of reasoning was to decide, on the
basis of all of the evidence in the trial, whether the jury were satisfied
beyond reasonable
doubt about the truth and accuracy, that is, the reliability,
of the complainants’ evidence about the elements of the charged
argument rested on the principle expressed by the High Court in
Hargraves v
that a criminal
trial is an accusatorial process in which the prosecution bears the onus of
proving the guilt of the accused beyond
reasonable doubt and the jury must act
on the basis that the accused is presumed innocent of the acts charged until
they are satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that he or she is guilty of those
acts. The plurality of the High Court held (at [41]) that, these being
fundamental features of a criminal trial, it follows that the judge’s
instructions to the jury must accord with them and
departure from them would be
a miscarriage of justice. The plurality held (at [42]) that a judge’s
instructions to the jury,
whether by way of legal direction or judicial
commentary on the facts, must not deflect the jury’s attention from the
to be persuaded beyond reasonable doubt of the accused’s guilt before
returning a verdict. The plurality went on to observe
(at [43]-[45]) that the
cases demonstrate that a jury’s attention can be deflected from its
fundamental task in different ways.
The plurality gave the examples of a trial
Judge’s commenting on the failure of an accused to give
the questioning of the
accused, in cross-examination, as to whether he could offer any reason or motive
for the complainant to lie,
inviting a jury to test the evidence given by an accused according to the
interest that the accused has in the outcome of the
trial, or suggesting that
the accused’s evidence should be scrutinised more carefully than the
evidence of other witnesses.
plurality held (at [46]) that the principle asks: did the judge’s
instructions deflect the jury from its fundamental
task of deciding whether the
prosecution proved the elements of the charged offence beyond reasonable doubt?
Further, whether there
has been a miscarriage of justice must always require
consideration of the whole of the judge’s charge to the jury and, in
case, the ultimate question must be whether, taken as a whole, the judge’s
instructions to the jury deflected the jury
from its proper task.
[73] We do not
accept that, taken as a whole, the prosecutor’s closing address or the
trial Judge’s summing up, or both
of them together, deflected the jury
from its proper task because of the submission (repeated by the trial Judge)
that the jury could
reason by way of the three propositions.
axiomatic that, in a case such as this, to find the applicant guilty of any
charge, the jury would have to be satisfied,
beyond reasonable doubt, that the
evidence of the relevant complainant as to the essential elements of that charge
was reliable,
that is, both honest and accurate.
[75] Unsurprisingly
then, the focus of the prosecutor’s address was on the assessment of the
reliability of the complainants’
evidence. The prosecutor said that, in
making that assessment, the jury should bear in mind that they were young
communicating about sexual matters foreign to
their evidence was
affected by the way human memory works and inconsistencies in a story or between
different witnesses, particularly
and do not detract from their
reliability.
prosecutor said the case comes down to the simple proposition: are you (the
jury) satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt about
whether or not the allegations
made by the complainants happened, whether they are telling the
It is clear that the word
‘truth’ here was used in the sense of objectively true, that the
things the complainants said
actually happened as they had alleged. The word
‘truth’ was used to refer to the reliability of the
complainants’
evidence, which requires both accuracy and honesty.
[77] By this
submission, the jury were told that they were required, before they could find
the accused guilty, to make a positive
finding about the reliability (the
accuracy and truth) of the allegations made by the complainants.
prosecutor went on to outline the three ‘competing
propositions’.
of those was that the jury is satisfied, beyond reasonable doubt, about
‘the truth’ of the complainants’
allegations.
Again, it is
apparent that this reference to ‘truth’ was a reference to
reliability (not simply honesty), i.e. to evidence
that the jury could safely
act on to convict the applicant. The first proposition was not expressed as an
assumption that the complainants
told the truth or that their evidence was
reliable. Rather, it was the positive finding the jury were required to make in
find the applicant guilty. The other two propositions were the two
things that would preclude the positive finding that the complainants’
evidence was reliable, namely that the evidence of the complainants was not
accurate or was not honest. The prosecutor made submissions
as to why the jury
would put to one side the possibilities that the complainants’ evidence
was not accurate or was not honest,
and submitted that, consequently, the jury
could make the positive finding that their evidence was reliable. The prosecutor
said that, once he had gone through the evidence, the jury would conclude
(i.e. positively find) that the complainants were telling
the truth, i.e. their
evidence was reliable and could be safely acted
prosecutor then went on to deal with the evidence of each complainant in
relation to each count, making various submissions
of the evidence, including its detail, the demeanour of the complainants when
giving it, and whether
it had the ‘ring of
In doing so, the
prosecutor referred a few times to the ‘three propositions’. The
prosecutor also submitted that, in
anticipating matters that might be put by the
Defence, he was not removing or shifting the burden of proof, which he said
on the Crown to prove all elements of an offence beyond a reasonable
doubt and the accused need prove
The prosecutor dealt
with the evidence of other witnesses, which was largely complaint evidence, and
then with the evidence of the
The applicant’s
denials of the offending were mentioned, as was his evidence that he had
opportunity to commit the
There was then the
submission about the applicant’s response to the confrontation set out
above, at the end of which the prosecutor
said that the case comes down to the
fundamental proposition and that is whether or not the jury are satisfied on the
evidence that
both complainants told the truth when they spoke to police and
when they were
cross-examined.
summing up, the trial Judge properly re-framed the ‘three
propositions’ as ‘three possibilities’,
thereby confirming
that the first possibility was not an assumed starting point, and made very
clear that the first possibility related
to reliability, comprising both honesty
and accuracy, permitting the positive finding that ‘the things that they
told you about
[81] Properly
understood, the submission was that the jury needed to make, and could make, a
positive finding that the complainants’
evidence was reliable because it
was both accurate and honest, the ‘three propositions’ submission
was not a departure
from the fundamental features of a criminal trial, and did
not distract the jury from their task.
[82] The trial
Judge clearly understood the submission in that way, after the applicant’s
trial counsel took issue with the
submission on the basis that the three
possibilities did not include the possibility that someone else had committed
the offending
against BH.
trial Judge correctly observed, that possibility would fall within the second
proposition, namely that BH’s evidence
[83] Ultimately,
the applicant’s trial counsel did not press for any direction or
instruction to be given by the trial Judge
to address the prosecutor’s
submission. As discussed earlier in these reasons, the failure of competent
counsel to seek a particular
direction from the trial Judge, or to seek a
re-direction or clarification of a submission made by a party, is a relevant
consideration
in determining whether the absence of a direction or an asserted
misdirection comprises a miscarriage of justice.
applicant submitted that the prosecutor’s submission was particularly
‘controversial’ when the accused
had given evidence on oath denying
the charges, and the prosecutor did not address the jury about the
accused’s evidence. It
is not accurate to say the prosecutor did not
address the jury about the accused’s evidence. He did address it,
particularly
the accused’s denials of the alleged offending, albeit
dismissively. Given that the accused simply denied he committed the
offending, there was little that could be said about why the jury should reject
his evidence.
[85] Reliance
was placed by the applicant on
Douglass v The
The case concerned an
appeal from a trial by judge sitting alone, who had found the
complainant’s evidence to be truthful,
but had not made a finding that her
evidence was reliable. The intermediate appeal court held that the trial
Judge’s acceptance
of the complainant’s evidence as truthful
necessarily carried with it a rejection of the appellant’s sworn evidence
the alleged offending. The High Court held (at [13]) that accepting the
complainant’s evidence as truthful was not inconsistent
with the existence
of a reasonable doubt as to guilt, as the judge could not convict unless
satisfied that the appellant’s
evidence was not reasonably possibly true.
The High Court held (at [14]) that the failure to record any finding respecting
the appellant’s
evidence left as a possibility that the judge simply
preferred the complainant’s evidence and convicted upon it applying a
standard less than proof beyond reasonable doubt, which was a legal error. The
High Court found it unnecessary to address the consequence
of that error because
the second appeal ground (insufficiency of the evidence) succeeded.
applicant argued, on the basis of
, that the prosecutor’s
failure to tell the jury they could only convict the applicant if they were not
satisfied his evidence
reasonably possibly true, and to tell the jury that if they did not know where
the truth lay, they should acquit, led to a departure from the fundamental
features of a criminal trial, and distracted the jury
from their task. The
submission was that the three propositions omitted these two possibilities from
the ‘universe of possibilities’
that the jury must consider before
finding guilt.
[87] We do not
accept these submissions. First,
does not address what a
prosecutor should tell a jury in their closing address, nor what directions a
trial Judge should give to
a jury about reasoning to guilt in a case involving
the word of a complainant (alleging certain offending) against the word of an
accused (denying certain offending). The High Court said (at [12]) that it was
an error for the intermediate court of appeal to view
the criminal trial as
reducing to a case of ‘word against word’, because that
characterisation fails to recognise that
the resolution of a criminal case does
not depend on whether the evidence of one witness is preferred to that of
another, but on
whether the evidence taken as a whole proves the elements of the
offence beyond reasonable doubt. The decision of the High Court
was that it was
an error for the intermediate court of appeal to have accepted, without any
express finding that the complainant’s
evidence was
the trial Judge was satisfied of the commission of the offence beyond reasonable
doubt because he found the complainant’s
evidence to be
prosecutor is not in the position of an intermediate court of appeal or a trial
Judge. In any event, we do not accept that the
effect of the prosecutor’s
closing address, taken as a whole, was to submit to the jury that they should
prefer the evidence
of the complainants over the evidence of the accused and/or
that, if they did, they could convict him of the offences.
[88] Secondly,
as set out above, the three propositions related only to the jury’s
consideration of whether or not the complainants’
evidence was reliable.
This part of the prosecutor’s address did not purport to cover the field
of matters for the jury’s
consideration before reaching a verdict.
[89] Thirdly,
the trial Judge gave directions to the jury: (i) as to the onus and standard of
proof, on multiple occasions, in clear
and compelling terms; and (ii) about the
jury’s consideration of the applicant’s evidence. We will deal with
this second
aspect in addressing the third proposed ground of appeal.
[90] In oral
submissions, the applicant argued that the prosecutor’s submissions
regarding BH’s evidence infringed the
principle in
was one of the examples given by the plurality in
of ways in which a jury’s attention can be deflected from
its fundamental task, namely by introducing an inquiry into why the
complainant
would lie, which would invite the jury to accept the complainant’s
evidence unless there were some demonstrated
motive to lie, thereby denying that
the trial is an accusatorial process in which the prosecution bears the onus of
proving the offence
beyond reasonable doubt. We do not accept that the
prosecutor suggested to the jury that the applicant was required to demonstrate
a motive to lie, or invited the jury to engage in that kind of inquiry. Rather,
the prosecutor invited the jury to consider whether
a child who was lying about
the offending would include the kinds of details about it that BH did. That is
not to deny that the trial
is an accusatorial process in which the prosecution
bears the onus of proving the offence beyond reasonable doubt.
[91] During the
course of his closing address, the prosecutor submitted as
all of the evidence you have a doubt based on reason, you have a rational doubt,
then of course you are obliged to act on
that, give the benefit of the doubt to
the accused and acquit.
applicant argued, correctly, that it is an error to instruct a jury that a
reasonable doubt is a rational doubt or a doubt
founded on reason in the
analytical sense or by detailed mental
This single
statement, in the context of the prosecutor’s address as a whole (which
otherwise referred to ‘reasonable
doubt’), and the trial
Judge’s summing up (which consistently referred to ‘reasonable
doubt’), coupled with
that the trial Judge
explained the term ‘reasonable doubt’ in the usual way in her
opening address as words which do
not benefit from any further definition or
elaboration and have their ordinary English meaning in the application of
ordinary common
sense standards, was utterly unlike the trial Judge’s
direction found to have effected a miscarriage of justice in
miscarriage of justice was effected by this submission, either alone or in
conjunction with the other matters raised by the applicant.
[93] For all of
the above reasons, we are not persuaded that the prosecutor’s closing
address about the three propositions,
and/or the trial Judge’s summary of
it, comprised a miscarriage of justice.
[94] Given that
full argument was heard in relation to this ground of appeal, we would grant
leave to appeal on this proposed ground.
However, the ground of appeal is not
Proposed ground 3 – Failure to give a complete
What happened at trial
[95] The trial
Judge’s summing up included the
case is what is sometimes referred to by lawyers as a case of ‘oath on
oath’. The only evidence about what happened
in relation to each charge
comes from the child complainant, that is [BH] or [AT] as the case may be,
depending on the count, and
from the accused, [the applicant].
Now, it is important to remember that at all times the Crown bears the onus
of proving each and every element of the offence.
So you do not just say to yourself, ‘Oh, we’ve heard two
different versions’ or ‘We’ve heard two different
who do we believe?’ It is not that balancing exercise. The Crown has to
prove each and every element of the charge
beyond reasonable doubt. So the
accused ... has taken the course of giving evidence on oath. By law he is not
required to do this.
He is entitled to sit in the dock and say nothing and if he
did that he could not be questioned about the matter and no adverse inference
could be drawn against him if he had exercised that right. By going into the
witness box he exposed himself to the risk of cross-examination
by the Crown
prosecutor.
Now, if you see fit, you are entitled to give him some credit for this. It is
a matter for you to decide whether your estimation of
[the applicant] has been
improved by the fact that he got into the witness box and exposed himself to
that risk of cross-examination
when by law he did not have to do so.
Now, having said all that, when considering his evidence you can accept it or
reject it in whole or in part the same as every other
If you decide to reject his evidence or the evidence going to the essential
issues in the case, that by itself, is not enough for
you to convict him. You
still have to be satisfied on the other evidence. The Crown still has to prove
his guilt beyond reasonable
doubt on the basis of the evidence that has been
presented to you.
You cannot turn his denials into positive evidence against him if you see
what I mean. You still have to be satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt as to the
truth of [BH’s] evidence concerning the essential elements of counts 1 to
8 and of [AT’s] evidence concerning
the essential elements of count 9. If
you have any reasonable doubt about that evidence or about the evidence in
relation to any
particular charge, you must bring in a verdict of not guilty on
that charge.
Having heard all the evidence, you might not be sure where the truth lies.
The accused does not have to persuade you of his innocence.
If you do not know
where the truth lies – if there is a reasonable doubt in your minds, he is
entitled to the benefit of that
[96] Again, the
applicant’s trial counsel did not raise any issue about the adequacy of
this direction with the trial Judge.
Proposed appeal
[97] The third
proposed ground of appeal is that the trial Judge failed to give a proper
direction. It was argued that the second limb of the direction,
as enunciated by the High Court in
De Silva v The
was not given. That
limb appears in the following passage of that judgment (at
... [I]t is preferable that a
direction be
framed along the following lines: (i) if you believe the accused’s
evidence ... you must acquit;
(ii) if you do not accept that evidence ... but
you consider that it might be true, you must acquit
; and (iii) if you do not
believe the accused’s evidence ... you should put that evidence ... to one
side. The question will
remain: has the prosecution, on the basis of evidence
that you do accept, proved the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt?
[emphasis added]
Consideration
[98] At the
outset, it is important to note that the judgment in
delivered on 13 December 2019, approximately three months after the trial Judge
delivered her summing up in this matter on 20
September 2019. It is therefore
unsurprising that the trial Judge did not use this precise formulation.
Nonetheless, we consider
that she did convey the essential components of a
direction consistent with then contemporary High Court
jurisprudence as confirmed in
[99] As the
majority in
pointed out (at [7]), the source of the
direction was the following observations of Brennan J (in
case turns on a conflict between the evidence of a prosecution witness and the
evidence of a defence witness, it is commonplace
for a judge to invite a jury to
consider the question: who is to be believed? But it is essential to ensure, by
suitable direction,
that the answer to that question (which the jury would
doubtless aske themselves in any event) if adverse to the defence, is not
as concluding the issue whether the prosecution has proved beyond reasonable
doubt the issues which it bears the onus of proving.
The jury must be told that,
even if they prefer the evidence for the prosecution, they should not convict
unless they are satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt of the truth of that evidence.
The jury must be told that, even if they do not positively believe the evidence
for the defence, they cannot find an issue against the accused contrary to that
evidence if that evidence gives rise to a reasonable
doubt as to that issue.
[100] After
noting (at [9]) that, in
, Deane J also had concerns about the
confusion that may arise where a direction is expressed in terms of a choice
between conflicting
accounts, the majority in
went on to refer
to the subsequent clarification provided by Gaudron J and Gummow and Hayne JJ in
Murray v The Queen
, this Court made clear that it is never appropriate for a
trial judge to frame the issue for the jury’s determination as involving
choice between conflicting prosecution and defence evidence: in a criminal trial
the issue is always whether the prosecution has
proved the elements of the
offence beyond reasonable doubt. In light of
, the occasions on
which a jury will be invited to approach their task as involving a choice
between prosecution and defence evidence
should be few.
[101] It can be
seen from the trial Judge’s direction set out above that her Honour
complied with all of these instructions.
She did not express the jury’s
task as one involving a choice between conflicting accounts. Indeed, she
expressly stated it
was not a balancing exercise. She also said that they could
not turn the applicant’s denials into positive evidence against
importantly, the trial Judge repeated several times that the prosecution had to
prove each element of its case beyond reasonable
doubt based on the other
evidence in the case.
[102] Moreover,
subsequent to this direction, the trial Judge went through each of the elements
of each charge and each of the circumstances
of aggravation. In doing so, the
trial Judge told the jury three times that the applicant had given evidence
denying that he had
done what the complainants said he had and said at least 14
times that the prosecution had to prove all of those elements of the
against the applicant beyond reasonable doubt.
[103] As to the
second limb of the
direction, while the trial Judge did not use
its precise terminology (for the reasons already discussed), she did convey its
when, at the conclusion of the direction set out above, she
Having heard all the evidence, you might not be sure where the
truth lies. If you do not know where the truth lies – if there
reasonable doubt in your minds, he is entitled to the benefit of that doubt.
applicant argued the trial Judge’s direction was not equivalent to the
second limb of
as it did not specifically refer to the
applicant’s evidence and a direction in this form had been deprecated in
some authorities.
No such authority was cited, but the decision in
was said to be the
source of this form of direction.
, the Full Court of the Supreme Court of South Australia
overturned a conviction of an accused because the trial Judge told the jury
number of times that it was for them to decide where the truth lies, which
overlooked the possibility that they were unable to
say where the truth lies,
which possibility would require an acquittal.
[106] As to the
submission that a ‘
direction’ has been
‘deprecated’ in some authorities, the only authority that research
has identified that might
possibly be described that way is
The Queen v
That case was an
appeal against convictions for six counts of unlawful sexual intercourse, with
the prosecution case essentially
resting on the complainant’s evidence and
the defence case essentially resting on the accused’s evidence. The
argued that the trial Judge’s summing up, which included a
direction, common in South Australian ‘oath against
oath’ cases, was not in accordance with the law because the jury
invited to ask the improper question: Who is to be believed? The trial Judge had
said to the jury that they may be left in any
one of three situations: (1)
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the prosecution evidence, in which case the
verdict would be guilty;
(2) persuaded by the appellant’s evidence, in
which case the verdict would be not guilty; or (3) unable to decide where the
truth lies, in which case the prosecution would not have proven its case beyond
reasonable doubt and the verdict would be not guilty.
[107] Nicholson
J (Kelly and Peek JJ agreeing) observed (at [35]) that the question in the case
was whether or not the trial Judge,
by the directions given, satisfied the
requirements of and achieved the effect of the
injunction. The
appellant’s submission was (at [36]) that the trial Judge failed to give a
direction, which gave rise to a substantial miscarriage of
justice, which was exacerbated by leaving the jury with a
direction at the end of the summing up.
[108] Nicholson
J observed (at [38]) that a
direction appeared to be peculiar to
South Australia, although it did appear to also be used in the Northern
Territory Magistrates
Court. It had been used in South Australia for many years
and was in the benchbook for trial Judges in South Australia. Nicholson
(at [39]) that a
direction logically and correctly covered the
field of possible approaches to the evidence and was not an incorrect
description of
the jury’s task, but Nicholson J was concerned that it
might, if used uncritically, occasionally be productive of confusion
minds of some jury members. Nicholson J set out (at [39]) why that might be so
and concluded (at [40]) that the giving of
direction should be
cautiously entered upon and only after carefully crafting it to fit with the
summing up as a whole, including,
in particular, other directions concerning
onus and standard of proof, and it should not simply be uncritically tacked on
end of a summing up as some sort of final ‘fail safe’
explanation of the jury’s task.
[109] Nicholson
J held (at [49]) that, notwithstanding its potential to confuse, the
formulation, properly employed, is a time-honoured method in
South Australia of satisfying the concern stated in
[50]) that ultimately the judge must make it clear that nothing short of proof
beyond reasonable doubt will do. His Honour
held that when the trial
Judge’s summing up as a whole and counsels’ addresses were
considered, even though the trial
Judge did not tell the jury that even if it
was to reject the applicant’s account, it still must go on to consider
whether or not it accepted the prosecution proofs beyond reasonable
doubt or that by going into the witness box and giving evidence
on oath the
appellant did not thereby assume any onus of proof, which always remained with
the prosecution, the jury should have
retired with a proper appreciation of its
task. Further (at [51]), at no time throughout the summing up, was the jury
choose between the two competing versions and the burden of the
summing up was always to the contrary. No miscarriage of justice
was found to
have occurred.
[110] In that
case, no direction was given in the form of the second limb or the third limb of
direction was given. Nevertheless, the
directions as given were held not to give rise to a miscarriage of justice.
[111] We do not
consider that the decision in
assists the applicant or otherwise
affects the conclusions we reach.
[112] Considered
as a whole, we are satisfied that, by the end of the trial Judge’s summing
up, there was no perceptible risk
that the jury might be left with the
impression that the applicant’s evidence would only give rise to a
reasonable doubt if
they believed it to be truthful, or that a preference for
the evidence of the complainants sufficed to establish guilt. So much is
confirmed by the failure of the applicant’s trial counsel to seek any
further or re-direction in the form now said to be necessary,
namely of the
second limb of a
direction as set out in
[113] For all of
the above reasons, we are not persuaded that the trial Judge’s summing up
comprised a miscarriage of justice.
[114] Given that
full argument was heard in relation to this ground of appeal, we will grant
leave to appeal on this proposed ground.
However, the ground of appeal is not
Disposition
[115] Leave to
appeal in respect of the three grounds of appeal pressed at the hearing is
[116] The appeal
is dismissed.
--------------------
Liberato v The Queen
[1985] HCA 66
159 CLR 507
MLW v The Queen
HCF v The Queen
[2023] HCA 35
Zhou v The Queen
’) at [22].
Weiss v The Queen
[2005] HCA 81
224 CLR 300.
Transcript, pp 27-28. The
appeal is from the decision of the Queensland Court of Appeal in
[2023] QCA 134.
Orreal v The Queen
[2021] HCA 44
274 CLR 630
Craig v The Queen
[2018] HCA 13
264 CLR 202
Nudd v The Queen
[2006] HCA 9
(2006) 80 ALJR 614
The Queen v Baden-Clay
(2016) 258 CLR 308
Hamilton (a pseudonym) v The Queen
[2021] HCA 33
(2016) 274 CLR 531
TKWJ v The Queen
[2002] HCA 46
212 CLR 124.
Ibid at [8].
See, for example,
[2023] NSWCCA 152
per Davies J (Hamill and McNaughton JJ
agreeing), citing
The Queen v Dookheea
[2017] HCA 36
(2017) 262 CLR 402
per Kiefel CJ, Bell, Gageler, Keane, Nettle and Edelman JJ;
[2011] NSWCCA 266
per Bathurst CJ (James and Johnson JJ
Greenhaigh v The Queen
[2017] NSWCCA 94
per Basten JA
(Button and N Adams JJ agreeing).
AB 127-128.
AB 128-129.
AB 152-153.
AB 167-168.
Flood-Smith v The Queen
[2018] NSWCCA 103
per Payne JA (Garling and Wright JJ agreeing), cited
with approval in
Kramer v The King
[2023] NSWCCA 152
J (Hamill and McNaughton JJ agreeing).
Carr v The Queen
[1988] HCA 47
(1988) 165 CLR 314
at 324-325 per Brennan J. This passage has been cited and
followed many times, for example, in
De Silva v The Queen
[2019] HCA 48
(2019) 268 CLR
per Nettle J;
Heathcote v The King
[2023] SASCA 68
KHL v Western Australia
[2022] WASCA 122
per Buss P and at
[66] per Beech JA.
Barca v The Queen
[1975] HCA 42
’) at [16] (per Gibbs, Stephen and Mason
The Queen v MMJ
[2006] VSCA 226
166 A Crim R 501.
The Queen v BEC
Hewitt v The King
per Payne JA (Garling and Wright JJ agreeing).
R v Salahattin
[1983] VicRp 49
R v Alexander
[1994] VicRp 58
[1994] 2 VR 249
R v Gallagher
[1998] 2 VR
[2001] VSCA 1
(2001) 118 A Crim R 479
[2006] VSCA 226
(2006) 166 A Crim
[2010] QCA 152.
AB 139-140, 152, 153.
AB 165-172.
Hargraves v The Queen
[2011] HCA 44
(2011) 245 CLR 257
’) at [38]-[41] per French CJ,
Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ.
RPS v The Queen
[2000] HCA 3
(2000) 199 CLR 620.
Palmer v The
[1999] HCA 38
(1998) 199 CLR 1
Robinson v The
[1991] HCA 38
(1991) 180 CLR 531.
AB 138-139.
AB 139-140.
AB 140-150.
AB 150-152.
AB 152-153.
Douglass v The Queen
[2012] HCA 34
(2012) 86 ALJR 1086
Green v The Queen
[1971] HCA 55
’) at 33 per Barwick CJ, McTiernan and Owen
Thomas v The Queen
[1960] HCA 2
(1960) 102 CLR 584
at 606 per Windeyer
The trial Judge’s opening
address was not transcribed.
AB 193-194.
De Silva v The Queen
[2019] HCA 48
(2019) 268 CLR 57
’) at [11].
Murray v The Queen
[2002] HCA 26
(2002) 211 CLR 193
and [57] respectively. See also
The Queen v Calides
(1983) 34 SASR 355
The Queen v Lavery
(2013) 229 A Crim R 559.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (385 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter