URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTLC/2023/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:20:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Inquest into the death of Janelle Pamkal [2023] NTLC 4 (15 March 2023)
Inquest into the death of Janelle Pamkal
[2023] NTLC 4
TITLE OF COURT: Coroners Court
FILE NO(s): D0112/2021
DELIVERED ON: 15 March 2023
DELIVERED AT: Darwin
HEARING DATE(s): 14 - 15 February 2023
FINDING OF: Judge Elisabeth Armitage
CATCHWORDS: Person held in care, CareFlight retrieval, aortic dissection,
Chest Pain Pathway
REPRESENTATION:
Counsel Assisting: Chrissy McConnel
Counsel for Department of
Health: Tom Hutton
Judgment category classification: A
Judgement ID number:
[2023] NTLC 4
Number of paragraphs: 31
Number of pages: 13
IN THE CORONERS COURT
AT DARWIN IN THE
TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
No. D0112/2021
In the matter of an Inquest into the death of
ON: 3 July 2021
AT: Royal Darwin
Judge Elisabeth Armitage
Introduction
was born at Royal Darwin Hospital (“RDH”) on 30 October 1985, the
second oldest of five children, to Carol Pamkal
and Billy Yalawonga (deceased).
Her mother has requested that she be referred to by her first name. She was
raised in Maningrida
through primary school but attended high school in Darwin.
As a teenager, she was very musical, she loved Rap music and liked to
dance. After school she moved around quite a bit but returned to Maningrida when
she was about 23 because her father was
ill. She stayed in Maningrida until he
passed away. Janelle married Leon Lawrence and they had two boys who were born
in 2007 and
had a history of hospital admissions for mental illness. In 2006, when she was
20 years old, she experienced an episode of
psychosis and was admitted to the
Darwin inpatient mental health unit (“Cowdy Ward”). She remained
there for one month,
and was diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder with a
differential diagnosis of bipolar affective disorder, possibly triggered by
cannabis use. Following her discharge, medical records indicate that Janelle did
not engage with mental health services for a period
of three years.
2010, Janelle was admitted to the Joan Ridley Unit (“JRU”), the
secure in-patient mental health unit at RDH, for acute
psychosis. She was an
in-patient for one month and was recommenced on antipsychotic medication. In
2011 she had a 6 week admission
to Cowdy Ward for acute psychosis. She responded
well to electroconvulsive therapy (“ECT”), and was discharged with
depot paliperidone injections (“depot”). In 2020 she was
readmitted, because she was thought-disordered and aggressive.
responded well to ECT, and on discharge resumed monthly depot. When she passed
away she was up to date with her depot injection
having last received it on 22
Bulman Community
was staying with family at the Weemol community in Bulman, approximately 300
kilometres from Katherine. It was said that while
there she was regularly
consuming cannabis. On the afternoon of 2 July 2021, she attended at the Bulman
Community Health Clinic (“Clinic”)
because she couldn’t sleep
and requested medication. The Remote Area Nurse (“RAN”) thought she
seemed agitated
and worried and gave her two 5 milligram tablets of the sedative
Olanzapine to assist her.
approximately 10.10am on the morning of 3 July 2021, multiple calls were
received by Clinic staff regarding Janelle. It was reported
that she was
agitated, yelling and walking around Weemol naked. Two RANs responded
immediately, arriving at Weemol approximately
ten minutes later. They saw
Janelle lying on the ground partially naked. She was dirty and wearing only
trousers which were down
around her ankles. She appeared to be dehydrated with a
dry mouth. She was throwing rocks at family members who were trying to approach
her and told the RANs that she was hearing loud noises and that she did not want
family around as they were “judging her”.
The RAN’s persuaded
Janelle to let them assist her. She dropped the rocks, then seemed to
deliberately throw herself to the
ground, but she did not appear to be injured
or hurt. She was offered a sedative (Olanzapine) which she declined.
was encouraged, and eventually agreed, to go to the clinic. During the drive she
complained of being very thirsty and was given
water to drink. She said that she
felt nauseous but did not vomit. She was disturbed by the noise of the radio and
requested that
it be turned off. They arrived shortly before 11am but Janelle
was reluctant to go inside and she refused to answer questions about
health. She was eventually persuaded to go inside but continued to appear
agitated and was pacing around the treatment
room. Because of her behaviour the
RAN could not check her vital signs. Janelle said she was feeling sick and
wanted to vomit, and
she put her fingers down her throat and forced herself to
Involuntary admission for psychiatric assessment
District Medical Officer (“DMO”) service is a 24-hour telemedicine
decision support and emergency retrieval activation
service for patients in the
Northern Territory. The RAN rang the on-call DMO, Dr Jill Farrer, and requested
a return call. Dr Farrar
reviewed Janelle’s medical records and
familiarised herself with Janelle’s mental health history and her previous
to Cowdy Ward and JRU. At approximately 11.35am, Dr Farrer spoke with
the RAN who further described Janelle’s behaviour that
day and her
attendance at the Clinic the day prior. The RAN also reported that Janelle was,
having trouble standing, refusing a physical
examination, and declining any oral
medications.
Farrer considered that Janelle was exhibiting psychotic behaviour based on:
her history of
mental health illness, and her previous diagnoses of bi- polar disorder and drug
induced psychosis;
her described
psychotic behaviour which included auditory hallucinations and paranoia;
having sought assistance which indicted her behaviour had risen to a level that
was concerning to those around her; and
her behaviours
which raised a risk of reputational danger (taking her clothes off), and posed a
danger to others (threatening children
and throwing rocks).
Farrer considered that part of her presentation was atypical for psychosis. In
particular her difficulty standing, vomiting, refusal
to permit a physical
examination, and refusal of oral medication, pointed to a possible physical
illness. After prescribing 10 milligrams
of Olanzapine and 10 milligrams of
Diazepam to be administered (so that she would be as calm and comfortable as
possible), Dr Farrer
requested that the RAN make further efforts to complete
observations. Later, the RAN was able to take a set of standard observations
which indicated that Janelle’s respiratory rate was fast and her blood
pressure was a little low but she did not have a fever.
the information available, Dr Farrer determined that Janelle should be
involuntarily admitted into RDH for psychiatric examination
under section 34(3)
of the Mental Health and Related Services Act (the Act), and completed the
necessary paperwork (Form 9). At 12pm,
a CareFlight referral form was submitted
with the provisional diagnosis of psychosis, together with a reference to a
possible concomitant
physical illness.
Janelle was a “person held in care” at the time of her passing, an
inquest was mandatory.
CareFlight retrieval
received the referral at 12.13pm. After a discussion between Dr Farrer and the
CareFlight Medical Retrieval Consultant,
the job was prioritised as a P3 which
requires a response within six hours. This is considered the appropriate
prioritisation for
a psychiatric patient requiring retrieval who is otherwise
medically stable.
CareFlight aircraft departed promptly for Bulman at 12.55pm. On board was Dr
Emma Zorab, Retrieval Registrar. With some assistance
Janelle walked up the
stairs of the aircraft at 2pm. She lay on a stretcher and allowed Dr Zorab to
examine her. Dr Zorab identified
abnormalities in her respiratory rate at 36
breaths per minutes and her heart rate of 120 beats per minute. However, she
alert and not complaining of any breathlessness. Her blood pressure
and oxygen saturations were normal. She complained of feeling
thirsty despite
having been given fluids and Dr Zorab administered a further 500mls of saline
intravenously. Dr Zorab was satisfied
that she was stable enough to travel and
the aircraft departed Bulman at 2.20pm. During the flight Dr Zorab carried out a
point-of-care
blood test. Dr Zorab considered that Janelle was breathing fast to
compensate for acidosis in her blood and that she had an organic
disorder which
was causing the abnormalities in her physiology. Janelle remained stable
throughout the flight though her heart and
respiratory rate remained high. Dr
Zorab phoned RDH to alert the triage nurse about her concerns for Janelle and
she requested a
Majors bed and not a mental health bed be allocated.
in Darwin, Janelle and Dr Zorab travelled by St Johns Ambulance to RDH. While in
the ambulance, Janelle complained of pleuritic
chest pain. Dr Zorab considered
that she may have been suffering from an infection or Pulmonary Embolus. Dr
Zorab offered pain relief
but Janelle declined.
Royal Darwin Hospital
arrived at RDH at 3.58pm and Janelle was quickly transferred to a bed in the
emergency department (ED). At 4pm, Dr Zorab handed
Janelle’s care over to
Dr Nicolas Forget, an Emergency Medical Consultant and the most senior Doctor
within the Majors unit
of the ED. Dr Zorab again explained her concerns
regarding Janelle’s high heart and respiratory rate, abnormal blood tests
and chest pain.
4.08pm, the ED Resident Medical Officer (RMO) commenced a medical assessment.
The RMO recorded that Janelle reported central chest
pain, which was sharp and
pleuritic and which she said had started in the morning while feeding her son.
It was noted that she was
“Alert. Looks in pain.” Initial
impressions noted by the RMO were psychosis and, concerning the chest pain,
embolus(?), myocardial infarction, pneumonia(?).” The
plan was to conduct three ECG’s, blood testing including Troponin,
psychiatric review, urine analysis and cardiac monitoring. At 5.17pm blood
results identified elevated Troponin. Troponin can (amongst
other things) be a
marker for myocardial damage.
further test was ordered for 7.30pm.
6.04pm, Dr Forget conducted a bedside ultrasound and found a moderate
pericardial effusion.
D-Dimer testing, a blood test that identifies the presence of abnormal blood
clotting. At 7.08pm the D-Dimer returned
an elevated level. Results of the
second test for Troponin levels revealed that they had not increased. The
results indicated that
myocardial infarction was less likely. A Computed
Tomography Pulmonary Artery (“CTPA”) was completed at 7.50pm.
of the CTPA were received at 9.55pm. There was no evidence of pulmonary
embolic disease but a small pericardial effusion was observed
with features of
right heart failure. At 9.57pm, Janelle was lying on the floor complaining of
chest pain but refusing to return
to her bed for monitoring. At 10.40pm she was
agitated, pulling out lines, spitting and making it difficult for staff assess
Nevertheless,
she was reviewed by the Night Medical Registrar as a priority patient at the
start of his shift. She told him that her
pain was “much better”
than it had been when she arrived at the ED. She discussed some personal
concerns and it was noted
that she looked unwell. The plan was to admit her for
discussion with the Cardiology team.
after that review, Janelle went into cardiac arrest. At approximately 11pm,
Code Blue was called, ED staff attended and Janelle
was found to be pulseless
and apnoeic. Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (“CPR”) was immediately
commenced. She was moved
to the resuscitation bay and Advanced Life Support
(“ALS”) was commenced but as she had a non-shockable rhythm, a
defibrillator
could not be used.
Forget conducted an echocardiogram which showed a large pericardial effusion. He
then attempted a pericardiocentesis procedure
to relieve the pericardial
effusion, using the echocardiogram for guidance. On-call Cardiologist
Consultant, Dr James Marangou, assisted
but the pericardial effusion was
completely clotted and could not be relieved. Dr Marangou considered that the
clinical situation
was dire. There was evidence of a catastrophic underlying
pathology resulting in clotted blood forming within the pericardial space.
clotted blood was compressing the heart causing cardiac arrest. As there is no
on-site Cardiothoracic Surgery service at RDH,
a decision was made by the
clinical team to perform a thoracotomy as a last resort attempt to manually
extract the clotted blood
from the pericardial space. This was undertaken by Dr
Forget who commenced direct cardiac massage, sadly all without success. Having
exhausted all options to save her life, she was declared deceased
Findings at Autopsy
6 July 2021 Dr Bjorn Swigelaar, forensic pathologist, performed an autopsy and
found the cause of death was aortic dissection with
associated acute aortitis.
Dr Dimuth Gunawardane provided a second opinion and agreed with the finding of
aortic dissection, but
considered it associated with “suppurative
inflammation possibly from a bacterial infection.”
dissection is a rare (3.47 incidences per 100,000 people) and life threatening
condition which occurs when the inner lining
of the aorta tears, allowing blood
to be pumped into its wall causing the inner and middle layers of the aorta to
split (dissect).
There are two types of aortic dissection. Type A is the most
dangerous and involves a tear in the upper part of the aorta where it
heart. Type B is a tear in the lower part of the aorta. Janelle suffered a Type
A dissection.
Marangou explained that risk factors for aortic dissection include high blood
pressure, connective tissue disorders and vascular
inflammatory disorders. The
risk increases with age and is greater for men. Dr Forget said that in almost
twenty years of emergency
medicine, Janelle was the first case he had seen of a
young woman with an aortic dissection.
Care at Royal Darwin
part of the investigation, an expert report was obtained from Professor John
appropriate Emergency Department medical response to Ms Pamkal’s
presentation with chest pain would have been to follow
a standard Chest Pain
Pathway. The Chest Pain Pathway used at Royal Darwin Hospital indicates that,
in the absence of clear electrocardiogram
evidence of acute myocardial
infarction, Emergency Department doctors should consider and confirm or exclude
a list of differential
diagnoses. He provided a list of alternative diagnoses
and went on to say:
“As it was, the doctors considered the possibility of non-ST elevation
myocardial infarction (NSTEMI), pneumonia, and pulmonary
embolism and excluded
the possibility of pneumonia and pulmonary embolism by performing a CT pulmonary
angiogram. According to the
Pathway, one of whose purposes is to ensure that
uncommon diagnoses are not missed, the doctors should also have considered the
possibility
of thoracic aortic dissection even though it is exceedingly uncommon
in 35 year old women. In order to exclude the possibility of
thoracic aortic
dissection they should have asked the Radiologist to perform a CT thoracic
angiogram at the same time as the CT pulmonary
angiogram. The CT pulmonary
angiogram was performed at about 2000 hours. If a CT thoracic angiogram had
been performed at the same
time, as should probably have been the case, it
would, more likely than not, have shown diagnostic evidence of thoracic aortic
dissection.
For Ms Pamkal to survive the aortic dissection, cardiothoracic
surgical treatment needed to be provided before midnight on 3 July
understanding is that there was no Cardiothoracic Surgical service at Royal
Darwin Hospital in July 2021 and that patients
requiring cardiothoracic surgery
were transported to Adelaide for that service. Given the apparent absence of
Cardiothoracic Surgery
services at Royal Darwin Hospital, Ms Pamkal would not
have survived even if her thoracic aortic dissection had been diagnosed on
evening of 3 July 2021”.
Professor Didier Palmer, who is the Director of the Emergency & Trauma
Centre of RDH and Director of the Division of
Emergency Medicine for RDH and
Palmerston hospital prepared the institutional response for the Department of
Dr Palmer disagreed with
Professor Raftos in relation to his interpretation of the Chest Pain Pathway and
the appropriateness of
ordering a CT thoracic angiogram (“CTTA”) at
the same time as the CTPA. He considered that Janelle’s symptoms were
investigated appropriately and sequentially for her chest pain. Dr Palmer said
of the investigations,
“This involved initial blood tests,
ECG, CXR. These were essentially non- contributory towards diagnosis except for
troponin. A repeat troponin revealed no rise (which largely excluded
an ECG normal myocardial infarction) and a D-Dimer was performed
as a raised
troponin with pleuritic pain is most likely a pulmonary embolus. The D-Dimer if
negative excludes the diagnosis of pulmonary
embolus. The D-Dimer was positive
and therefore a CT pulmonary embolus study was performed as the next logical
Most diagnoses are made at first contact however rarer conditions and
atypical presentations are often initially elusive. Complex
condition diagnosis
is akin to peeling an onion one layer at a time. You sequentially exclude the
likely diagnoses (in this case
myocardial infarction and pulmonary embolus) and
then progress to exclude less likely conditions. The next likely diagnoses in
case were myopericarditis (inflammation of the heart muscle) and then
dissection. The dissection extended and caused death prior
to those further
investigations. As demonstrated in the literature this is not unusual and this
tragic case had more confounders
I would not consider this a “missed” diagnosis, the diagnostic
process was proceeding appropriately but could not outpace
the disease
The “retrospectoscope” is a powerful tool, when you know the post
mortem diagnosis every hint points at that diagnosis,
when analysed
prospectively with the information at hand at the time things are somewhat more
If diagnosis had been achieved on that evening a jet retrieval to Adelaide
would have been arranged and Ms Pamkal would still have
been in the Emergency
& Trauma Centre at the time of her cardiac arrest and subsequent death.
For Ms Pamkal to have survived the diagnosis would have had to be made by
2200hrs and a 24hr on site cardiothoracic service would
have to have been
available. The mortality would still have been approximately 20%.”
effect of the evidence of Dr Forget and Dr Palmer was that at the time the CTPA
was ordered there were a number of potential diagnoses.
Conducting a CCTA at
that time was not indicated because:
it would have
exposed Janelle to additional radiation, to test for a condition that was
“exceedingly unlikely”;
it would have
delayed the return of the Radiologists report, and the potential confirmation
and treatment of the more likely Pulmonary
it may have
undermined the utility of each CT scan – due to the different dye and
contrast analysis required;
it would have
prevented other patients from using the CT scanner, as well as the Radiologist
from reviewing other patients’
imaging – potentially delaying their
diagnoses and treatment; and
practice were applied to the management and treatment of every patient in ED
there would be simultaneous testing for scores
of conditions which would be
unlikely to yield results and such over-testing would grind the system to a
the experts disagreed as to the appropriate timing for ordering a CCTA, they
agreed that even if she had been diagnosed,
the absence of a Cardiothoracic
Surgery service at RDH meant that nothing could be done to save her in Darwin
and she would have
passed away before any transfer to Adelaide was
achievable.
Formal Findings
to section 34 of the
Coroners Act
, I make the following findings:
(1) The identity
of the deceased is Janelle Pamkal, born on 30 October 1985 in Darwin in the
Northern Territory.
(2) The time of
death was 11.58pm on 3 July 2021. The place of death was Royal Darwin
(3) The cause of
death was aortic dissection.
particulars required to register the death:
deceased was Janelle Pamkal.
deceased was of Aboriginal descent.
deceased was not employed.
death was reported to the Coroner by Royal Darwin Hospital.
cause of death was confirmed by Forensic Pathologist, Doctor Bjorn Swigelaar
deceased’s mother was Carol Pamkal and her father Billy
Comments/Recommendations
Office of the Coroner offers its sincere sympathy to Janelle’s family for
their grief and loss. Counsel for the Department
acknowledged that the death of
Janelle was sudden and also extended the condolences of NT Health to her family
and loved ones. I
thank Counsel for their careful assistance with this inquest.
is tragic and regrettable that a 35 year old woman who had none of the risk
factors usually seen in a person suffering from an
aortic dissection, passed
away unexpectedly from such a rare condition. I am satisfied on the evidence
that despite the best efforts
and appropriate care by medical staff at every
stage of her treatment, including the RAN staff in Bulman, the DMO, CareFlight
the medical team at RDH, her death was unavoidable.
make no recommendations.
Dated this 15 day of March 2023.
_________________________
ELISABETH ARMITAGE
TERRITORY CORONER
Troponin is also elevated in
many other conditions such as trauma, hypovolaemia, cardiac arrhythmia, heart
failure, pulmonary embolus,
renal failure, aortic dissection, sepsis and severe
exercise - see Report of Didier Jon Palmer, 26 January 2023, page
Pericardial effusion is an
abnormal collection of fluid within the space surrounding the heart, contained
by the pericardium, a sac
of lining tissue surrounding the heart. Affidavit of
Dr James Marangou, 2 February 2023, para
Report of Professor John
Raftos MBBS FCEM, dated 10 January
Report of Didier Palmer
OAM, MB Dch MRCGP FRCS FRCP FRCEM FACEM, dated 26 January 2023.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.05 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter