URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCCA/2024/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:18:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The King v Mamarika [2024] NTCCA 5 (16 April 2024)
The King v Mamarika
[2024] NTCCA 5
PARTIES: THE KING
MAMARIKA, Anthony
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: CA 1 of 2023 (22041054)
DELIVERED: 16 April 2024
HEARING DATE: 22 May 2023
JUDGMENT OF: Grant CJ, Brownhill and Burns JJ
CATCHWORDS:
CRIME – Appeals – Appeal against sentence – By Crown
against inadequacy
Whether sentence manifestly inadequate – Respondent’s moral
culpability reduced by profound disadvantage including childhood
deprivation and
cognitive dysfunction – Punishment for risk of danger to occupant of
building properly incorporated into sentence
for aggravated reckless
endangerment of life and not also sentence for arson – Fire confined
– Little risk of spread
to building – Damage caused not significant
in monetary terms – Sentence for arson offence within range –
sentence not manifestly inadequate having regard to total criminality
conduct – Appeal dismissed.
Criminal Code 1983
(NT) s 174C, s 174G, s 243
Ajax v The Queen
[2006] NTCCA 12
(2006) 17 NTLR 80
Andalong v O’Neill
[2017] NTSC 77
Bugmy v The Queen
(2013) 249 CLR 571,
Muldrock v The
[2011] HCA 39
(2011) 244 CLR 120
Pearce v The Queen
[1998] HCA 57
(1998) 194 CLR 610
v De Simoni
(1981) 147 CLR 383
R v O’Connor
[2014] NSWCCA 53
R v Verdins
[2007] VSCA 102
(2007) 16 VR 269
The Queen v Roe
[2017] NTCCA 7
(2017) 40 NTLR 187
Veen v The Queen (No 2)
(1988) 164 CLR 465, referred to.
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: V Engel SC with T Grealy
Respondent: A Abayasekara with K Roussos
Appellant: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Respondent: Northern Territory Legal Aid Commission
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 29
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
The King v Mamarika
[2024] NTCCA 5
CA 1 of 2023 (22041054)
ANTHONY MAMARIKA
CORAM: GRANT CJ, BROWNHILL & BURNS JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 16 April 2024)
December 2022, the respondent was sentenced for one count of arson contrary to
s 243(1) of the
Criminal Code 1983
(NT) (Count 1), and one count of
aggravated reckless endangerment of life contrary to ss 174C and 174G(a) of
Criminal Code
(Count 2). The pleaded circumstance of aggravation was
that the offence was committed ‘by the use of an offensive weapon, namely
[2] The maximum
penalty applicable to the offence in Count 1 was life imprisonment, while that
applicable to the offence in Count
2 was 14 years’ imprisonment. The
respondent was sentenced to 2 years’ imprisonment on Count 1 and 5
years’ imprisonment
on Count 2. The sentences were accumulated to the
extent of 12 months, such that the total sentence imposed was 6 years’
imprisonment.
A non-parole period of 4 years was imposed. The accumulated
sentences and the non-parole period were backdated to commence on 23
2022 to take into account time served prior to sentencing.
[3] The Crown
has appealed against the sentences imposed by the primary judge. The single
ground of appeal pleaded is that the primary
judge erred in imposing sentences
which are, both individually and in their totality, manifestly inadequate in all
of the circumstances.
[4] The Crown
seeks orders that this Court quash the sentences imposed by the primary judge
and impose such a sentence as this Court
considers warranted in law and which
should have been passed at first instance.
[5] The appeal
should be dismissed for the reasons which follow.
relating to Crown appeals
principles to be applied in Crown appeals are not in doubt. They are
conveniently to be found in the judgment of this Court
The Queen v
Crown appeals
against sentence should be a rarity brought only to establish some matter of
principle, and to afford an opportunity
to the Court of Criminal Appeal to
perform its proper function in this respect; namely, to lay down principles for
the guidance of
courts sentencing offenders. The reference to a “matter of
principle” must be understood as encompassing what is necessary
the kind of manifest inadequacy or inconsistency in sentencing standards which
constitutes an error in point of principle.
As to what will constitute an error in point of principle, in
this Court stated:
R v Barbara
(NSW Court of Criminal Appeal, unreported judgment
number 60638 delivered 24 February 1997), Hunt CJ at CL, with whom the other
of the Court agreed, pointed out that the passage from the judgment in
cited by Thomas J was not limited to laying down some new point
of principle. His Honour said:
“It is usually overlooked by respondents that the High Court has at the
same time also clearly indicated that sentences which
are so inadequate as to
indicate error or departure from principle, and sentences which depart from
accepted sentencing standards,
constitute error in point of principle which the
Crown is entitled to have this Court correct.”
These remarks do not operate to displace the principle expressed by King CJ
R v Osenkowski
It is important that prosecution appeals should not be allowed to
circumscribe unduly the sentencing discretion of judges. There must
always be a
place for the exercise of mercy where the judge’s sympathies are
reasonably excited by the circumstances of the
case. There must always be a
place for leniency which has been traditionally extended even to offenders with
bad records when the
judge forms the view, almost intuitively in the case of
experienced judges, that leniency at that particular stage of an
life might lead to reform. The proper role for prosecution
appeals, in my view, is to enable the courts to establish and maintain
standards of punishment for crime, to enable idiosyncratic views of individual
judges as to particular crimes or types of
crime to be corrected, and
occasionally to correct a sentence which is so disproportionate to the
seriousness of the crime as to
shock the public conscience.
The principles enunciated in
House v The King
remain applicable to the
determination of manifest inadequacy. In the oft-quoted passage from that
decision, the High Court stated:
The manner in which an appeal against an exercise of discretion should be
determined is governed by established principles. It is
not enough that the
judges composing the appellate court consider that, if they had been in the
position of the primary judge, they
would have taken a different course. It must
appear that some error has been made in exercising the discretion. If the judge
upon a wrong principle, if he allows extraneous or irrelevant matters to
guide or affect him, if he mistakes the facts, if he does
not take into account
some material consideration, then his determination should be reviewed and the
appellate court may exercise
its own discretion in substitution for his, if it
has the materials for doing so. It may not appear how the primary judge has
the result embodied in his order, but, if upon the facts it is
unreasonable or plainly unjust, the appellate court may infer that
in some way
there has been a failure properly to exercise the discretion which the law
reposes in the court of first instance. In
such a case, although the nature of
the error may not be discoverable, the exercise of the discretion is reviewed on
the ground that
a substantial wrong has in fact occurred. Unlike courts of
criminal appeal, this court has not been given a special or particular
review sentences imposed upon convicted persons. Its authority to do so belongs
to it only in virtue of its general appellate
power. But even with respect to
the particular jurisdiction conferred on courts of criminal appeal, limitations
upon the manner in
which it will be exercised have been formulated. Lord
Alverstone LCJ said that it must appear that the judge imposing the sentence
proceeded upon wrong principles or given undue weight to some of the facts (
). Lord Reading LCJ said the court will not interfere because its
members would have given a lesser sentence, but only if the sentence
from is manifestly wrong (
). Lord Hewart LCJ has said that the
court only interferes on matters of principle and on the ground of substantial
miscarriage of
Hili v The Queen
, the plurality reasons contain the following
observations concerning the assessment of manifest inadequacy, in the absence of
assertion of specific error, on the basis that the sentence subject to
appeal was unreasonable or plainly unjust:
[A]ppellate intervention on the ground that the sentence is manifestly
excessive or manifestly inadequate “is not justified
simply because the
result arrived at is markedly different from other sentences that have been
imposed in other cases”. Rather
as the plurality went on to say in
, “[i]ntervention is warranted only where the difference is
such that, in all the circumstances, the appellate court concludes
have been some misapplication of principle, even though where and how is not
apparent from the statement of the reasons.
[...] But what reveals manifest excess, or inadequacy, of sentence is
consideration of all the matters that are relevant to fixing
the sentence. The
references made by the Court of Criminal Appeal to the circumstances of the
offending and the personal circumstances
of each offender were, therefore,
important elements in the reasons of the Court of Criminal Appeal.
The applicants’ submissions criticising the sufficiency of the reasons
given by the Court of Criminal Appeal pointed out that
the Court of Criminal
Appeal identified no specific error in the sentencing judge’s findings of
fact or reasons. That is right,
but because the only ground advanced by the
Director was the ground of manifest inadequacy, it had to be assumed that the
alleged no specific error. That the Court of Criminal Appeal identified
no specific error is, therefore, unsurprising. The absence
of identification of
such an error does not bespeak error on the part of the Court of Criminal
Even where manifest inadequacy is found, this Court retains a residual
discretion as to whether the respondent should be re-sentenced.
the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal stated:
The right of the Crown to appeal against a sentence on the grounds of
inadequacy is exceptional. However, where sentences imposed
are so inadequate as
to indicate error or departure from principle, or depart from accepted
sentencing standards, they demonstrate
error in point of principle which the
Crown is entitled to have this Court correct. The case must be a compelling one
before this
Court will interfere. It is not sufficient that this Court would
itself, in the position of the sentencing judge, have imposed a
more severe
sentence. However, sentences outside the permissible range of those the product
of a properly exercised sentencing discretion
prima facie manifest error. Even
so, in the case of a Crown appeal, there remains a residual discretion as to
whether the Court will
interfere. (Footnotes omitted)
As to the exercise of the residual discretion, in
Green v The Queen
the plurality of the High Court stated:
A primary consideration relevant to the exercise of the residual discretion
is the purpose of Crown appeals under s 5D which, as observed
these reasons, is “to lay down principles for the governance and guidance
of courts having the duty of sentencing
convicted persons.” That is a
limiting purpose. It does not extend to the general correction of errors made by
sentencing judges.
It provides a framework within which to assess the
significance of factors relevant to the exercise of the discretion.
That principle has been accepted and applied by this Court in
R v Hitanaya
The principles governing Crown appeals are not in doubt and are well known.
They were discussed in
[2006] NTCCA 10
161 A Crim R
] and it is unnecessary to repeat that discussion. Even if the
manifest inadequacy is such as to demonstrate error in point of principle,
Court must carefully consider the next step which involves determination as to
whether this is one of those rare and exceptional
cases in which the Crown
appeal should be allowed and the respondent resentenced.
, and before
was decided,
s 414(1A) of the
Criminal Code
was enacted to provide that in
exercising its discretion on an appeal against sentence with respect to an
indictable offence, the
Court must not take into account any element of double
jeopardy when deciding whether to allow the appeal or impose another sentence.
Riley CJ considered the impact of s 414(1A) of the
Criminal Code
on the Court’s residual discretion, and described the
ambit of the discretion in light of that section. His Honour stated:
[Section 414(1A) of the
Criminal Code
] removes any need for the Court
of Criminal Appeal to give consideration to ensuring that Crown appeals are
“rare and exceptional”.
Responsibility in that regard rests with the
Director of Public Prosecutions.
Apart from double jeopardy considerations, the Court retains a residual
discretion to determine that, despite error having been established
satisfied that a different sentence ought to have been passed, a Crown appeal
should be dismissed or a reduced sentence
should be imposed.
Factors that may be relevant to the exercise of the residual discretion to
dismiss an appeal, despite inadequacy of sentence, include
the presence of
unfairness arising from such matters as delay, parity, the totality principle,
rehabilitation and fault on the part
of the Crown.
Accordingly, the principle of double jeopardy no longer requires this Court
to ensure that appellate intervention is rare and exceptional
in the manner
spoken of in
. It remains the case, however, that this Court will
not intervene where no point of principle arises, and will be slow to intervene
where there is a countervailing factor which may warrant the exercise of the
residual discretion.
(Footnotes omitted)
Facts of the offending
[7] The facts of
the offending are set out in the sentencing remarks of the primary
On 22 December 2020 you and RS were at Mindil Beach, where
you drank alcohol. You both went to Uncle Sam's, where you purchased some
and returned to your house at One Mile Dam. You told RS to go to sleep. She
stated she did not want to go to sleep as she
was hungry, and began to eat her
food. You became angry and began to yell at RS.
You walked over to her and punched her once to the back of the head. You
used your left clenched fist and continued to yell at her.
RS became fearful
and locked herself inside the bedroom. You tried to get into the room by
kicking the door, but you were unable
to gain entry.
RS called 000 to speak to the police, and reported being hit by you. The
person who took the call heard banging and smashing in the
background. RS
requested that she stay on the phone as she was scared. While she was on the
phone to police, you dragged a nearby
mattress towards the room before leaning
it against the bedroom door, where she was taking refuge.
You lit fire to the mattress, causing it to ignite, and smoke began to fill
RS's room. You said, "I am going to make you suffocate
and you will die." RS,
while still on the phone to police, reported seeing the flames and described
having difficulty breathing.
You left the area. RS was unable to leave the room due to the ignited
mattress blocking the door and all of the windows of the room
being shut.
Shortly afterwards, the fire brigade attended and extinguished the fire and
forced open the bedroom door, which allowed
RS to leave. She was taken to
hospital by St John Ambulance.
At about 2:08 am on the same morning, you returned to the location, and
whilst holding your hands over your head, you approached police
and said, "I
give myself up." Police arrested you and you were taken to the Palmerston
Watchhouse.
The material components of the mattress were completely destroyed, with only
the innerspring mattress remaining. The bedroom door
of the dwelling, the door
frame, walls and steps leading into the bedroom all suffered significant fire
related damage, including
significant charring.
RS had difficulty breathing due to smoke inhalation. She also had tenderness
to the back of her head, where you had punched her.
In her victim impact statement, RS told the court she was in hospital because
the smoke meant she could not breathe. She has said
it makes her sad that you
hit her. She was very frightened. She stated, "He did an awful thing to
Further, she told the court her house was burnt, the mattress and blanket got
burnt, there was lots of damage inside. She stated,
"Anthony is not nice when
he is drinking. He is violent."
The decision of the primary judge
[8] The primary
judge accepted that the facts revealed serious offending and persistence by the
respondent in the offending conduct.
The primary judge referred to a report from
a psychologist which stated that the respondent had told the psychologist that
fire to the mattress to terrify the victim and to burn the house down
with the victim inside. The respondent had told the psychologist
that he behaved
badly when intoxicated and was prone to “raging”.
[9] The primary
judge noted that the respondent had acknowledged to the psychologist that his
conduct was wrong and made no attempt
to justify his behaviour. The respondent
also agreed that the victim was likely to be harmed by his conduct. The primary
judge proceeded
on the basis that the events the subject of the charges must
have been terrifying for the victim.
respondent left the scene after he lit the fire. The primary judge stated that
this showed that the respondent was reckless
died. Her Honour stated that the respondent’s conduct gave rise to a
danger of death to the
victim and her unborn child.
[11] The primary
judge noted that houses at One Mile Dam are in “terrible condition”,
and were better described as sheds
rather than houses. They nevertheless
provided shelter to a number of people who often have nowhere else to live.
Photographs of
the damage occasioned to the building revealed that the damage
was not especially significant from a monetary point of view.
[12] The primary
judge acknowledged that the respondent had a significant criminal history,
including previous convictions for damaging
property, aggravated assault,
assaulting a worker, deprivation of liberty, causing bodily harm and other
offences. The primary judge
noted that although many of the convictions were
dated, there was a pattern of reoffending.
[13] The primary
judge received a report from a psychologist and other medical records relating
to the respondent. So far as the respondent’s
personal circumstances were
concerned, the primary judge noted that the respondent was 50 years old at the
time of offending, and
52 years old at the time of sentence. He was one of eight
children and grew up on Groote Eylandt. As an adult he had lived at both
Umbakumba and Angurugu, as well as spending one or two years at Elcho
respondent attended Umbakumba School until year 10. His employment history was
described as “chequered”. The
primary judge acknowledged the lack of
opportunities for work in remote areas. Nevertheless, the respondent had worked
doing gardening and maintenance, on the Night Patrol at Angurugu and
as a ranger on Elcho Island.
[15] The primary
judge noted with regard to the respondent’s medical history
(a) he was hospitalised at about 16 months of age after ingesting kerosene;
(b) in the early 1980s he suffered a head injury in a car accident;
(c) in 1986 he was hospitalised as a result of an assault with a machete by his
stepfather which left him with severe head lacerations;
(d) in 2018 he suffered a “cardiac event”; and
(e) at the time of sentencing, he suffered from health conditions including
ischaemic heart disease, persistent atrial fibrillation
and type 2 diabetes.
respondent had been subject to psychiatric reviews in 1992, 1993 and 1998. The
primary judge stated that the reports from
those reviews “pointed to low
intellect, suspected background trauma and neglect”, which explained in
part the respondent’s
personality difficulties. The respondent’s
father was an alcoholic who beat the respondent’s mother regularly. The
and his mother and siblings would, on occasion, seek refuge at
relatives’ homes until the respondent’s father had settled
respondent’s father died when the respondent was eight years old. The
respondent was adopted by an uncle who was
subsequently banished from the
community, leaving the respondent with no clear male role model. His mother died
[17] The primary
judge did not recite the contents of the psychologist’s report in detail,
but summarised them as follows:
It is a high quality report, which
is very helpful. She states you have poor cognitive functioning. You are
likely to have significant
problems with adaptive functioning and will require
intervention and supervision regimes geared for people with intellectual
impairment.
These cognitive problems could represent neurodevelopment disorder
or damage from traumatic brain injury linked to a background
of trauma and
[18] Having read
“readily” able to make
a finding of profound disadvantage, including
childhood disadvantage and deprivation, which did not diminish with the passage
time. On psychological testing, the respondent placed in the 7
percentile, meaning that 93% of the population scored higher. The primary judge
accepted that the respondent’s moral culpability
for the offences was
reduced because of these matters.
[19] The primary
judge stated that the respondent had been addicted to alcohol since his
formative years, and had used other substances
such as cannabis. The primary
judge found that there was an obvious link between the respondent’s
childhood disadvantage, his
commencement of substance abuse and his offending
conduct. The primary judge nevertheless noted that protection of the community
was a significant factor in sentencing the respondent.
conclusion, the primary judge said:
When you are eventually returned
to the community, you will need to be monitored and treated for multiple health
conditions, including
mental health needs. While you are in custody, the
psychologist recommends you attend the RAGE; that is Recognising Anger and
Empowerment program, and the family violence program, as well as work
camps such as Datjala, which may help you engage in pro social
activities and
combat institutionalisation.
As the psychologist recommends, and I agree, that upon release, possibly
initially on parole, you be assessed for a package through
the NDIS to assist
with sourcing placement in an appropriate supported accommodation setting, and
that you are subject to intensive
case management, electronic monitoring and
alcohol monitoring.
Further, she recommends you be assessed regularly by a forensic psychologist
to determine appropriate interventions, that you be provided
treatment focussed on self-regulation and that close consultation be conducted
with your elders from Groote Eylandt.
It seems to me, given [your] poor cognitive state, when you are eventually
released, you will need a disability support worker and
a possible guardianship
order so that you are able to live a reasonable life in the community. This
should also reduce the risk
of reoffending.
Correctional Services will need to liaise with the NDIS providers. This
really is required in your case.
[21] The primary
judge allowed a 20% discount on sentence for the respondent’s pleas of
The Crown submissions on appeal
[22] The Crown
submitted on appeal that the offending in question was extremely serious,
involving an attack on a pregnant victim
with whom the respondent was in a
domestic relationship at the time.
[23] The Crown
submitted that the respondent was assessed by the psychologist as presenting a
high risk of intimate partner and general
violence in the community and a high
risk of general offending. The report from the psychologist stated that the
respondent had a
consistent pattern of perpetrating severe violence against
partners in the absence of clear provocation and lacked empathy for his
partners. He had demonstrated an entrenched cycle of violence with no ability to
manage the danger he presented, and he had persisted
in carrying and using
weapons in his offending.
[24] The Crown
also drew attention to the respondent’s significant prior criminal
history, particularly for offences of violence.
With regard to that history, the
Crown submitted that the sentence imposed by the primary judge suggested an
improper assessment
was made of the respondent’s prospects of
rehabilitation, or that inappropriate weight was given to that consideration.
Crown submitted that it was not open to the primary judge to determine that
the establishment of a disability support worker and
a possible guardianship
order “should also” reduce the risk of reoffending. The Crown
contended that this overstated
the firmness of the respondent’s
post-release plan, and significantly overstated the respondent’s prospects
of rehabilitation.
[25] Regarding
Count 1, the Crown made the following observations:
(a) it carries a maximum penalty of life imprisonment;
(b) the conduct engaged in by the respondent was accompanied by an intent to
kill the victim;
(c) it was preceded by a physical assault on the victim;
(d) the respondent “trapped” the victim in the room where she
attempted to call for assistance;
(e) all of the windows in the room were shut;
(f) the victim was pregnant; and
(g) the respondent had a history of serious violent offending, particularly
towards women.
[26] The Crown
submitted that in all the circumstances, a sentence of two years imprisonment
was manifestly inadequate.
[27] Ranged
against that, the Crown conceded that the sentence of five years imprisonment
imposed by the primary judge for Count 2
was not manifestly inadequate. However,
the Crown maintained its submission that the sentence imposed on Count 1 was
manifestly inadequate,
with the consequence that the total sentence imposed was
also manifestly inadequate. In its written submissions, the Crown contended
the non-parole period was also manifestly inadequate, but ultimately did not
address this issue at the hearing of the appeal.
[28] The Crown
accepted that if the Court was satisfied that error on the part of the primary
judge was demonstrated, it carried the
obligation of persuading the Court that
the residual discretion should not be exercised. The Crown submitted further
that although
a judgment of this Court might in itself serve to lay down the
relevant principles without need to interfere with the sentences imposed,
interest considerations and the maintenance of confidence in the due
administration of justice required re-sentencing in order
to impose an
appropriate sentence on an offender. In support of that proposition, the Crown
cited the decision of
R v O’Connor
, in which Adamson J (with whom
RA Hulme and Davies JJ agreed) said:
Although the principal purpose
of the determination of a Crown appeal is to give guidance to sentencing judges,
the sentence actually
imposed on the respondent is still of considerable
importance. The need for specific deterrence in the present case would not be
served by an exercise of the residual discretion.
Nor indeed would the need for general deterrence be fulfilled were the
residual discretion to be exercised. The general deterrence
of a sentence is not
to be measured solely by reference to its effect on putative respondents. One of
the purposes of incorporating
an element of general deterrence in a sentence is
to ensure that sentences accord with legitimate community expectations and that
public confidence in the administration of justice is maintained:
Markarian v
(2005) 228 CLR 357 at
per McHugh J.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent submitted that it is plain from the counts on the indictment, which
both alleged conduct through the use of fire,
and the facts tendered on the
pleas before the primary judge, that the two counts overlapped in a significant
way. The respondent
submitted that, in fact, there was a complete overlap to the
extent that the conduct of the respondent which formed the basis of
each charge,
being the conduct in placing the mattress against the door of the room in which
the victim had taken shelter and setting
the mattress alight, was the
respondent accepted that it was proper for the Crown to proceed with both counts
in order to capture all of the criminality
in the offending. While the same
conduct was the basis for each count, there was a legitimate distinction between
the results of
that conduct relevant to each charge. In Count 1 it was the
damage to the building that was the relevant result, while in Count 2
resulting danger of death to the victim. The respondent referred in that respect
to the decision in
Pearce v The Queen
in which, in joint reasons, McHugh,
Hayne and Callinan JJ said:
To the extent to which two offences of
which an offender stands convicted contain common elements, it would be wrong to
punish that
offender twice for the commission of the elements that are in
common. No doubt that general principle must yield to any contrary
legislative
intention, but the punishment to be exacted should reflect what an offender has
done; it should not be affected by the
way in which the boundaries of particular
offences are drawn. Often those boundaries will be drawn in a way that means
that offences
overlap. To punish an offender twice if conduct falls in the area
of overlap would be to punish offenders according to the accidents
of adjustment
in history, rather than according to their just
respondent submitted that the structure of the total sentence imposed by the
primary judge must be considered in the light
of this principle. The primary
judge had a wide discretion as to how to approach the task of imposing sentence
where there were elements
common to each of the offences, but was bound to take
into account the principle of double jeopardy as expressed in
respondent submitted that, consistent with the principles expressed in
, the primary judge was justified in imposing a lower sentence on
Count 1 than might otherwise have been the case to ensure that the
was not being doubly punished for the same conduct.
accepting that the offending was objectively serious, the respondent submitted
that it was not open to the primary judge
to sentence on the basis that the
respondent intended to kill the victim. To do so would be to offend against the
principle expressed
that no one is be
punished for an offence of which they have not been convicted. In that regard,
the respondent was specifically
charged with the offence of being reckless to
the danger of the victim’s death rather than intending to cause her death,
would have amounted to the more serious crime of attempted murder.
addition, the respondent submitted that the actual danger of death to the victim
in the circumstances of this case was difficult
to quantify and should not be
overstated. The fire was confined to the mattress that was on the other side of
the door and no part
of the house caught fire. There did not appear to be a
significant risk of the building itself catching fire and the fire spreading
further as the building was not made of flammable material. It had a steel
frame, tin clad walls and roof, wire windows and concrete
steps. The windows in
the room in which the victim had taken refuge were not shut, as the Crown
alleged, but rather had a wire cage
preventing the victim from exiting the room
through the windows. It was accepted that the victim had difficulty breathing
smoke inhalation, but did not appear to have lasting injuries.
[35] With regard
to the damage to the house relevant to Count 1, the structural damage was
confined to charring and smoke damage from
the burning mattress to which the
fire itself was confined. No monetary value for the cost of the damage to the
building was provided
by the Crown and the primary judge remarked that the
damage was not significant from a purely monetary point of view.
respondent referred to the decision of this Court in
as recognising that the offence of arson is an offence
which can be committed in a wide variety of circumstances. Mildren J, with
Martin (BR) CJ and Thomas J agreed, stated:
The offence of arson, of
course, is an offence which can be committed in a wide variety of circumstances.
The extent to which a sentencing
court needs to impose a deterrent sentence will
often be determined by factors, such as the value of the property destroyed,
the property was occupied at the time particularly at night by persons
who are asleep, the level of risk to other persons in neighbouring
properties as
well as to police and firefighters involved in checking the premises for
occupants and in fighting the fire, whether
the offender was intoxicated at the
time, whether the owner of the property will suffer any consequential loss over
and above the
destruction of the property itself (for example in the case of
business premises by the loss of profits due to disruption to the
whether or not anyone was in fact injured or killed as a result of the fire and
if so the number of victims and the extent
of those injuries. Matters going to
mitigation will often include cooperation with the authorities, pleas of guilty,
lack of prior
convictions and in the case of Aboriginal persons in particular,
may include the fact that the defendant has been brought up in an
impoverished
section of society which has become dysfunctional through the effects of alcohol
or other drug misuse. These of course
are not intended to be a complete list of
all of the aggravating or mitigating factors which the sentence that will be
required to
[37] In all of
the circumstances, including the need to modify individual sentences to avoid
double punishment, the respondent submitted
that the individual sentences
imposed were not manifestly inadequate.
respondent submitted that in imposing sentence, the primary judge made express
reference to the principles of denunciation
and deterrence. Her Honour
specifically had regard to the respondent’s significant criminal history
and that the respondent
was at high risk of general and violent recidivism. The
primary judge acknowledged that protection of the community was a significant
sentencing factor. The express references to those matters did not reveal error.
The respondent submitted, consistent with the decision
of the majority of the
High Court in
Veen v The Queen (No
that the primary judge
could not give the respondent’s criminal history such weight as to lead to
the imposition of a penalty
that was disproportionate to the gravity of the
offence. In addition, the respondent submitted that the purposes of criminal
vary and overlap, and none of those purposes can be considered in
isolation from the others. Sometimes different purposes may point
in different
directions.
respondent submitted that there were matters in the sentencing exercise
undertaken by the primary judge that pointed in the
direction of mitigation of
sentence. The primary judge had made a finding of profound disadvantage
including childhood deprivation
which had not diminished with the passage of
time and repeat offending. Based on the psychological evidence, the primary
able to find that the respondent had early attachment stress from
grief and disruption in living and caring contexts, and coming
from a home where
he witnessed severe violence and his needs were neglected. He had problems with
his development, cultural integration,
personality and behaviour that were
consistent with an individual with significant background trauma. The
psychologist’s report
established that the respondent had poor cognitive
functioning and was likely to have significant problems with adaptive
functioning
that would require intervention and supervision regimes geared
towards people with intellectual impairment.
[40] Counsel for
the respondent submitted that these matters reduced the moral culpability of the
respondent consistent with well-established
principles.
Other relevant matters
that mitigated sentence included the respondent’s plea of guilty and his
poor health, which included
ischaemic heart disease, persistent atrial
fibrillation and type 2 diabetes.
respondent submitted that sentencing is not a process that leads to a single
correct sentence and the primary judge’s
discretion was broad in drawing
all of the relevant matters together in order to arrive at a single assessment
of the offender and
the offending. The respondent submitted that the Crown had
not demonstrated that the synthesis of all of these factors had resulted
sentence that was plainly below the lowest end of the range of sentences that
could be imposed on the facts before the primary
[42] In relation
to the Crown’s submission that the sentence imposed on the respondent
suggested that the primary judge had
improperly assessed the respondent’s
prospects of rehabilitation or had given inappropriate weight to that
consideration, the
respondent conceded that the primary judge had not made an
express finding as to the respondent’s prospects of rehabilitation.
However, the primary judge did state that the respondent’s prior record
“does not provide any real hope that [the respondent]
rehabilitated unless strong interventions, treatments and programs are offered
and taken up by [the respondent].”
The respondent submitted that this was
plainly an expression that the respondent was someone who had poor prospects of
rehabilitation
at the time of sentencing, but that his prospects may be improved
if he was prepared to comply with intensive therapeutic management.
respondent submitted that this assessment did not reveal error.
[43] The primary
judge then proceeded to discuss the recommendations of the psychologist as to
the necessary interventions, treatments
and programs required for an improvement
in the respondent’s prospects of rehabilitation. The respondent submitted
is self-evident that, if the level of support recommended by the
psychologist was put in place and the respondent appropriately engaged
supports, his risk of reoffending would be reduced and his prospects of
rehabilitation would be increased. That, however,
did not amount to a finding by
the primary judge that those plans were currently in place and that,
accordingly, the respondent had
good prospects of rehabilitation.
[44] Given the
substantial overlap arising from the conduct common to both offences, the
respondent submitted that substantial concurrency
was warranted. Given the
Crown’s concession that the sentence on Count 2 was within range, the
accumulation of half of the
sentence of Count 1 could not be said to be
manifestly inadequate. Taking totality into account, the overall sentence of 6
imprisonment adequately reflected the overall criminality of the
[45] Finally,
the respondent submitted that the non-parole period of 4 years represented
approximately 67% of the overall sentence,
a figure above the mandatory minimum.
No specific argument had been advanced by the Crown to support the proposition
that the non-parole
period was manifestly
inadequate.
Consideration
Crown’s concession that the sentence imposed on Count 2 was not manifestly
inadequate leaves open for consideration
in this appeal only three
(a) Was the sentence imposed on this offender for this offence of arson
manifestly inadequate?
(b) Was the total sentence imposed on the respondent manifestly inadequate to
reflect the overall criminality of his offending?
(c) Was the non-parole period imposed manifestly inadequate?
worthwhile reiterating what was said by this Court in
Crown appeals against sentence, as extracted at the commencement of these
reasons. That is, they should be a rarity brought
only to establish some matter
of principle, and to afford an opportunity to this Court to perform its proper
function in laying down
principles for the guidance of sentencing courts. In the
context of this appeal, the performance of that function must necessarily
into account that in
, Mildren J stated:
Before leaving
this appeal, I think something needs to be said about the current level of
sentencing for offences of this kind. Arson
is potentially an extremely serious
offence as it carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment for life. The current
level of sentences
are, in my view, too lenient and need to be increased
significantly.
statement was expressly endorsed by Martin (BR) CJ, who said that
“potential offenders are now on notice that in future
they can expect to
receive significantly longer sentences of imprisonment for this
and by Thomas J,
who said that “I agree with the comments of Mildren J that sentences for
this event should be increased taking
account of ... the factors he has
identified”.
respectfully agree with and adopt what was said by their Honours in that
[49] However,
the statement by Mildren J was immediately followed by the passage extracted at
paragraph [36] above, to the effect
that arson is an offence which can be
committed in a wide variety of circumstances. Those circumstances were expressed
whether the defendant has been brought up in an impoverished section
of society resulting in dysfunction. That draws attention to
the mitigating
principles expressed in cases such as
, which had
clear application in this case. To the extent that the potentially aggravating
circumstances of arson include whether
the property was occupied at the time and
the attendant level of risk to persons, in accordance with the principle
expressed in
, punishment for that feature of this offending was
properly incorporated into the sentence imposed for the aggravated reckless
endangerment
of life offence and not also into the sentence imposed for the
arson offence.
For these reasons, this case is not an appropriate vehicle
for this Court to lay down general principles regarding sentencing for
[50] For those
same reasons, it cannot be concluded that the sentence imposed for the arson
offence in this case, although low, was
so manifestly inadequate as to bespeak
error. The primary judge found that the respondent’s moral culpability for
his offending,
including the offence of arson, was reduced by reason of profound
disadvantage including childhood deprivation and cognitive dysfunction.
challenge has been made to that finding. The primary judge was obliged to
address the very significant factual commonalities that
existed across the two
charges. While the primary judge did not expressly state that the sentence for
the offence of arson had been
moderated for this purpose, that requirement
necessarily informs the consideration of whether the sentence imposed was
inadequate. In addition, the fire was confined to the mattress, there
was little risk that it would spread to the building given
its non-flammable
construction, and the damage caused by the fire was not significant in monetary
respondent’s submission that the primary judge was not entitled to
sentence him on the basis that he intended to kill
the victim should also be
accepted. To do so would be to sentence the respondent on the basis that the
elements of the crime of attempted
murder were made out, and he was guilty of a
serious crime with which he had not been charged. Insofar as the Crown made any
regarding the respondent’s state of mind regarding the risk
that his conduct presented to the victim, it was found in Count
allegation was that he was reckless as to danger of death to the victim that
arose from his conduct. This is very different
to an intention to kill the
[52] The primary
judge was entitled to sentence the respondent for the arson offence on the
following basis:
(a) the value of the damage to the building was not great;
(b) there was little, if any, risk that the fire would actually take hold in the
fabric of the building;
(c) while the building was occupied, and a risk of harm to the victim existed,
the respondent could not be punished twice for that
single act of reckless
endangerment;
(d) while the victim suffered from the effects of smoke inhalation, there was no
evidence that she had suffered any ongoing physical
(e) there was little if any chance of the fire spreading to other structures;
(f) there was little or no risk to those called to extinguish the fire;
(g) there was no evidence of any consequential loss to the owner of the
(h) the respondent pleaded guilty;
(i) the respondent voluntarily surrendered to police and made full admissions;
(j) the respondent’s moral culpability was reduced by reason of profound
disadvantage and cognitive dysfunction, and as a result,
the importance of
deterrence and punishment as sentencing objectives should be moderated.
[53] Having
regard to those considerations, the sentence imposed for the arson offence was
within range. Turning then to whether the
overall sentence imposed by the
primary judge was manifestly inadequate, it must be borne in mind that the same
conduct formed the
basis of each charge. Accordingly, a substantial degree of
concurrency of sentences was inevitable and it cannot be said that a total
sentence of 6 years imprisonment was manifestly inadequate having regard to the
total criminality of the respondent’s conduct.
[54] Although no
submissions were developed by the Crown regarding the non-parole period imposed
by the primary judge, the non-parole
period imposed amounted to approximately
67% of the total sentence, which fell within the primary judge’s
sentencing discretion.
[55] The appeal
is dismissed.
________________________
The Queen v Roe
[2017] NTCCA 7
R v O’Connor
It was accepted that no issue of
“double jeopardy” arose on the sentencing of the respondent because
each offence had
other elements that were not in common: see
[2017] NTSC 77.
Pearce v The Queen
[1998] HCA 57
194 CLR 610
R v De Simoni
Ajax v The Queen
Veen v The Queen (No 2)
(1988) 164 CLR 465.
Veen v The Queen (No 2)
(1988) 164 CLR 465 at 476-477.
Bugmy v The Queen
(2013) 249 CLR 571;
Muldrock v The Queen
[2011] HCA 39
(2011) 244 CLR 120
[2007] VSCA 102
(2007) 16 VR 269.
Ajax v The Queen
Ajax v The Queen
Ajax v The Queen
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (216 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter