URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTLC/2022/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:21:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
O'Neill v Bangun [2022] NTLC 21 (20 October 2022)
O’Neill v Bangun
PARTIES: JULIE ANN O’NEILL
DEREK BANGUN
TITLE OF COURT: LOCAL COURT
NO: 22215811
DELIVERED: 20 OCTOBER 2022
DATES: 4, 5 and 6 OCTOBER 2022
DECISION OF: ACTING JUDGE NEILL
CATCHWORDS:
Consideration of
“escape from
lawful custody
” within the meaning of section 112(1) of the
Criminal Code Act
in the lawful custody of the
Commissioner
” within the meaning of subsection 9(1)(a) of the
Correctional Services Act
; the relationship between section 112(1)
lawful custody
” and the exercise of control by the
Criminal Code Act sections 1,111 and
Correctional Services Act sections 4, 9, 10, 11 and
Rex v Keane N.Z.L.R. [1921] 581
R v Ryan and Walker
[1966] VicRp 76
[1966] V.R. 553
R v Scott [1967] V.R.
REPRESENTATION
Prosecution: Ms R. Everitt
Defence: Ms C. White
Prosecution: DPP
Defence: NTLAC
Judgment category
classification: B
Judgment ID Number:
[2022] NTLC 021
paragraphs: 40
THE LOCAL COURT
AT DARWIN IN THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY OF
No. 22215811
JULIE ANN O’NEILL
DEREK BANGUN
REASONS FOR DECISION
(Delivered 19 October
ACTING JUDGE JOHN NEILL
Introduction
Bangun (“the Defendant”) is a 19 year-old man who is currently an
inmate at Darwin Correctional Centre at Holtze
(“the Centre”). It is
common ground that as at 22 May 2022 he was a prisoner in lawful custody
following his conviction
for an offence. He has subsequently been charged that
he has committed a further offence, namely:
On the 22nd May
2022 at Darwin in the Northern Territory of Australia
a prisoner in lawful custody following conviction, escaped from such
Contrary to section 112(1)(a) of the Criminal
112(1) of the
Criminal Code Act
relevantly provides as
112 Escape from lawful
person who:
(a) is a prisoner in lawful custody following his arrest or conviction for an
(aa) and (b) –
(not relevant)
And who escapes from such custody, confinement or detention, is guilty of
an offence.”
Defendant is charged only that he escaped from lawful custody. There is no
charge of attempting to escape, or of being at any
time in the course of
escaping, from lawful custody.
Defendant has defended this charge. The matter came before me for hearing on 4
October 2022 and submissions continued for an hour
or so on each of 5 and 6
October 2022. I reserved my Decision.
hearing proceeded on the basis of agreed facts which were received as Exhibit
P1. There was no live evidence. In the course of
submissions I also received a
copy of the NT Government Gazette published 8 October 2014 as Exhibit D2 and
copies of four Natural
Resource aerial maps published by the NT Department of
Environment, Parks and Water Security, as Exhibit D3.
set out the agreed facts in Exhibit P1, as follows:
Police v Derek
Statement of Agreed
1. The defendant in this matter is Derek
Bangun. At the time of the incident he was serving a term of imprisonment at
Darwin Correctional
Centre (the Centre). The defendant was housed in Sector 11,
the Centre's Low Security Area.
2. A google map image depicted the
Centre in marked Annexure A to these Facts.
3. The co-defendant,
Dennis WATERS, was also a serving prisoner and housed in Sector
4. Sector 11 is outside of the main complex of Centre. A
Google map depicting Sector 11 is marked Annexure B to these
5. Prisoners in Sector 11 are advised that they are not
permitted to leave the Sector at any time except when escorted by Correctional
Officers or unsupervised when walking from Sector 11 to the main complex and
back again for approved purposes. Sector 11 prisoners
are required to register
their arrival at the main complex (via an electronic badge register) within a
prescribed window of time
otherwise an alarm triggers. Additionally, prisoners
who are undertaking work tasks are permitted to move around the Centre
the area between the Sector 11 fence and the perimeter fence) at the
direction of Correctional Officers who have general supervision
of the work
party. They are permitted to move freely within the Sector.
Sector 11 is surrounded by a 1.2m fence. The external perimeter fence is less
than 200m from the Sector 11 perimeter fence. In
between the Sector 11 fence and
the external perimeter fence is bushland and a dirt road.
external perimeter fence is interrupted by the entrance road, which is monitored
by CCTV cameras. There are numerous CCTV cameras
around the Centre, including
that at the entrance, which are all monitored by Correctional Officers in the
Intelligence Office.
8. The external perimeter fence wraps around
the road, finishing a short distance inside the entrance
22 May 2022
9. Shortly before 4:36pm on
22 May 2022, the defendant and co-defendant climbed over the Sector 11
10. The defendant and co-defendant were captured on CCTV
climbing over the fence and running into the adjacent bushland, away from
entrance road. This is depicted in Annexure C to these Facts.
Other prisoners within Sector 11 informed the Correctional authorities that two
prisoners had left Sector 11. Accordingly an emergency
muster was called, which
confirmed that the defendants were no longer within the Sector and their
identities.
12. At approximately 4:45pm, Correctional Officers
commenced vehicle patrols of the Centre and adjacent roads.
around 5:15pm the defendants were sighted running from the bushland towards
Sector 11. This is depicted in Annexure D to these
defendants then jumped the fence back into Sector 11. This is depicted in
Annexure E to these Facts.
15. Upon their return, the defendants
were directed to the Sector 11 Office, where they searched and then transported
to Sector 5
Charlie to be placed into separate confinement.
The defendants were asked if they left to collect contraband, to which WATERS
advised that they were “getting smokes”.
17. There is
no evidence to indicate that the defendants were outside the external perimeter
18. At no time did the defendants have permission to leave
their assigned
accommodation areas.
My description - Google aerial map of the buildings, roads and fences
comprising all of Darwin Correctional Centre.
My description - Google aerial map of the buildings and nearby roads and
fences comprising Sector 11 of Darwin Correctional Centre.
My description - still photo taken from CCTV of defendant and co-offender,
one having climbed over from inside the Sector 11 1.2 metre
fence and running
away from it, and the other still within Sector 11 and running at the fence
apparently intending to climb over
My description - still photo taken from CCTV of defendant and co-offender
running from outside Sector 11 towards the Sector 11 fence
with external
perimeter fence to their rear.
My description - Still photo taken from CCTV of defendant and co-offender,
one having climbed over the Sector 11 fence and now inside
Sector 11, and the
other in the act of jumping over that fence and re-entering Sector
Correctional Services Act
Northern Territory
Correctional Services Act
provides for the declaration
of correctional services establishments and the management and control of those
establishments and offenders,
and related purposes.
9(1)(a) of the
Correctional Services Act
provides that a prisoner
lawful custody of the
Commissioner
” if the prisoner “...
is at a custodial
correctional
”. Section 4 of this Act is the
interpretation section, and “
Commissioner
” is defined to mean
Commissioner of Correctional Services appointed under section
of this Act.
correctional facility
” is defined in subsection 11(1)(a) of this Act
as follows:
11 Correctional Services
Establishments
(1) Each of the following is a
correctional
services establishment
custodial correctional
, which is one of the following:
(i) a correctional
correctional centre
” is defined in section 12 of this Act as
12 Correctional centres
The Minister may, by
notice, declare a place to be a correctional
(2) The Minister may assign the correctional centre a
D2 in this proceeding includes on its page 17 a
notice dated 22
September 2014 in which the then Minister for Correctional Services declared Lot
6222 in the Hundred of Bagot to
be a correctional centre, pursuant to section 12
Correctional Services Act
aerial maps in Exhibit D3 depict Lot 6222 in the Hundred of Bagot. They show a
complex of buildings and surrounding fences all
of which are located entirely
within the boundaries of Lot 6222 in the Hundred of Bagot. It was common ground
in the parties’
submissions before me, and I was able to determine
independently from a comparison of these aerial maps with Annexures A and B to
Exhibit P1, that this complex of buildings is the Darwin Correctional Centre at
Holtze, including the buildings comprising Sector
Findings and Observations
the basis of this foregoing evidentiary material I am able to make some findings
of fact, and make some related observations.
find that at all material times the Defendant was serving a term of imprisonment
at Darwin Correctional Centre (“the Centre”),
and that he was housed
in Sector 11, the Centre’s Low Security Area.
find that at some material time the Defendant climbed over the fence which
provides the boundary around Sector 11 and he was then
outside Sector 11 for a
period of time, in breach of the Centre’s rules/requirements for prisoners
accommodated in Sector 11.
is no evidence before me that the Defendant was outside the Centre’s
external perimeter fence at any material time.
is no evidence before me that the Defendant was outside the boundaries of Lot
6222 in the Hundred of Bagot at any material time.
find that at all material times the Defendant was at a custodial correctional
facility within the meaning of the
Correctional Services
find accordingly that the Defendant at all material times was “
lawful custody of the Commissioner
(of Correctional
Services)” within the meaning of subsection 9(1) of the
Correctional
Services Act
Lawful Custody of the Commissioner
for the prosecution submitted that a prisoner could be “
in the lawful
of the Commissioner
(of Correctional Services)” within
the meaning of the
Correctional Services Act
but nonetheless not be in
lawful custody
” within the meaning of section 112 of the
Criminal Code Act.
expressions “
lawful custody
appearing in section 112 of the
Criminal Code Act
are not defined in that
Custodial correctional facility
” is defined in
Definition section 1 of the
Criminal Code Act
, where the definition in
subsection 11(1)(a) of the
Correctional Services Act
is adopted. However,
that expression “
correctional facility
not appear in section 112 of the
Criminal Code Act.
It does appear in
subsection 111(b) of that Act but only in the context of an offence of conveying
something into a “
custodial correctional facility
purpose of facilitating the escape of a prisoner.
am satisfied that the purpose and functions of the
Correctional Services
are related to administrative and management matters relevant to the
control of prisons and prisoners. I am satisfied that the concept
in the lawful custody of the Commissioner
” as established
Correctional Services Act
has not been adopted into the
Criminal Code Act
and I conclude that concept is not identical with the
concept of “
lawful custody
” as used in section 112 of the
Criminal Code Act. Accordingly, my finding in paragraph 19. above does not
conclude this matter.
Lawful Custody
this proceeding the prosecution must establish beyond reasonable doubt that the
Defendant had escaped from the Darwin Correctional
distinction between the process of escaping and the concluded fact of having
escaped is well-established – see for example
Rex v Keane
NZLR 581 (“
”) at page 583.4 to 583.9, and specifically
at 583.5 where Sim A.C.J. delivering the judgment of the Court of Appeal
“If a prisoner has regained his liberty by getting away from the
precincts of the prison, and also from the sight and control
of all prison
officials, he then has made his escape, and is no longer in lawful
R. v Ryan and Walker
[1966] VicRp 76
[1966] V R 553
the Full Court of the Supreme Court
of Victoria held that the offence of escaping from prison is not necessarily
concluded once the
prisoner has escaped from the confines of the prison. At page
556.2 the Court unanimously said:
“... the offence of escaping from gaol involves as one of its
essential elements the regaining by the prisoner of his liberty;
element is not satisfied the moment a prisoner sets foot outside the walls of
his gaol if he is followed immediately by
his gaolers in pursuit of him who have
not lost sight of him and are hot on his heels”.
was referred to the Decision of the Full Court of the Supreme Court of Victoria
[1967] V.R. 276 (“
”). In that
Decision Smith J said the following:
The definitions of the crime of escape (by a prisoner) that are to
be found in the books indicate that the essence of the offence
is the act of
going at large out of an actual custody then existing. Thus in
Stephen’s Digest of Criminal Law
Ed. (1883), art.
152, it is said that the crime is committed by a person “who, being
lawfully in custody for a criminal offence,
escapes from that custody”. In
Russell on Crime
ed., p.359, it is said that “an
escape is when one who was arrested gains his liberty before he is delivered by
of law”; and references then made by the author to the use of
the terms “escape”, “prison breaking”
“rescue” to describe different ways in which “the
liberation... is effected”. In
Archbold, Criminal Pleading, Evidence
and Practice
ed., s.3428 of the same work it is stated that
to support a charge of negligently permitting an escape it must be proved that
prisoner was in “
actual custody
“Furthermore, in
Hawkins, Pleas of the Crown
, vol. 2, Ch. 19,
s. 14, it is stated that an indictment for escape against the jailer must
expressly show that the prisoner was “actually
in the defendant’s
custody” and that he “went at large”. To the same effect is
Chitty’s Criminal Law
ed., vol. 2, p. 172 (n). And
this view is confirmed by the old precedents of indictments for escape by a
prisoner, which normally
, that at a specified time and
place the defendant whilst in the custody of a named person escaped and went at
large from and out
of that custody: compare Chitty, op. cit., vol. 2, pp.158,
161, 171, 191-2:
Burn’s Justice of the Peace
(1845), vol. 2, pp. 346-9.
“It is clear also, I consider, that the element of going at large
out of an actual custody, which is essential to constitute
an escape, must be a
conscious act done by the prisoner with the intention of liberating himself from
that custody. This conclusion
is supported by the general principles of the
common law; for it is a “
cardinal rule
intent and the act must both concur to constitute the crime” - citations
the same Decision Barry J held at page 284 as follows:
“A successful escape from imprisonment under a judicial sentence may
be effected by escaping from the precincts of the gaol
or from the custody of
the gaoler when outside the precincts of the gaol, for example when on a work
party or when receiving hospital
treatment”.
in the same decision, Gillard J held at page 291 as follows:
“In this context, it appears to me that the word
“escape” must bear its common law meaning, namely, an unauthorised
voluntary departure of the prisoner either from a place (the gaol) or a
relationship of keeper and prisoner. So far as an escape
from gaol is concerned,
the physical act of departure from the place would be as it was at common law
the most significant characteristic
of the escape”.
Decisions raise for consideration in the present matter an analysis of
” from which Mr Bangun is said to
have escaped - what were the limits of that place by reference to the
precincts of the gaol
” and can it be concluded that the
Defendant departed from those limits and was at large and free “
the custody of the gaoler
”, namely the Darwin Correctional Centre, as
discussed in
? Can it be concluded that the Defendant had got away
the sight and control of all prison officials
discussed in
Agreed Facts establish that a fence marks the boundary around Sector 11. This
fence does not however create a significant barrier
to departure from Sector 11.
The fence is only 1.2 metres in height and the photographs being Annexures C, D
and E to the Agreed
Facts show that there is no razor wire or barbed wire or
other significant physical obstacle in the structure of this fence preventing
anyone from stepping over it or climbing over it by placing their foot or feet
on top of the upright bars.
200 metres outside the fence surrounding Sector 11 there is the perimeter fence
which surrounds the entire Centre. The height
of this perimeter fence is not
provided in the Agreed Facts but its height can be assessed from the photograph
in Annexure D, which
shows that fence in the background and the Defendant and
his co-offender by way of contrast in the foreground. In addition to this
evidence in the Agreed Facts, I take judicial notice of the appearance and
height of the perimeter fence around the Darwin Correctional
Centre based on my
having visited and inspected the Centre in my role as a Local Court
find that the perimeter fence surrounding the Centre is between 3 and 4 metres
find that the perimeter fence surrounding the Centre presents a very formidable
barrier which would be extremely difficult for any
person to climb over without
equipment such as a ladder or a rope.
Agreed Facts establish that the Defendant once outside the Sector 11 fence could
not pass beyond the perimeter fence surrounding
the Centre except by walking
around to the entrance road to the Centre where that road interrupts the
perimeter fence, and then taking
that road out of the area surrounded by the
perimeter fence. The Agreed Facts establish that there are numerous CCTV cameras
the Centre, including at the entrance where the perimeter fence is
interrupted by the entrance road, and that these CCTV cameras
are all monitored
by Correctional Officers in the Centre’s Intelligence Office.
Agreed Facts go on to establish that the Defendant and his co-offender were
captured by CCTV cameras at 4:36 PM on 22 May 2022
climbing over the Sector 11
fence and then running into the adjacent bush land, “
away from the
entrance road
” - that is, they did not at that time move towards the
one gap in the perimeter fence surrounding the Centre. Other prisoners
Sector 11 informed the Correctional authorities who called an emergency muster
and then at 4:45 PM that day, a bare nine minutes
after the Defendant and his
co-offender had climbed over the Sector 11 fence, commenced vehicle patrols of
the Centre and adjacent
was submitted on behalf of the prosecution that although there was extensive
CCTV camera surveillance of all the relevant areas,
these were not monitored by
Correctional officers in real time. Accordingly, it was submitted, it was
possible a prisoner could climb
over the Sector 11 fence, walk around to the
entrance road and walk via that road through the gap in the perimeter fence and
from the Centre when nobody was actively monitoring the feed from the
relevant CCTV cameras. However, there was no evidence before
me of the number
of officers engaged at any material time in such monitoring. There was no
evidence of the number of screens requiring
such monitoring. There was no
evidence of how much time might pass when any particular CCTV camera feed might
not be monitored.
conclude on the evidence before me that the Defendant was not at any material
time outside the precincts of the Darwin Correctional
Centre after he had
climbed over the Sector 11 fence. He was still constrained by the external
perimeter fence. To escape that constraint
he would have needed to walk around
to the entrance road, and then exit along that road through the gap in the
perimeter fence and
move away from the Centre.
further conclude on the evidence before me that the Defendant had not at any
material time got away “
from the sight and control of all prison
; nor was he “
at large and free from the custody of
the gaoler”.
He could not have walked out along the entrance road
without being under CCTV surveillance, and he was under CCTV surveillance over
much of the area between the Sector 11 fence and the external perimeter fence.
The very prompt response time shown by Correctional
officers after the Defendant
was reported outside the bounds of Sector 11 is further evidence of the custody
and control exercised
over the Defendant and the co-offender by the
” in the circumstances of this
proceeding.
is no doubt on the evidence before me that the Defendant breached management
rules and requirements of the Darwin Correctional
Centre by being where he was
not permitted to be. This breach however did not amount to a complete or even a
major failure of the
control over the Defendant exercised by the Darwin
Correctional Centre at any material time. It did not amount to an escape from
lawful custody.
find the Defendant not guilty of count 1.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (212 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter