URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTADComm/1998/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:16:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kalich, Elfrida v Franc Es [1998] NTADComm 2 (24 June 1998)
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION COMMISSION
COMPLAINANT:
MRS ELFRIDA KALICH
RESPONDENT:
MR FRANC ES
MS DAWN LAWRIE
HEARING COMMISSIONER
COUNSEL ASSISTING:
MR DAVID ALDERMAN
GROUNDS OF COMPLAINT:
DISCRIMINATION ON THE GROUNDS OF SEX (
AND SEXUAL HARASSMENT (
) OF THE NT
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION ACT
DATE OF DECISION:
24 JUNE 1998
INTRODUCTION
On 14 May 1996 a delegate of the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner
accepted a complaint from Mrs Elfrida Kalich against Mr Franc Es,
the operator
of a business known as Stainless Steel Industries, alleging discrimination in
the area of work on the grounds of sex
and sexual harassment contrary to
Section 19(1)(b)
Anti-Discrimination Act 1992
Following investigation and an
unsuccessful attempt to conciliate the matter, the delegate referred the
complaint to the NT Anti-Discrimination
Commissioner for Hearing pursuant to
of the Act.
A copy of the referral report was sent to
the parties.
The Hearing of the matter was delayed due to litigation in
another place concerning a procedural issue.
April 1995 the Complainant Mrs Elfrida Kalich was employed by the Respondent, Mr
Franc Es as a casual book-keeper. Mrs Kalich's
position was subsequently
changed to permanent part-time work, with a minimum of 15 hours per
Mr Es is the owner/operator of a business known as Stainless Steel
Industries.
While Mr Es employed two young men on a temporary basis on
"work experience", the business of steel fabrication was undertaken by
with Mrs Kalich the only other permanent employee.
The business is
located in Hardy Road, Berrimah, an industrial area just south of
Mr Es resided on the premises until early March 1996 when he
leased a flat in Bagshaw Terrace, Palmerston.
While residing at the
workshop it was Mr Es's custom to invite friends and business colleagues to
barbeques on site, including Mrs
Kalich and her husband John Kragelius. Wine
and beer would be available at these barbeques.
It was also Mr Es's
custom to offer wine at the workplace, during working hours to any visitors and
to his employee Mrs Kalich. On
a Friday he would usually order pizzas or
Chinese meals, for staff and business associates.
Mr Kragelius attended
some of these barbeques.
Mr Es held business luncheons at the Palmerston
Tavern and the Novotel Atrium (Darwin) to which employees were invited. A
function to which both Mrs Kalich and Mr Kragelius were invited was
held at the Casino "Boardroom".
Mr Es invited both Mrs Kalich and Mr
Kragelius to his flat for a special Easter dinner, however only Mrs Kalich
Mrs Kalich alleged that Mr Es would press her to drink wine
during working hours, that as a result she became "tipsy" and would need
before driving home; that he requested she use her "woman's ways" to entice a
business person to meet with Mr Es; that on
hearing Mrs Kalich's husband
was to work in Tennant Creek Mr Es looked "happy", referred to her as a "lawn"
or "hay" widow and invited
her to his home for chicken drumsticks and
Mrs Kalich further alleged that Mr Es made unwelcome remarks of a
sexual nature; touched her breasts, bit her on the thigh and placed
around her waist from behind, and that this conduct amounts to
discrimination and sexual harassment, contrary to
Sections 19(1)(b)
Anti-Discrimination Act
Mrs Kalich alleged
that because she resisted his advances, Mr Es downgraded her position to
"casual" part-time, and that because of
the stress she suffered she resigned in
Mr Es agreed that on occasion he would offer Mrs Kalich wine
after working hours, that he would pay her compliments, and that he invited
Mrs Kalich and Mr Kragelius to various functions, including the special
Easter meal at his flat.
Mr Es denied having pressured Mrs Kalich to
drink wine, or subjecting her to unwelcome advances including biting her thigh.
Mr Es stated that placing Mrs Kalich on a casual employment basis was
due solely to the financial affairs of the company, and was
not as a result of a
rebuff to the alleged sexual harassment. In his defence to the points of claim,
Mr Es also stated Mrs Kalich
would occasionally visit him at his home without a
specific invitation.
THE LEGISLATION
Anti-Discrimination Act 1992
came into operation 1 August 1993, and makes
discrimination based on sex in the area of work unlawful, unless a specific
"Discrimination" is defined in the following
SECTION 20 - DISCRIMINATION
(1) For the purposes of this Act, discrimination includes -
(a) any distinction, restriction, exclusion or preference made on the basis
of an attribute that has the effect of nullifying or impairing
equality of
opportunity; and
(b) harassment on the basis of an attribute,
in an area of activity referred to in Part 4.
(2) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), discrimination takes
place if a person treats or proposes to treat another
person who has or had, or
is believed to have or had -
(a) an attribute;
(b) a characteristic imputed to appertain to an attribute; or
(c) a characteristic imputed to appertain generally to persons with an
less favourably than a person who has not, or is believed not to have, such
an attribute.
(3) For discrimination to take place, it is not necessary that -
(a) the attribute is the sole or dominant ground for the less favourable
treatment; or
(b) the person who discriminates regards the treatment as less
favourable.
(4) The motive of a person alleged to have discriminated against another
person is, for the purposes of this Act, irrelevant."
"Sexual harassment"
is prohibited conduct and is outlined in the Act as follows:
SECTION 22 - PROHIBITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT
(1) A person shall not, in an area of activity referred to in Part 4,
sexually harass another person.
(2) Sexual harassment takes place if a person -
(a) subjects another person to an unwelcome act of physical intimacy;
(b) makes an unwelcome demand or request (whether directly or by implication)
for sexual favours from the other person;
(c) makes an unwelcome remark with sexual connotations; or
(d) engages in any other unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature, and
(e) that person does so -
(i) with the intention of offending, humiliating or intimidating the other
(ii) in circumstances where a reasonable person would have anticipated the
possibility that the other person would be offended, humiliated
or intimidated
by the conduct; or
(f) that other person is, or reasonably believes that he or she is likely to
be, subjected to some detriment if he or she objects
to the act, demand,
request, remark or conduct.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2)(e)(ii), circumstances that are
relevant in determining whether a reasonable person would have
anticipated the
possibility that the other person would be offended, humiliated or intimidated
by the conduct include -
(a) the sex, age or race of the other person;
(b) any impairment that the other person has;
(c) the relationship between the other person and the person engaging in the
conduct; and
(d) any other circumstance of the other person."
the Act is also relevant:
SECTION 91 - BURDEN AND STANDARD OF PROOF
(1) Subject to this section, it is for the complainant to prove, on the
balance of probabilities, that the prohibited conduct alleged
in the complaint
is substantiated.
(2) Where a respondent wishes to rely on an exemption, it is for the
respondent to raise and prove, on the balance of probabilities,
exemption applies."
THE EVIDENCE
Mrs Kalich gave detailed
evidence relating to the alleged offences, and called two witnesses, Glenda
Beljon and John Kragelius.
It is undisputed that Mrs Kalich commenced
work as a part-time bookkeeper with Stainless Steel Industries 26 April 1995,
working 10-15
hours per week; that in July 1995 her position changed to
permanent part-time, and that she resigned 10 May 1996.
The circumstances
of Mrs Kalich's resignation are, however, in dispute.
Mrs Kalich stated
she became aware of the job through a neighbour who had previously held the
position but had resigned. Mrs Kalich
stated the neighbour was "having a
relationship" with Mr Es at that time, and didn't want to continue working with
Mr Es while having
a relationship.
After commencing employment with Mr
Es, Mrs Kalich was learning to use a computer package "Mind Your Own Business"
(MYOB) and was
assisted by a friend and table-tennis companion, Glenda
On 23 August 1995 Mrs Kalich went to Indonesia for a month and on
her return she alleged Mr Es told her his relationship with the
neighbour was
finished. Mrs Kalich's evidence was that Mr Es then started asking her to
lunch, at least once a month - to the Palmerston
Tavern or (most of the time)
the Atrium in Darwin. If there were people in the workshop on Fridays, Mr Es
would order in pizzas
or chicken.
Mrs Kalich went on to outline how Mr Es
would offer her glasses of wine - once when her friend Glenda was present and
with increasing
frequency from December 1995. Mrs Kalich stated she was due to
finish work around 3:00pm and Mr Es would offer the wine from 2:30
When asked how much she drank, Mrs Kalich replied:
"Well, that's Mr Es trick. When I - I told him at the beginning, when
he offered me, I said, 'I don't drink', and he said 'Oh, you
will like this
'cause this is the sweet', so I tried to drink. Yeah, it was sweet, and it was
Lambrusco, the wine brand."
Mrs Kalich referred to "compliments" paid to
her by Mr Es:
"Oh, you look nice. Your breasts are nice. You should not - you should not
wear bra, he said and you should wear shorter skirt or
shorter short and talking
like my face it looked nice. You don't look old."
Mrs Kalich alleged
that on several occasions Mr Es tried to kiss her fingers. She stated that she
didn't say or do anything at the
time, but on the following mornings at work she
told him she was not interested in a relationship - that her husband was angry
she was late home and was worried about her driving while
Mrs Kalich gave evidence that once, after both had been drinking
wine, Mr Es placed his hands on her breasts and she said: "No, this
much." This was alleged to have happened in January 1996. At the time, they
were sitting in the relatively small office,
which had a curtain over the window
which looked out onto the workshop floor. Mrs Kalich asked for the curtain to
be moved in February
as she "didn't feel comfortable."
In answer to a
question from Counsel Assisting Mrs Kalich alleged that the following events
occurred in February 1996:
"... actually he - he grabbed my waist when I was standing in the workshop
and I straight away said 'I don't like this', and I reminded
him many times that
- I said 'I'm not interested and I'm married', and he always say, 'oh yeah', or
'I see', he said 'that's why
you couldn't do anything, because you are married',
and sometimes in February when I was working with the computer, he bit
Mrs Kalich corrected this statement, saying she was bitten on the
leg by Mr Es in July 1995 - in February she was grabbed around the
Mrs Kalich told her friend Mrs Beljon of these events.
outlined a series of events relating to an invitation from Mr Es to visit
his home on Good Friday, April 5 1996. On Thursday
4th April Mr Es asked
Mrs Kalich to come to lunch on the Friday as he was going to make a special
pancake from Slovenia.
"Because I refuse all the invitation before, he said 'please come'. 'All
right then' I said, and I said to him, 'pancake only', and
he said 'oh yes.
What else can I do?' he said "you are married. I can't do anything'. So I went
there for a pancake and he cook
the pancake already and he pour cognac on top of
the pancake and I couldn't eat the whole lot because it - there was cognac there
so I didn't really like, and he serve with wine again, and I - as usual, he
refilled my glass with wine again and again. I drank."
After the lunch
Mrs Kalich went and sat on the doorstep facing the backyard - it is alleged Mr
Es then bent his knees and tried to
kiss Mrs Kalich - who struggled, asked
him to stop - and said: "This is sexual harassment."
Mr Es stopped
immediately, and Mrs Kalich went home.
On her return to work on Tuesday 9
April Mrs Kalich noticed Mr Es looked unhappy, called her Mrs Kalich instead of
Elfrida, and said:
"You should be more active to promote the
On or about 15 April Mr Es asked if Mrs Kalich's husband, Mr
Kragelius could come and service the office cars. Mrs Kalich said no
husband had obtained work in Tennant Creek and was leaving Darwin
On 18 April Mrs Kalich alleged Mr Es teased her about
being a "lawn widow" (
) and asked her home for a dinner of chicken
drumsticks. Mrs Kalich refused the invitation, and stated that on the
following day,
19 April 1996, Mr Es's attitude towards her changed - he called
her Mrs Kalich instead of Elfrida and was less friendly.
On that day
Mr Es asked Mrs Kalich to ring "Michael" to come to the workshop on the Saturday
or Sunday for some photographic work.
Michael was known to be busy, and Mrs
Kalich stated she clearly remembered Mr Es saying: "Use your ability as a woman
to drag him
to come to the workshop ...."
Mrs Kalich found this remark
offensive and humiliating and retorted: "Women and men are equal" to which Mr
Es is alleged to have
responded: "Equal? Why don't you want to make love with
Mrs Kalich says she was surprised and upset at that remark and said:
"I have been telling you that I am not interested in you as a
It was alleged that Mr Es walked from the office, returning a short
time later to advise that a person called Jane would be coming
to work as a
receptionist the following week if Mrs Kalich was unable to work.
Mrs Kalich stated she recorded these incidents in
the office diary in
Indonesian.
An appointment was made for lunch with Michael at the Atrium
for 26 April, but at the last minute Michael rang and cancelled.
Es and Mrs Kalich went to the lunch and Mr Es ordered whisky for himself and Mrs
Kalich. Mrs Kalich does not like whisky, but
drank a little of it.
Mr Es and Mrs Kalich returned to the workshop, about 2:00pm, Mrs Kalich
said she was going home - Mr Es said "at 2:00pm" but
made no other
Mrs Kalich felt she had not worked her full time that day, and
without being asked went to work the following day (Saturday) to help
the workshop.
Mr Es was away on a job until approximately 2:00pm and on
his return told Mrs Kalich she was to be at his place for lunch at 4:00pm
saying: "Don't say anything - thank you."
After going home Mrs Kalich
went, as asked, to Mr Es's flat in Palmerston for the meal Mr Es had prepared.
Potatoes, meat and wine.
After the meal, refilling Mrs Kalich's drink, Mr
Es went and had a shower - on his return he asked if Mrs Kalich would like to
a shower, saying she could lock the door.
Mrs Kalich declined the
offer and said she was going home.
Mrs Kalich then alleged Mr Es said:
"Don't insult me - you are rude - I don't want to fuck you." Mrs Kalich stated
she replied:
"Don't use that word to me" and went home.
On 29 April Mrs
Kalich went to work, and Mr Es said: "Your face looks like a cucumber. Can you
make it longer?" Mr Es went outside,
then suddenly returned, half opening the
office door - saying: "Boo Boo."
Mrs Kalich stated she felt humiliated
and was upset. She took the next day off work, but went to a breakfast seminar
on Friday 2
May representing the company. Following the breakfast she arrived
at the workshop around 9:30 - Mr Es was not there as he had an
appointment with
On his return to the office Mr Es handed Mrs Kalich a letter,
which was tendered in evidence, and is quoted in full:
"STAINLESS STEEL INDUSTRIES
UNIT 2/5 HARDY ROAD BERRIMAH N.T. 0820
P.O. BOX 38379 WINNELLIE N.T. 0821
TELEPHONE: (089) 32 3550 FACSIMILIE: (089) 32 1385
Alfrida KALICH
17 DUNBAR ST., GRAY, PALMERSTON
MRS. KALICH
With this letter I inform you about an important decission I made, as a
propreitor - manager of STAINLESS STEEL INDUSTRIES. It was
not easy to decide ,
that at this present financial situation I need to close the permanent position
of book keeper - receptionist.
For the most effective solution , this place
will be replaced with a temporary position , based on casual employement, for 15
per week, spred in two days ( Thursday and Friday )
T his decission starts with 10. of May 1996. (
Mrs Kalich and Mr Es were seated opposite each other in the
Mrs Kalich stated she said to Mr Es: "This is not because of
financial problems, this is because I refuse you ..."
Mrs Kalich said Mr
Es was "furious" and said: "Don't mention it, this is between employer and
employee" and then left.
Mrs Kalich worked her normal hours that day, but
then attended her doctor and received a certificate saying she was unfit for
and faxed it through to Mr Es. She resigned her position and did not
Mrs Kalich subsequently made a complaint of
discrimination and sexual harassment to the Anti-Discrimination
Commissioner.
Mrs Kalich's evidence was that she was changed from a
permanent employee to that of a temporary employee because she had refused
Es's unwelcome sexual advances.
Mr Es vehemently denied the
allegation, and insisted that his financial circumstances dictated the change in
Mrs Kalich's employment
status. Both parties spoke at some length on this
Mrs Kalich called two witnesses - Mrs Glenda Beljon and
Mr John Kragelius.
Mrs Beljon, a book-keeper, has known Mrs
Kalich since 1994/95 - they had met through table-tennis which they both play
two or three
times a week. They travelled interstate together, sharing a room
at motels in Perth, Melbourne, Adelaide and Alice Springs. These
trips occurred
between 1994-1996.
Mr Es had installed a computer at his business
premises, and in August 1995 Mrs Beljon went to Stainless Steel Industries
Mrs Kalich use and understand the financial software package
marketed as "Mind Your Own Business" (MYOB).
Arriving at approximately
2:00pm, Mrs Beljon stayed at the premises assisting Mrs Kalich until
approximately 5:00pm.
During the afternoon, Mr Es offered both Mrs Kalich
and Mrs Beljon glasses of wine, which Mrs Beljon said "we didn't really
In her evidence, Mrs Beljon stated that after her visit to the
work site, Mrs Kalich began to talk to her about her (Mrs Kalich's)
concerns - that Mrs Kalich was feeling very uncomfortable, that Mr Es's
conversations and actions had sexual connotations, and that
environment, with a curtain over the window made Mrs Kalich
uncomfortable.
Mrs Beljon recalled Mrs Kalich as telling her that Mr Es
had bitten Mrs Kalich on the thigh, and that Mr Es was inviting Mrs Kalich
to have meals with him and to visit him at home which, in Mrs Beljon's words
"she really didn't want to do".
Mrs Beljon was told by Mrs Kalich of the
letter advising Mrs Kalich of the change in her employment status from permanent
to casual, and it was Mrs Beljon's evidence that Mrs Kalich was
certain this change was because of Mrs Kalich's refusal to have a
relationship
with Mr Es.
At this time Mrs Beljon was about to leave her employment as
a part-time bookkeeper with a local firm trading as Northern Territory
Services. Mrs Beljon recommended her friend Mrs Kalich to a Mrs Muir of
Northern Territory Property Services, and Mrs Kalich
rang Mrs Muir and an
appointment was made for an interview.
However, when Mrs Kalich rang to
confirm the appointment, she was advised by Mrs Muir that the job was to be
advertised.
Subsequently Mrs Beljon asked Mrs Muir if her friend, Elfrida
Kalich, had got the job. Mrs Beljon then stated, Mrs Muir advised her
Muir had contacted Mr Es of Stainless Steel Industries for a reference, but he
had said words to the effect that Mrs Kalich
was inefficient, or incompetent.
Mrs Muir also indicated she was aware Mrs Kalich had taken out a complaint
of sex discrimination
against Mr Es.
Mr Kragelius gave evidence for Mrs
Mr Kragelius couldn't recall when he and Mrs Kalich were married,
but believed it to be around 1983.
Mrs Kalich started work at Stainless
Steel Industries in 1995, and from that time Mr Kragelius had several contacts
with Mr Es, including
performing some work on Mr Es's car, and attending several
social functions hosted by Mr Es, at the workshop, at Mr Es's home, and
Until he left to work in Tennant Creek Mr Kragelius would have
drinks with Mr Es at the workshop a "couple of times a week". Mr Kragelius
stated he did some work for Mr Es the day before leaving for Tennant Creek,
where he worked for approximately seven months.
Mr Kragelius stated that
on occasions Mrs Kalich would come home from work "upset", and that there were
occasions when Mrs Kalich
would come home having apparently had more than her
fair share of alcohol, which concerned Mr Kragelius as she had driven
It was Mr Kragelius's evidence that at the time his marriage was
under some strain.
With regard to the alleged biting of the thigh, Mr
Kragelius stated he had been told of the incident by his wife, but under
examination
Mr Kragelius contradicted his evidence as to when he was told
of the alleged biting incident, at the time it was said to have occurred
later, and finally stated he couldn't remember if he was told before he went to
Tennant Creek, while he was in Tennant Creek or
on his return from
Tennant Creek.
Mr Kragelius was vague and unable to remember with
any clarity the more formal social occasions he had attended which were hosted
His evidence was unclear as to when he became aware of the
various allegations against Mr Es, but stated he didn't mention his concerns
Mr Es at any time as he considered it was Mrs Kalich's business and she
could handle it.
Mr Kragelius was unable to remember if he was told of
the suggestion that Mrs Kalich use her "female abilities" to get the
photographer
to attend the workshop before he went to Tennant Creek, while he
was in Tennant Creek or on his return.
Mr Es gave evidence on his own
At the time of employing Mrs Kalich, Mr Es had two young men on
"work experience" in the workshop, Ian Luke and Eddy Clark, and two
workshop floor, Steven Graham who was intending to leave Darwin in November 1995
and Bob Spanner who was employed on a
contract basis.
Across the road
there was a cabinet maker joinery workshop run by a Mr Ivan Blackhall,
who used to come to Stainless Steel Industries
on a fairly regular basis for a
cup of coffee, lunch, and at times a glass of wine. Mr Es stated that Mrs
Kalich was invited to
participate, that the atmosphere was friendly and at times
"one glass of wine" turned into two glasses, and that they all went home
Mr Es gave evidence regarding the barbeques he arranged at the
workshop at which employees and their families were invited to attend,
lunches at the Palmerston Tavern and the Atrium which Mrs Kalich, as an employee
was invited to attend. There was also a
Christmas lunch at the "Boardroom"
(Darwin Casino) attended by his accountant Mrs Gustafson and her husband,
Mr Kragelius and Mrs
Mr Es referred to a lunch he hosted at the
Atrium attended by Mrs Kalich and Mr Michael McRostie, the photographer
contracted to produce
advertising/promotional material for the company, and
referred to as Michael in Mrs Kalich's evidence.
Mr Es was clear in his
evidence that any compliments paid to Mrs Kalich were general compliments,
said to cheer her up, and that Mr
Kragelius was included in his invitations for
dinner at his flat. Mr Es said he asked Mr Kragelius why Mr Kragelius had
not attended
the Easter dinner at Mr Es's flat, and that Mr Kragelius had
replied: "We had a silent week, we didn't speak".
It was after this
dinner that Mr Es was alleged to have told Mrs Kalich she needed to become "more
active to promote the business".
In evidence, Mr Es said that while it was not
Mrs Kalich's role to "promote" the business, she was encouraged to represent the
at various seminars and business breakfasts.
Mr Es also referred
to an incident when he needed to get some stationary from the office cupboard
and had to pass Mrs Kalich - in
his words - "I grabbed her with my hands along
her waist to pass". Mr Es said it was not a sexual approach, it was "just to
Mr Es referred to the offers of drinks at the workplace, which
were offered to work acquaintances, visitors, staff, and Mrs Kalich's
Mr Kragelius. While Mr Es stated that, in retrospect, that may have been
unwise, he was adamant that there was no ulterior
motive in offering wine to Mrs
Mr Es denied the allegations of sexual harassment - he denied
having grabbed Mrs Kalich's breasts, and denied having said "Don't insult
you are rude - I don't want to fuck you" at his home.
Mr Es spoke of his
wish to encourage Mrs Kalich to gain experience in general office management,
and his encouragement for her to
use the computer software packages - he stated
he was happy with her work, and understood her difficulty with language as he is
migrant and spoke very little english before 1987.
January to April
1996 was a quiet period for Stainless Steel Industries. The volume of work had
decreased and several of Mr Es's
cheques to suppliers were dishonoured. He was
called in for an interview with his bank manager, and according to his evidence
Es decided to cut down on his costs, one effect being to temporarily change
the permanent position of book-keeper to a casual temporary
position until the
business improved. Mr Es described his business as facing a "financial
The change in status of the book-keepers position to casual
temporary would allow for 15-20 hours per week, and Mr Es viewed this
financially prudent temporary arrangement.
There was conflicting evidence
as to whether Mr McRostie attended the luncheon or lunches at which Mr Es and
Mrs Kalich were present,
and I shall refer to that matter later.
called several witnesses -
• Mr Bryant;
• Mr Blackhall; and
• Mr Clark.
Mr McRostie also attended as a witness.
Mr Bryant is an upholsterer,
and operated his business from a shed across a driveway from Stainless Steel
Industries.
Mr Bryant's evidence was that he would visit Stainless Steel
Industries and share a drink, either a cup of coffee during the day or
beer or wine after work. He remembered a person called "Freda" being employed
at Stainless Steel Industries, but had never
noticed any impropriety between Mr
Es and Mrs Kalich.
Mr McRostie is the photographer who had been engaged
by Mr Es to prepare some promotional material from Stainless Steel
Industries.
Mr McRostie stated he had attended a few business lunches
with Mr Es at the Atrium Hotel, always with other people he described as
business associates of Mr Es present.
Mr McRostie remembered one lunch
where Mr Es and a person he described as a "secretary" present, but was unable
to recall the date
and could not identify Mrs Kalich as the person
Despite extensive questioning and after examining his diary Mr
McRostie could not recall taking photographs of Mrs Kalich, or having
Mrs Kalich present.
Mr Clark was called as a witness by Mr Es.
While at secondary college, Mr Clark had done some "work experience" at
Stainless Steel
Industries - there were also some other men employed at that
time, and Mrs Kalich.
In his evidence Mr Clark remembered lunches on a
Friday being held at the office, with wine being offered to others although he
not drink, being under-age.
Both parties agreed that Mr Es is a
friend of Mr Clark's family, and had sponsored Mr Clark on a trip to
Mr Es occasionally took Mr Clark's family to lunch of a
weekend, and had twice employed Mr Clark on work experience.
outlined his recollection of the layout of the office area and Mrs Kalich's
"work station", facing the air conditioner with
the window and a computer to her
Mr Blackhall gave evidence by telephone from the USA.
Blackhall had conducted a joinery business in a rented workshop in Berrimah,
across the road from Stainless Steel Industries.
Mr Blackhall's evidence
was that he would get together with Mr Es after they had knocked off work and
have a few drinks. At times
they had pizzas, or other food, and it was a
general relaxation period at which "Elfrida"
(Mrs Kalich) was present more
often than not. Other friends of Mr Es's were also present from time to
Mr Blackhall described the relationship between Mr Es and
Mrs Kalich as a reasonably friendly employer/employee situation. Mr
did not sense any romantic tie between Mr Es and Mrs
SUBMISSIONS
Both parties made submissions
essentially repeating their earlier evidence - the complainant Mrs Kalich
referring to the offering
of drinks, the meals at Mr Es's unit and in particular
the alleged events at the dinner on the night of Good Friday and the late
on Saturday 27 April 1996.
Mrs Kalich mentioned the diary notes she
had made of specific incidents as they occurred 18 and 19 April, the writing
being in Indonesian.
These pages have been removed from the office diary
and neither party was able to explain how the pages came to be
Mrs Kalich also referred to her visit to the doctor following
receipt of the letter from Mr Es, of her visit to the police at Palmerston
her referral to the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner by the police.
her submission Mrs Kalich referred to the timing of the writing of the letter
changing her employment status, which Mr Es, contrary
to his earlier evidence
now agreed was written the night before his appointment with the bank
Mrs Kalich submitted that this indicated her change in employment
status was because of her rejection of Mr Es's advances, rather
than as a result
of the meeting between Mr Es and his bank manager.
The respondent Mr Es
denied any impropriety stating that Mr Kragelius had been included in the
invitations to dinner, that Mrs Kalich
had always had the opportunity to
refuse wine when offered it, that compliments paid to Mrs Kalich were simply
courteous and part
of his culture, that he had not physically harassed or
assaulted her, and that his remark regarding her being a "hay widow" or "lawn
widow" was meant as a joke.
It was Mr Es's submission that Mrs Kalich
knew and accepted his need to reduce her hours because of his financial
difficulties, and
that although he had allowed a friendliness to develop in the
workplace, he had not sexually harassed Mrs Kalich.
Counsel Assisting
referred to the conflicting evidence of the parties and the various themes - one
that everything Mrs Kalich had
alleged was true; that some or nearly all of
what she had said was true but that things that had happened were now being
in a different light; that some of the things were true but others
had been manufactured to assist her case; and the theme that
none of her
allegations were true and her whole case had been fabricated.
Mr Alderman
outlined the tests applying to
of the Act, and referred to the
evidence, or perceived lack of it, relating to those tests.
Mr Alderman
cited several leading decisions on sexual harassment which I found
Mrs Kalich's complaint is one of
discrimination on the grounds of sex
and sexual harassment, pursuant to
Sections 19(1)(b)
Anti-Discrimination
The respondent, Mr Frank Es, denies that any such discriminatory
or prohibited conduct occurred and both parties gave evidence and
witnesses to support their evidence.
This matter has been extremely
difficult to determine with directly conflicting evidence being put to me, with
both parties exhibiting
overt hostility towards each other, and with undisputed
evidence as to work place practices which, in my view, significantly blurred
normally accepted divisions between a person's work, social and private
It is not in dispute that it was common practice for the employer,
Frank Es, to offer wine and food to his employees and acquaintances
working hours, to take employees to lunch, and to invite his employee, Mrs
Kalich, and husband, Mr Kragelius to his home for
food and wine.
these invitations were accepted by Mrs Kalich who attended without her husband
at a time when Mrs Kalich and Mr Kragelius
were experiencing difficulties in
their relationship.
The matters raised by Mrs Kalich were serious -
allegations of breast grabbing, thigh biting, unwelcome attempts to kiss her,
(apparently successful) to intoxicate her and invitations to visit her
employer's home at night, after squash or table tennis, culminating
in a change
of her employment status and subsequent resignation due to her refusal of the
alleged sexual advances.
Mrs Kalich called her husband, Mr Kragelius, as
a witness. His evidence can most charitably be described as extra-ordinary. Mr
was evasive, contradicting himself on important issues of fact, and
when asked to clarify these contradictions suffered a severe
I find it difficult to believe that Mr Kragelius was unable to
remember when Mrs Kalich first told him of the alleged incidents of
harassment - at the time they were said to have occurred, some time later, when
he was in Tennant Creek or on his return from
Tennant Creek.
no weight to the evidence of this witness.
Mrs Kalich's second witness,
Glenda Beljon impressed me as a straightforward, honest witness and I accept her
evidence relating to
conversations with the complainant, during which Mrs Kalich
evinced concern and distress at Mr Es's conduct.
Mrs Beljon recalled
asking Mrs Kalich: "Well, why do you stay there?" and Mrs Kalich's
response was: "Well, because it's fairly
hard to get other work and it's near
where I work and the hours suit me and I really haven't got another job and I
need the money."
Mrs Beljon remembered being shown a bruise on Mrs
Kalich's thigh which was allegedly the result of the bite by Mr Es, but other
her brief time at the workshop during which time she was offered wine by Mr
Es, Mrs Beljon could not give direct evidence as to the
allegations, she
simply recounted what she had been told by Mrs Kalich.
That being said,
I accept her evidence as to Mrs Kalich's distress while recounting the alleged
instances of harassment.
Similarly, I accept the evidence of Mr Es's
witnesses, Mr Bryant, Mr Clark and Mr Blackhall, all of whom referred to Mr Es's
of providing food and alcohol to staff and acquaintances, and at times of
taking staff and their families for lunch at various hotels.
Their frank
and honest evidence confirmed the unusual mixing of business and pleasure which
was Mr Es's normal business practice.
Other than the offers of alcohol, none of
these witnesses was able to offer any evidence on the specific allegations made
Mrs Kalich and Mr Es had given directly conflicting
evidence as to whether Mr McRostie, the photographer, attended a luncheon at the
Novotel Atrium, and despite persistent questioning and eventual reference to his
Mr McRostie was unable to recall with any clarity when and with whom
he lunched.
Mr McRostie was evasive, and I regard his evidence as
unreliable and attach no weight to it.
Was Mrs Kalich subjected to sexual
harassment by Mr Es?
In this unusual matter it is worthwhile to
re-examine the definition of both discrimination and sexual harassment.
"SECTION 20 - DISCRIMINATION
(1) For the purposes of this Act, discrimination includes -
(a) any distinction, restriction, exclusion or preference made on the basis
of an attribute that has the effect of nullifying or impairing
equality of
opportunity; and
(b) harassment on the basis of an attribute,
in an area of activity referred to in Part 4.
(2) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), discrimination takes
place if a person treats or proposes to treat another
person who has or had, or
is believed to have or had -
(a) an attribute;
(b) a characteristic imputed to appertain to an attribute; or
(c) a characteristic imputed to appertain generally to persons with an
less favourably than a person who has not, or is believed not to have, such
an attribute.
(3) For discrimination to take place, it is not necessary that -
(a) the attribute is the sole or dominant ground for the less favourable
treatment; or
(b) the person who discriminates regards the treatment as less
favourable.
(4) The motive of a person alleged to have discriminated against another
person is, for the purposes of this Act, irrelevant.
SECTION 22 - PROHIBITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT
(1) A person shall not, in an area of activity referred to in Part 4,
sexually harass another person.
(2) Sexual harassment takes place if a person -
(a) subjects another person to an unwelcome act of physical intimacy;
(b) makes an unwelcome demand or request (whether directly or by implication)
for sexual favours from the other person;
(c) makes an unwelcome remark with sexual connotations; or
(d) engages in any other unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature,
(e) that person does so -
(i) with the intention of offending, humiliating or intimidating the other
(ii) in circumstances where a reasonable person would have anticipated the
possibility that the other person would be offended, humiliated
or intimidated
by the conduct; or
(f) that other person is, or reasonably believes that he or she is likely to
be, subjected to some detriment if he or she objects
to the act, demand,
request, remark or conduct.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2)(e)(ii), circumstances that are
relevant in determining whether a reasonable person would have
anticipated the
possibility that the other person would be offended, humiliated or intimidated
by the conduct include -
(a) the sex, age or race of the other person;
(b) any impairment that the other person has;
(c) the relationship between the other person and the person engaging in the
conduct; and
(d) any other circumstance of the other person."
If I accepted at face
value all the allegations and statements made by Mrs Kalich then I would
find that the conduct complained of
met all the relevant tests and a complaint
of severe sexual harassment had been substantiated.
Conversely, if I
accepted Mr Es's defence and evidence at face value I would be most unlikely to
reach such a conclusion, and the
complaint would be dismissed.
the truth lies somewhere in between.
provides guidance on the burden and standard of proof required in these
"SECTION 91 - BURDEN AND STANDARD OF PROOF
(1) Subject to this section, it is for the complainant to prove, on the
balance of probabilities, that the prohibited conduct alleged
in the complaint
is substantiated.
(2) Where a respondent wishes to rely on an exemption, it is for the
respondent to raise and prove, on the balance of probabilities,
exemption applies."
In deciding whether the complainant, Mrs Kalich, has
proved on the balance of probabilities that the prohibited conduct occurred I
have taken note of the following judicial guidelines.
Actual Persuasion Needed
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
(1938) CLR 336
at 361 Dixon J, said:
"The truth is that, when the law requires the proof of any fact, the tribunal
must feel an actual persuasion of its occurrence or
existence before it can be
found. It cannot be found as a result of a mere mechanical comparison of
probabilities independently
of any belief in its reality.
No doubt an opinion that a state of facts exists may be held according to
indefinite gradations of certainty; and this has led to
attempts to define
exactly the certainty required by the law for various purposes. Fortunately,
however, at common law no third
standard of persuasion was definitely developed.
Except upon criminal issues to be proved by the prosecution, it is enough that
affirmative of an allegation is made out to the reasonable satisfaction of
the tribunal.
But reasonable satisfaction is not a state of mind that is attained or
established independently of the nature and consequence of
the fact or facts to
be proved."
Difference Between Civil And Criminal Standard Of Proof
The difference between the criminal standard of proof and the civil standard
of proof is no mere matter of words: it is a matter
of critical substance. No
matter how grave the fact which is to be found in a civil case, the mind has
only to be reasonably satisfied
and has not with respect to any matter in issue
in such a proceeding to attain that degree of certainty which is indispensable
the support of a conviction upon a criminal charge:
Reifek-v-McElroy
[1965] HCA 46
(1965) 112 CLR 517
Source: The ABC of Evidence at [6070] [6130]
(Butterworths)
On the evidence before me I am unable to find that Mr Es subjected
Mrs Kalich to an unwelcome act of physical intimacy.
carefully considered all the evidence relating to Mr Es's conduct at the Good
Friday lunch and his subsequent conduct in the
workplace, his remarks about Mrs
Kalich being a "hay widow" or "lawn widow" and the invitation to Mrs Kalich to
shower at Mr Es's
flat following the late Saturday lunch, and I find that this
conduct was unwelcome, and was of an implicit sexual nature with sexual
connotations.
The invitation to lunch at the flat was inextricably linked
to Mrs Kalich's employment by Mr Es, indeed on his own evidence this link
was clearly established.
I accept the evidence of Mrs Kalich that Mr Es
referred to her having a "face like a cucumber" and jumped at her saying "boo
and while these remarks are offensive and demeaning, they are not
necessarily related to unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature.
the evidence before me I find that:
• Mr Es did request that Mrs Kalich "use her feminine ways" to induce
Mr McRostie to attend lunch;
• As an employee, Mrs Kalich felt obligated to accept invitations
issued by her employer, Mr Es;
• Mr Es did ask Mrs Kalich if she would like to shower while at his
• Mr Es pressed Mrs Kalich to drink wine and kept refilling her glass,
and that this caused her considerable discomfort;
• Mr Es made unwelcome remarks as to Mrs Kalich being a "lawn widow" or
"hay widow" and immediately extended an invitation to
Mrs Kalich to have dinner
at Mr Es's flat;
and I find an established pattern of conduct occurred in circumstances
where a reasonable person would have anticipated the possibility
that the other
person would be offended, humiliated or intimidated by the conduct.
Mrs Kalich's evidence and demeanour supported her statement to Mrs Beljon that
she needed the job, and I find that she reasonably
believed she would be
subjected to detriment if she objected to her employer's behaviour.
Es's admission that he had written her notice of change of employment status
before seeing his bank manager, while earlier stating
it was as a direct result
of the meeting with the bank manager, reinforces Mrs Kalich's submission of a
change in status because
of her refusal to accept Mr Es's unwelcome
While on the evidence I am unable to come to a finding as to
the allegations of thigh biting and the grabbing of breasts, for the
outlined above I find Mrs Kalich was subjected to sexual harassment by
Mr Es in the area of her work, and that this conduct
amounted to a
detriment restricting
Mrs Kalich's right to equality of opportunity in the
workplace because of her sex.
"SECTION 88 - ORDERS AFTER HEARING
(1) If, after the hearing of a complaint, the Commissioner finds the
prohibited conduct alleged in the complaint is substantiated,
the Commissioner
may make one or more of the following orders:
(a) an order requiring the respondent not to repeat or continue the
prohibited conduct;
(b) an order requiring the respondent to pay to the complainant or another
person, within a specified period, an amount, being an
amount not more than that
prescribed, that the Commissioner considers appropriate as compensation for loss
or damage caused by the
prohibited conduct;
(c) an order requiring the respondent to do specified things to redress loss
or damage suffered by the complainant or any other person
because of the
prohibited conduct;
(d) an order declaring void all or part of an agreement made in connection
with the prohibited conduct, either from the time the agreement
was made or
subsequently.
(2) In this section, the specified things a respondent may be required to do,
include, but are not limited to the following:
(a) employing, reinstating or re-employing a person;
(b) promoting a person;
(c) moving a person to a specified position within a specified time.
(3) In this section, "damage", in relation to a person, includes the offence,
embarrassment, humiliation, and intimidation suffered
by the person.
(4) If, after the hearing of a complaint, the Commissioner finds the
prohibited conduct alleged in the complaint is not substantiated
Commissioner shall make an order dismissing the complaint."
complainant, Mrs Kalich, did not seek compensation for loss of income, but has
sought compensation for hurt, humiliation and distress.
I have carefully
considered all the evidence put to me in this matter, and have noted the case
law presented by Counsel Assisting.
While sexual harassment should never
be trivialised, this is, to put it mildly, an unusual case.
Invitations
to drinks at work were offered and accepted, the complainant and her husband
accepted the hospitality of the respondent
on numerous occasions, and Mrs Kalich
impressed me as a strong independent person of considerable
resilience.
Taking all these matters into account, I issue the following
within 28 days of the issuing of this Order the respondent
Mr Franc Es
pay the complainant Mrs Elfrida Kalich the sum of $3,000 for hurt,
humiliation and distress.
Commissioner
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (115 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter