URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTMHRT/2015/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:21:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
X, Re [2015] NTMHRT 1 (1 September 2015)
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF
Mental Health Review Tribunal
DECISION NUMBER:
[2015] NTMHRT 1
MATTER TYPE:
Review of Interim Community Management Order
DECISION OF:
Richard Bruxner, Peter O’Brien, Suzi Kapetas
DELIVERED ON:
1 September 2015
1 July 2015 an interim community management order (‘CMO’) was made
in respect of X
Mental Health and Related Services Act
hearing of the Mental Health Review Tribunal (‘MHRT’) to review the
interim CMO under
was scheduled for 15 July 2015;
however, it did not proceed on that date and was instead adjourned under
, apparently by consent, to 22 July 2015.
the hearing on 22 July 2015, the MHRT raised with the parties a concern
regarding the effect upon the interim CMO of the adjournment
of the 15 July 2015
hearing. Specifically, it doubted that
so as to preserve the effect of the 1 July 2015 interim CMO beyond its original
14 day lifespan (see s 45(3)).
provides as follows:
(5A) An order that is
in force at the adjournment of a hearing remains in force during the adjournment
despite any earlier date that
was fixed for its expiry.
to the MHRT, it appeared strongly arguable that ‘order’ in
applied only to orders of the MHRT. If that was the case, the 1 July 2015
interim CMO had lapsed by the time of the 22 July 2015
hearing, and there was a
real question as to whether there was anything for the MHRT to review.
matters transpired (and partly in order to meet the concern raised by the MHRT),
a new interim CMO in respect of X was made on
22 July 2015. That meant that -
whatever the status of the 1 July 2015 interim CMO - the review hearing could
proceed on the basis
that the MHRT would be reviewing the 22 July 2015 interim
nevertheless remained the question – significant both in the context of
X’s matter and in the context of MHRT proceedings
generally –
has the effect that the adjournment of a review hearing
relating to an interim CMO operates so as to extend the effect of the interim
CMO until the adjourned date. The answer to that question would also likely
dictate the answer to the question of the effect of
the adjournment of a review
hearing relating to a person’s admission as an involuntary patient (eg
under s 39(1))).
MHRT invited the parties to provide written submissions regarding the issue and
to that end provided the parties with a copy of
a memorandum prepared by the
President of the MHRT in which his provisional views had been set out.
legal representatives provided written submissions on 29 July 2015 and written
submissions on behalf of the CEO, Department
of Health, were provided on 5
August 2015. The submissions on behalf of X urged the conclusion that
does not operate in respect of the adjournment of review hearings
relating to interim CMOs (or involuntary admissions). The submissions
of the CEO did not advocate a particular interpretation of
Instead the CEO pointed to a variety of considerations tending in opposite
directions.
the reasons below, the MHRT has reached the view that the adjournment of a
review hearing relating an interim CMO does not have
the effect that the interim
CMO remains in force until the adjourned hearing date. This is because an
interim CMO is not an ‘order’
applies. In addition, the MHRT has no power, express or implied, to extend the
operation of an interim CMO beyond the 14 days maximum
mandated by the
the issue does not arise in X’s case, the reasoning supporting the
conclusions above would appear to apply with equal
force to the adjournment of
review hearings relating to involuntary admissions.
to grant adjournments
provides as follows:
(5) The Tribunal may
adjourn a hearing.
makes it clear that the MHRT has the power to adjourn proceedings. Even
in the absence of
, that is a power that almost certainly would
have arisen as a matter of necessary implication. The critical question for
purposes, however, is whether the power to grant adjournments is subject
to limitations, whether arising expressly or by implication
question must be answered in the context of: the scheme established by the
; the important rights and interests served by that scheme; and the role of
the MHRT in the protection of those rights and interests.
role of the MHRT
recognises the need in particular circumstances for interference
with fundamental human rights and liberties, its focus is upon ensuring
such interferences only occur when absolutely necessary and after a process in
which the affected person’s interests are
thoroughly and fairly
considered.
MHRT plays a pivotal role in that process by considering, at a hearing at which
all interested parties are represented, whether
it should make orders allowing
involuntary treatment of people who are mentally ill (or who have certain other
broadly (and leaving aside the particular case of complex cognitive impairment),
the occasion for the MHRT to make such orders
arises in two ways. The first
occasion is where a person has been involuntarily admitted or made subject to an
interim CMO as a
result of a decision of an authorised psychiatric practitioner
(or practitioners). The other occasion is where a person is already
involuntary admission or a CMO as a result of a previous decision of the
the MHRT is
considering a matter, or reviewing an order made on an
earlier occasion, the
imposes strict time limits within which it is
required to do so. Thus, an involuntary admission or interim CMO
be reviewed by the MHRT ‘within 14 days’
(s 123(1)(a)
Similarly an order of the MHRT ‘must’ be reviewed ‘by the date
fixed’ by the MHRT for the review when making
(5)(a),(b) and (c)).
addition, and critically for present purposes, the power of the MHRT at a review
hearing to make orders for the involuntary treatment
of a person depends upon
its satisfaction of the criteria in
Unless the person satisfies
those criteria, the
does not give the MHRT power to order that they be
dealt with on an involuntary basis. There is no power to make orders based upon
anything less than satisfaction of the matters in
That is unaffected
by whether the order may only be for a short duration (eg because of an
adjourned hearing).
matters in paragraphs
above point to a feature of
that is critical to understanding the practical limits upon the
MHRT’s power to adjourn a hearing. Although such a power is
conferred by the
, the necessary effect of
is that an order
adjourning a review hearing does not
‘preserve’ the proceedings before the MHRT so that the same issues
necessarily present for determination on
the adjourned occasion. For an
adjournment to have that sort of effect, there is the need for specific
provision in the
Section 129(5A)
(emphasis added):
that is in force at the adjournment of a hearing remains in force during the
adjournment despite any earlier
date that was fixed
for its expiry.
is designed to address the effect of
by identifying
circumstances where the adjournment of a review hearing
the status quo is preserved until the adjourned date.
is important, however, to pay close attention to the text of
are strong indications in the text that the section is intended only to
of the MHRT.
cases where the MHRT decides to continue involuntary treatment after reviewing
an involuntary admission, an interim CMO, or one
of its own previous orders,
there can be no doubt that it makes an ‘order’ within the meaning of
the MHRT – so
much is clear from the terms of
(and especially
the case of involuntary admissions under
Division 2 (mental illness) or
Division 3 (mental disturbance) an authorised psychiatric practitioner makes a
decision which leads
to a patient’s admission for a limited period. In
the case of
reviews relating to such admissions, there is no
‘order’ in force at the time of the MHRT hearing. The
nowhere describes such an admission as involving an ‘order’.
Instead, The MHRT review is concerned with whether there
order for a person to be detained as an involuntary patient. (For another clear
example of the distinction drawn by
between involuntary admission and
an order see
“The MHRT may review the admission of a person
as an involuntary patient or an order made under this Act...”)
same reasoning cannot directly be applied in the case of
reviews relating
to interim CMOs, because the review is concerned with something
as an ‘order’ (albeit a very different type of order from one
resulting from an MHRT review). For the reasons below,
however, there are
other good grounds for concluding that an interim CMO is not an
‘order’ within the meaning of
‘date that was fixed’
the MHRT makes an order following the review of an involuntary admission, an
interim CMO, or one of its own previous orders,
it must ‘fix a date for
the order to again be reviewed’ (see
s 123(5)(a)
, (b) and (c)).
Moreover, the review must occur ‘by the date fixed’
(s 123(3)).
is not the case with an involuntary admission or interim CMO. Such an admission
or order will be for a stated period, up to
the applicable maximum. Although an
authorised psychiatric practitioner may decide that a person will be
involuntarily admitted,
or made subject to an interim CMO, for less than the
applicable maximum periods, that is not the same as
fixing a date
expiry of the admission or interim CMO.
Other power to extend
an interim CMO?
considerations to those above work against a conclusion that the MHRT has power
to extend the operation of an interim CMO
(or the period of an involuntary
admission) pending the hearing of an adjourned review application. There is no
such express power
speaks against the implication of such a power
as an incident of the adjournment power under
In addition, the fact
the legislature has made express provision in
for the continued
effect of certain orders does not support the existence of a separate power to
extend other types of involuntary
considerations
can also be observed that, apart from the above analysis, there is a sound
reason in principle for drawing a dividing line for
the purposes of
between involuntary treatment resulting from orders of the MHRT
and such treatment as a result of decisions by authorised psychiatric
practitioners. In the former case, the order under review is necessarily one
that the MHRT has made following a full hearing, with
all the protections that
entails for the affected person. In the latter case, there has been no such
is contended on behalf of the CEO that reading
as inapplicable to
interim CMOs (and involuntary admissions) will have the practical result that
reviews must be conducted by the
MHRT within the 14 day maximum period required
. The CEO points out that this might present practical
difficulties in terms of what are described as the vagaries of MHRT proceedings
(availability of interpreters, ability of legal representatives to obtain
instructions etc). That is undoubtedly correct; however,
such considerations
are properly addressed at the legal policy level.
any event, it can be noted that the MHRT would not necessarily be precluded, in
dealing with review hearings affected by such vagaries,
from making orders of
short duration. It is not productive to speculate here on the circumstances in
which such an order might be
made; however, the MHRT would only do so upon
reasonable satisfaction of the matters in
and proper consideration of
the personal and public interests served by the
matters above all point very strongly to a conclusion that only orders of the
MHRT are continued in force by
upon the adjournment of an MHRT
hearing under
The consequence, in X’s case, was that the
interim CMO dated 1 July 2015 did not remain in force as a result of the
adjournment
of the MHRT hearing on 15 July 2015.
DATED: 1 September 2015
Richard Bruxner
Peter O’Brien
Suzi Kapetas
Section 141(2)
prohibits the inclusion in these reasons for decision of anything that may tend
to identify the patient to whom the decision
See also s 48,
which provides, perhaps superfluously, that the MHRT must review an interim CMO
as soon as practicable after being
notified that it has been made.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (521 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter