URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTLC/2023/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:20:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kurniawan v Gifkins v Proprietors [2023] NTLC 2 (5 January 2023)
CITATION: Kurniawan v Gifkins v Proprietors
[2023] NTLC 2
VIRNA KURNIAWAN
WARREN GIFKINS
THE PROPRIETORS — UNIT PLAN N0. 24/84 OF 93 SMITH STREET, DARWIN,
NORTHERN TERRITORY
Third Party
TITLE OF COURT: LOCAL COURT
FILE NO(s): 2020-03186-LC
DELIVERED ON: 5 January 2023
DELIVERED AT: DARWIN
HEARING DATE(s): 30 March 2022
JUDGMENT OF: JR Gordon
CATCHWORDS:
Interrogatories; vagueness; oppression; form of answers; yes or no
answers; caveated answers; admissibility of an apology
Defamation Act 2006
Personal Violence Restraining Act
Local Court (Civil Jurisdiction) Rules
Alliance Craton Explorer Pty Ltd v Quasar Resources Pty
[2012] FCA 290
Aspar Autobarn Co-operative Society v Dovala Pty
(1987) 16 FCR 284
Austal Ships Pty Ltd v Incat Australia Pty Ltd
[2010] FCA 795
(2010) 272 ALR 177
Alliance Craton Explorer Pty Ltd v Quasar
Resources Pty Ltd
[2012] FCA 290
Palmer v John Fairfax & Sons Ltd
(1986) 5 NSWLR 727
James v Nationwide News Pty Ltd
(1992) 110 FLR
Perpetual Trustees of Australia v Brenton
(1985) 35 NTR
Prowse v Harbour Radio Pty Ltd
[2016] NSWSC 57
Fairfax Media Publications Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2011] NSWSC 646
Nibbs v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
[2010] NTSC 52
REPRESENTATION:
Plaintiff: W Roper
Defendant: R Rasmussen
Third Party: Nil
Solicitors:
Plaintiff: Turner Freeman Lawyers
Defendant: Hunt & Hunt Lawyers
Third Party: Minter Ellison
Judgment category classification: B
Judgment ID number:
[2023] NTLC 2
Number of paragraphs: 114
IN THE LOCAL COURT
AT DARWIN IN THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY OF
No. 2020-03186-LC
VIRNA KURNIAWAN
WARREN GIFKINS
THE PROPRIETORS — UNIT PLAN N0. 24/84 OF 93 SMITH STREET, DARWIN,
NORTHERN TERRITORY
Third Party
DECISION OF L GORDON JR
(Delivered 5 January 2023)
substantive matter before the Court is an application for damages pursuant to
Defamation Act 2006
brought by way of Statement of
Claim filed 17 September 2020.
is unnecessary to detail the factual nexus of the case or the matter complained
of for the purposes of the current Interlocutory
Application. The facts of the
matter, save for the content of the answers to any interrogatories as discussed
below, do not bear
significant weight as to the determinations herein.
13 July 2021 the Plaintiff filed a Notice to Answer Interrogatories, which was
subsequently answered by way of Affidavit promised
by the Defendant on 23
September 2021.
Plaintiff, being unsatisfied with a number of answers therein brought an
Interlocutory Application filed 23 February 2022 seeking
further verified
answers in relation to interrogatories 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, and
Defendant opposed the application and filed written submissions on 23 March
2022. The Plaintiff filed written submissions in support
of the application on
17 March 2022.
should be noted that the Third Party in the proceedings, joined by Third Party
Notice filed 11 October 2021 who defends the proceedings
in accordance with
their Notice of Defence filed 19 November 2021 did not appear at the
Interlocutory hearing and was not heard in
relation to the interrogatory
interrogatories have been issued pursuant to
Local Court
(Civil Jurisdiction) Rules
It is fair to note that both parties
have been non-compliant with certain time
regarding the
interrogatories however neither party took issue in this regard and I do not
intend to belabour the timing issues in
such circumstances.
purpose of interrogatories is well established. As noted by Mansfield J in
Alliance Craton Explorer Pty Ltd v Quasar Resources Pty Ltd
at 25 (references omitted):
“The ultimate aim of the process of discovery of information by
interrogatories is to shorten the trial and save costs. They
are to enable a
party to litigation to obtain discovery of material facts in order either to
support or establish proof of his or
her own case, or to find out what case (but
not the evidence) the party has to meet; or to destroy or damage the case
his or her opposition”
are also well-settled grounds for objecting to
interrogatories
, with the primary
complaint in the current matter relating to concerns of vagueness and
oppressiveness. The disputed interrogatories
and the objections raised are
discussed below.
Interrogatory 4
Interrogatory
4 flows from an affirmative answer to interrogatory 3 being “
time of the matter complained of did you have any information with respect to
any of the material therein?”
Defendant was then asked:
state what information you had;
who or what was the source of the information (identify specifically
information);
all documents containing such information which you had in your possession at
the time of the publication of the matter complained
identify all documents containing such information as to which the you had
been informed of their contents or parts thereof but which
you did not have in
your possession at the time of publication of the matter complained of and
provide a complete description as
to the terms by which these documents were
described to you.
state the use made of each of the documents described or referred to in
(c) and (d) above;
identify any such information which consisted of an oral communication and
state the substance of what was said by each such person;
identify all matters of past experience and background or of contemporary
history or notoriety and anything else relating to the
matter complained of
which occurred to you prior to its
publication.
interrogatories were initially objected to on the basis that it was
broad, vague and oppressive, and any relevant material is contained in
the Notice of Defence and the Lists of Documents filed in this
and further that the sources of information disclosed in interrogatory 5 may
assist in answering number 4.
after a consideration of relevant authorities, most relevantly
Palmer v John
Fairfax & Sons Pty Limited
James v Nationwide
and their application to
the defence of qualified privilege
the Defendant conceded the need to
answer the interrogatory.
this concession however is the Defendants submission that a number of
authorities do not permit some of the answers which
the Plaintiff seeks. I agree
with this submission, for the reasons set out below.
relation to interrogatory 4(b) the Defendant will be directed to answer, but not
to the extent that any such answer offends the
principles established in
Perpetual Trustees of Australia v
I agree with the
Defendants submission
application of principles concerning particulars are apt to apply to
interrogatories, as both concern and constrain themselves
to matters in issue
between the parties.
the extent the interrogatory seeks to identify any witness to be called by the
Defendants, the Defendant need not answer, unless
the name of the
person is a substantial part of a fact material to an issue in the case, or an
essential element in the
in my view interrogatory 4(e) (at 11(e) above), is inconsistent with authority.
Prowse v Harbour Radio Pty
her Honour McCallum J affirmed
her findings in
declined to require the Defendant to provide an explanation of their
applied the findings of Hunt J in
determined:
“The second paragraph of this interrogatory asks the defendant to
state why he held such opinions... Leave to ask it would be
refused in any event
because it could be relevant only to the reasonableness of the defendant's
opinion and not to the honesty with
which he held that opinion. It matters not
whether the opinion be biased or prejudiced, as long as it is honestly held:
Kemsley v Foot
MGM Pictures Ltd
Defendant will not be directed to answer interrogatory 4(e).
Defendant submits that to a large degree, the matters to which it has been
conceded an answer is required in relation to interrogatory
4, have been
answered in interrogatory 5. For the avoidance of any confusion or
misinterpretation across the two answers, and noting
that per this submission,
that the task is largely done and will merely be repeated, my view is that
verifying answers to interrogatory
4 are not oppressive and ought be done
separately to interrogatory 5.
for my findings above in relation to interrogatories 4(b) & (e), the
Defendant will be directed to answer interrogatory 4.
Interrogatory 5
Interrogatory
In respect of each source of information for the matter complained
of (specifying each source) at the time of publication of the matter
of, did you have a view as to:
a) the nature and/or quality of the information furnished by the
b) the accuracy of the information furnished by the source;
c) whether the source was biased against the plaintiff;
d) whether information furnished by the source required
corroboration?”
Plaintiffs objection to the Defendants answer is twofold. Firstly, that the
answers given should be in a ‘yes or no’
format and secondly that
the answers (to either interrogatory 5 or 6) cannot be caveated by the words
the main sources of information’
first with the use of the caveat ‘
the main sources of
information’
Plaintiff made the following submissions:
“[O]ne of the problems that I had with the potential answer to
interrogatory 5; this is where Mr Gifkins says, "I object to
this interrogatory
as it's too broad, vague and oppressive; however, as to the main sources;" now
this is the problem; he can't say
"the main sources," he's got to indicate what
sources he had.
He can't just say, "Ah, I had some but now, these are the important
[H]e cannot say, "this is the main," because that's not answering the
That's leaving a whole gap there...
One of the important things about interrogatories is that it helps to
issues, it helps to work out what evidence ought to be called and
shouldn't be called,
for example, and helps to confine the way in which the case is
agree. As was noted in
“The admission which the plaintiff sought from the defendant by the
interrogatory in question in the present case was that the
material disclosed in
the answer to it is the whole of what was in the defendant's possession at the
time of publication... [to]
obtain a finding in his favour that that information
did not reasonably give rise to the imputations conveyed. For that purpose,
whole of the information in the defendant's possession at the relevant time must
be disclosed in the
use of the qualification ‘the main sources’ introduces a potential
uncertainty as to the completeness of the answer
and should not be allowed. The
Defendant will be directed to answer as to all sources.
respect to the second arm of the argument, I share the view of the Defendant.
The Defendants submissions in relation to interrogatory
“22) The Plaintiff’s Submissions contend that the subject
interrogatory required a ”yes” or “no" response.
23) Firstly, it ought be noted that the Plaintiff’s contention is
not that the subject interrogatory has not been answered,
Plaintiff’s complaint is with the nature of the answer.
24) Secondly, the submission that the subject interrogatory required a
limited response, is patently misconceived.
25) The subject interrogatory clearly requires the Defendant to specify
each source.
26) The provision of yes or no answers absent the articulation of a
meaningless.”
Defendant detailed 4 events referred to in the Status Report, that being the
matter complained of, which he characterised as:
a) “The Dog Case”;
b) “The Lock-Box, Sticker and Wi-Fi Case”;
c) “Personal Violence Protection Orders”; and
d) “Criminal Cases"
my review of the answers to the interrogatories for each category I find as
the “The Dog Case”:
a) the nature and/or quality of the information furnished by the source: Answer
insufficient – an independent tribunal being
the Northern Territory Civil
and Administrative Tribunal is identified however the Defendant’s view of
the quality of the information
is not provided.
b) the accuracy of the information furnished by the source: Answered – the
Defendant was satisfied.
c) whether the source was biased against the Plaintiff: Answered – No.
d) whether information furnished by the source required corroboration: Answered
the “Lock box, sticker & wifi case”
a) the nature and/or quality of the information furnished by the source:
Answered – The Defendant was satisfied.
b) the accuracy of the information furnished by the source: Not answered.
c) whether the source was biased against the Plaintiff: Not answered.
d) whether information furnished by the source required corroboration: Not
the “Personal Violence Protection Orders”
a) the nature and/or quality of the information furnished by the source:
Answered – The nature of the information was personal
experience. Although
the quality of the knowledge was not strictly addressed, it seems unlikely the
Defendant would question the
reliability of his own experience.
b) the accuracy of the information furnished by the source: Not answered.
c) whether the source was biased against the Plaintiff: Not answered.
d) whether information furnished by the source required corroboration: Not
answered. Although evidence of potential corroboration
was given, the
requirement for further corroboration was not addressed.
the “Criminal Cases”
a) the nature and/or quality of the information furnished by the source: Answer
insufficient. The submissions of the Plaintiff below
are accepted and a further
answer is required:
“[H]e says he got it from the NT News. Now, that may be a
well-known news source in the Northern Territory; I profess my ignorance
that's a particular newspaper or a channel or a radio station... Is it a
particular article that was published? Is it a
radio broadcast he listened to?
Was it the TV news that he watched?
One might expect him to say, "Well, okay, I watched the NT News on this
night, presenter gave this information. I took the information
to be accurate
and honest and reliable because it presented on the NT News, and I assumed that
they, you know, they took steps to
verify it," as an example.”
b) the accuracy of the information furnished by the source: Answered – Yes
the Defendant was satisfied as to accuracy.
the source was biased against the Plaintiff: Answered – Yes, no
indications of bias.
d) whether information furnished by the source required corroboration: Answered
– Yes, further corroboration was not required.
relation to interrogatory 5 the Defendant will be directed to provide better
answers, as to all sources of information, not just
those he identifies as the
‘main sources’, including but not limited to:
a) “The Dog Case” interrogatory 5 (a), in relation to the nature and
quality of the information furnished;
b) The “Lock box, sticker & Wifi case” interrogatory 5(b)
regarding the accuracy of the information furnished; (c)
c) The “Personal Violence Protection Orders” interrogatory 5 (b),
(c) & (d); and
d) The “Criminal Cases” interrogatory 5 (a).
Interrogatory 6
Plaintiffs objection on the basis of the use of the words “the main
sources” which depletes the quality of the Defendants
evidence in relation
to interrogatory 6, is dealt with and remedied, above.
Defendants objection to interrogatory 6 is:
“l object to this interrogatory as it is vague and, in the
alternative, it is oppressive. However, I was satisfied with the
nature, quality
and accuracy of the information provided as described in my answer to
interrogatory 5.
Plaintiff submits that that the interrogatory is legitimately founded on the
basis that if there are views formed and set out
in answer to interrogatory 5
(which there are) then the Plaintiff is entitled to enquire further as to those
views, hence interrogatory
the Defendant adopted the ‘yes or no’ mode of answering
interrogatory 5, which in my view, he was not bound to do,
then interrogatory
6’s relevance and purpose becomes clearer.
expect that some of the additionally directed answers to interrogatory 5 may
resolve some of the deficiencies in the answers (or
lack thereof) to
interrogatory 6, particularly 6(a), however this of course will not be known
until such time as the further answers
are furnished.
do not share the Defendants view that this interrogatory is vague, particularly
when taken in context of the answers given in interrogatory
considering oppression I am mindful of the tests espoused in
Alliance Craton
Explorer Pty Ltd v Quasar Resources Pty
“If the energy, effort, time and cost required to address the
interrogatories is not reasonably proportionate to the end sought
achieved, then the interrogatories should not be administered. In making a
decision, a balancing exercise must be undertaken:
the benefits of narrowing and
clarification of issues against the costs and the burden placed over the
respondents inherent in the
task of answering the written questions fully and
accurately.”
Considering
the stage of the proceedings and noting the foreshadowing of amended pleadings
discussed in the course of this application,
the possible overlap of evidence
across interrogatories 5 and 6 and the potential for narrowing and defining
issues in dispute, I
am not of a view that requiring answers to interrogatory 6
is oppressive in all of the circumstances.
Accordingly,
I will direct that answers are
Interrogatory 7
do not intend to set out in full either interrogatories 7 & 8, nor the
answers to same due to the length of each, save for the
examples extracted below
relied upon as the basis of the determinations regarding both.
Plaintiff submits that the answers to interrogatory 7 “...
are evasive
and contravene the obligations placed upon the defendant by the
LOCAL COURT
(CIVIL JURSIDICTION) RULES 1998
Rule 17.04(3).
They require a ‘yes’
Defendant argues that the interrogatories have been ‘comprehensively
answered’, that there is no articulated basis
to seek any further
and that the Plaintiffs
complaint is effectively that they don’t like the manner in which they
have been answered, not that
there has been a failure to adequately
my view, there are a number of examples whereby the Defendant cannot and should
not be constrained to ‘yes or no’ answers.
Interrogatory
7((a) provides:
At the time of publication of the matter complained of, did you intend it
to convey of the plaintiff that:
a) The plaintiff was knowingly involved in 1 NTCAT case, 3 Violence
protection orders and 1 criminal case which were not genuine and
were driven by
a desire to intimidate, harass, annoy and frustrate the Committee's substantive
Defendant answers:
At the time of publication:
a) I intended to convey that the Plaintiff was knowingly involved in 1 NTCAT
case, 3 violence protection orders and 1 criminal case
which appear to be driven
by a desire to intimidate, harass, annoy and frustrate the Committee’s
substantive work. I did not
intend to convey, and did not convey, that the
matters were not genuine.
the Defendant is being interrogated in relation to a number of separate
propositions he is entitled to respond to each individually,
to ensure the
accuracy of his evidence. In the example above, if the Defendant is compelled to
answer yes or no only he would be
bound to accept (or deny) in full all elements
of the interrogatory when the more accurate answer (in the view of the
is ‘yes’ to the Plaintiff’s involvement and
motivation in various legal proceedings and ‘no’ to the
of such proceedings.
the Defendant directed to answer in a yes or no format the answer would
apparently be ‘yes
no’, which presents obvious
difficulties and perhaps better reflects an example of the potential evasiveness
complained of
by the Plaintiff.
further example is seen in interrogatory 7(b) which reads:
At the time of publication of the matter complained of, did you intend it
to convey of
the plaintiff that:
a) [Omitted]
b) The plaintiff became aggressive and behaved in an intimidating and
harassing manner against Committee members Judy Richardson,
Warren Gifkins and
Jason Gay when she received an NTCAT notice which behaviour resulted in a number
of Protection Orders being made
by the Court against her;
Defendant’s answer is:
“b) l intended to convey that the Plaintiff became aggressive and
behaved in an intimidating and harassing manner against Committee
members Judy
Richardson, Jason Gay and l when she received an NTCAT notice which behaviour
resulted in a number of Protection Orders
being made by the Court against her.
Further, l advise that Jason Gay was never a Committee member.”
compelling the Defendant to answer simply yes or no would result in a situation
where the Defendant would be prevented from
correcting a minor factual error
(that Jason Gray was not a committee member). Clearly, it is not acceptable to
require a ‘yes
or no’ answer, which results in known inaccuracies,
potentially leaving the Defendants credibility unwittingly subject to attack.
Interrogatory
11(c) is as follows:
At the time of publication of the matter complained of, did you intend it
to convey of the plaintiff that:
a) [Omitted]
b) [Omitted]
c) The plaintiff was responsible for bringing before the local courts 11
Personal Violence Protection Orders and 2 criminal cases
whilst her partner
prosecuted another NTCAT case challenging the lawfulness of a lock-box, a
sticker and building Wi-Fi infrastructure
being on common property;
my view, this interrogatory contains no less than 6 individual
propositions:
a) That the Plaintiff was responsible for bringing before the Local Court 11
Personal Violence Restraining Order cases;
b) That the Plaintiff was responsible for bringing before the Local Court 2
criminal cases; and
c) That the Plaintiff’s partner prosecuted a Northern Territory Civil and
Administrative Tribunal case challenging:
infrastructure
Defendant is entitled to hold an individual view on each of these propositions;
it is not the case that an affirmative answer
on one proposition must
necessarily produce the same outcome for each. He should be not compelled to
simply yes or no across the
entire interrogatory.
the balance of interrogatory 11 ((d) – (i)) in my view, they are answered,
variously in the affirmative and negative. Although
the Defendant adopts the
practice of restating the question in his answer, for instance “
intended to convey that the Plaintiff became aggressive against Committee
Members during BBQs by the pool
, this does not
nullify or obfuscate his evidence and in my view, his answers would not be of
greater value or clarity were they simply
further directions will be made in relation to interrogatory
Interrogatory 8
Plaintiffs complaint in relation to interrogatory 8 mirrors that of
interrogatory 7, in that the answers provided should be in
no’ format.
Interrogatory
8 is essentially a repeat of interrogatory 7(a) – (i) except that rather
than exploring what the Defendant
intended to convey
, on each of the sub
points he is interrogated as to his
at the time of publication.
the reasons set out above, I do not accept the submission that yes or no answers
should be ordered.
is a second component to the complaint in relation to interrogatory 8; that the
second half of the interrogatory which is unnumbered
and appears after 8(i) has
been ignored and remains unanswered. The second half of the interrogatory
If in any instance the answer is yes, specify in relation to each
(i) The basis of such belief;
(ii) All enquiries made by you into that particular matter, including by
whom and of whom each enquiry was made, and the response
received to it as well
as the dates and times the enquiries were made;
(iii) The source or sources of all information on which the belief was
founded, and in relation to each such source the defendant’s
reasons for
regarding it as reliable and accurate.
Defendants answers dispose whether he did or did not hold a belief in relation
to items 8(a)-(i), he does not provide answers
detailing the basis, enquiries or
sources which informed such beliefs.
Defendant confirms he held certain beliefs in relation to interrogatories 8 (a),
(b), (c) (in the relation to the Plaintiff’s
partners NTCAT litigation
only), (d), (e), (f) and (i).
Defendant, having failed to address this component of the interrogatory, will be
directed to answer, however in doing so, I reiterate
my observations in
paragraphs 15 – 17 above with respect to the identification of witnesses
and the explanation of opinion.
Interrogatory 11
Plaintiff asks:
As at the date of publication of the matter complained of did you dislike
the plaintiff?
Defendant answers:
l object to this interrogatory as it is not a proper request and it does
not relate to a question in issue between the
Plaintiff submits that the question goes to the issue of malice and aggravated
Defendant makes various submissions about the Plaintiffs pleadings arguing that
there is no pleading of malice and that any claim
for aggravated damages is
bereft of material facts noting “[
i]t is beyond dispute that a party
need not plead to particulars and that the same cannot fill gaps in a demurrable
Defendant relies upon the decision of Master Luppino (as he then was) in
Stephen Nibbs v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
[2010] NTSC 52
assert the need for specificity in pleadings as to what Plaintiff will allege to
be the facts, particularly in relation to defamation
cases. Mr Roper for the
Defendant, argued there is no obligation on the Defendant to seek to strike any
inadequate pleadings, he
is entitled proceed on the case as pleaded. The
Plaintiff (and in indeed the Defendant) will stand or fall on their pleadings
the onus falls to the party pleading to ensure they have adequately put the
issues for determination before the Court.
Ultimately,
and noting amendments to pleadings were ultimately foreshadowed at the
conclusion of the interlocutory hearing, I have
determined that I need not make
any findings as to the adequacy of the pleadings in order to determine whether
interrogatory 11 ought
be answered.
second arm of the Defendants objection relates to the subjective nature of the
evidence the Defendant is being compelled to answer.
In written submissions it
“lt calls upon the Defendant to form a subjective view as to what
“like” means in this context. Moreover, whether
someone likes or
dislikes another person (whatever that may subjectively mean to them) cannot be
probative of malicious
Rassmusen for the Plaintiff concedes that a dislike will not be probative of
malice but argues:
“"Did you dislike the plaintiff?" Now, not determinative, I accept,
but one of the indicia, one of the matters that one puts
together in time and
case together on malice. So a yes or no answer to that wouldn't destroy his
defence of qualified privilege and
show malice but it goes to
my view an individual’s view as to what constitutes
‘disliking’ and how that may, or may not, affect their dealings
such a person is of such a subjective nature that ordering such an interrogatory
be answered doesn’t, in my view, advance
the purposes of interrogatories.
instance, in the retail realm where ‘the customer is always right’
it is not difficult to imagine a scenario where
a challenging customer engenders
a feeling of dislike in the sales person and despite this dislike, never
translates into any adverse
actions, behaviours or consequences for either
the Defendant whether he disliked the Plaintiff, particularly in the absence of
any particulars or definition of what it is
to ‘like’ someone, is of
such low probative value and vulnerable to misapplication or misapplication that
it will not
assist the proceedings, shorten the trial, prove or disprove either
parties case.
Defendant will not be directed to answer interrogatory 11.
Interrogatory 12
Plaintiff asks:
By publication of the matter complained of did you intend the persons to
published it to think the less of the plaintiff?
Defendant answers:
l object to this interrogatory as it is not a proper request and it is
does not relate to a question in issue between the
dispute regarding whether malice and/or aggravated damages are adequately plead
and therefore constitute a live issue before the
Court is traversed above in
relation to interrogatory 11.
note the pleadings set out in the Reply filed 13 July 2021 (which had not been
brought to counsel for the Defendants attention at
the time of the hearing)
largely dispense with any argument that the issue of malice is not in issue
before the Court. Irrespective,
the Defendant continues to assert the
inadequacies in the pleadings for aggravated damages and reply upon same for the
basis of their
ongoing objection.
Nonetheless,
the Defendant states:
As to Interrogatory 12 and should the Plaintiff amend its Statement of
Claim so as to properly advance a claim for aggravated damages,
the Defendant
would be prepared to provide a further verified affidavit answering that
interrogatory. We are instructed the answer
will simply be
accept the submission advanced on behalf of the Plaintiff that damages, the
quantum and nature of damages are inherently in issue
in a claim for defamation.
But that doesn’t dissuade from the need for the heads of damage to be
properly plead. I concur with
the remarks of Mr Roper for the
“... you need to plead aggravated damages or you need to properly
plead aggravated damages (inaudible) foundation material facts
upon which you
You can't simply say, "And we've suffered loss and damage, and in
addition to loss and damage, we want aggravated damages," without
spelling out
the material facts upon which you
I see it, I can approach the dispute regarding interrogatory 12 in one of two
ways. Firstly, conduct a full analysis and make a
determination in relation to
the adequacy or otherwise of the pleadings of aggravated damages in the
Statement of Claim. If satisfied
as to the deficiencies as asserted by the
Defendant, provide the Plaintiff the opportunity to amend the pleadings, and
the interrogatory, as currently drafted could be put to the Defendant
without objection and a verified answer of ‘no’
will be entered into
Alternatively,
if the Defendant is not directed to further answer interrogatory 12 and the
Plaintiff maintains that aggravated damages
are sufficiently plead and that such
relief is open to the Court to grant, should the claim be successful, then the
Plaintiff still
has her answer – ‘no’. Albeit not verified or
entered into evidence but nonetheless on the court record by virtue
written submissions filed, on instructions, by counsel for the
irrespective of my view of whether aggravated damages are adequately plead, or
whether they are plead in an alternate form in
the future, when the Defendant is
by publication of the matter complained of did you intend the
persons to whom you published it to think the less of the plaintiff?
the answer will be no.
my view this is sufficient. It became apparent during the course of the
interlocutory hearing that amendments to pleadings are
likely. Whether this is a
course which the Plaintiff seeks to adopt in the future, remains to be seen.
However, noting the delays
this matter has already faced (in part by the
Defendant’s change in representation and periods of self-representation,
length of time taken by the Plaintiff to bring this application and
admittedly, the time taken to deliver a decision regarding same,
for which I am
apologetic), there is merit in adopting a course which serves to assist an
expeditious determination of the substantive
proceedings.
Defendant will not be directed to answer interrogatory
Interrogatory 13
the course of the hearing of the matter counsel for the Plaintiff acknowledged
that the Defendant had in fact answered the
question and withdrew the
application for a better answer to interrogatory 13.
further directions will be made with respect to interrogatory 13.
Interrogatory 14
Plaintiff asked:
Did you ever publish in relation to the plaintiff and the matter
complained of any:
a) apology;
b) retraction;
c) correction;
d) clarification.
If so, specify by what means and on what day or days as well as the
content both in words or images of the apology, retraction, correction
clarification.
Defendant answered:
I object to this interrogatory on the basis that such information is not
admissible in these
proceedings.
Plaintiff asserts that the interrogatory is relevant to the issue of
arguing that it is
possible that an apology intended to come to the attention of the Plaintiff
might in fact not reach her or that
a verbal apology may be asserted, which
would not appear in discovery. Counsel for the Plaintiff did not address
Defamation Act 2006
Defamation Act 2006
. Inadmissibility
of evidence of certain statements and admissions
(1) Evidence
of any statement or admission made in connection with the making or acceptance
of an offer to make amends is not admissible
as evidence in any legal
proceedings (whether criminal or civil);
[not applicable].
section 19:
Evidence of an apology
on liability for defamation
(1) An apology made by or on behalf of a person in connection with any
defamatory matter alleged to have been published by the person:
(a) does not constitute an express or implied admission of fault or
liability by the person in connection with that matter; and
(b) is not relevant to the determination of fault or liability in
connection with that matter.
(2) Evidence
of an apology made by or on of a person in connection any defamatory matter
alleged to have been published by the person
is not admissible in any civil
proceedings as evidence.
relevant to question of interrogatories as sought by Plaintiff]
of any apology (in the event one has been, or is ultimately made) may have a
role to play in the proceedings with respect
to mitigation of any damages or
costs. There may be legitimate argument regarding whether things said or done
constitute an apology
and how that effects the admissibility of evidence.
at this stage and in the absence of any indication that an apology does or
doesn’t exist, I am duly satisfied that
precludes the Defendant
from being compelled to answer interrogatory 14 (comprising a) –
disposes with the dispute regarding interrogatories.
Additionally,
the Defendant seeks orders in relation to his application for security for costs
filed 21 February 2022. While the application
did not proceed and the Defendant
is content for it to be dismissed, the Defendant nonetheless seeks the costs of
and incidental
to the application.
Defendants application of 21 February 2022 sought security for costs on the
basis of an unpaid costs order between the parties
in relation to a
Violence Restraining Act
application. This costs order was made against the
Plaintiff on 10 February 2021 in an amount of
Plaintiff was put on notice by correspondence between legal representatives on 8
February 2022 that, should the costs remain unpaid
in 7 days then an application
would be brought in the instant
proceedings.
the costs order was discharged, but not before the Defendant incurred the costs
of bringing his interlocutory
application.
Defendant submits that the Plaintiffs conduct in making payment on demand more
than a year after the costs were due and only in
the shadow of a potentially
negative impact in these proceedings constitutes a capitulation on behalf of the
Plaintiff and in such
circumstances warrants a departure from costs in the
Plaintiff, in submissions opposing the making of a costs order in relation to
the Defendants interlocutory application, makes
much of the delay in pursuing
payment of the costs order. Noting enforcement was not pressed for over 12
months and then the Plaintiff
was allowed just 7 days to make payment. In my
view this is irrelevant.
of the steps taken by the Defendant were outside the Rules of Court or
timeframes therein. The Plaintiff stood in breach of her
costs order for in
excess of a year, that is a decision for her. It should not be for the Defendant
to incur further costs and inconvenience
in enforcing the order of the Court,
the Plaintiff should have acceded to the decision of the Court when it was made,
in February
2021. Not when she has formed a view it has become disadvantageous
to remain in breach of the costs order in light of her defamation
proceedings.
the Plaintiff argues that the application for security for costs was foredoomed
to fail. This will of course remain unknown,
the application now not being
Defendant concedes that the starting point for an order for costs is
costs in the proceeding unless the court orders otherwise
pursuant to r63.18 of the
Supreme Court Rules
but argues that the
conduct of the Plaintiff was so unreasonable that the Court ought depart from
the usual course in this circumstance.
noted above, I see nothing reasonable in how the Plaintiff responded to the
costs order issued against her in the personal violence
proceedings. Her seeming
ignorance or ambivalence to the orders of this court are concerning. However, I
can only consider the reasonableness
of the conduct of the parties in relation
to this application and proceeding when considering whether a costs order should
this regard, I find that the Defendant successfully used this proceeding as a
vehicle to enforce the previously unsatisfied costs
order, an unusual approach
perhaps, but for all intents and purposes, a successful one. However, his
application for security for
costs is undetermined, and will remain so.
the Plaintiffs part, she apparently identified a means by which to circumvent
the Defendants intention for security for costs,
by paying the costs order, and
potentially saving both parties the costs of a contested application. I cannot
find this unreasonable.
there is some argument about the diligence of the Plaintiff in attending to the
costs order when put on notice of the application,
and some factual debate
regarding the date of issue of a cheque and its arrival at the Defendants legal
representatives; in the limited
time period all of the above transpired and the
application was bought, I do not find it necessary to reach any formal
conclusions
in this regard, noting it does not alter my view set out at
paragraph 110 above.
Accordingly,
the Defendants application filed 21 February 2022 is dismissed with the costs of
same to be costs in the cause.
parties are at liberty to apply in relation to the Plaintiff’s
interlocutory application of 23 February 2022.
orders in intend to issue with respect of the interlocutory applications are
28 days he Defendant answer (with verification) the following interrogatories
that have been administered by the Plaintiff:
a) Interrogatory number 4, excluding 4(e);
b) Interrogatory number 5, including all sources of information for the matter
complained of, including but not limited to;
Dog Case” interrogatory 5 (a), in relation to the nature and quality of
the information furnished only;
“Lock box, sticker & Wifi case” interrogatory 5(b), regarding
the accuracy of the information furnished; (c) &
“Personal Violence Protection Orders” interrogatory 5 (b), (c) &
(d) only; and
“Criminal Cases” interrogatory 5 (a) only.
Interrogatory
d) Interrogatories numbered 8(a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f) & (i) with respect
basis of such belief;
enquiries made by the Defendant into that particular matter, including by whom
and of whom each enquiry was made, and the response
received to it as well as
the dates and times the enquiries were made;
source or sources of all information on which the belief was founded, and in
relation to each such source the Defendant’s
reasons for regarding it as
reliable and accurate.
Defendants application for security for costs filed 21 February 2022 is
dismissed with the costs of same to be costs in the cause.
matter is adjourned for pre-hearing conference before the Judicial Registrar on
15 February 2023 at 10.15 am.
Noting Interrogatories were
initially directed by be administered on or before 11 June 2022 and the
Defendant’s (who was self-represented
until 10 September 2021) answers
were not provided within 28 days per R
See for instance Aspar
Autobarn Co-operative Society v Dovala Pty Ltd
(1987) 16 FCR 284
; Austal Ships
Pty Ltd v Incat Australia Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2010] FCA 795
(2010) 272 ALR 177
Craton Explorer Pty Ltd v Quasar Resources Pty Ltd
Annexure “A”
to the Affidavit of Terrence Louis Goldberg promised 23 February
Affidavit of Warren Hugh
Geoffrey Gifkins filed 23 September 2021 at para
(1986) 5 NSWLR
(1992) 110 FLR
(1985) 35 NTR
Defendants written
submissions in respect of the Plaintiffs Application filed 23 February 2022
filed 23 March 2022 at para 20
Perpetual Trustees of Australia v Brenton
(1985) 35 NTR 44
[2016] NSWSC
Kermode v Fairfax
Media Publications Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2011] NSWSC 646
(27 June 2011) (McCallum
Prowse v Harbour Radio
[2016] NSWSC 57 at
Supreme Court of New South
Wales, 14 July 1989
(unreported)
“A” to the Affidavit of Terrence Louis Goldberg promised 23 February
Transcript of
proceedings at p 16
Palmer v John Fairfax & Sons Pty Limited
(1986) 5 NSWLR 727
Defendants written
submissions in respect of the Plaintiffs Application filed 23 February 2022
filed 23 March 2022 at paras 22-
Affidavit of Warren Hugh
Geoffrey Gifkins filed 23 September 2021 at para
Affidavit of Warren Hugh
Geoffrey Gifkins filed 23 September 2021 at para
Applicants Submissions
filed 17 March 2022
Defendants written submissions in respect of the Plaintiffs Application filed 23
February 2022 filed 23 March 2022 at para
Affidavit of Warren
Hugh Geoffrey Gifkins filed 23 September 2021 at para
Affidavit of Warren
Hugh Geoffrey Gifkins filed 23 September 2021 at para
Affidavit of Warren
Hugh Geoffrey Gifkins filed 23 September 2021 at para
Affidavit of Warren
Hugh Geoffrey Gifkins filed 23 September 2021 at para 15.
Defendants written
submissions in respect of the Plaintiffs Application filed 23 February 2022
filed 23 March 2022 at para
Transcript of proceedings
Affidavit of Warren
Hugh Geoffrey Gifkins filed 23 September 2021 at para
Defendants written
submissions in respect of the Plaintiffs Application filed 23 February 2022
filed 23 March 2022 at para
Transcript of proceedings
Affidavit of
Warren Hugh Geoffrey Gifkins filed 23 September 2021 at para
Applicants Submissions
filed 17 March 2022
Defendants Written Submissions in Respect of his Application filed 21 February
2022 at para 3
Ibid at para
Ibid at para
Ibid at para 14
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (356 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter