URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCA/2024/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:16:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SE v Masani [2024] NTCA 7 (3 December 2024)
SE v Masani
[2024] NTCA 7
PARTIES: SE
MASANI, Kolisi
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: 22305339
DELIVERED: 3 December 2024
HEARING DATE: 11 July 2024
JUDGMENT OF: Brownhill, Huntingford and Reeves JJ
CATCHWORDS:
CRIMINAL LAW – Appeals – Application for extension of time to
appeal judgment – Proposed appeal without merit –
Application
CRIMINAL LAW – Appeals – Proposed appeal against sentence –
Youth – Whether primary judge erred by finding
that the sentence imposed
by the Youth Justice Court was not manifestly excessive – Sentence imposed
consistent with sentencing
principles for young offenders – Relevance of
general deterrence and denunciation where offending is adult-like –
violence as adult-like offending – Appropriate balance between
rehabilitation and other sentencing factors – Primary
judge not in
Criminal Code Act 1983
(NT) s 188(2)
Youth Justice Act 2005
AK v The Queen
[2021] NTCCA 4
Forrest v R
[2017] NTCCA 5
[2010] HCA 45
(2010) 242 CLR 520
Markarian v R
(2005) 228 CLR 357;
[2005] HCA 25
R v Goodwin
[2003] NTCCA 9
R v Wurramara
Richards v R
[2024] NTCCA 4
SE v Masani
[2023] NTSC 96
TM v The Queen
[2017] NTCCA 3
University of Wollongong v Metwally
(1985) 60 ALR 68,
Wong v The Queen
[2001] HCA 64
(2001) 207 CLR 584
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: G Chipkin with J Bourke
Respondent: L Babb SC with L Auld
Solicitors:
Applicant: North Australian Aboriginal Justice Agency
Respondent: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 25
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
SE v Masani
[2024] NTCA 7
No. 22305339
KOLISI MASANI
CORAM: BROWNHILL, HUNTINGFORD and REEVES JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 3 December 2024)
Introduction
[1] On 21 March
2023 the applicant, who was at the time 16 years of age, pleaded guilty before a
judge in the Youth Justice Court
to a charge of aggravated assault. He committed
that assault in February 2023 on GM, his then domestic partner of two years. GM
17 years old at the time.
[2] Under s
188(2) of the
Criminal Code 1983
(NT) an offence of aggravated assault
carries a maximum penalty of five years’ imprisonment.
[3] After an
adjournment to obtain a presentence report, the sentencing judge: declined to
enter a conviction against the applicant;
imposed a sentence of
15 months’ detention on him; and ordered that sentence be fully
suspended immediately on certain conditions.
applicant subsequently appealed that sentence to the Supreme Court on two
grounds: that it was manifestly excessive; and that
the sentencing judge had
failed to have due regard to
Youth Justice Act 2005
when imposing a custodial sentence on him. That section expressed one of the
principles to be applied in the sentencing of young
offenders namely, to impose
a sentence of detention or imprisonment on a youth “only as a last
resort” and “only
if there is no appropriate alternative”.
[5] The primary
judge dismissed that appeal. In this application the applicant seeks an
extension of time to appeal that judgment.
The primary issue is whether an
appropriate balance was struck between rehabilitation, on the one hand, and
general deterrence, denunciation
and community protection, on the other, when
sentencing a young offender. For the reasons that follow we do not consider that
primary judge committed any error in dismissing the applicant’s
appeal. Accordingly, this application will be
Procedural history and the ground of appeal
[6] There is a
number of important aspects of the procedural history to this application that
deserve noting at the outset. First,
as already alluded to, because the
applicant failed to file his notice of appeal within 28 days of the delivery of
the primary judgment,
this matter came before this Court as an application for
an extension of time to appeal. However, shortly after the commencement
hearing of the applicant’s application, the respondent indicated that he
did not contest the explanations advanced by
the applicant in support of his
application but, instead, contended that the application should be refused
because the proposed appeal
had no merits.
[7] Next, before
that indication was given, the applicant sought to amend his proposed grounds of
appeal to abandon grounds 1 to 4
inclusive as separate grounds of appeal and,
instead, to rely upon them as particulars of ground 5. Since that application
was unopposed,
orders were made accordingly. That means that the
applicant’s sole proposed ground of appeal is former ground 5, as follows:
“The primary judge erred by finding that the sentence imposed by the Youth
Justice Court was not manifestly excessive in all
of the circumstances”.
[8] It also
means that the particulars of that ground, as contained in what were grounds 1
to 4 are as follows:
primary judge erred by finding that the offending was 'adult-like'.
primary judge erred by having regard to an irrelevant sentencing consideration,
namely, the prevalence of domestic violence offences
committed by adult men
against adult women and the need to deter adult men from committing such
offences, whereas the offender and
victim in this case were both youths.
primary judge erred by finding that there was 'no practical difference' in the
different sentencing options available (specifically
as between a suspended
sentence, good behaviour bond or community work order) except as to how the
sentence would appear on the appellant's
primary judge erred by misapplying the principles in relation to the sentencing
of youth offenders, namely, that these principles
are not readily applicable 'in
a case such as this where the sentence is fully suspended'.
[9] At this
point, two things are worth noting with respect to these procedural matters.
First, because the second ground of appeal
before the primary judge is no longer
being pursued,
the sole ground of
appeal before both his Honour and, as proposed, before this Court, is
substantially the same. Secondly, neither
before the primary judge, nor before
this Court, has the applicant made any direct challenge to any of the factual
findings made
by the sentencing judge.
The circumstances of the
[10] At the
hearing before the sentencing judge on 21 March 2023, an amended statement of
facts was tendered as an exhibit and then
recited to the Court. Immediately
after that occurred, the applicant’s lawyer stated that those facts were
admitted. In his
judgment, the primary judge provided the following summary of
those facts:
appellant (aged 16) and the victim (aged 17) were in a domestic relationship and
had been partners since 2021. At 12.27 am on
Friday 17 February 2023, GM
was walking on the footpath at Gregory Terrace, Alice Springs, with some
relatives. Without reason, SE
approached GM and assaulted her. He punched her
twice to the body, then kicked her legs in an attempt to make her lose her
As a result of that she fell over. He then forcibly kicked her another
three times while she was on the ground. That caused her immediate
yelled out to her relatives for help. He continued to assault her by hitting her
over the head and body with a steel [dish]
rack. GM attempted to get up off the
ground but SE continued to assault her with the steel rack, causing her to fall
back onto the
ground. He forcibly kicked her to the face as she was cowering in
pain. He continued to kick her to the back. He then told her to
follow him. He threatened that if she didn’t get up and follow him he
would continue to assault her. GM was afraid
of SE and followed him to the
Council lawns where she used a bubbler to wash blood off her face. Police
arrived while she was doing
In addition to pain all over her body, GM sustained a one centimetre gaping
laceration to the back of her head. She was taken to Alice
Springs Hospital
where she received medical treatment for her
The sentencing judge’s remarks
sentencing judge began his remarks on 5 May 2023 by describing the charge
against the applicant, by identifying the maximum
penalty for the offence
concerned and by emphasising how seriously that offence was regarded by the
Legislature. He then turned to
make some observations about the significance of
the domestic context in which the applicant’s assault had occurred. They
You’ve been in a relationship [with GM]......for a
little while ...... You were both quite young. I think you would have been
14 and she was about 15 when your relationship began. ......[W]hen you ... enter
into a domestic relationship with someone,
it does come with a lot of
responsibility to make sure you look after that person in a good
[12] In this
regard, his Honour later referred to GM’s victim impact statement in which
she said, among other things, that she
was afraid of the applicant. He also
referred to the photographs before him depicting the injuries she had suffered
and to the fact
that he had, earlier in the proceeding, put in place a full no
[13] Next, his
Honour highlighted some of the salient features of the applicant’s
offending including: that he became enraged
with GM because he thought he was
being teased by her; that he assaulted her with a rake [sic, rack]; that he
kicked her and struck
her face and back while she was on the ground and
vulnerable; and that his assault was “graphically depicted in the CCTV
and “continued for some time”.
sentencing judge then recorded several mitigating factors which ultimately led
him to conclude that the applicant had “solid
prospects for [his]
future”. They included: that his conduct was “very out of
character”; that it was the first
time he had come before a court
“for any trouble at all”; that he was “well supported”
by his family; and
that while he was on bail he had complied with the conditions
thereof “very very well”.
[15] On the
question whether general deterrence was a relevant sentencing factor where an
offender is young and has an excellent personal
background and unblemished
record, but has committed an offence involving domestic violence, his Honour
made the following observations:
As was highlighted by [your
usually, general deterrence is not a significant sentencing factor
in this court. Nor is it usually when young people like yourself,
of prior good
character come to court. Unfortunately, domestic violence is prevalent and your
conduct can only be viewed as very
adult in nature. And the court has a
responsibility to say to you, and other people in the community, if you want to
get involved
in domestic violence, you can only expect that the court will treat
it very seriously. And deal with it in an appropriate
(emphasis added)
particular regard to his status as a young Aboriginal male person, his Honour
You have ....I’ve been told, completed some cultural
ceremonies with the senior men in your family group. And you know, real
don’t behave like this towards their partners. ....it’s expected
that you’ll care for your family, in a good
way, and not get involved in
domestic violence.
balancing all these matters, the sentencing judge concluded that the
applicant’s “violent assault” on GM
warranted him serving a
sentence of 15 months detention. In fixing this period, his Honour’s
starting point was 20 months from
which he made a 25% reduction to take
account of the applicant’s early plea of guilty. However, because of his
prior good record
and good prospects for rehabilitation his Honour considered
that no conviction should be recorded against the applicant and that
sentence of detention should be suspended immediately: “on your promise to
stay out of trouble for the next 14 months”
and to comply with the five
conditions set out in the pre-sentence report.
The primary
judge’s reasons
[18] In the
introductory section of his reasons, the primary judge: described the charge
against the applicant, including its four
circumstances of aggravation,
identified the maximum penalty applicable to the offence of aggravated assault,
detailed the sentence
that had been imposed by the sentencing judge and
summarised the two grounds of appeal before
His Honour then set out the
summary of the applicant’s offending to which reference has already been
[19] Thereafter,
his Honour identified the principles that applied to sentencing appeals where
manifest excess was a ground of appeal
and the main sentencing principles set
Youth Justice
Following that review, he
reviewed several authorities that discussed the importance of rehabilitation as
the predominant factor
when sentencing young offenders and the circumstances in
which general deterrence may emerge as a relevant
consideration.
connection with the latter, his Honour examined the circumstances in which a
period of detention or imprisonment may be ordered
in the sentencing of a young
offender. In addition to serious and repeat offending he identified offending
which involved “adult-like”
behaviour as warranting that
His Honour exemplified
drug and driving offending as the type of behaviour that justified such a
characterisation.
examples he added: “...situations where small groups of youths engage in
criminal activities at night time, taking
the form of property offences and in
some cases assaults and robbery. And, unfortunately, domestic violence against
Aboriginal women
respect to this last form of “adult-like” behaviour, his Honour
referred to the long standing and “awful
predicament of some Aboriginal
women being treated violently by their Aboriginal partners”. He pointed
out that such behaviour
had been lamented for decades by Northern Territory
Courts and provided, as an example, the Northern Territory Court of Criminal
Appeal judgment in
respect to the question whether such behaviour may warrant a period of detention
or imprisonment being imposed on a young
offender, his Honour
Unfortunately violence inflicted by some Aboriginal men
upon their Aboriginal partners remains particularly prevalent in and near
Springs. This requires a Court to place strong emphasis upon denunciation,
general deterrence and the need to protect other
Aboriginal women from such
violence. This is particularly important in relation to youthful offenders, and
more so where their victims
are also very young. Other youths need to be made
aware that if they engage in this kind of conduct they are liable to be
to a term of detention, notwithstanding that they are
[23] Finally, on
matters of principle, his Honour expressed the view that the rationale for
avoiding the imposition of a period of
actual detention on a young offender, in
order to avoid adversely affecting his or her successful rehabilitation, “
so readily applicable in a case such as this where the sentence is
fully suspended”.
respect, he went on to compare the differing consequences that applied to a
breach of a suspended sentence under the
Sentencing Act
Justice Act
[24] In applying
these principles to the applicant’s case, the primary judge considered
that the following aspects of his offending
justified its characterisation as
both objectively serious and adult-like in nature:
..... In addition
to the fact that it was a case of domestic violence against his young partner,
it was unprovoked and prolonged,
involved him kicking GM to the face and back
when she was on the ground, and him using the steel rack as a weapon and hitting
to the head and body several times. Also, it occurred in the presence of
some relatives who apparently felt unable to assist despite
her calling to them
for help. Moreover, he continued to assert his control over GM by threatening to
continue to assault her if she
did not get up and follow him. I consider that
this offending falls at the mid-range of offending for this kind of
[25] Accordingly,
his Honour concluded that the sentencing judge had struck the correct balance
between rehabilitation and general
deterrence when imposing an immediately
suspended sentence of detention on the applicant. Specifically, he
The need for denunciation, general deterrence and protection
of other Aboriginal girls, was properly reflected by the Youth Justice
ordering detention. The need for rehabilitation was properly reflected in the
normal way by suspending that sentence, in the
present case without requiring
the appellant to spend any time in actual detention. The appellant’s good
character and good
prospects of rehabilitation were also reflected by his Honour
ordering no conviction be
[26] Reinforcing
the need to include an element of general deterrence in sentences for offences
involving domestic violence his Honour
It was and remains
important that the appellant, and other men, particularly young men as they
embark upon domestic relationships,
be made fully aware that if they engage in
this kind of violent and prevalent behaviour, detention or imprisonment may well
Furthermore, that members of the community, particularly Aboriginal
women, be protected from such behaviour insofar as it is possible
orders to achieve such an important
[27] The primary
judge reiterated many of these remarks in the concluding paragraphs of his
reasons where he dismissed the manifest
excess ground of appeal before him. He
I do not consider that the period of detention ordered, namely
15 months detention after a 25% discount, was manifestly excessive.
said, the offending was very serious, and this kind of offending, namely
domestic violence against Aboriginal women, is
prevalent, rendering it important
that the sentence properly reflect the need for general deterrence. A starting
point of 20 months
was well within the range of sentences imposed in other cases
with comparative
circumstances.
The first alleged error – former ground of appeal 1
[28] As noted
earlier, each of these former grounds of appeal is now advanced as a particular
of the sole remaining ground of appeal:
that the sentence imposed by the
sentencing judge was manifestly excessive. Considered in that light, it is not
immediately apparent
how this particular achieves that purpose. It baldly
asserts that: the primary judge, not the sentencing judge, erred by finding
the [applicant’s] offending was 'adult-like'.
[29] That state
of affairs is not clarified in the applicant’s written submissions. The
only errors identified in those submissions,
concerning this particular, were
that the primary judge did not explain why his offending was adult-like and that
he did not have
regard to numerous alleged childlike features of his conduct.
Those features were said to include that: there was no evidence of
planning or
premeditation; there was no attempt by the appellant to conceal his identity
during the offending; there was no attempt
by the appellant to avoid detection
afterwards; the offending was committed in an open public space in the Alice
Springs CBD.....;
the victim was in company with family members at the time and
called out for their assistance....; the brazen nature of the offending
while the offending involved the use of a weapon being a metal dish rack...it
was .....[not] an inherently dangerous weapon
such as a knife or baton; and the
appellant had no prior criminal history.
[30] There are
several reasons why this alleged error is unmeritorious and does not justify the
applicant being granted an extension
of time to appeal. First, the original
finding about the “adult-like” nature of the applicant’s
offending was made
by the sentencing judge, not the primary judge. So much
appears in the summary of the sentencing judge’s remarks set out earlier
where he observed that: “Unfortunately, domestic violence is prevalent and
your conduct can only be viewed as
very adult in nature
”. (emphasis
As already mentioned,
that finding was not challenged before the primary judge and nor has it been
challenged in this appeal. In
those circumstances, it is difficult to see how
the primary judge erred in adopting it or, consistent with long established
why the applicant should now be permitted to pursue it before this
[31] In any
event, even if that course were to be permitted, it would fail. That is so
because, as is clearly apparent from the summary
of his judgment set out
the primary judge gave
detailed and cogent reasons why the sentencing judge was correct in making that
finding. Whether or not the
applicant’s conduct coincidentally reflected
some of the childlike features he claims in his contentions above does not
affect this
conclusion.
A young person who
enters into a domestic relationship takes on the adult responsibilities of such
a relationship and, generally
speaking, their commission of violence against
their partner is inherently ‘adult-like’, given the context of the
relationship.
The second alleged error – former ground of
particular is expressed in the following terms: “the primary judge erred
by having regard to an irrelevant sentencing
consideration, namely, the
prevalence of domestic violence offences committed by adult men against adult
women and the need to deter
adult men from committing such offences, whereas the
offender and victim in this case were both youths”.
[33] As with the
previous particular, there are several reasons why this alleged error is
unmeritorious and does not justify the applicant
being granted an extension of
time to appeal. First, on its face it proceeds on the erroneous assumption that
the primary judge was
the sentencing judge. Patently that is not so. Instead,
his Honour was considering an appeal from the sentencing judge’s decision,
the sole relevant ground of which was that the sentence that he imposed on the
applicant was manifestly excessive.
importantly, as with the previous particular, the alleged error advanced in this
particular was not raised before the primary
judge. In those circumstances, it
gives rise to the same difficulties as were identified with respect to that
particular.
[35] Moreover,
during both hearings before the sentencing judge, the applicant’s lawyer
expressly conceded that the prevalence
of domestic violence in the Alice Springs
community was a relevant sentencing consideration and the sentencing judge
relied on those
concessions, in part, in his sentencing remarks.
[36] Specifically,
during his submissions on 21 March 2023, the applicant’s lawyer said:
“...I am obviously conceding
to your Honour that, firstly, domestic
violence is a stain on our community and despite being in the Youth Court,....
still has some work to do I would say. Limited of course because of
age and lack of priors but still, in my submission general deterrence
application because of the prevalent nature of the
offending”.
[37] He then
reiterated these sentiments in his submissions on 5 May 2023 when he said:
“...while deterren[ce] has a –
generally a lower consideration in
the Youth Court, I accept in our context of Alice Springs, where domestic
violence is very common,
I accept deterren[ce] has some work in the sentencing
[38] Given the
circumstances of the applicant’s offending and the clear terms of these
concessions, it is unsurprising that
the sentencing judge made specific mention
of them in his sentencing
[39] Finally,
and in any event, we reject the proposition contained in this particular as
wrong in principle. As the primary judge
explained in his reasons,
while the prevalence of domestic
violence is a factor that raises the need to deter all males from offending in
that manner, the
correlated need to protect Aboriginal women from such violence
has particular resonance when the female victim is “very young”.
addition, where the male offender is also quite young, general deterrence has a
particular role in deterring other young males
from engaging in the same violent
conduct and thereby, hopefully, diverting them from embarking on a course of
offending that carries
with it a notorious rate of recidivism.
[40] For these
reasons, this alleged error is unmeritorious and does not justify the applicant
being granted an extension of time
The third alleged
error – former ground of appeal 3
particular alleges that: “the primary judge erred by finding that there
was 'no practical difference' in the different
sentencing options available
(specifically as between a suspended sentence, good behaviour bond or community
work order) except as
to how the sentence would appear on the appellant's
[42] It concerns
the following conclusion that the primary judge reached in one of the concluding
paragraphs of his reasons:
The only practical difference between
the different forms of sentence in the present case is that the
appellant’s record would
show that he had been sentenced to detention, as
distinct from sentenced to a GBO or
applicant contended that, contrary to these remarks, there was a real tangible
difference between a sentence of detention,
albeit fully suspended, and a Good
Behaviour Bond or a Community Work Order. They included, so he contended: that
the former was
custodial in nature and the latter non-custodial; that a
suspended sentence carries with it a greater risk of incarceration; and
because he was more than 16 years old, the prohibition in
Youth Justice Act
no longer applies to
response, the respondent contended that the applicant had misconceived the
effect of his Honour’s comments and that,
when his reasons were read as a
whole, it was apparent that he made no such finding. This was so, he submitted,
because in that,
and earlier passages, his Honour had explained how the
immediate suspension of the applicant’s sentence of detention meant
in practical terms, he was not actually incarcerated and, instead, was free to
pursue his rehabilitation, albeit on conditions.
As well, so he contended, his
Honour explained how the term and nature of the applicant’s suspended
sentence, namely 15 months’
detention, appropriately operated to serve the
ends of general deterrence and community protection.
[45] For the
following reasons, we accept the general thrust of the respondent’s
contentions and reject those of the applicant.
To begin with, his Honour did not
actually make a finding in the terms quoted in this particular. That is to say,
his Honour did
not find there to be ‘no practical difference’
between the sentencing options mentioned but rather he found that: “The
practical difference between the different forms of sentence in the
present case is that
the appellant’s record would show that he had been
to detention, as distinct from sentenced to a GBO or
[46] When this
conclusion is read in the context of the detailed reasoning that preceded it, we
do not consider it is erroneous as
alleged. In truncated form, his
Honour’s reasoning proceeded as follows. First, in one of the initial
paragraphs of his reasoning
his Honour emphasised (by
underlining) the following parts of [26] and [27] of
focus on rehabilitation over deterrence in the case of youthful offenders is
directed to the offender’s capacity to alter
his or her behaviour so as
not to reoffend, and to ensure the youth is dealt with in a way that
acknowledges his or her needs and
will provide him or her with the opportunity
to develop in socially responsible ways. Rehabilitation may carry far less
respect of a repeat offender who has previously been afforded a number
of opportunities to modify his or her behaviours through the
imposition of
non-custodial dispositions, but has failed to do so and has committed a very
serious criminal offence. In such cases
the prospects of rehabilitation may be
considered as diminished, and the weight properly attributed to rehabilitative
the sentencing process lessened as a result. The youth must be held
accountable and made aware of his or her obligations under the
law and the
consequences of contravening the law. The court must maintain a
balance between the needs of the youth, the rights of the victim and the
interests of the community.
This is not to say that the prospects of rehabilitation will necessarily be
considered as extinguished in cases of serious offending.
It is only to say that
the manner in which the balance is to be struck between rehabilitation and the
other sentencing purposes will
be guided by a consideration of both the
seriousness of behaviour and the prior criminal history.
That balance will be
reflected in such matters as whether the sentence is custodial or
non-custodial
; and, if custodial, the length of the head sentence, whether a
non-parole period or an order suspending sentence is imposed, and
the minimum
time to be served. By way of example,
the purposes of punishment,
denunciation and deterrence may be primarily served by the imposition of a stern
head sentence, while
at the same time the purpose of rehabilitation may be
primarily served by an order suspending sentence
after a period of
incarceration of lesser duration than would otherwise have been required but for
the offender’s youth.
his Honour conducted a similar exercise with respect to [35] of
Although the sentencing court takes into account the same
considerations which inform fixing the head sentence, it may be expected
apply different weightings to those considerations for the purpose of
determining whether an order suspending sentence should
be made and, if so,
after what period of imprisonment. It is both legitimate and appropriate where
warranted by the circumstances
of the case for a sentencing court to give
greater weight to the purposes of punishment, denunciation and deterrence
when fixing the head sentence, and to give greater weight
to the purpose of
rehabilitation in making an order suspending sentence.
his Honour discussed the effect that actual detention had on a young
offender’s successful rehabilitation as follows:
Broadly, the
rationale underlying
and most of the other cases concerning young
offenders is that the likelihood of successful rehabilitation of a young
offender will
not be assisted, rather may well be impaired, if the offender is
actually detained or imprisoned and thereby exposed to other criminals.
reflected in the principle in s 4(c) of the Act, that: “a youth
should only be kept in custody for an offence (whether
on arrest, on remand or
under sentence) as a last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of
[49] In the
succeeding paragraph to this discussion, his Honour distinguished the
“broad rationale” underpinning these
observations and he then
contrasted the differing consequences applying to a breach of a suspended
sentence under the
Sentencing Act
Youth Justice
his Honour summarised the competing ends that were served by the sentence that
was imposed on the applicant.
[51] Finally on
this aspect, in the three paragraphs immediately preceding the subject
his Honour returned
to a discussion of the consequences that would flow from a breach of the
condition of the applicant’s suspended
sentence order as
In this case, the appellant knows that if he does anything
like this again or otherwise breaches the terms of his suspended sentence,
may be re-sentenced and be then ordered to spend some time in detention.
Even if his Honour had imposed a different penalty such as a good behaviour
order or a community work order, it is likely that the
same conditions would
have been attached.
Re-offending or non-compliance would ultimately likely result in the same
consequences, whether it be a warning, an extension of the
relevant operational
period, variation or addition of conditions, or imposing a period of detention.
This is so whether the Court
is dealing with a breach of a Good Behaviour Order
(GBO) ordered under s 83(1)(f) and s 91, breach of a Community Work Order
under s 83(1)(h) and s 94, or a breach of a suspended sentence
ordered under s 83(1)(i) and s 98(2). Section 121(6) requires the
confirm or vary the order, or revoke the order and resentence the
[52] In our
view, this truncated review of the primary judge’s reasoning amply
demonstrates that his Honour was correct in his
conclusion which is attacked by
this particular that the only practical difference between the different forms
of sentence under
consideration by the sentencing judge was the form in which
the applicant’s sentence would appear on his record. For these
this alleged error does not provide a basis for the applicant being granted an
extension of time to appeal.
The fourth alleged error –
former ground of appeal 4
[53] In this
last particular, the applicant alleges that the primary judge erred:
“...by misapplying the principles in relation
to the sentencing of youth
offenders, namely, that these principles are not readily applicable 'in a case
such as this where the
sentence is fully suspended'”. The observations to
which this alleged error relates are already set out
particular may be disposed of briefly. In our view, it is clear from the summary
of his Honour’s reasons that we set
and from the truncated,
but more detailed, review that we conducted with respect to the previous alleged
that his Honour carefully
considered the principles concerning the sentencing of young offenders in the
course of determining that
the sentencing judge had correctly applied those
principles when he sentenced the applicant to an immediately suspended term of
without recording a conviction. This alleged error does not,
therefore, provide a basis for granting the applicant an extension of
The sole ground of appeal – former ground of appeal
[55] Having
disposed of the four particulars advanced in support of the applicant’s
sole ground of appeal, we turn, finally,
to the ground itself. It alleges that:
“The primary judge erred by finding that the sentence imposed by the Youth
Justice Court
was not manifestly excessive in all of the
circumstances”.
[56] Having
reached the conclusion noted earlier with respect to the appropriateness of
imposing an immediately suspended term of
detention on the applicant, the
primary judge dismissed the equivalent ground before him in the following
I do not consider that the period of detention ordered,
namely 15 months detention after a 25% discount, was manifestly excessive.
As I have said, the offending was very serious, and this kind of offending,
namely domestic violence against Aboriginal women, is
prevalent, rendering it
important that the sentence properly reflect the need for general deterrence. A
starting point of 20 months
was well within the range of sentences imposed in
other cases with comparative
circumstances.
[57] In his
written submissions, the applicant accepted that it could be inferred that the
sentencing judge found his offending to
be in the mid-range of objective
seriousness. As can be seen above, the primary judge made an express finding to
that effect. However,
despite not having challenged either of these findings in
this appeal the applicant submitted that: “if the matter did fall
the middle range, and it is not entirely clear that it did ..[respectfully, it
is submitted that the offending fell between
the low and middle range].. it was
certainly at the lower end”. On that footing, combined with all of the
mitigating matters
identified by the sentencing judge including: that he was a
young person of good character, with no prior convictions; that he had
an early plea of guilty; and that he had good prospects for rehabilitation, the
applicant contended that his sentence was
manifestly excessive. Finally, while
accepting that each matter turned on its own facts and circumstances, he also
relied on several
comparative sentences, to emphasise that the starting point of
20 months’ detention fixed by the sentencing judge “was
almost that
indicated as appropriate for adult offenders with significant
histories”.
[58] In response
the respondent submitted that the sentence was well within the sentencing
judge’s sentencing discretion in
that it appropriately combined a term of
detention, to reflect the gravity of the offending and to denounce the conduct
with the decisions to immediately suspended that term of detention and
not to record a conviction, to reflect youth sentencing principles.
applicant’s reliance on comparative sentences the respondent emphasised
that: “[A]ppellate intervention is
not justified simply because the result
arrived at below is markedly different from other sentences that have been
imposed in other
cases” citing
principles concerning a ground of appeal of this kind are well-established. They
applied as equally to the appeal before
the primary judge, as they do to this
appeal. One begins from the presumption that there is no error. The appellant is
then required
to show that an error exists, either arising from some
identifiable misapplication of principle, or by inference from an assessment
that the sentence is “unreasonable or plainly unjust”. To be
“manifestly excessive” the sentence must be
“clearly and
obviously excessive”, not just arguably so. That determination is made
having due regard to the fact that
sentencing judges are, in the exercise of
their sentencing discretion, “allowed as much flexibility ... as is
consonant with
consistency of approach and application of principle”.
Accordingly, an appellate court is not to substitute its opinion for
that of the
sentencing judge merely because it would have exercised that discretion
differently.
[60] We do not
consider that the primary judge erred in concluding that the sentence imposed by
the sentencing judge was not manifestly
excessive. As his Honour explained in
his reasons, the sentence that the sentencing judge imposed was consistent with
principles in that it had due regard for the seriousness and nature
of the applicant’s offending, namely serious domestic violence,
consequent need for general deterrence and denunciation while, at the same time,
properly and appropriately accommodating
his demonstrably good prospects for
rehabilitation as a young offender. As for the comparative sentences advanced by
the applicant,
we agree with the respondent: in the peculiar circumstances of
this matter they do not assist.
Disposition
[61] For these
reasons, neither the particulars of error advanced with respect to, nor the
substance of, the applicant’s sole
proposed ground of appeal, have any
merits. Accordingly, there is no purpose in granting him an extension of time to
pursue his proposed
appeal. The order is:
the applicant’s application for an extension of time to appeal filed
6 March 2024 is
---------------------------
See at [4] above.
At the hearing of this application
the parties accepted that this summary was accurate.
SE v Masani
[2023] NTSC 96
’) at [4]-[5].
Transcript of 5 May 2023 at
Transcript of 5 May 2023 at
Transcript of 5 May 2023 at
at [1]-[3].
at [4]-[5] set out at
[10] above.
at [6]-[11].
at [12]-[24].
at [18] having
reviewed, among other authorities, the Northern Territory Court of Criminal
Appeal judgments in
R v Goodwin
[2003] NTCCA 9
AK v The Queen
[2021] NTCCA 4
TM v The Queen
[2017] NTCCA 3
at [20] quoting Fox
& Freiberg at p 355.
[1999] NTCCA 45
See at [15] above.
University of Wollongong
(1985) 60 ALR 68 at 71.
See at [21] to [23] and [25]
In this respect it is worth
noting that some of those features are patently repetitive, others are not
consistent with established
sentencing principles, namely that the absence of an
aggravating factor is not a mitigating factor, and the last is not obviously
See at [30] above.
Transcript of 21 March 2023 at
Transcript of 5 May 2023 at
See at [15] above and the
emphasis added.
at [23] set out
at [22] above.
That prohibition prevents a
court other than the Youth Justice Court taking into account a finding of guilt
made with respect to
a juvenile who is 15 years or younger in respect of an
offence for which no conviction is recorded.
at [25] partly set
out at [23] above.
at [37] set out at
[25] above.
at [42] set out at
[42] above.
at [39]-[41].
at [24]-[25] set out
at [48]-[49] above.
See at [18]-[27] above.
See at [46]-[51] above.
[2001] HCA 64
(2001) 207 CLR 584
Markarian v R
228 CLR 357;
[2005] HCA 25
[2010] HCA 45
(2010) 242 CLR 520
Forrest v R
[2017] NTCCA 5
Richards v R
[2024] NTCCA 4
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (206 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter