URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTRTCmr/2015/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:21:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rosas -v- Chief Executive Officer (Housing) [2015] NTRTCmr 25 (14 July 2015)
REASONS FOR THE ORDER OF THE COMMISSIONER OF TENANCIES
INQUIRY – Wednesday 20 May 2015
LARTETA ROSAS v CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER (HOUSING)
RT1415-0318
MAISIE SHINE v CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER (HOUSING)
RT1415-0297
Shine and Ms Rosas (‘the tenants’) are public housing tenants under
separate (but relevantly identical) tenancy agreements
with the Chief Executive
Officer (Housing) (‘the CEO’).
challenge the lawfulness of the CEO’s actions in conducting
‘drive-by’ inspections of their rented premises.
also say that a clause of the tenancy agreements which the CEO has purported to
invoke against them is invalid on ground that
it is inconsistent with the
Residential Tenancies Act
the reasons that follow the first challenge fails, and the second succeeds.
matters were heard together and the issues in each involved considerable
overlap. In these reasons I will only differentiate
between the tenants where
it is necessary to do so in order to highlight differences in the relevant facts
or in the issues raised
on their behalf.
Shine is the tenant of unit 1/15 Victoria Highway, Katherine. Her current
tenancy commenced on 5 January 2012 and will expire
on 8 January 2017. The
tenancy is subject to memorandum of common provisions number 372011 (‘the
common provisions’).
18 September 2014 Ms Shine received a letter written on behalf of the CEO.
letter, which is reproduced as an appendix 1 to these reasons, advised Ms Shine
that a ‘drive-by’ inspection of her
premises had taken place on 16
September 2014 and referred to a need for ‘immediate attention’ to
her yard. The letter
also referred to a requirement under the tenancy agreement
‘to maintain your premises in a neat, tidy and clean condition at
times’ and noted that this obligation extended to external areas. The
letter listed a series of expectations on the part
of the CEO regarding how a
yard was to be maintained in a ‘reasonable manner’.
letter also foreshadowed a further ‘drive-by’ inspection in 14
days’ time. It concluded by cautioning Ms Shine
to ‘treat this
notice seriously because if you fail to rectify the identified issues/s, the
department will have no option
but to serve you with a Notice to Remedy Breach
by Landlord which may result in termination of your tenancy.’
pause here to note that it was submitted on behalf of the CEO that the letter
made it clear that commencement of termination action
was only a ‘last
resort’. I reject that submission. A reasonable person reading the
letter - and particularly the words
commencing ‘no option’ quoted
above - would conclude that failure to take the required action by the time of
‘drive-by’ inspection was likely to lead to termination
the letter referred to a ‘drive-by’ inspection, it was common ground
at the hearing that the inspection in fact
carried out in relation to Ms
Shine’s premises involved entry upon the common property at 15 Victoria
Highway and the taking
of photographs over or through a horizontal slatted
fence. Indeed, it was common ground that the observations made of Ms
yard (and recorded in photographs) could not have been made
otherwise than by entering the common property.
photographs taken demonstrate that significant quantities of long grass had
grown at one end of the yard and that the yard was
generally in a condition that
might be described as unkempt. Apart from a milk crate situated under a
clothesline, no loose items
or rubbish were evident.
response to the letter, Ms Shine consulted her lawyers who wrote to the CEO on
29 September 2014. The lawyers complained that the
CEO’s practice of
conducting ‘drive-by’ inspections was unlawful and should cease
immediately. They insisted that
any future inspections of Ms Shine’s
premises take place only in accordance with section 70 of the
Residential
Tenancies Act
CEO responded by letter dated 7 October 2014. In substance, the CEO asserted
that the practice of conducting ‘drive-by’
inspections was not
unlawful. The CEO gave no indication that the practice would cease or that
action would not be taken on the
basis of the inspection on 16 September
will deal later in these reasons with Ms Shine’s evidence regarding the
effect upon her of the events above.
Rosas is the tenant of a house at 26 Heron Crescent Katherine. According to the
material before me, her most recent fixed term
tenancy of the premises expired
on 25 January 2015. Assuming no subsequent fixed term tenancy has been entered
into, she occupies
the premises on a periodical tenancy, but otherwise according
to the common provisions (see section 83 of the
Residential Tenancies
appears that on 18 June 2014 an officer of the CEO conducted a
‘drive-by’ inspection of Ms Rosas’s premises;
however, it led
to no action by the CEO and there is no evidence that Ms Rosas was at any
relevant time aware of it.
27 August 2014 a further ‘drive-by’ inspection was conducted and
this led to a letter being sent to Ms Rosas that day.
The letter was materially
the same as the letter sent on 16 September 2014 to Ms Shine (see appendix
further ‘drive-by’ inspection of Ms Rosas’s premises on 18
September 2014 led to the issue that day of a form
RT04a ‘Notice by
Landlord to Tenant to Remedy Breach of Term of Agreement’.
RT04a, which is reproduced as appendix 2 to these reasons, purported to be
notice of a breach of clause ‘20.5(a)(e)(ii)(iii)’
of the common
provisions and required attention by Ms Rosas to rectifying the alleged breach
by 1 October 2014. The notice purported
to require the following action by Ms
Rosas (failing which termination action was foreshadowed):
“Heavy cleaning of all external areas including screens,
doors, windows, walls porch and courtyards
Remove foul smells/odours
Remove all rubbish externally
Mow/slash yard and edges, remove garden waste from yard, remove weeds from
fence line”
material before me includes photographs apparently taken of the yard of the
premises on 18 September 2014 (the copies in evidence
are misdated 2013). It is
apparent that the photos were taken from on the footpath/driveway area outside
the fence of Ms Rosas’s
photographs show the presence of long grass in certain areas (including along
the fence lines), piles of palm fronds and some
miscellaneous loose items.
Although the yard might be described as unkempt and untidy, it is hardly in the
sort of condition that,
having regard to general experience in this
marks on the walls, it is difficult to see any justification for the
demand for ‘heavy cleaning’ of external areas.
Nor is there any
evidence before me of what were the ‘foul smells/odours’ referred to
in the notice. I note that the
letter dated 27 August 2014 said nothing about
the need to clean the walls or the matter of any smells or odours.
letter dated 29 September 2014 Ms Rosas’s lawyers wrote to the CEO
complaining that the practice of ‘drive-by’
inspections was unlawful
and that the Notice to Remedy, which depended upon such an inspection, should be
CEO responded by letter dated 30 September 2014 to the effect that the Notice to
Remedy would not be withdrawn.
will deal later in these reasons with Ms Rosas’s evidence regarding the
effect upon her of the events above.
The proceedings
Shine and Ms Rosas subsequently made the present applications to the
Commissioner of Tenancies. After a series of mentions, and
directions for the
exchange of evidence and submissions, a hearing was conducted
Katherine courthouse on 20 May 2015.
Inconsistency
is convenient to first deal with the tenants’ contention that clause
20.5(e) of the common provisions (being the clause invoked
by the CEO against
them) is inconsistent with the
Residential Tenancies Act
and invalid.
Residential Tenancies Act
relevantly provides as follows:
20 Contract to avoid Act prohibited
(1) An agreement or arrangement that is inconsistent with this Act or the
Regulations or purports to exclude, modify or restrict the
operation of this Act
or the Regulations, is void to the extent of the inconsistency.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to an inconsistency, exclusion,
modification or restriction expressly permitted by or
under this Act.
(3) A purported waiver of a right under this Act is void.
(4) A landlord must not enter into an agreement or arrangement:
(a) to exclude, modify or restrict the operation of this Act (directly or
indirectly); or
(b) that purports to exclude, modify or restrict the operation of this Act
(directly or indirectly).
Maximum penalty: 100 penalty units.
20.5 of the common provisions is relevantly in these terms:
20.5 The Tenant:
(a) will ensure that the Premises and Ancillary Property are not in an
unreasonably dirty condition, allowing for reasonable wear
(e) shall maintain and keep at their own expense the Premises in a neat, tidy
and clean state having regard to the condition of the
(i) as recorded in the Property Condition Report, or
(ii) if there is no Property Condition Report, at the Commencement Date or
earlier occupation, including:
(A) use sinks, basins, baths, toilets or other plumbing facilities for their
intended purpose and keep the same clear of obstruction;
(B) water and nurture any lawn, trees, shrubs or all gardens on the
(C) remove and lawfully dispose of any Rubbish;
can immediately be noted that clause 20.5(e) is unfortunately drafted.
Specifically, it appears likely that the word ‘including’,
with sub paragraphs (A), (B) and (C), was not meant to form part of clause
20.5(e)(ii)
, but was instead meant to refer to
clause and clause 20.5(e)(i). It is difficult to imagine that there could have
been an intention to distinguish between a tenant’s
obligations in respect
of the matters in subparagraphs (A), (B) and (C) simply on the basis of whether
or not there was a property
condition report.
20.5(a) substantially replicates section 51(1)(a) of the
Residential
Tenancies Act
by which it is a term of a tenancy agreement that a tenant
'will not maintain the premises and ancillary property in an unreasonably
condition, allowing for reasonable wear and tear'.
is no provision of the Act by which the terms of a tenancy agreement include a
term in the form of clause 20.5(e).
tenants submit that the (negatively expressed) obligation in section 51(1)(a)
and clause 20.5(a) not to maintain premises in an
unreasonably dirty condition
is different in content from the (affirmatively expressed) obligation in clause
20.5(e) to maintain
premises in a 'neat, tidy and clean state'.
obligation to keep premises ‘clean’ is substantially different from
an obligation not to allow them to become or remain
‘unreasonably
suggestion that the difference is purely semantic flies in the face of other
parts of section 51 of the
Residential Tenancies Act.
by section 51(2) of the
Residential Tenancies Act,
a tenant is obliged at
of a tenancy to
the premises to a landlord in a
reasonable state of repair and in a reasonably clean condition. In other words,
to the extent the
Residential Tenancies Act
on a tenant that is comparable to the obligation in clause 20.5(e), it is not an
obligation that continues throughout
the term of the tenancy.
it might be suggested that words such as ‘neat’ and
‘tidy’ are concerned with something different
‘clean’, the fact that the legislators chose to express a
tenant’s obligation regarding the condition of premises
in terms of
‘[not] unreasonably dirty’ makes it difficult to accept that a
tenant could nevertheless be subjected to
an obligation to keep premises neat
and tidy. To put the matter another way, it is difficult to see how premises
that are dirty,
but not unreasonably so, could nevertheless be kept neat and
Haack on behalf of the CEO sought to meet the strong appearance of inconsistency
in several ways.
submitted that there is no inconsistency because clause 20.5(e) merely reflects
the CEO's view of what is entailed in the tenant's
obligation not to maintain
premises in an unreasonably dirty condition. I do not consider that that
submission is maintainable.
First, it involves an interpretation of clause
20.5(e) that is not reasonably open on its plain words. Secondly, as a matter
contractual construction, the CEO's subjective view of what the clause means
is irrelevant.
also submitted that account needs to be taken of other statutory provisions
affecting the subject tenancies. In this regard she
noted that clause 2.4 of
the common provisions provided in effect that the landlord and the tenant agreed
to comply with the provisions
of the Act, the
Housing Act
(NT), as well
as all relevant Commonwealth and Northern Territory legislation and local
government by-laws.
referred specifically to section 19 of the
Housing Act
relevantly in these terms:
19 Tenant to be responsible for maintenance of dwelling
(1) The tenant of a dwelling must keep the dwelling and its equipment in the
condition that, in the opinion of the Chief Executive
Officer (Housing), it was
in when that person became the tenant of that dwelling or as improved from time
to time by the Chief Executive
Officer (Housing), fair wear and tear, and damage
by, or arising out of, fire, storm and tempest, flood or earthquake
(2) Where the tenant of a dwelling has not complied with the requirements of
subsection (1) in respect of the dwelling, the Chief
Executive Officer (Housing)
may enter that dwelling, by such agents, employees and workers as it thinks fit
for the purpose, and
cause to be carried out any work necessary to make good the
default of that tenant.
(3) The costs and expenses reasonably incurred by the Chief Executive Officer
(Housing) in exercising its powers under subsection
(2) are a debt due and
payable to it by the tenant of the dwelling in respect of which those powers
were exercised.
noted that a public housing tenant's obligation in section 19(1) is similar in
content to a tenant's contractual obligation under
clause 20.5(e).
also submitted that the tenant's obligation under section 19(1) of the
Housing Act
is properly to be regarded as giving content to what amounts
to "unreasonably dirty condition" for the purposes of section 51(1)(a)
made a similar submission in relation to the
Katherine Town Council By-laws
('KTC By-laws'),
which impose obligations upon occupants and owners
of land in the Council area (which include the tenants’ premises) to keep
the land free of litter and free of unsightly or hazardous vegetation (see
especially KTC By-laws 30 and 31).
Ms Haack's submissions point to interesting potential issues regarding the
interaction of the common provisions, the
Residential Tenancies Act
Housing Act
and the KTC By-laws, none has a bearing upon the question
whether clause 20.5(e) is inconsistent with section 51(1)(a) of the
Residential Tenancies Act.
it can be observed in relation to section 19 of the
Housing Act
tenant's obligation is measured according to an opinion of the CEO regarding the
condition of premises. There is no necessary
correspondence between such an
opinion and the standard established by clause 20.5(e). In any case, no
evidence is offered in this
case of any opinion that might have been held by the
CEO in relation to either of the tenants' premises.
it is instructive to note that section 7(5) of the
Residential Tenancies Act
specifically identifies sections of the
Housing Act
to which the
Residential Tenancies Act
does not apply. Neither section 51 nor
section 20 is listed. It may also be observed here that section 34 of the
Housing Act
provides that the
Residential Tenancies Act
to premises let under the
Housing Act
in the case of the KTC By-laws, enforcement of an occupier's obligations is a
matter for the Council.
and fundamentally, obligations owed by a tenant under the
Housing Act
the KTC By-laws are owed
by force of those laws
and are enforceable
accordingly. Even if the laws imposed upon a tenant obligations of identical
content to the obligations in clause
20.5(e) - which is not the case - that
would not, in my opinion, be a basis for regarding such a clause as permissible
in a residential
tenancy agreement in the face of section 20 of the
Residential Tenancies Act.
should add that the above reasoning is unaffected by the fact that clause 2.4 of
the common provisions purports to import obligations
owed by landlords and
tenants under the
Housing Act
and KTC By-laws. (To the extent such
obligations may in fact be more onerous than obligations imposed by the
Residential Tenancies Act
further questions of inconsistency under
section 20 may arise; however, there is no need to consider such questions
regard to the matters above, I am satisfied that clause 20.5(e) of the common
provisions is inconsistent with the term of a
residential tenancy agreement
created by section 51(1)(a) of the
Residential Tenancies Act.
purporting to require the tenants to maintain the premises and ancillary
property in a ‘neat, tidy and clean state’
the clause imposes an
obligation of a fundamentally different order from section 51(1)(a) by which the
tenant’s relevant obligation
is to ensure that premises are not allowed to
become, or stay, unreasonably dirty.
least to the extent that clause 20.5(e) requires a tenant to keep premises
‘clean’ it is inconsistent with the term
in section 51(1)(a) and
therefore invalid for the purposes of section 20 of the
Residential Tenancies
conclusion most directly flows from the obvious conflict between ‘[not]
unreasonably dirty’ and ‘clean’;
however, it is also strongly
arguable in my view that an obligation during the currency of a tenancy to
maintain premises in a ‘neat,
tidy... state’ is incompatible with a
standard of cleanliness that rises no higher than ‘[not] unreasonably
The CEO’s concession
partial response to the tenants’ challenge to clause 20.5(e), the CEO
offered a concession to the effect that part of clause
20.5(e), namely
20.5(e)(ii)(B) - which obliges a tenant to ‘water and nurture any lawn,
trees, shrubs or all gardens’
forming part of the premises - was capable
of imposing ‘a higher onus... than under the Act’ upon public
housing tenants
in the Katherine region.
CEO submitted that steps would be undertaken to remove that obligation from
existing and future tenancies.
CEO’s concession is noted; however, in case there is any doubt, I
emphasise that my conclusion above was reached independently
concession.
Other inconsistency?
the course of preparing these reasons, it occurred to me that there may be
another, discrete, basis upon which it is arguable that
clause 20.5(e) is partly
inconsistent with the
Residential Tenancies Act
and invalid by reason of
section 20.
20.5(e)(ii) requires that the assessment of neatness, tidiness and cleanliness
for the purposes of the clause is to have regard
to the condition of the
premises ‘at the Commencement Date or earlier occupation’ in
situations where there is no Property
Condition Report. ‘Property
Condition Report’ is defined in clause 1 to mean ‘a record of the
state of repair
of the Premises prepared in accordance with Division 1 of Part 5
Residential Tenancies Act
observe that the effect of clause 20.5(e)(ii) may be difficult to reconcile with
section 51(5) of the
Residential Tenancies Act
by which - in
circumstances where no condition report is prepared under Part 5 at the
commencement of the tenancy - a tenant is presumed
to have complied with each of
the various terms imposed by section 51(1) and by which the condition of
premises at the conclusion
of the tenancy is presumed to be their condition at
the commencement.
no argument was addressed to the matter, I will limit my observations in this
regard to those above. I do, however, suggest
that attention is given to section
51(5) in the event there is a review of clause 20.5(e).
Declaration of invalidity?
tenants seek an order or declaration that clause 20.5(e) of the
a finding of invalidity under section 20 of the
Residential Tenancies Act
might be an important step in a path of reasoning to a decision reached in
an application under the
however, that is
a different matter from the making of a declaration.
regard to the provisions of the
Residential Tenancies Act
there are specific conferrals of power to make particular declarations (for
example in relation to excessive rent, the
abandonment of premises or the
validity of a purported termination) – it is not clear to me that there is
power to make such
an order or declaration.
is unnecessary for me to form a final view. Even assuming I had the power to
make a declaration such as sought by the tenants
I would decline to exercise the
discretion to do so.
instead note that the CEO has model litigant obligations (acknowledged in the
CEO’s submissions and at the hearing) and that
I therefore expect that my
findings and observations in relation to clause 20.5(e) will result in prompt
attention by the CEO to
that clause.
Off-premises inspections
in their submissions and at the hearing, the parties referred to the CEO’s
practice or policy of conducting ‘drive-by
inspections’, that
description is in my opinion inapt. As my recounting of the facts above
demonstrates, the inspections conducted
in relation to the tenants’
premises involved more than simply driving past them. On the contrary, in each
case, it appears
that the officer who conducted the inspection or inspections
parked and got out of their car in order to observe the premises. In
of Ms Shine, the officer entered upon the common property in order to make
observations.
my view the expression ‘off-premises inspections’ is a more
appropriate and accurate description for what appears to
take place in pursuance
of the CEO’s inspection policy. I will only refer to
‘drive-by’ inspections where the
context requires.
The CEO’s Inspection Policy
materials before me include a copy of a document apparently current as at 2
September 2013 in which is set out the CEO’s
‘Inspection
Inspection Policy includes introductory clauses as follows:
1. Policy Statement
The aim of this policy is to outline the various inspections and ensure that
access to the property is in accordance with relevant
legislation.
The purpose of conducting inspections is: to ensure a tenancy is
proceeding satisfactorily; to assess repairs and maintenance requirements,
encourage responsible management of public housing dwellings; and to assess an
asset for strategic planning purposes.’
clause 6.1:
6.1 Compliance with the
Residential Tenancies
All inspections and access to a public housing dwelling by the Department of
Housing must comply with the
Residential Tenancies Act
The following regulations apply to inspections:
inspections must
be at least three months apart;
inspections must
not interfere with the tenant’s right to “quiet enjoyment of the
the Department
of Housing must give at least seven days written notice of an inspection;
the tenant must
be present for the inspection unless they have given permission for the landlord
to inspect the dwelling using the
Department of Housing’s keys,
Access is also permitted for the following purposes; providing that
24 hours’ notice has been given to the tenant:
to carry out
repairs or to determine if repairs have been satisfactorily completed
With the consent of the tenants, Department of Housing staff may
also be granted access without notice. Consent of the tenant is not
required if
staff have reasonable grounds to suspect that significant damage to the dwelling
has occurred.
Drive-by inspections are permitted at any time without notice
to the tenant
(italics added)
words in italics are the only reference anywhere in the Inspection Policy to
‘drive-by’ inspections.
The tenants’ submissions
tenants contend on a number of grounds that the CEO’s conduct of
off-premises inspections of their premises is unlawful.
No provision for off-premises inspections in the Residential
Tenancies Act
correctly submit that Part 9 of
Residential Tenancies Act
specific provisions dealing with the circumstances in which a landlord may enter
and inspect premises. Most relevantly,
section 70 provides that a landlord may
enter premises for the purpose of an inspection but only after giving seven
days’ notice
of the intention to do so and only at certain intervals (of
at least three months, or more if agreed).
tenants also (correctly) point out that the
Residential Tenancies Act
says nothing about inspection occurring otherwise than by gaining entry to
the presence of express provision for inspections involving entry of premises
nor the absence of provision for inspections
not involving entry is a basis for
a finding that off-premises inspections are unlawful for the purposes of the
Residential Tenancies Act
‘Observable’ breach
moving to consider the tenants’ other grounds for challenging off-premises
inspections, it is convenient to note that
their submissions regarding the
requirement for inspections under Part 9 appeared to assume, at least in part,
that a landlord’s
entitlement
to take action against a tenant for a
suspected breach of a tenancy agreement might be affected by the manner or
circumstances in
which the breach comes to the landlord’s attention (and
specifically, whether or not the breach was revealed in the course
inspection permitted by the
Residential Tenancies Act
the extent the tenants made that assumption, it was in my opinion
misconceived.
may often be the case that the requirement for seven days’ notice of a
formal inspection under section 70 of the
Residential Tenancies Act
well as the fact that such inspections can occur no more than four times a year,
means that many breaches of a tenancy agreement
go undetected (because, for
example, they are able to be addressed during the notice period). It would be a
clear mistake, however,
to therefore conclude that such breaches are in any
permissible
. It would also be a clear mistake to disregard
breaches that are detectable otherwise than pursuant to a formal inspection.
is instructive in this context to consider a situation where premises are in a
condition, observable from outside the premises,
which involves a clearly
arguable breach of a tenant’s obligations under a tenancy agreement.
for example, that a dog’s decomposing carcass was visible in a
tenant’s backyard from a public footpath or road.
That would be a
situation in which, very arguably, the tenant was in breach of the obligation
not to maintain the premises in an
unreasonably dirty condition.
landlord who observed such a situation from outside the premises, or who learnt
of such a situation from a third party, would plainly
be entitled to take action
to require the tenant to remedy the alleged breach. It could surely make no
difference that the possibility
of a breach had come to the landlord’s
attention otherwise than as the result of an inspection conducted under Part 9
Residential Tenancies Act.
Peace, privacy and quiet enjoyment
central focus of the tenants’ challenge to the CEO’s practice of
conducting off-premises inspections concerned the
effect of that practice upon
their ability to occupy their premises in peace and privacy.
law relating to the entitlement of citizens to protection against invasions of
their peace and privacy is notoriously unsettled.
It is nevertheless clear that
on the current state of the law there is nothing
unlawful about
the act of observing or photographing private property from a vantage point
outside that
there anything
unlawful about documenting the observations or
relying upon the observations as a basis for legal action.
is therefore necessary for the tenants to demonstrate some facet of their legal
relationship with the CEO that makes the CEO’s
conduct in carrying out and
relying upon off-premises inspections unlawful.
central facet of the relationship upon which the tenants rely is that landlords
are obliged by sections 65 and 66 of the
Residential Tenancies Act
interrupt their quiet enjoyment of the premises or to interfere with their
reasonable peace or privacy in the use of the premises.
65 and 66 of the
Residential Tenancies Act
provide as follows:
Tenant to be able to use and enjoy property
It is a term of a tenancy agreement that:
(a) a tenant is entitled to quiet enjoyment of the premises without
interruption by the landlord or a person claiming under the landlord
superior title to the landlord's title; and
(b) the landlord will not cause an interference with the reasonable peace or
66 Landlord
not to interfere with tenant's enjoyment of premises
(1) A landlord must not cause interference with the reasonable peace or
in accordance
with this Act.
Maximum penalty: 100 penalty units.
(2) A landlord must not force, or attempt to force, a tenant to vacate the
(a) except in accordance with this Act; or
(b) in circumstances that amount to harassment of a tenant.
Maximum penalty: 100 penalty units.
their written submissions and at the hearing the tenants tended not to
differentiate between requirements of sections 65 and 66(1).
Their cases were
conducted on the basis that the conduct of the CEO of which they complained was
a breach of the landlord’s
obligation under either or both of those
provisions (i.e. whether viewed in terms of quiet enjoyment or reasonable peace
and privacy).
essence, they submitted that the practice of off-premises inspections, as
implemented in their particular cases, affected their
peace and privacy and
quiet enjoyment of the premises in a way that was neither reasonable nor
otherwise in accordance with the
Residential Tenancies Act
their submissions, each of the tenants identified the following particular
aspects of the CEO’s conduct:
the fact the
inspections were not consented to and could occur at any time, unbeknownst to
the tenant and irrespective of their presence
at the premises;
the physical act
of the inspection, which could involve any combination of the following: driving
by the premises; observing the premises
(including by getting out of the car and
standing on the road or footpath); and photographing the premises;
the fact that
the photographs taken and observations made during an inspection could be
recorded in the CEO’s files and databases
in relation to the tenancy;
the fact the
inspections could form the basis of follow-up action by the CEO including: the
sending of compliance letters; the foreshadowing
of further inspections (again
at a non-specified time) to monitor compliance; and threats of eviction in the
event of non-compliance;
the case of Ms Shine, the following additional matters were relied upon:
the fact the
inspection involved entering upon the common property of the block of flats of
which the premises formed part and the
taking of photographs of her backyard
through gaps in a fence. (It was common ground at the hearing that the backyard
is not observable
otherwise than in this matter);
the fact that a
letter of complaint by her lawyers to the CEO demanding cessation of the
practice of drive-by inspections cease was
met with the response that the
practice would continue.
the case of Ms Rosas an alternative argument was also mounted to the effect that
in the circumstances of her case the conduct of
the inspection had in fact
involved an unauthorised entry of land that was ‘ancillary property’
to her premises, namely
the footpath and driveway outside the fence of the
premises. That argument is dealt with in a separate section of these
of the tenants submitted affidavits regarding the personal effect upon them of
the drive-by inspections and subsequent action
Shine deposed as follows:
3. On 18 September 2014 I received a letter from the respondent
telling me that they had done a drive by inspection of my yard on
16 September
2014. The letter said I needed to mow the grass and trim overgrown vines and
shrubs along the fence line with 14 days.
It said they would then do another
drive by inspection. If I didn’t mow the grass, the letter said I would
get a ‘Notice
to remedy’ which meant I might get evicted.
4. The grass is long near the fence because my next-door neighbour always
waters right next to the fence between us. I believe he
does this so that that
his dogs can keep cool in the wet grass when it is hot. This makes the grass
5. I own a petrol powered whipper-snipper but I struggle to use it by
myself. I ask my son Russel to mow my lawn with my whipper-snipper
and I buy the
petrol. I had always planned to get Russel to mow the grass on the weekend of 4
and 5 October 2014. He did this.
6. I became very worried when I read the letter because it said that if I
don’t cut my grass I might get evicted. I read the
letter over and over
again many times, particularly the part about the termination of my tenancy.
7. The thought of being evicted worries me a lot. I don’t have any
other housing that I could move to. I am sick women and don’t
gets me down a bit.
8. I was also confused by this letter. I didn’t think that a
landlord could do an inspection at any time without me knowing.
I felt that I
had to do something about it because it was worrying me. This is why I sought
legal advice.
9. I asked my lawyer to write to the respondent asking them to stop doing
drive by inspections. My lawyer told me the respondent responded
to this letter
by saying that they would keep doing them and that they didn’t think they
were against the law.
10. I feel like my privacy has been breached. I believe that the
respondent’s staff must have come right to my fence and looked
through it to see the grass. You can’t see the grass or my yard from the
11. Knowing that the respondent and their staff come and look in my yard
makes me lose trust in them. I start to think ‘what
else might they do to
my yard or house when I am not there?’ I worry that they might come in to
my house one day when I am
12. I have been a tenant of the respondent for a long time. I know about
the normal type of inspection where they tell me when they
are coming. At those
inspections I tell them problems I have with the house and the respondent raises
things they want me to do.
If the respondent had have talked about my grass at a
normal inspection I would have explained that I was getting Russel to cut it
13. By spying on me and sending me letters like this I feel like the
respondent is picking on me and harassing me. I have asked them
to stop but they
say they will keep going.
letter referred to by Ms Shine in paragraph 3 is the letter from the CEO that is
reproduced in Appendix 1.
Rosas deposed as follows:
4. I receive Centrelink benefits.
5. I have been suffering from anxiety and depression for a little while
now. I am on medication for depression. I also take medicine
for cholesterol and
6. In 2012 I had a lump removed from my breast. This was a very stressful
time for me and my depression and anxiety got worse after
the operation.
7. In 2013, my relationship with my kids’ father finished. I am
still dealing with this and have been to mediation. There is
another round of
mediation in the near future. This has caused me a lot of stress as well.
8. I used to get my lawn mowed by Kalano. It cost me $70 each time. After
housing told me to mow my lawn I contacted Kalano and they
put the price up to
$250. I couldn’t afford to pay that much.
9. I am registered with NT Carers, I need support because of my health
10. The drive by inspections cause me a lot of problems. I know housing do
these kinds of inspections. I feel like I am always being
watched. It’s
like I’m being stalked. I can’t relax in my own home. If me or the
kids go out into the yard I worry
we’ll be photographed or housing will
drive by and then I’ll stress because I think I’ve done something
else wrong.
11. After I got the Notice to Remedy I was really worried because I
couldn’t afford to get my lawns mowed.
12. I had to speak to a lawyer to explain what I could do. I was worried I
would lose my house and me and my kids would have nowhere
13. I don’t mind having my house inspected, I know that is part of
renting a place. I don’t think they should be allowed
to just drive by and
take photos like they do.
notice to remedy referred to by Ms Rosas in paragraph 11 is reproduced in
Appendix 2.
have no hesitation in accepting that the concerns described by Ms Shine and Ms
Rosas in their affidavits are genuinely held by them.
do not, however, consider that those concerns are a product of any breach by the
CEO of obligations owed under sections 65 and 66
Residential Tenancies
the tenant’s concerns are closely analysed, it emerges that they are
undermined by an element of circularity - specifically,
a question-begging
conviction that the landlord’s conduct is wrongful.
for example, the tenants complain about the prospect of the landlord taking
compliance action against them in reliance upon
the inspections, as well as
doing so on a basis that is legally unsound.
reasons I have already attempted to explain, there is nothing
improper about a landlord relying upon observations made and/or recorded
otherwise than in the conduct of an entry/inspection under
Part 9 of the
Residential Tenancies Act
finding above that clause 20.5(e) of the common provisions is inconsistent with
section 51(1) of the
Residential Tenancies Act
means that action by the
CEO in reliance upon the tenants’ obligations under that clause (for
example in seeking eviction for
failure to rectify a ‘breach’ of the
clause) would likely fail; however, that likelihood does not of itself mean that
threatened action in reliance upon clause is improper.
action by a landlord in reliance upon an unenforceable contractual obligation
could be regarded as improper there would need
to be evidence that the landlord
was aware (or should have been aware) of the unenforceability of the obligation,
or that relying
upon the obligation was otherwise actuated by that faith or an
improper purpose. There is no basis for such a finding against the
CEO in this
conduct by the landlord would not be improper, then a concern on the part of the
tenant about such conduct, or the prospect of
it, cannot be such as to transform
the propriety of the conduct.
is not to say that a practice such as the CEO’s practice of conducting
off-premises inspections could not in certain circumstances
involved an
actionable interference with a tenant’s rights under sections 65 or 66 of
Residential Tenancies Act
for example such inspections were being conducted:
regularity that was disproportionate having regard to the tenants’ history
of compliance with his/her obligations under
a tenancy agreement; or
otherwise than
for the purpose of monitoring and enforcing the tenants’ compliance with
his/her obligations;
then such a conclusion might be more readily reached;
however, there is no evidence that would support such a conclusion in the
should add that I have reached that conclusion with greater hesitation in
relation to the application by Ms Shine than in relation
to Ms Rosas.
is because the off-premises inspection in the case of Ms Shine involved entry by
the CEO’s officer onto the common property
of the block of flats of which
the premises formed part. It was common ground at the hearing that the
inspection could not have been
undertaken from any other vantage point.
Ultimately,
however, I have determined that those factors did not of themselves transform
the quality of the inspection. Once again,
there was nothing
unlawful in the act of the CEO’s officer entering upon the common
property, even if the purpose for doing so was to make an
observation that
otherwise could not be made.
would note, however, that off-premises inspections such as occurred in the case
of Ms Rosas – which might, colloquially, be
described as involving
‘snooping’ of a different order than inspections of parts of
premises that are freely observable
from a public place – are of their
nature more prone to opening up questions of harassment and/or improper
in the circumstances of the tenants’ applications
tenant’s concerns about the practice of off-premises inspections are based
upon misconceptions about that practice which
mean that those concerns (whilst
they are undoubtedly genuinely held) do not provide a basis for a finding that
the practice involves
an actionable interference with their quiet enjoyment of
the premises or their reasonable peace and privacy in the use of the premises;
the fact that
the CEO made (and recorded) observations in the context of the off-premises
inspections involved no more interference
with the tenants peace and privacy
than if the observations had been made by someone other than the CEO; and
the off-premises
inspections did not take on a special quality simply by reason of the fact that
the CEO undertook them in the capacity
of landlord. Nor did they take on such a
quality by reason of the CEO seeking to rely upon them in taking steps directed
to securing
compliance by the tenants with their obligations under the tenancy
agreement. In addition, in the absence of bad faith or improper
purpose, it was
not relevant that the CEO was insisting upon compliance with an invalid
obligation.
tenant’s rights under sections 65 and 66 of the
Residential Tenancies
have not been infringed as a result of the CEOs practice of conducting
and relying upon off-premises inspections and in the circumstances,
applications in relation to the practice will be dismissed.
The alternative contention by Ms Rosas
will be recalled that the observations made of Ms Rosas’s premises were
made from the footpath and driveway areas outside
the fence of those
is nevertheless contended on behalf of Ms Rosas that by entering upon those
areas the CEO’s officer entered ‘ancillary
property’ of the
premises, contrary to section 68 (1) of the
Residential Tenancies Act
which provides that it is a term of a tenancy agreement that the landlord
may only enter the premises or ancillary property in accordance
with the Act -
that is, in accordance with the procedures relating to inspections set out in
part 9 of the
Residential Tenancies Act
to section 4 of the
Residential Tenancies Act
ancillary property
, in relation to premises to which
a tenancy agreement relates or is to relate, means:
(a) ancillary real property, including a garden, not forming part of the
(b) fixtures; and
(c) chattels, including but not limited to furniture, other household effects
and a garden watering system,
provided, or to be provided, by the landlord, either under the
tenancy agreement or independently of the agreement for use by the
tenant, but
does not include common property within the meaning of the Unit Titles Act or
Unit Title Schemes Act.
means residential premises or part of residential
premises to which a tenancy agreement relates or is to relate, but does not
premises leased principally for business purposes whether or not the
premises may be used for residence under the lease.
residential premises
means premises intended for occupation as
a place of residence and includes a caravan intended for occupation as a place
of residence
and a houseboat intended for occupation as a place of
Rosas does not submit that CEO has any title to the footpath and driveway areas
outside the fence of her premises. She nevertheless
contends on a variety of
bases that that land is nevertheless ‘ancillary property’ within the
meaning of section 4 of
Residential Tenancies Act.
refers, for example, to the fact that the letter of 27 August 2014 purported to
require her to mow the ‘verge and fence
addition, she refers to various provisions of the KTC By-laws which give rights
to, and impose obligations upon, private land owners
in relation to adjoining
land under the care/control of the Katherine Town Council (including footpaths
and driveways or ‘crossing
points’ external to a property’s
boundaries). She submits, in effect, that such landowners have non-proprietary
in relation to the adjoining land. She says that, in her case, these
non-proprietary rights have been ‘transferred’
by the CEO to Ms
Rosas by virtue of the tenancy agreement relating to her premises. As such, the
relevant areas have been ‘provided’
by the landlord within the
meaning of section 4 of the
Residential Tenancies Act
my view, these contentions are without substance. Quite apart from the very
strained reasoning necessary to support a conclusion
that there has been any
transfer of ‘non-proprietary’ rights as suggested, the argument
faces the fundamental problem
that the definition of ‘ancillary
property’ in section 4 of the
Residential Tenancies Act
real property
provided by a landlord. Whatever (if any) rights
the CEO provided to Ms Rosas in respect of land outside the fence of the
there was no sense in which that land was real property of the nature
referred to in the section 4 definition.
addition, the contentions involve insufficient regard to the way in which
‘premises’ and ‘residential premises’
are defined in the
Residential Tenancies Act
Concluding observations
fact that I intending dismissing the tenants' applications should not be
regarded as an endorsement of the CEO’s policy
of off-premises
inspections.
to the evidence before me, the present form of that policy consists of nothing
more than a single statement in the broader
‘Inspection Policy’
document that '(d)rive-by inspections are permitted at any time without notice
the tenant.'
is a dangerously broad statement.
the affidavit material relied upon by the CEO and at the hearing it was noted
that drive-by inspections may occur randomly, for
example when officers are in
an area on other business. In addition, it was acknowledged that a drive-by
inspection might occur
when an officer is travelling to or from work. The lack
of any structure or detail in respect of drive-by inspections, especially
the frequency
with which they are undertaken;
the manner in
which observations are to be made; and
protocols and
procedures for recording both the fact of an inspection and its outcome;
means that there is no certainty in terms of
inspections are being carried out,
This creates obvious potential for the conduct of drive-by inspections according
to the present ‘policy’ to cause public
housing tenants to feel that
they are being unfairly singled out. A tenant subjected by a landlord to an
unregulated series of
informal inspections might well feel such a
sense of harassment and intimidation that the landlord is found to be in breach
contractual and statutory obligations in sections 65 and 66 of the
Residential Tenancies Act
should also emphasise that my rejection of the tenants' applications does not
involve approval of the action taken by the CEO in
reliance upon the
off-premises inspections. In my view, the action taken by the CEO in both
matters is fairly described as a heavy-handed
response to what at the very
highest could only be regarded as minor breaches of the tenants' obligations in
respect of the upkeep
there was nothing improper about the sending of the 'yard letter' to either
tenant, or, in the case of Ms Rosas, the subsequent
delivery of the notice to
remedy, it is plainly apparent that the course adopted by the CEO caused
considerable distress and anxiety
to each of Ms Rosas and Ms Shine who,
understandably, felt that their tenancies were in real peril.
Accordingly,
I order in each of matters RT1415-0318 and RT1415-0297 that the tenant’s
application is dismissed.
Dated this Tuesday 14 July 2015
Richard Bruxner
Delegate of the
Commissioner of Tenancies
Appendix 1 – Letter to Ms Shine dated 18 September
Appendix 2 – Notice to Remedy to Ms Rosas dated 18
September 2014
In fact, on the
approach I have taken below to the tenants’ challenge to the practice of
off-premises inspections, the validity
of clause 20.5(e) is ultimately
irrelevant.
Each page of the
document is watermarked ‘under review’; however, there was no
suggestion on the part of the CEO that
the document is not reflective of the
currently applied policy.
It can be noted
that the only legislation referred to in the Inspection Policy is the
Residential Tenancies Act
The tenants did
not seek to submit that the CEO’s conduct of off-premises inspections was
unlawful by reason of the
Surveillance Devices Act
(NT), or its
Commonwealth counterpart. Having regard to the definition of ‘private
activity’ in that legislation (cf
s 4 of the NT Act), it would appear
unlikely that the inspections in this case could have involved any breach.
It can be noted
that neither Ms Shine nor Ms Rosas refers to having been present at the time of,
or to having observed, an off-premises
inspection of their premises taking
place. Extracts from the CEO’s Tenancy Management System nevertheless
include records
of two such inspections of Ms Shine’s premises in 2013 and
2014 and three of Ms Rosas’s premises in 2014. Given the
ill-defined and
ad hoc nature of the CEO’s policy in relation to such inspections it would
not surprise me if there had been
other inspections in those periods (which were
not documented because nothing requiring attention had been observed) - in fact,
consider this likely.
The situation
might well be different if, subsequently to the publication of these reasons,
there were an attempt to invoke clause
20.5(e) in its present form.
That is, even
allowing for the problems with clause 20.5(e) of the common provisions.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (36 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter