URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCAT/2024/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:17:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Venture Housing Company Ltd v City Of Palmerston [2024] NTCAT 15 (20 November 2024)
Venture Housing Company Ltd v City of Palmerston
DECISION NUMBER:
[2024] NTCAT 15
VENTURE HOUSING COMPANY LTD
CITY OF PALMERSTON
MATTER TYPE:
Review Jurisdiction -
Local Government Act 2019
2024-00433-CT
HEARING DATE:
11 NOVEMBER 2024
DECISION OF:
LESLIE MCCRIMMON
DATE OF ORDERS:
20 NOVEMBER 2024
APPEARANCES and REPRESENTATION (if any):
J Gatland instructed by McCullough Robertson Lawyers
RESPONDENT:
J W Roper SC instructed by Maher Raumteen Solicitors
REASONS FOR DECISION:
Housing Company Ltd (the ‘Applicant’) is the registered owner of a
large number of lots in the suburbs of Driver
and Johnston in the local
government area of the City of Palmerston (the ‘Respondent’). In
relation to such lots, the
Applicant sought from the Respondent an exemption
from the payment of municipal rates pursuant to section 222(1)(g) of the
Local Government Act 2019
(the ‘LGA’).
a decision of the Respondent dated 17 January 2024, the Respondent upheld an
earlier decision of the Respondent to the effect that
the Applicant did not fall
within the exemption set out in section 222(1)(g) of the LGA. In particular, the
Respondent concluded
that the Applicant’s land for which an exemption of
rates was sought was used for a commercial purpose; namely, “the
of accommodation in exchange for
Background facts
Applicant, established in 2011 by the Northern Territory Government
(‘NTG’), operates as a not-for-profit community
It is a public benevolent
institution registered with the Australian Charities and Not-for-profits
Commission established under the
Australian Charities and Not-for-profits
Commission Act 2012
These facts were not in dispute in these
proceedings.
the Applicant’s establishment, the NTG, as in-kind
transferred legal title to
a number of properties to the Applicant. Such properties could only be used for
the provision of affordable
housing to eligible
applicants.
The NTG also provided,
and continues to provide, funding. Such funding is provided pursuant to a
Funding Deed entered into between
the NTG and the Applicant dated 30 July 2012
(the ‘Funding Deed’).
Applicant provides subsidised social and affordable rental housing to eligible
Northern Territory applicants. Relevant to the
lots at issue in these
proceedings, the Applicant provides four types of charitable programs to
eligible applicants:
5.1. National
Rental Affordability Scheme (‘NRAS’) – applicants must meet
the NRAS eligibility requirements, including,
inter alia, falling within the
income limits as set by the Commonwealth Department of Social Services. Pursuant
to the NRAS Scheme,
rent must be at least 20% less than the market rent as
assessed by an independent valuer or indexed to the Consumer Price Index
“The Applicant sets the rent on all of its NRAS
properties at no greater than 74.99% of the market value rent, and in accordance
with the NRAS maximum rental
5.2. Venture
Affordable Housing – to be eligible for this program, applicants must be
working and fall under the Venture Affordable
Housing income limit for their
household. Rent for the program is set at no more than 74.99% of market rent
which is calculated independently
every two years, and pursuant to the CPI in
alternate years;
5.3. Social
Housing – eligibility for this program is determined by the Department of
Territory Families Housing and Communities
public housing eligibility criteria.
Only those on the NTG’s Public Housing waitlist are eligible. Rent is
calculated pursuant
to the NTG’s Rental Rebate Policy and Rent Policy. In
this program, rent is calculated at 25% of assessable household income,
100% of the Commonwealth Rent Assistance, and is capped at the gazetted
5.4. Specialist
Disability Accommodation – eligibility for this program is determined by
the National Disability Insurance Agency.
The amount of the funding available to
an eligible applicant is determined by the National Disability Insurance Scheme
and is not based on the applicant’s income. Pursuant
to the NDIS Specialist Disability Accommodation Guidelines, the Applicant
charge an eligible applicant a Reasonable Rent
Contribution.
lots relevant to these proceedings, and the program which applies to each lot,
are set out
Housing Program
Venture Affordable Housing
Social Housing
30-59, 61, 63, 65,67-85, 87-91, 93-105, 107, 109-117, 118-123
60, 64, 66,
Disability Housing
Venture Affordable Housing
86, 92, 106, 108
Social Housing
before the Tribunal indicates, and the Tribunal accepts, that the rental income
received by the Applicant does not cover
its costs. Further, the Tribunal is
satisfied that the rent the Applicant receives is below market rent. In the
absence of capital
grants and subsidies, for example from the NTG, NRAS and
NDIS, the Applicant would operate at a
land is exempt from local government rates is governed by section 222 of the
LGA. Relevant to these proceedings, the section
(1) The following land (exempt land) is exempt from rates:
(a) Crown land that is:
(i) vacant and not the subject of a lease; or
(ii) occupied by the Territory for a public purpose (other than the provision of
public housing);
(g) subject to subsections (3) and (4), land used for a non-commercial
purpose by a public benevolent institution or a public charity
registered with the Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission
established under the
Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission Act
(2) If land is used for 2 or more different purposes, and one or more but not
all the purposes are exempt, the land is not exempt
from rates unless the
non-exempt purpose is merely incidental to the exempt purpose.
(3) Subject to subsection (4), in deciding whether land is used for a
commercial or non-commercial purpose, the fact that the user
is a public
benevolent institution or a public charity is irrelevant and the question is to
be decided according to the nature of
the use and not the nature of the
Is the Applicant’s land used for a non-commercial purpose within the
meaning of section 222(1)(g) of the LGA?
term ‘non-commercial purpose’ is not defined in the LGA.
Consequently, the words should be given their natural and
unless “there are
sufficient indications of some other
‘other meaning’ arises in these proceedings.
determining whether land is used for a commercial or non-commercial purpose,
section 222(3) of the LGA requires the Tribunal to
focus on the nature of the
use rather than the nature of the user. In other words, the fact that the
Applicant is a public benevolent
institution, or a public charity, is irrelevant
to the determination of whether the land is used for a non-commercial
the insertion of subsection (3) into section 222 of the LGA, the line of High
Court of Australia authority in cases such as
Salvation Army (Victoria)
Property Trust v Fern Tree Gully Corporation
[1952] HCA 4
(1952) 85 CLR 159
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Word Investment Ltd
(2008) 235 CLR
, appear to have no application to the resolution of these proceedings. In
both cases, the relevant legislation required the court
to focus on whether the
activities of the entity claiming the exemption were solely for a charitable
) or used exclusively for a charitable purpose (
notwithstanding, the Applicant submits that:
the nature of the use
to which the Properties are put in providing affordable housing to tenants who
meet specific eligibility criteria
that arise from disadvantage is a
non-commercial purpose, and the fact that the provision of affordable housing is
a recognised charitable
object is relevant to that
consideration.
Respondent, by contrast, submits that:
the question before the
Tribunal cannot be framed by reference to the purpose being the provision of
affordable, social or disability
housing, as proceeding in this manner bleeds
into the necessary consideration of the commercial/non-commercial character of
the purpose,
those very considerations one is required to eschew by virtue of
222(3) of the LGA expressly directs the Tribunal to focus on the nature of the
use and not on the nature of the user. Proceeding
on the basis pressed by the
Applicant would be contrary to the express intent of the subsection. In this
regard, the Respondent is
counsel for the Respondent notes that:
Neither ss(3) or (4) [of
section 222 LGA] find any mirror in corresponding interstate legislation.
Moreover, the author can find no
judicial consideration of any similarly framed
provisions.
assistance as to why the legislature decided to include section 222(3) in the
LGA is afforded by the Explanatory Statement to the
Local Government Bill 2019
With respect to the subsection, the Explanatory Statement, unhelpfully but not
surprisingly, does little more than put in prose
form what is clearly stated in
the subsection. In addition, no assistance can be gleaned from
The resolution of the issue in these proceedings must be determined by reference
to the ordinary meaning of the words “land
used for a non-commercial
purpose” in section 222(1)(g) of the LGA.
Macquarie Dictionary
online defines the word ‘non-commercial’
to mean “not commercial”. The word ‘commercial’ is
defined to mean:
1. of, or in the nature
of, commerce.
in commerce.
of returning a profit: a commercial project.
of being sold in great numbers ...
possible commercial return above artistic considerations.
preoccupied
with profits or immediate gains.
Chief Executive, Department of Lands v Whackett
[1995] QLAC 5
the Queensland Land Appeal Court considered the ordinary English meanings of the
words ‘commercial purpose’.
Among the ordinary English
meanings of “commercial” are “of, engaged in, bearing on,
commerce; interested in financial
return rather than artistry”
Australian Concise Oxford Dictionary
Macquarie Dictionary
and “capable of returning a profit; ... preoccupied with profits or
immediate gains” (
Macquarie Dictionary
). “Commerce”
includes the interchange of goods or commodities or services, especially on a
large scale, and trade or
The relevant “purpose” is the “object to be attained, thing
intended” (
Australian Concise Oxford Dictionary
) or, in other words
“the object for which anything ... is done, ... an intended or desired
result; end or aim” (
Macquarie Dictionary
). In this context (and by
contrast with “character”) the word “purpose” seems to
be subjective in nature
or at least have a subjective component. So for the
business or industry to have a commercial purpose there must be some intention
or desire on behalf of those engaged in the business or industry to pursue
commercial goals rather than merely to be engaged in the
enterprise for
recreational or some other purpose.
subjective component of the word ‘purpose’ as used in section
222(1)(g) of the LGA has, pursuant to section 222(3),
been removed from the
Tribunal’s consideration. To comply with the section, the Tribunal must
assess objectively whether the
leasing of the Applicant’s lands means the
lands are used for a commercial purpose by the Applicant.
Respondent submits that the proper question for the Tribunal’s
determination is simply: “Is the letting of residential
property, a
non-commercial purpose”.
The characterisation of the issue in this way is not supported by the ordinary
meaning of the word ‘commercial’.
evidence indicates that the lots available to eligible applicants pursuant to
the NRAS, the Venture Affordable Housing scheme
and the Social Housing scheme,
are leased at a rent below, and in the case of Social Housing substantially
below, the market rate.
There is no evidence to suggest that the leasing of the
lots is capable of returning a profit or that the lessor is preoccupied with
profits or immediate gains. By leasing the properties at below market rents, it
cannot be said that, objectively, the lessor is setting
possible commercial
return above other considerations.
an objective assessment of the evidence, it cannot be said that the Applicant is
using the land for a commercial purpose. It follows,
therefore, that the land is
used for a non-commercial purpose by the Applicant within the meaning of section
222(1)(g) of the LGA.
Disability Housing is used for a non-commercial purpose by the Applicant within
the meaning of section 222(1)(g) of the LGA
is unclear. Whether the combination
of NDIS payments and the Reasonable Rent Contribution results in rent payable to
the Applicant
which is below the market rate is not addressed by the Applicant
either in evidence or submissions. Consequently, whether the three
allocated to Disability Housing are rateable is a matter for the Respondent
based on its assessment whether, in light of the
reasoning in this decision, the
three lots are used for a non-commercial purpose.
Respondent submits that the charging of rent, regardless of the level of profit
or lack thereof realised, is
commercial.
It notes that there
may be a number of reasons why a landlord might offer a property to a
prospective tenant below market rates,
for example, to secure a longer-term
lease or to attract a particular
Further, the Respondent
submits that the Tribunal can take judicial notice of the fact that a
significant majority of residential
property rentals in Australia result
from negatively geared investment
properties.
Tribunal accepts that there may be a myriad of reasons why a landlord may decide
to accept lower than market rent. If it is to
secure a longer-term lease, it may
be that the landlord has determined that rental market volatility may result in
extended periods
during which the property remains empty if a long-term tenant
is not in place. In such circumstance, the landlord will be setting
possible commercial return above short-term profit considerations, which would
constitute a commercial purpose.
Alternatively,
a landlord may agree to below-market rent to attract or assist a particular
tenant. Whether the land is used for a
non-commercial purpose will depend on the
facts. If the particular tenant is the landlord’s child, it may be that a
is charged for reasons which cannot be construed as commercial.
Conversely, the landlord may offer a low rent to an individual who
the landlord
perceives will benefit the landlord’s business in other ways. In such a
case it may be found that the land is
used for a commercial purpose.
using the land to minimise the landlord’s overall tax liability may be a
commercial purpose, but does not assist the
Tribunal in the resolution of these
proceedings. As the above discussion illustrates, each case must be assessed on
its own facts.
If the Tribunal accepted the Respondent’s assertion, a
landlord renting property to her child for $10 per week would constitute
used for a commercial purpose. Such a proposition is not supported by the
definition of the word ‘commercial’ or
the relevant case law.
submission pressed by the Respondent is as
It would be
a remarkable result if housing stock that had been let by the Chief Executive
Officer of Housing and was rateable in his/her
hands by virtue of ss222(1)(ii),
was to become other than rateable simply by virtue of the management of the
leased properties, subject
to all the same rents, terms and conditions, being
outsourced to Venture. ...
[R]eading ss222(1)(g) in the context of the LGA as a whole and particularly
in light of ss222(1)(a)(ii), (3) and (4), cannot, in Council’s
submission, result in properties that are being utilised for the same purpose,
being treated differently depending upon
who presently holds them.
this submission the Respondent maintains that:
In simpler terms, the
Territory, by the [Funding] Deed and
subsequent agreements predicated
thereon, has effectively outsourced to Venture the task of managing a portfolio
of public housing
stock, the management of which would otherwise fall within the
purview of the Chief Executive Officer of
as has been noted above, it is true that some of the lots the subject of these
proceedings were transferred to the Applicant
as ‘in-kind’ funding,
the Applicant notes that, “none of the NTG Properties (as defined by
clause 23 of the Funding
Deed) had previously been used as public housing stock
before they were transferred to the
Applicant”.
It follows,
therefore, that the transferred lots may have been rateable when legal title
vested in the NTG, but such lots were not
rateable pursuant to section
222(1)(a)(ii) of the LGA.
any event, the Respondent’s submission fails to accord sufficient weight
to the fact that the fee simple estate in the subject
lots is vested in the
Applicant. Section 222(1)(a) exempts Crown lands falling within the criteria in
sections 222(1)(a)(i) and (ii).
The term ‘Crown lands’ is defined in
Crown Lands Act 1992
lands” means all lands of the Territory, including the bed of the sea
within the territorial limits of the Northern
Territory, and including
estate in fee simple that is registered in the name of the Territory
does not include reserve lands. [Emphasis mine]
these proceedings, the estate in fee simple in the relevant lots is registered
in the name of the Applicant, not the Territory.
The lots are not Crown lands
within the meaning of section 222(1)(ii) of the LGA. If an entity satisfies the
requirements of section
222(1)(g), namely the entity holding the fee simple
estate is a “public benevolent institution or a public charity that is
registered with the Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission
established under the
Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission Act
(Cth)”, it is entitled to rely on the section provided it
satisfies the requirement that the land is used for a non-commercial
fact that land utilised for the same purpose by two different entities may be
“treated differently depending upon who presently
is entirely
consistent with wording of section 222 of the LGA. The Respondent’s
submission is not accepted.
Law relating to review
proceedings come within the Tribunal’s review jurisdiction
pursuant to
section 327 and Schedule 2 of the LGA, and section 33(1) of the
Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2014
(the 'NTCAT Act).
Pursuant to section 46(1) of the NTCAT Act, the “objective of the Tribunal
exercising its review jurisdiction
is to produce the correct or preferable
50(1) of the NTCAT Act provides that:
After reviewing a decision,
the Tribunal must, after a proceeding in its review jurisdiction:
(a) confirm the decision; or
(b) vary the decision; or
(c) set aside the decision and:
(i) substitute its own decision; or
(ii) send the matter back to the decision maker for reconsideration in
accordance with any recommendations the Tribunal considers
appropriate; or
(d) make a different decision if permitted by the relevant Act.
Respondent submits
There is an
obvious inconsistency in the Tribunal’s powers in the foregoing regard, in
that whilst the Tribunal can vary the
Decision under s50(1)(b) or set aside and
substitute its own decision under s50(c)(i), it cannot made a decision different
in substance
to that at which Council arrived, in the absence of the express
conferral of such power under the LGA (see s50(1)(d) of the NTCAT
Act and the
specific caveat therein).
In this regard, the LGA confers no such express power (see s327 of the
Respondent goes on to submit that:
In the circumstances of this
particular matter and should the Tribunal find the Decision to be in error, the
effect of the foregoing
is that the Tribunal’s powers of disposition would
be limited to setting aside the Decision and remitting the matter to Council
under s50(1)(c)(ii).
Explanatory Statement for the
Northern Territory Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Bill 2014
makes no reference to what is now section 50(1)(d) of the
NTCAT Act. It provides:
The Tribunal may on a review, affirm, vary,
or set aside the decision
of the original decision-maker. If the Tribunal
sets aside the decision it may substitute its own decision or send the matter
to the original decision-maker for reconsideration. Any decision made upon
reconsideration is open to review by the Tribunal.
section 50(1)(d) is interpreted in the way submitted by the Respondent, section
50(1)(c)(i) is not available to the Tribunal if,
having examined the evidence
before the original decision-maker, the Tribunal concludes that the decision
made was not the correct
or preferable decision. In other words, in the vast
majority of cases where the Tribunal is vested with review jurisdiction, the
Tribunal would, pursuant to section 50(1)(d), be precluded from setting aside
the decision of the original decision-maker and substituting
its own decision if
the latter was different than the former. In the Respondent’s submission,
only if the Act which vests review
use by the Tribunal of section 50(1)(c)(i) would that option be available to the
if the matter is sent back to the decision-maker with a recommendation that it
make a decision in accordance with the Tribunal’s
reasoning, such
recommendation may be rejected by the decision-maker, the same decision made,
and the affected party would have no
option but to seek a further review in the
Tribunal. Such a result could not have been intended by the legislature.
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR
the court observed at [70]:
A legislative instrument must be
construed on the prima facie basis that its provisions are intended to give
effect to harmonious
goals. Where conflict appears to arise from the language of
particular provisions, the conflict must be alleviated, so far as possible,
adjusting the meaning of the competing provisions to achieve that result which
will best give effect to the purpose and language
of those provisions while
maintaining the unity of all the statutory provisions. Reconciling conflicting
provisions will often require
the court “to determine which is the leading
provision and which the subordinate provision, and which must give way to the
is no need to resort to a consideration of leading and subordinate provisions in
this case because there is no inconsistency
in the Tribunal’s powers in
section 50(1)(c)(i) and (d) of the NTCAT Act. In section 50(1)(d), the words
“different decision”
refers to a decision made by the Tribunal on a
basis not considered by the original decision-maker. It applies to the
circumstance
where the Tribunal comes to the correct and preferable decision
through the examination of an issue which was not considered by the
decision-maker, usually because no attention was given to the issue in the
evidence and submissions of the parties.
In such a circumstance, unless the
Act conferring review jurisdiction on the Tribunal allows for such a different
decision to be made,
the Tribunal must refer the matter back to the
decision-maker pursuant to section 50(1)(c)(ii).
these proceedings, the Tribunal considered the same evidence and issues that
were before the original decision-maker. Consequently,
the mischief at which
section 50(1)(d) of the NTCAT Act is aimed does not arise.
lots made available by the Applicant to eligible applicants pursuant to the
NRAS, the Venture Affordable Housing scheme and the
Social Housing scheme, are
lands “used for a non-commercial purpose by a public benevolent
institution or a public charity
that is registered with the Australian Charities
and Not-for-profits Commission established under the
Australian Charities and
Not-for-profits Commission Act 2012
(Cth)”. Consequently, such land is
exempt from rates pursuant to section 222(1)(g) of the LGA. The correct or
preferrable decision
is to set aside the decision of the Respondent in relation
to this land and substitute the decision of the Tribunal pursuant to section
50(1)(c)(i) of the NTCAT Act.
the lots used for Disability Housing also fall within the purview of section
222(1)(g) cannot be ascertained based on the
evidence provided by the Applicant.
Whether the lots used for such purpose are exempt is a matter for the Respondent
considered in
light of the reasons provided in this
parties have indicated that they wish to be heard on the question of costs.
While, pursuant to section 131 of the NTCAT Act,
the general rule is that
“parties bear their own costs in a proceeding before the Tribunal”,
sections 132 to 134 do permit
the Tribunal to make a costs order.
may be matters relevant to the question of costs of which the Tribunal is not
aware. Either party shall have two weeks from
the date of the orders arising
from this decision to bring an Ordinary Application for
Accordingly, the Tribunal orders that:
decision of the City of Palmerston dated 17 January 2024, in which the City of
Palmerston upheld its earlier decision to the effect
that the land owned by
Venture Housing Company Ltd referred to in Order 2 did not fall within the
exemption set out in
section 222(1)(g)
Local Government Act 2019
is set aside.
lots in the City of Palmerston at issue in Tribunal proceedings 2024-00433-CT
made available by Venture Housing Company Ltd to
eligible applicants pursuant to
the National Rental Affordability Scheme, the Venture Affordable Housing scheme
and the Social Housing
scheme are exempt from rates pursuant to
Local Government Act 2019
is given to either party to Tribunal proceeding 2024-00433-CT to bring, by 4
December 2024, an application for costs.
20 November 2024
LESLIE MCCRIMMON
TRIBUNAL MEMBER
Letter from L Cercarelli, CEO
of the Respondent, to the Applicant dated 23 June 2023 at
Affidavit of Karen
Elizabeth Walsh promised on 13 May 2024 at
Affidavit of Karen
Elizabeth Walsh promised on 13 May 2024 at
Respondent’s written
submissions dated 13 September 2024 at
Funding Deed between the
NTG and Venture Housing Company Limited dated 30 July 2012 at
Affidavit of Karen
Elizabeth Walsh promised on 13 May 2024 at [44]; Funding Deed at 19.6,
Affidavit of Karen
Elizabeth Walsh promised on 13 May 2024 at
Affidavit of Karen
Elizabeth Walsh promised on 13 May 2024 at
Affidavit of Karen
Elizabeth Walsh promised on 13 May 2024 at
Affidavit of Karen
Elizabeth Walsh promised on 13 May 2024 at
Affidavit of Karen
Elizabeth Walsh promised on 13 May 2024 at [36]-[42].
Affidavit of Karen Elizabeth
Walsh promised on 13 May 2024, annexures at pp 90-94. While the street address
of the relevant properties
was provided by the Applicant, it is not necessary to
include such addresses in this decision. The purpose of the table is to identify
the number of lots falling within the four programs.
Affidavit of Karen Elizabeth
Walsh promised on 13 May 2024 at
P Herzfeld, T Prince,
Interpretation
ed, Thomson Reuters, 2020)
Nelson Proprietary Limited
[1947] HCA 17
(1947) 74 CLR 629
Applicant’s
submissions dated 21 June 2024 at [35].
Respondent’s
submissions dated 13 September 2024 at [48].
Respondent’s
submissions dated 13 September 2024 at [39]. The Tribunal agrees with this
observation.
Respondent’s submissions dated 13 September 2024 at
Respondent’s
submissions dated 13 September 2024 at
Respondent’s
submissions dated 13 September 2024 at
Respondent’s
submissions dated 13 September 2024 at [66].
Respondent’s
submissions dated 13 September 2024 at
Respondent’s submissions dated 13 September 2024 at
Applicant’s
Submissions in Reply dated 27 September 2024 at
Respondent’s
submissions dated 13 September 2024 at [70].
Respondent’s
submissions dated 13 September 2024 at
Ross v The Queen
[1979] HCA 29
(1979) 141 CLR 432
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (37 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter