URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCAT/2025/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:17:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Proprietors Units Plan 97014 v KS & RRR Pty Ltd [2025] NTCAT 9 (20 June 2025)
The Proprietors Units Plan 97/014 v KS & RRR Pty Ltd
DECISION NUMBER:
[2025] NTCAT 9
THE PROPRIETORS UNITS PLAN 97/014
KS & RRR PTY LTD
MATTER TYPE:
Original Jurisdiction –
Unit Titles Act 1975
2023-04049-CT
HEARING DATE:
28 MAY 2024 (with further submissions filed on 21 and 28 June 2024,
and 28 January and 3 February 2025)
DECISION OF:
DATE OF ORDERS:
20 JUNE 2025
APPEARANCES and REPRESENTATION (if any):
Mr Patrick Cozens, Cozens Johansen Lawyers
RESPONDENT:
Dr Danial Kelly, Kelly & Partners Lawyers
REASONS FOR DECISION:
applicant, The Proprietors Units Plan 98/014, is a body corporate established
Unit Titles Act 1975
for a strata complex comprising 26 units
at 68 Marina Boulevard, Cullen Bay, in Darwin (referred to herein as the
all material times the 26 units were owned by seven individual persons (natural
or corporate), each of which was a member of the
Body Corporate. Nineteen of
those units had one owner (Arenseear Pty Ltd represented by Mr Rob
Blenkinship),
two units had a
single owner (Mr Adam Gollow), and the remaining five units were individually
owned. The Chair of the Body Corporate is Mr Victor Harris, who owns one
complex is managed by Whittles Body Corporate Management Pty Ltd, which was
appointed to that role for a three year term from
1 October 2022 to 30 September
At all material times the
Whittles strata manager was Mr Carl Carlsund.
respondent, KS & RRR Pty Ltd, is the current owner of unit 3. Its directors
are Mr Rui (or Ruis) Mu and Ms L Mu.
19 April 2022 the former owner of unit 3 leased it for commercial purposes, the
“Permitted Use” being “Body Piercing
and Tattoo Studio”,
with two persons as joint tenants. The term of the lease is five years from 2
May 2022 to 1 May 2027 (with
no option to renew). The rent is $3,750.00 per
month (ie $45,000.00 per year).
lease was extant when KS & RRR Pty Ltd purchased unit 3 as an
investment (in around June/July 2022); it then replaced the
former owner as the
landlord of the lease.
commercial lease of unit 3 as a tattoo studio had insurance ramifications for
the Body Corporate (and in turn for the
particularly an increase
of $21,814.61 in the annual cost (for the year to 8 February 2024) for
insuring the strata complex through
a different
The total annual cost was
$78,704.61, as compared to an estimated $56,890.00 if there was no tattoo
increased cost of $21,814.61 was not foreseen by the Body Corporate when the
lease was granted in May 2022, and was not known
KS & RRR Pty Ltd when it purchased unit 3 in around June/July
2022 (after the grant of the
The Body Corporate (and
Mr Mu and Mr Harris) was first apprised of this issue on or about
20 December 2022 when its then insurer,
CHU, refused further cover given
the tattoo studio in unit 3
with all seven members informed of the increased cost at an extraordinary
general meeting on 22 December 2022. Nor was the
increased cost known to Mr
Blenkinship when Arenseear Pty Ltd subsequently purchased 19 units in the
complex from a former
Unit Titles Act 1975
the full insurance premium is
apportioned to each unit by reference to its “unit entitlement”
) as compared to the “aggregate value” of all 26
units of the strata complex,
unless by “unanimous resolution” each unit owner (or member) agrees
(s 36(4)(b)).
UEV for unit 3 may be expressed as
meaning that if the
‘default’ position in
KS & RRR Pty Ltd is liable to pay 14.9% of the increased cost
of $21,814.61 – being $3,250.38 (rounded
pursuant to
, the Body Corporate claims that at a general meeting
on 16 March 2023 all unit owners unanimously resolved (
resolution 2
the increased cost of $21,814.61 would be wholly apportioned to unit 3 –
being an increased liability to KS & RRR
$18,564.23 (ie $21,814.61 minus $3,250.38). The resolution has continued effect
in future years for increased insurance
costs insofar as they relate to the
(current) tattoo studio tenancy of unit 3.
2 made no change regarding the remainder of the insurance cost ($56,890.00); it
continues to be apportioned between units
by reference to UEV (albeit under
rather than
The quantum of that apportionment is not in
dispute, albeit that its claimed legal basis (resolutions 2 and 3) is
challenged.
KS & RRR Pty
Ltd disputes, and has not paid, the increased insurance cost. Accordingly, by
application dated 24 November 2023
(as amended on 18 January 2024), and pursuant
and (4A)(a) of the
Unit Titles Act
, the Body Corporate claimed the outstanding “sum of $22,719.00 or
such other amount” determined to be the “contribution
or “debt” due “as at 18 January
“debt” of $22,719.00 comprises the “Admin Insurance Premium
Contribution” of $7,573.00 for three quarters,
as per invoices issued on
17 March 2023, 1 June 2023, and 4 September
KS & RRR Pty
Ltd denies the claim on the basis that resolution 2 was never unanimously
agreed, or was qualified by a letter of
commitment and assurance dated
16 March 2023 which was drafted and signed by Mr Carlsund and countersigned
or endorsed by all members
at the general meeting on that date. The letter was
drafted, and signed, immediately prior to the vote on resolution
letter is said by KS & RRR Pty Ltd to require the reversal of
resolution 2 at a future Body Corporate meeting particularly
if it is unable to
either: (i) recover the increased cost of $21,814.61 from its tattoo studio
tenants; or (ii) evict the tenants.
If so the ‘default’
position in
would be restored, with KS & RRR Pty Ltd
liable to pay a “contribution” of $3,250.38 (rounded up) rather than
full increased cost.
Body Corporate said the letter contained no such “promise”, and was
not an “enticement” to induce KS &
RRR Pty Ltd to
support resolution 2. Rather the letter was merely a letter of
“gentlemen’s agreement” about a “very, very hot
topic”, which did not legally bind the Body Corporate
or the members to
reverse resolution 2.
purpose was to give KS & RRR Pty Ltd “some
confidence” that resolution 2 was not “necessarily set in
and that “there was more road that could be travelled
depending on what happened down the track” vis-à-vis
& RRR Pty Ltd recovering the increased cost from the
tenants or evicting them.
that time the question of liability could be discussed at a future meeting where
members had “liberty” to decide whether
or not to rescind or vary
the resolution, provided that KS & RRR Pty Ltd had done
everything it could to either recover the increased
cost from its tenants, or
evict them for breach of the
related (special) resolutions were said to have been (unanimously) passed at the
meeting on 16 March 2023
allocate up to $15,000.00 to cover
KS & RRR Pty Ltd’s “reasonable costs”
if the tattoo studio lease
ended – provided that
KS & RRR Pty Ltd “used best endeavours to ensure the
Tenant has vacated the tenancy [of unit
3] as soon as practicable”
resolution 1
); and (ii) amend the Body Corporate’s budget to
reflect the allocation of $15,000.00 (in resolution 1) and the increased
cost, including by increasing and determining unit contributions for
the Body Corporate’s “Administration Fund”
to “reflect
the apportionment terms agreed to in Motion 2 [ie resolution 2]”
underlying premise of these three resolutions, based on “advice”
obtained by the Body Corporate, was that –
upon becoming liable in full
for the increased insurance cost, and pursuant to the lease of unit 3
– KS & RRR Pty Ltd could
recover that cost from its
tattoo studio tenants, either as an outgoing under cl 10.1(a) of the lease or
pursuant to an obligation
or indemnity under cl 18.4 or 18.5; or evict the
tenants if the cost was
not paid (ie due to breach of the
If the latter, the
increased insurance cost would lapse – because the tattoo studio in unit 3
had ceased. This underlying premise
of the three resolutions was legally
“advice” also suggested eviction because the tattoo studio usage had
not been approved under the
Planning Act 1999
, an omission
which the tenants rectified such that that suggestion became moot.
the reasons which follow, the Body Corporate’s claim cannot be sustained,
and must be dismissed.
the evidence demonstrates that on 16 March 2023 Mr Mu (on behalf of
KS & RRR Pty Ltd) gave only qualified support for resolution
2, namely that it would be reversed on “request” particularly if the
increased insurance cost of $21,814.61 could not
be recovered as an outgoing, or
an obligation or indemnity, from its tattoo studio tenants, or they could not be
evicted. This proviso
on KS & RRR Pty Ltd’s support was
wholly unsurprising. The letter of commitment and assurance to
KS & RRR Pty Ltd confirms
that Mr Mu’s support for
resolution 2 was qualified. The Body Corporate’s failure to record this
qualification and include
the letter in its minutes of the meeting on
16 March 2023 breaches regulatory requirements, and requires
rectification.
contrary position of other unit owners who gave evidence (Mr Harris, Mr
Blenkinship and Mr Gollow), supported by Mr Carlsund (who
drafted the
letter), that the letter had no legal effect and was merely a letter of
“comfort” and a “gentlemen’s
agreement” does not
accord with its text, and also evinces a lack of objectivity and a serious
misunderstanding of KS &
RRR Pty Ltd’s position. At
least, there was no unanimity in the members’ consideration and
understanding of resolution
2 at the meeting on 16 March 2023.
factual finding means that resolution 2 was not carried at the meeting (since
unanimity was required), and thus is not in force.
The contrary record in the
Body Corporate’s minutes requires rectification.
follows that resolution 3 miscarried and is void due to non-compliance with
Unit Titles Act 1975
because, in reliance on
resolution 2, it purportedly altered the ‘default’ position in that
provision whereby “determine[d]”
contributions are apportioned
amongst members by reference to the UEV of each
That purported alteration
can only be valid if resolution 2 was unanimously carried (and is valid) ,which
case. Again, the contrary record in the Body Corporate’s
minutes requires
rectification.
only six working days’ written notice was given to members of the meeting
on 16 March 2023, and its proposed resolutions
– particularly nos 1, 2 and
3, being related or “interconnected” resolutions which were part of
This contravened the
legislative mandate that there be 21 working days’ notice of a unanimous
resolution (ie resolution 2)
and 14 working days’ notice
for other resolutions (ie resolutions 1
Additionally, there
was no notice at all of the letter of commitment and assurance dated 16 March
2023 which qualified resolution
2, and was drafted during the meeting.
substantial contravention of the legislative mandate was not merely
“technical”
that the resolutions were “not
invalidated”.
Nor can the
mandate be said to have been unanimously
The issues raised were
legally complex, with the members having markedly different interests. It was
incumbent on the Body Corporate
to ensure that each member had sufficient time
to carefully consider the resolutions (including in light of legal advice),
particularly
by fully complying with the regulatory time periods. That did not
Body Corporate’s omission to do so, and conduct of the meeting,
significantly contributed to injustice by limiting the capacity
KS & RRR Pty Ltd to obtain legal advice about the
resolutions – particularly the “advice”, and incorrect
(that KS & RRR Pty Ltd could recover the increased
insurance cost of $21,814.61 from the tenants, or evict them), on
resolutions were based. Moreover the Body Corporate provided no opportunity at
all to KS & RRR Pty Ltd to obtain legal
advice about the
letter of commitment and assurance which was drafted, and signed, during the
meeting (immediately prior to the vote
on resolution 2).
Accordingly,
in my view, resolutions 1, 2 and 3 are void ab initio due to contravention of
the notice requirements in cl 30(1)(b)(i)
and (ii) of Schedule 1 of the
Titles (Management Modules) Regulations
since resolutions 2 and 3 were never carried and/or are void, the Body Corporate
has not yet given “notice” under
Unit Titles Act
of a determined “contribution” for the “Admin
Insurance Premium Contribution” (of $7,573.00 for unit 3) which
specified in the three quarterly invoices issued to
KS & RRR Pty Ltd on 17 March 2023, 1 June 2023, and
4 September 2023
(in sum being $22,719.00).
This non-compliance
renders each invoice invalid (at least insofar as the invoices
concern that item), and means there is no “recoverable debt”
$22,719.00 which may be recovered by proceedings in the Tribunal under
Small Claims Act 2016
follows that the application must be
19 April 2022 the former owner of unit 3 leased it for commercial purposes, the
“Permitted Use” being “Body Piercing
and Tattoo Studio”,
with two persons as joint tenants. Hitherto unit 3 was occupied, and presumably
leased, as an office by
the Cullen Bay Marina Management Corporation.
term of the lease is five years from 2 May 2022 to 1 May 2027 (with no option to
renew). The rent is $3,750.00 per month (ie $45,000.00
the time of grant on 2 May 2022 the approved use for unit 3 under the
Planning Act 1999
was for office purposes, which did not
include the commercial provision to the public of tattooing or body
There was no
application at that time to obtain approval under that statute for this altered
use of unit 3.
KS & RRR Pty
Ltd purchased unit 3 as an investment (in around June/July 2022), at which time
the lease was extant. Accordingly
KS & RRR Pty Ltd replaced
the former owner as the landlord of the
24 November 2022, prior to being apprised of the increased insurance cost due to
the tattoo studio, the Body Corporate held an
annual general meeting. It was
attended by two members (the Chair, Mr Harris, and Mr Gollow, as well as the
strata manager, Mr Carlsund),
meaning that there was no
In this circumstance the
meeting proceeded with several interim resolutions passed, which were
subsequently notified to other members
and confirmed pursuant to the process in
cl 32 of Schedule 1 of the
Unit Titles (Management Modules) Regulations
such resolution (motion no 3) was to appoint Whittles as the strata manager for
a (backdated) three year term from 1 October 2022
to 30 September
The evidence did not
disclose the identity of the strata manager (if any) prior to 1 October
2022, particularly in May 2022 when
the tattoo studio lease of unit 3 was
no 7 proposed that a licensed valuer be engaged to provide an Insurance
Valuation Report for the strata complex buildings,
which would subsequently be
adopted on receipt. The meeting minutes note that the last such report was
obtained in 2013, at which
time the replacement cost of the buildings was
$4,575,000.00. This motion, and proposal, was rejected (meaning that there was
interim resolution, and thus no subsequent confirmation of that
resolution).
a related motion, no 8, entitled “Insurance” was passed. It proposed
that the “current insurance coverage
be reviewed and added to and/or
adjusted” by reference to quotes arranged by Whittles from an established
broker, insurer and
underwriting agency. The meeting minutes note that the
“Body Corporate is currently negotiating the insurance
no 9 proposed that the “attached administrative fund budget” for the
financial year ending on 30 September 2023
be “approved and
adopted”. The total unit contributions of $67,610.00 were “the same
as the previous budget”.
It was expected that the cost of renewed
insurance would be $49,000.00; that is, the Body Corporate and its members were
aware that the leased tattoo studio in unit 3 would cause
insurance difficulties (ie the insurer’s withdrawal of future cover,
an increased insurance cost from an alternative
This was easily the
largest expense, being about 58% of the Body Corporate’s budgeted annual
expenditure of $84,262.00.
motion recorded that the total contributions of $67,610.00 would be apportioned
amongst members by reference to the UEV of each
unit (ie the
‘default’ position in
Unit Titles Act
), and paid by quarterly instalments in advance from 1 October
2022. The UEV for unit 3 was identified in the budget as equating to
(ie 14.9% of the total contributions), with a quarterly contribution of
$2,518.00 (ie an annual contribution of
$10,072.00).
This motion was
no 11 authorised Whittles, from time to time, to recover overdue contributions
from members, including by “instructing
a debt recovery company to
initiate legal
proceedings”.
This motion
was passed.
noted in relation to motion no 8 (and possibly as part of a formal review),
Whittles arranged for the renewal of insurance. By
email dated 20 December 2022
to Mr Carlsund, MGA Insurance Group confirmed that the Body
Corporate’s then insurer, CHU, had
refused further cover given the tattoo
studio in unit 3.
the Body Corporate and its then members (including
KS & RRR Pty Ltd) had not foreseen that insurance may be
the premium significantly increased due to the tattoo studio lease,
this is a known issue for strata complexes particularly where
there is mixed use
(eg commercial and residential lots, as is the case here). Other commercial
activities which may increase the
cost of strata insurance reportedly include
tobacconists (noting the current illegal trade in tobacco) and massage
that respect
the strata insurance cost is “influenced by the highest risk tenant”
(eg a mechanic in an industrial duplex,
as compared to an adjoining lot used as
an office).
New South Wales strata legislation includes a process whereby a lot owner may
consent to meet the cost of an increased strata premium
which derives from the
use of that lot, with review by the NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal where
a lot owner “unreasonably”
In Victoria, pursuant
to a 2021 amendment, an owners corporation for a strata complex may pass on an
excess insurance premium to
a lot owner if it “solely relates to a lot
owner’s lot”.
legislative process does not exist in the Northern Territory under the
Titles Act 1975
also advised Mr Carlsund on 20 December 2022 that, if there was no tattoo
studio, Body Corporate insurance for the following year
would be at an increased
“indicative” cost of
$53,570.00.
Marina Operator
Liability Insurance of $3,320.00 was added, giving a final estimated cost of
$56,890.00 if there was no tattoo
– as compared to
the budgeted sum of $49,000.00 which was tabled at the Body Corporate meeting on
24 November 2022.
Carlsund forwarded this email and advice to Mr Mu (of unit 3) and the Chair, Mr
Harris, later that day.
days later, on 22 December 2022, the Body Corporate held an extraordinary
general meeting to discuss insurance (particularly CHU’s
provide further cover), which was attended by all seven owners of the
Pursuant to
Unit Titles Act 1975
and by “unanimous
resolution”, the members resolved that the Body Corporate would not insure
the buildings and other
improvements for their replacement value against a broad
range of risks identified in
for a period of
which the Body Corporate would source an alternative
default position under
is that a Body Corporate must insure against
those risks. The Body Corporate’s resolution meant that it was not in
that provision, but also exposed it to significant risk (during
Darwin’s wet season) for an uninsured period of “up to
Body Corporate secured an alternative insurer (One Underwriting Pty Ltd) well
within that 90 day period, at a total annual cost
– as compared
to an estimated $56,890.00 if there was no tattoo
This increased cost of
$21,814.61 was not foreseen by the Body Corporate when the lease was granted in
May 2022, or by KS & RRR
Pty Ltd when it purchased unit
3 in around June/July 2022 (after the grant of the
email to Mr Mu dated 6 February 2023 (copied to Mr Blenkinship, Mr Gollow and
Mr Carlsund), Mr Harris provided a comparative breakdown
of the cost of
insurance including that there was an estimated increased cost of $21,814.61 due
to the tattoo studio in unit 3. Mr
Harris advised that One Underwriting Pty
Ltd was the only firm to offer insurance with the tattoo studio in situ, and
that its offer
expired on 8 February 2023 (after which the premium would
substantially increase).
Body Corporate accepted the offer and secured insurance from One Underwriting
Pty Ltd for the 12 month period from 8 February
8 March 2023 Mr Carlsund gave written notice of a general meeting on
16 March 2023, principally to increase and apportion members’
contributions to cover the increased insurance cost. The notice identified three
related motions about that topic, as follows (referred
to herein as
resolution 1
resolution 2
Insurance - Business Interruption. (Special Resolution).
A motion is passed by a special resolution if at least two thirds of the
votes cast are in favour of the motion and the unit entitlements
of the lots for
the votes against the motion do not exceed 25% of the total unit
entitlements.
That the Body Corporate agree to expenditure of up to $15,000 (in whole or in
of reasonable costs incurred by the Owner of Unit 3, if the Tenant in
Unit 3 vacates the tenancy due to changes made to the Budget
and the Owner of
Unit 3 has used best endeavours to ensure the Tenant has vacated the tenancy as
soon as practicable.
Record your vote on the voting summary.
Motion 2. Contributions - Insurance Fund. (Unanimous Resolution)
A motion is passed by a unanimous resolution if the number of votes in favour
of the motion is equal to the total number of lots.
That the Body Corporate agree to apportion the costs of the insurance premium
in a formula other than by UEV. That formula being:
Quoted cost of an insurance
premium offered without the current Unit 3 tenant in place to be apportioned by
UEV and the difference
between the insurance premium paid and an insurance
premium offered to be apportioned to Unit 3.
Record your vote on the voting summary.
Motion 3. Amend the Budget. (Special Resolution)
A motion is passed by a special resolution if at least two thirds of the
votes cast are in favour of the motion and the unit entitlements
of the lots for
the votes against the motion do not exceed 25% of the total unit
entitlements.
That, in accordance with the provisions of the
Unit Titles Act
Corporate agree to amend the budget to increase the Administrative Fund
contributions to meet its likely expenditure.
Contributions under this budget are increased from the previous budget with
total contributions of $104,327.41 for the financial year
ending 30/09/23. The
increase is effective from 1/4/2023.
The annual Administration Fund contribution payable by each Unit holder is to
be paid by quarterly installments, as from 01/04/2023,
each always in advance of
the due date.
Record your vote on the voting summary.
“interconnected” resolutions recognise that
KS & RRR Pty Ltd may incur financial liability if the tenants
consequently
vacated the premises (eg lost
Accordingly, pursuant to
resolution 1, the Body Corporate gave advance authorisation to contributing to
such reasonable costs as
may be incurred – capped at $15,000.00.
meeting notice of 8 March 2023 was accompanied by a revised budget (as per
resolution 3), which was identical to the budget considered
at the annual
general meeting on 22 November 2022 excepting changes relating to insurance
and unit contributions (as per resolution
Both budgets included a
standard line item entitled “Contributions” for the Body
Corporate’s “Income”,
which was respectively recorded as
$67,610.00 on 22 November 2022 and $68,386.80 on 8 March 2023. It was met by all
members, as apportioned
by reference to a unit’s UEV. The latter revised
budget included an additional line item for “Income” entitled
“Contributions -
Insurance Fund” which totalled $50,259.61.
There was also a new section entitled “Calculation of Levies” which
what was said to be a “Once-off” shortfall contribution for
the “increased insurance premium” in the sum
of $21,815.00 which was
allocated solely to unit 3.
nomenclature for the line items accurately identifies their character as
“contributions” – being a term used
Unit Titles Act
, whereby a Body Corporate recovers the cost of various expenses from
its members. One of those expenses is the insurance premium
for which a Body
Corporate is liable to an insurer under a contract. The members are not party to
that contract, and do not themselves
incur an insurance premium. Rather,
pursuant to the legislative scheme, the members are required to contribute to
that and other
expenses incurred by the Body Corporate.
conceptual distinction between an “insurance premium” incurred by
the Body Corporate, and a “contribution”
required of a member to
meet that and other expenses incurred by the Body Corporate (combined with
“contributions” from
other members), informs the construction and
effect of cl 18.4 and 18.5 of the lease (as discussed below).
revised budget incorrectly identified anticipated income (particularly from unit
contributions) as $104,327.41, being the (erroneous)
figure also stated in
resolution 3 as the “total contributions” for the financial
year ending on
30 September 2023.
the hearing Whittles explained that, inadvertently and due to
“administrative oversight”, this and several related
figures in the
revised budget (and in resolution 3) were “presented in error due to the
legacy of previously created budget
variants” in other documentation which
explored different insurance scenarios for earlier consideration by the Body
Corporate’s
correct figure for anticipated income was $76,486.10, which was specified in a
budget forwarded to unit owners by Mr Carlsund
on 21 March 2023 (together with
the minutes of the meeting on 16 March 2023) – but with no written advice
that this and related
corrections had been
or that there would be a
formal correction of the documentation by resolution at a subsequent general
resolutions reflected “advice” that the Body Corporate had no power
|take any action against the tattoo studio tenants, either to
recover the increased insurance cost or evict them from unit
This aspect of the
“advice” was accurate. Only the landlord (ie
KS & RRR Pty Ltd) can enforce the unit 3 lease, either
recovering incurred costs (assuming that the lease so provides) or evicting the
tenants if there is a breach. However due to the
‘default’ position
Unit Titles Act 1975
KS & RRR Pty Ltd was not (fully) liable for the increased
insurance cost (ie $21,814.61) as part of its levied “contribution”,
and thus could not recover that amount from the
Accordingly
the purpose of the resolutions (particularly resolution 2) was to displace the
‘default’ position in
Unit Titles Act
whereby the increased insurance cost (ie $21,814.61) is apportioned to
each unit by reference to its UEV. Instead unit 3 (ie
RRR Pty Ltd) would become fully liable for the increased
cost of $21,814.61 as part of its levied “contribution”, with
to it being recovered from the tenants. The other 25 units in the complex would
not incur any of that increased cost in their
“contributions”, and
thus would be in the same position as if the tattoo studio lease had never been
that respect the Body Corporate’s “advice” (as generally
disclosed in evidence or submissions) was that, upon
being levied in full for
the increased insurance cost (via resolutions 2 and 3),
KS & RRR Pty Ltd could either (pursuant to the
unit 3): (i) recover the increased cost of $21,814.61 from its tattoo
studio tenants, either as an outgoing under cl 10.1(a)
or pursuant to an
obligation or indemnity under cl 18.4 or 18.5; or (ii) evict the
tenants if the cost was not
Another basis for
potential eviction identified by the Body Corporate was that the tattoo studio
usage had not been approved under
Planning Act 1999
omission which the joint tenants promptly rectified by around July 2023
such that this prospect became moot.
KS & RRR Pty Ltd would be able to recover the increased cost
of $21,814.61 from its tenants, or evict them, was an underlying
premise of the
three “interconnected” resolutions. However, after the three
resolutions were (purportedly) passed at
the meeting on 16 March 2023,
KS & RRR Pty Ltd ascertained that this premise was
that respect at the hearing Mr Mu’s “understanding” was that
legally he could pass on a “portion”
of the increased insurance cost
“to the tenants, but not the full amount”
(ie $21,814.61).
position accords with the view, which I accept, that pursuant to cl 10.1(a) of
the lease KS & RRR Pty Ltd can recover
“Outgoings”
from the tenants on the basis that
this defined term
includes a “variation” to the levied “contribution” for
unit 3 under
Unit Titles Act 1975
this default provision was operative and – considered objectively –
was in the contemplation of the parties to
the lease as per its text when it was
executed on 19 April 2022.
Specifically
cl 10.1(a) of the lease provides that KS & RRR Pty Ltd
must be reimbursed by its tenants for (inter alia) “Body
Corporate Levies:
$1,112.67/month (subject to variation)” (as per the definition of
“Outgoings” in cl 1.1 and 10.1(a)),
which includes a
“contribution” to meet the cost of an increased insurance premium
where that “contribution”
necessarily derives from the grant of the
unit 3 lease. This construction means that, in Mr Mu’s words at the
hearing, KS &
RRR Pty Ltd can recover a
“portion” of the increased insurance cost of $21,814.61 –
which the Tribunal calculates
“portion” is plainly contemplated to be part of the
“Outgoings” which the tenants must reimburse under
cl 10.1(a), since
it is a “variation” which must occur under the default provision for
“contributions” in
in my view a “variation” such that the levied
“contribution” for unit 3 includes the full increased
insurance cost
(ie $21,814.61) is not a recoverable outgoing under cl 10.1(a), unless
there was prior disclosure to the tenants that
KS & RRR Pty Ltd would subsequently join in a unanimous
resolution to that effect under
Unit Titles
Section 36(4)(b)
is only engaged if
KS & RRR Pty Ltd positively agrees, after the execution
of the lease, to be levied in full for that cost (ie
as part of a unanimous
resolution by the members) – being an action which directly affects the
tenants’ interests. Absent
such disclosure, it cannot objectively be said
that the parties contemplated, or agreed, that
KS & RRR Pty Ltd would take that
action after the lease
was executed. Specifically, in this circumstance the full increased cost would
not be a “variation”
to the outgoing which the tenants must
reimburse under cl 10.1(a) (properly construed).
construction – that the full increased insurance cost (ie $21,814.61)
is not a recoverable outgoing under cl 10.1(a)) –
is informed by, and
accords with the letter and spirit of, the
Business Tenancies (Fair Dealings) Act 2003
Its legislative object is to ensure that a party is not surprised, after
execution, by an unexpected cost or event. To that end
requires that
there be disclosure of prescribed information prior to the execution of a
commercial lease, which must include the
“estimated outgoings for the
current outgoings year” – including “Insurance” –
on the basis that
actual outgoings are “calculated and reconciled”
at the end of that year.
10.1(a) must be construed in that legislative context.
former owner’s disclosure under that statute was not in evidence, however
it was not suggested that the tenants had prior
notice that the unit 3 landlord
would, after execution, voluntarily accept an increased
“contribution” under
Unit Titles Act
with a view to recovering that increase from the tenants – or
evicting them. The evidence, including that the Body Corporate
apprised of insurance difficulties on or about 20 December 2022 (when CHU
refused further cover), and that the increased
“unbeknownst” to the
accords with the
that there was no such disclosure. I proceed on that
Body Corporate separately said that, “on any reading” of cl 18.4 of
the lease, the increased cost of $21,814.61 (if
wholly apportioned to
KS & RRR Pty Ltd under
s 36(4)(b))
, “absolutely
can be” recovered by KS & RRR Pty Ltd from the
KS & RRR Pty Ltd submitted, by reference to the opening words
of cl 18.4, that the Body Corporate’s position on this point
incorrect because (properly construed) the tenants had not “do[ne]
anything” which may affect insurance or increase
a premium; the
tenants’ only action was to continue to operate the tattoo studio, being
the “Permitted Use” which
is expressly authorised by the
do not accept the Body Corporate’s construction of cl 18.4. As explained
above, conceptually there is a clear distinction
between an “insurance
premium” incurred by the Body Corporate under its own insurance policy,
and a “contribution”
required of a member pursuant to
(4)(b) – noting that the latter (ie a “contribution”) covers a
range of expenses, and only partially concerns
the Body Corporate’s
insurance expense. The Body Corporate is contractually liable to the insurer for
the former; a member
by statute is liable to the Body Corporate for the latter
as a “debt” under
Clause 18.4 expressly concerns an
“increase” in an “insurance premium”. It does not in its
terms address
a member’s liability from time to time to pay a levied
“contribution”.
Body Corporate further submitted that the question of whether
KS & RRR Pty Ltd can legally recover the increased cost of
from its tenants “is all completely irrelevant to our
case”, which is simply “that there was a unanimous resolution
reallocate the [increased] insurance, which Mr Mu agreed to”. According to
the Body Corporate, this bare fact (as recorded
in the minutes and as attested
by its witnesses) meant that KS & RRR Pty Ltd must be taken
to have agreed that it would bear
that increased cost – regardless of
whether that cost could be recovered from its tenants, and without a broader
of the circumstances including the Body Corporate’s
“advice” which informed the drafting of the three resolutions
the members’ understanding of their
do not accept this submission. The question of whether each of the Body
Corporate members unanimously resolved to apportion the
increased cost of
$21,814.61 to KS & RRR Pty Ltd (with it having no legal
power to reverse such an apportionment) is a question
of fact. It can only be
determined by considering the full circumstances which pertain to the Body
Corporate meeting which occurred
on 16 March 2023, including the
understanding of each member (and attendee) as to what was being voted upon.
This requires an appreciation
of the underlying premise of the Body
Corporate’s “advice” and the three resolutions which informed
the members’
understanding, namely that if passed
KS & RRR Pty Ltd would be able to recover the increased cost
of $21,814.61 from its tenants,
or evict them. The textual record of the three
resolutions in the minutes is relevant, but not necessarily conclusive, to
determining
that factual question.
follows from the above, in my view, that the three “interconnected”
resolutions were based on an incorrect premise,
namely that – if
resolution 2 was unanimously supported – KS & RRR Pty
Ltd would be able to recover the increased
cost of $21,814.61 from its tenants,
or evict them. That mistaken and misconceived premise derived from the Body
Corporate’s
“advice”, on which the members relied when
supporting the resolutions (in the case of KS & RRR Pty Ltd,
being qualified
support for resolution
least the absolute confidence which underpinned the Body Corporate’s
“advice” to its members was seriously misplaced;
it certainly cannot
be said to be clearcut, legally, that KS & RRR Pty Ltd could
fully recover the increased cost, or evict its
tenants. In turn this misplaced
confidence apparently informed an unjustified level of certainty and conviction
amongst the Body
Corporate’s witnesses that the status quo for insurance
which pertained prior to the tattoo studio lease could readily be restored.
was reflected in their evidence, including as set out below.
appreciated, and from a practical perspective, it was always likely that the
unit 3 tenants would resist paying the increased insurance
cost, and any attempt
to evict – as in fact occurred. The increased cost of $21,814.61 equates
to 48.48% of the annual rent
of $45,000.00; no commercial tenant could
realistically be expected to readily accept such an impost unless it was the
prior disclosure and/or clearly stated in the lease or in
legislation.
could it realistically be expected that KS & RRR Pty Ltd
would simply agree, without qualification, that 48.48% of the gross
profit from its investment property (unit 3) would be forgone to meet the Body
Corporate’s increased insurance cost
– especially since
KS & RRR Pty Ltd was not apprised of that possible cost when
it purchased unit 3. There was, at least,
no legal certainty that that lost
rental profit could readily be recovered from the unit 3 tenants if they
objected. Moreover the
cost of litigation, if KS & RRR Pty
Ltd were to try and enforce payment or evict, would quickly exceed the Body
Corporate’s
capped contribution of $15,000.00 (which in terms does not
concern the cost of litigation for enforcement of the payment) and the
(annual) insurance cost of $21,814.61.
Consequently,
as I conclude below, it is wholly unsurprising that on 16 March 2023
KS & RRR Pty Ltd gave only qualified support
for resolution
2, namely that the obligation to meet the increased insurance cost of $21,814.61
would be reversed on “request”
by KS & RRR Pty
Ltd – particularly if that cost could not be recovered as an outgoing, or
an obligation or indemnity, from
its tattoo studio tenants, or they could not be
notice dated 8 March 2023 gave members only six working days’ written
notice of the general meeting on 16 March 2023, and
its proposed resolutions
– particularly nos 1, 2 and 3. This contravened the legislative mandate
that there be 21 working days’
notice of a unanimous resolution
(ie resolution 2) and 14 working days’ notice for other
resolutions (ie resolutions 1
Additionally, there
was no notice at all of the letter of commitment and assurance dated 16 March
2023 which Mr Mu and KS & RRR
Pty Ltd took as qualifying
resolution 2 (a position which accorded with its text). The letter was drafted
during the meeting, and
signed or endorsed by all attendees immediately prior to
that resolution being put (as discussed below).
omission to comply with the regulatory time periods occurred in circumstances
where the resolutions concerned issues which were
legally complex, with the Body
Corporate members having markedly different interests. The object of the
legislative periods is to
ensure that there is sufficient time for each member
to consider resolutions, including by obtaining legal advice. Contrary to the
understanding expressed by the Body Corporate’s witnesses at the hearing,
the interests of KS & RRR Pty Ltd were not “very
closely aligned” with other members such that all could be taken to be
working “collectively together” to achieve
‘default’ operation of
Unit Titles Act 1975
establishes otherwise.
my view, in the circumstances, the non-compliance with regulatory time periods
was a substantial contravention of the legislative
mandate (ie not merely
“technical non-compliance”), such that resolutions 1, 2 and 3 are
void ab initio due to contravention
of the notice requirements in cl 30(1)(b)(i)
and (ii) of Schedule 1 of the
Unit Titles (Management Modules) Regulations
(as discussed below). There is no evidence that the members considered
this question, or agreed to waive the notice
requirement.
Wednesday 15 March 2023 Mr Carlsund forwarded a “General Meeting
Reminder” to all unit owners about the meeting scheduled
for the following
day, which encouraged any member who was unable to attend to participate by
completing the “attached proxy
form with the voting summary on the
reminder letter enclosed the meeting notice and supporting documentation
previously sent to members on 8 March 2023, including
the proposed
resolutions and the proposed budget (and a proxy voting
These documents were
identical to the proposed resolutions and proposed budget as previously provided
on 8 March 2023, with the anticipated
income (particularly from contributions)
incorrectly identified as $104,327.41.
on Wednesday 15 March 2023 Mr and Mrs Compain (who own one unit) forwarded
Mr Carlsund a completed proxy form which appointed
a representative of
Whittles as their proxy (a role fulfilled by Mr Carlsund), together with a
completed “Proxy Voting Summary”
form which stated their support for
all three motions (ie resolutions 1 to
general meeting commenced at 1 pm on Thursday 16 March 2023, and finished about
an hour later at 2.12 pm. Five unit owners (or
their representatives) physically
attended the meeting: Mr Harris, Mr Blenkinship, Mr Gollow, Mr Seth
Chin (the then owner of one
unit), and Mr Mu (who arrived about 10 minutes
The owner of another
unit, Lay & Sons Organisation Pty Ltd represented by Mr Chris Lay,
attended the meeting by telephone. Mr
Carlsund attended as the proxy for Mr
and Mrs Compain, meaning that all unit owners could vote regarding the
resolutions. Mr Carlsund
also attended in his capacity as the strata
meeting was formally chaired by Mr Harris, but with Mr Carlsund’s
assistance; in Mr Harris’s words, “Carl ran
At the hearing
Mr Carlsund said, and I accept, that the resolutions were discussed in
their numeric order, and voted upon when the
discussion for each resolution was
completed (whilst accepting that there was significant overlap in the discussion
of the three
resolutions due to them being “interconnected”) –
at which time Mr Carlsund formally read out the resolution, and
called for and
recorded the votes, with each member asked “individually” whether
the resolution was supported.
Harris and Mr Blenkinship agreed that this occurred, although Mr Mu
recalled that the “meeting was mostly a conversation
between me, Victor
[Harris] and Carl [Carlsund] about the insurance premiums”, with “no
resolutions”.
turns on this difference in recollection.
is not uncommon for a small entity with only seven members (principally due to
19 of the 26 units then having the same owner),
there was a level of informality
in the conduct of the meeting which may have contributed to some
misunderstanding or confusion by
other attendees regarding
KS & RRR Pty Ltd’s position as expressed by Mr Mu.
was also some minimalism, and error (including regulatory non-compliance), in
the recording of the minutes. There was no mover
or seconder for any of the
and although the
minutes record that the budget (relating to resolution 3) was amended during the
meeting to provide for KS &
RRR Pty Ltd to pay the increased
annual cost of $21,840.61 in “four equal quarterly instalments”,
there was no formal
amending motion to facilitate that
The budget was
(purportedly) further amended after the meeting by Mr Carlsund and the
Committee, with that additional change included
in the minutes which were
distributed to members on 21 March 2023 – but without any written
explanation or notice that that
had occurred.
the principal error in the minutes was that there was no reference at all to a
letter of commitment and assurance to KS &
RRR Pty Ltd dated
16 March 2023 which was drafted and signed by Mr Carlsund during the meeting,
and countersigned or endorsed by
all “members
This occurred
immediately prior to the vote on resolution 2, after Mr Mu explicitly stated
that he was not “paying for the
full amount” of the increased cost
as per that resolution (see below). The text of the letter is reproduced below.
It was plainly
drafted in response to Mr Mu’s expressed position.
serious error occurred because the Body Corporate (and its witnesses)
incorrectly believed that the letter (which Whittles retained)
“limited relevance”, and was merely a letter of
“comfort”. Hence a copy of the letter, or any reference
not included in the minutes which Mr Carlsund forwarded to members on
2023. This was a breach of regulatory requirements, which
requires rectification.
Body Corporate’s position (and that of its witnesses) about the relevance
of the letter was incorrectly maintained up until,
and at, the hearing. The
letter was first produced to the Tribunal by KS & RRR Pty Ltd
on the first day of the hearing, with
the Body Corporate’s objection to
its receipt overruled.
that respect the Body Corporate’s position does not address or accord with
the objective criterion in
Evidence (National Uniform
Legislation) Act 2011
, which determines whether evidence is
“relevant”.
reference to that statutory criterion the letter is plainly
“relevant” since, if adduced, it “could rationally
(directly or indirectly) the assessment of the probability of the existence of a
fact in issue in the proceeding” –
namely whether
KS & RRR Pty Ltd endorsed the three resolutions in the form
stated in the Body Corporate’s minutes, as distinct
from giving only
qualified support (or no support) particularly for resolution 2.
Consequently,
far from being of “limited relevance”, the letter is integral to
appreciating what actually occurred at
the meeting, particularly the position
expressed by Mr Mu on behalf of KS & RRR Pty Ltd about the
three resolutions. This factual
question requires consideration of all the
circumstances, not merely whether Mr Mu formally voted in favour of each
resolution (particularly
resolution 2) – as the Body Corporate asserts,
and KS & RRR Pty Ltd denies.
quite apart from the evidence that KS & RRR Pty Ltd gave only
qualified support to the resolutions (set out below),
the letter in its terms
gives a “Commitment” and “assurance” to
KS & RRR Pty Ltd about future liability
for the “cost
of the insurance premium” – which concerns the same subject matter
as the resolutions (particularly
nos 2 and 3). The use of these (and
associated) words, without more, necessarily means that the letter is
the hearing Mr Mu explained that, prior to the meeting, he relied on his
daughter to “briefly” explain the proposed
resolutions since he does
not read English well.
process imparted sufficient understanding, together with his discussions with
other members (particularly Mr Harris) and Mr
Carlsund, for Mr Mu to appreciate
that – as drafted – resolution 2 displaced the ‘default’
position in
Unit Titles Act 1975
whereby the
increased insurance cost (ie $21,814.61) is apportioned to each unit by
reference to its UEV. Instead unit 3 (ie KS &
RRR Pty Ltd)
would be fully liable for the increased cost of $21,814.61, and this would be
the case regardless of whether that sum
was recovered from the tenants (or they
were evicted).
Mu said that, accordingly, he expressly told the meeting to the effect that
whilst willing to assist the other members about the
increased insurance cost,
KS & RRR Pty Ltd gave only qualified support for
resolution 2. The qualification was that resolution
2 would be reversed on
“request”, particularly if the increased insurance cost of
$21,814.61 could not be recovered under
the lease by
KS & RRR Pty Ltd as an outgoing, or an
obligation or
indemnity, from its tattoo studio tenants, or they could not be evicted. The
qualification was required because Mr Mu
(ie KS & RRR Pty Ltd) was not “paying for the
full amount” of the increased cost.
that respect, at the hearing Mr Mu
the committee [ie the general meeting], I don’t agree to vote yes to the
full amount that they’re going to pass
on to me, and unless – I will
try to help to pass on to the tenants – if the tenants refuse we’ll
go – we will hold another meeting. I’ll support
In the middle of the meeting they draft a letter, asked everyone to sign, and
I accepted and I will sign that letter unless we hold
another meeting if the
tenants refuse to pay for insurance, because I told them I’m not going to
pay for it. I’m not
paying for full amount.
I did not vote yes [to resolution 2]. ... I vote “No”. And then
Carl [Carlsund] draft a letter, because I think they said
that we had to
finalise about the insurance side of it before we can close the – close
the meeting.
I didn’t really understand it [ie the letter of commitment and
assurance], and then Victor [Harris] explained to me. And then
I said I will try
to pass the full amount of increase to the tenants, but if the tenants refuse we
will hold another meeting because
I’m not paying for it.
I did not vote yes [to resolution 2]. I would not vote against myself. ...
When I said “No”, that’s when the letter
was drafted [ie the
letter of commitment and assurance dated 16 March 2023].
Carlsund said that he drafted the letter of commitment and assurance after the
vote on resolution 1, but prior to the vote on resolution
2. Mr Carlsund
said that he did so in response to discussion between the members, but did not
recall who requested that the letter
be drafted (or the precise detail of the
discussion).
Mr Carlsund left
the meeting for “between five and 10 minutes” to draft the letter,
with another staff member then placing
it on Whittles
letterhead.
On returning to
the meeting Mr Carlsund read out the letter, and it was passed around for all to
read and sign.
letter was addressed to “The Owner – Unit 3” (ie
KS & RRR Pty Ltd), and dated 16 March 2023. It
stated (bold
in original):
[Letterhead, date, name and address]
Body Corporate Commitment to Unit 3
As the Body Corporate managers duly appointed we advise that the members
present at the General Meeting held on Thursday 16
agreed to provide the Owner of Unit 3 with the following assurance.
That the Body Corporate will meet for the purpose of amending the budget to
reallocate the difference in the cost of the insurance
premium to the Body
Corporate should the owner of Unit 3 request the meeting.
Yours faithfully
[Mr Carlsund’s handwritten signature affixed]
Carl Carlsund
Strata Manager
[Handwritten signatures of members physically present affixed]
Carlsund’s handwritten signature was affixed in the space above his name,
and the letter was countersigned by members in
handwriting underneath by Mr
Harris, Mr Blenkinship, Mr Chin, Mr Gollow and Mr Mu (who were
physically present). Mr Gollow recalled
that the letter was read out to
Mr Lay (who attended the meeting by telephone), in which respect the letter
records that it was supported
by the “members present” which
included Mr Lay.
letter was not legally drafted, and there was no opportunity for any member to
obtain legal advice about it – but its meaning
is plain enough. Considered
objectively and on a fair reading the letter is expressed to qualify resolution
2, since it gives a “Commitment”
and “assurance” to
KS & RRR Pty Ltd about the subject matter of that
resolution – which hitherto Mr Mu had
explicitly rejected.
“Commitment” is a “promise or firm decision to do
something”, and an “assurance” is a
particularly “a statement or promise intended to give someone
confidence”.
commitment and assurance was that, if requested, the Body Corporate would amend
“the budget to reallocate the difference
in the cost of the insurance
premium” – thus qualifying resolution 2, which otherwise could not
be revoked at KS &
RRR Pty Ltd’s instigation.
Specifically,
this was a commitment and assurance that the increased cost of $21,814.61 which
was apportioned to unit 3 via resolution
KS & RRR Pty Ltd could seek to recover that sum from its
tenants as an outgoing or indemnity, would be reallocated
and reversed if
requested – particularly if the tenants refused to pay. In that respect it
is plain from Mr Mu’s statements
at the meeting on 16 March 2023 (as
extracted above) that the letter was drafted in direct response to his position
RRR Pty Ltd was not prepared to fully pay the
increased cost of $21,814.61 – and thus would not support resolution 2 if
irrevocably had that effect.
the resolution of this proceeding is not determined by the objective meaning of
the letter of commitment and assurance dated
16 March 2023, or the alternative
meaning attributed to it by the Body Corporate and its witnesses. It is
sufficient to establish
that, insofar as Mr Mu (on behalf of
KS & RRR Pty Ltd) supported resolution 2 (and the
amended budget under resolution 3), he
did so in the belief that it was
qualified by the letter of commitment and assurance as outlined in the preceding
conclude below, as a finding of fact, that that occurred. That factual finding
is determinative of this proceeding in favour of
KS & RRR Pty Ltd. It means that there was no unanimity
in the members’ consideration and understanding of resolution 2
meeting on 16 March 2023. Accordingly that resolution was not carried and is not
in force, since unanimity was required.
Mu did not recall whether resolution 2 was formally put after the letter was
drafted and signed by Mr Carlsund and countersigned
or endorsed by all members
However all other
witnesses recalled that resolution 2 was put after the letter was drafted and
signed, and I accept that that occurred.
That is, whilst Mr Mu recalled saying
“No” to resolution 2, on his evidence (extracted above at [96]) this
to that resolution being formally put after the letter was drafted and
Subsequently,
when resolution 2 was formally put, and on the evidence as a whole, I accept
that Mr Mu supported it (on behalf of KS
& RRR Pty Ltd).
This was the evidence of all other witnesses. However, contrary to the belief of
those witnesses (see below),
I find that Mr Mu gave that support in the
understanding that the resolution was qualified by the letter of commitment and
on the basis that it had the legal effect outlined above.
such qualified support was given is wholly unsurprising. Legally,
KS & RRR Pty Ltd had everything to lose, and nothing to
gain, from supporting resolution 2 (unless with qualification). Mr Mu well knew
that was the case, and thus expressed concerns at
the meeting which resulted in
the drafting of the letter of commitment and assurance – which was then
signed immediately before
the formal vote on resolution 2.
formally, resolution 2 ought to have been amended to expressly incorporate the
qualification in the letter and adjourned for
consideration at a later meeting
(given that it “alter[ed] the nature” of the original resolution and
including so that
legal advice could be
this does not mean
that Mr Mu believed (contrary to his evidence and the circumstances) that it was
not qualified by the letter,
or that KS & RRR Pty Ltd
now gave unqualified support to that resolution – despite having rejected
its original form only
minutes earlier. As discussed above the meeting was
conducted with a level of informality; there was no mover or seconder for any
the motions,
(relating to resolution 3) was amended during the meeting without any formal
amending motion to facilitate that outcome, and the budget was (purportedly)
amended again after the meeting and circulated to members
on 21 March 2023
without any written explanation or notice that that had occurred.
is hardly surprising, including given this informality, that Mr Mu believed that
resolution 2 was qualified by the letter –
noting, also, that he is
not legally qualified or versed in meeting procedure. In that respect there is
no evidence, and it was not
suggested by the Body Corporate or any of its
witnesses, that Mr Mu was told of their position that – in Mr
words – the letter “has really little substance in my
and was merely a
letter of “comfort” with no legal effect. Contrary to Mr
Harris’s understanding it cannot be concluded,
in the circumstances of
this matter, that “Mr Mu in his casting of yes to the motion [ie
resolution 2] was fully aware”
that the increased cost of $21,814.61 would
be irrevocably allocated to
KS & RRR Pty Ltd.
The evidence demonstrates otherwise.
same observation applies to the evidence of other Body Corporate witnesses.
Mr Carlsund,
who drafted the letter, agreed in cross examination that from his perspective it
was merely a letter of “comfort”
which recorded that in future
KS & RRR Pty Ltd could “ask” the Body
Corporate to reallocate the increased cost to
all members by reference to UEV
– but was not a “promise” to do so. Mr Carlsund said in
relation to the letter
and resolution
needed to be made clear, the group wanted to make clear to the owner of unit 3
that there was more road that could be travelled
depending on what happened down
the track, so that the Body Corporate could meet again to discuss anything that
may potentially happen.
The idea was, that previously we’ve heard the word
“enticement” used, I don’t consider it an
“enticement”
at all. I would have thought it would be more about
giving the owner of unit 3 some confidence that the decision that’s just
that members can always come back to the Body Corporate
and, to open up, call a
meeting and open up discussion, and have a vote on pretty much any matter.
It was [drafted] at the request of the Body Corporate though as I’ve
said I can’t recall who, to provide the Body Corporate
with something to
be able to give to unit 3 to what I thought at the time to say we can come back
together and discuss any outcome
that is generated from this meeting. That
– that this document I provide to the Body Corporate so that they could
provide the
unit, the owners of unit 3, with the assurance, with the comfort,
with the knowledge that no matter what, or depending, or whatever
the outcome of
the meeting for him [ie Mr Mu] in real terms, the Body Corporate could meet
again to discuss it.
Carlsund’s appreciation of the meaning of the letter does not accord with
his use of the words “Commitment” and
“assurance” which,
as explained above, respectively mean a “promise or firm decision to do
something”, and
particularly “a statement or promise intended to give someone
confidence”.
the letter promised that, if requested, the Body Corporate would in future meet
to amend the budget and “reallocate”
the increased insurance cost of
$21,814.61 to “the Body Corporate”. That is, resolution 2 would be
revoked, with the
increased cost allocated to all members by reference to
Blenkinship likewise described the letter as a “gentlemen’s
agreement” about a “very, very hot topic”
which was not
binding, with all members “very united” about the increased
insurance cost, and in which “everybody
had Mr Mu’s interests
Mr Blenkinship’s perspective the meeting was “just a down to
earth body corporate working together to collectively
get an outcome”
which was of great “sensitivity” to all members, such that the
letter of commitment and assurance
was drafted and considered without legal
this was Mr Blenkinship’s belief and perspective, the difficulty with
this appreciation is that the interests of KS &
RRR Pty Ltd
were not “very closely aligned” with other members such that all
could be taken to be working “collectively
together” to achieve the
same outcome.
‘default’ operation of
Unit Titles
establishes otherwise.
Mr Blenkinship
otherwise emphasised, as was common ground, that the tattoo studio had been a
“fantastic tenant of Mr Mu”,
and had not “caused any issue at
all” at the complex. The tenants’ business was “quiet”,
their business, do not create any problems, literally
they’re a ten out of ten tenant, they’re
Mr Blenkinship did not know why insurers “have all of a sudden
decided tattoo parlours are unattractive” (in fact, as
discussed above at
[42] to [43], this has been the case for some years), and accepted that the
increased Body Corporate insurance
cost from the unit 3 lease was
“unbeknownst” to the tenants.
Nonetheless
from Mr Blenkinship’s perspective that meant that the tenants were
“liable” for that cost, and the only
person who could legally
“facilitate” recovery of that cost from the tenants was Mr Mu,
since: “It’s his
liability, it’s his tenant, and he passes it
on to his tenant”.
characterisation does not accord with the legislative scheme, particularly the
default position in
Unit Titles Act 1975
KS & RRR Pty Ltd does not fully bear that
“liability” as part of its levied “contribution”.
& RRR Pty Ltd only bears full liability if, after the unit
3 lease was granted, it joins with other members in unanimously agreeing
to accept such liability – and it does not legally follow from
that subsequent action by the landlord that the tenants must
reimburse that
perspective, the tenor of which was shared by the Body Corporate’s other
witnesses, reflects the absolute confidence which
underpinned the Body
Corporate’s “advice” to members that the status quo for
insurance which pertained prior to
the tattoo studio lease could readily be
restored. This confidence, and that “advice”, was seriously
misplaced. As explained
above the three “interconnected” resolutions
were based on an incorrect premise; at least, it could not confidently be
that KS & RRR Pty Ltd could agree to contribute the increased
sum of $21,814.61 on the basis that this sum could readily
be recovered from the
tenants, or they could be evicted. The tenants were never likely to cooperate in
those outcomes; indeed they
sought legal advice, and strongly objected. The Body
Corporate’s “advice”, and confidence, seems to have clouded
the objectivity of its witnesses in forming their beliefs and perspective about
the letter of commitment and assurance and KS &
Ltd’s true position about the resolutions.
Gollow also did not accept that the letter was a “guarantee” that
the Body Corporate would pay the increased insurance
Likewise Mr Harris said
the letter was merely a “commitment and assurance” to “meet
again” to “discuss
the apportionment”, particularly to discuss
whether or not to revisit resolution 2 and reallocate the increased cost to all
members (by reference to
Again, whilst Mr Gollow
and Mr Harris held these beliefs, their positions do not accord with the express
text of the letter –
namely a “Commitment” and
“assurance” to “meet for the purpose of amending the budget to
reallocate”
the increased insurance cost. That and other objective
considerations confirm that Mr Mu’s support for resolution 2 was
17 March 2023 Whittles issued, on behalf of the Body Corporate, the first of
three quarterly invoices to KS & RRR Pty Ltd seeking
(inter alia) of the sum of $7,573.00 – being the “Admin Insurance
Premium Contribution” for the period
1 April to 30 June 2023. The same sum
was invoiced on 1 June and 4 September 2023 for the two following quarters.
These three quarterly
invoices for that line item total $22,719.00, and have not
Accordingly in
this proceeding the Body Corporate claims the outstanding “sum of
$22,719.00 or such other amount” determined
to be the “contribution
payable” or “debt” due “as at 18 January
KS & RRR Pty Ltd denies the claim.
Carlsund prepared draft minutes after the meeting, and forwarded them to all
members including KS & RRR Pty Ltd on 21 March
2023. As noted
above (at 86), there was some minimalism, and error (including regulatory
non-compliance), in the recording of the
minutes – including in the
enclosed budget which was (purportedly) amended after the meeting by
Mr Carlsund and the Committee,
without any written explanation or notice to
members that that had occurred. However the principal error in the minutes was
there was no reference at all to the letter of commitment and assurance to
KS & RRR Pty Ltd dated 16 March 2023 which was drafted
signed by Mr
Carlsund during the meeting, and countersigned or endorsed by
all “members
Mu said, and I accept, that upon receiving the minutes he immediately complained
to Mr Harris that they were not correct including
because the letter of
commitment and assurance was not attached – which Mr Harris incorrectly
considered was not required.
At the same time Mr Mu sought legal advice and representation from Mr Eric
Withnall, solicitor, about the three resolutions and the
email dated 31 March 2023 to Mr Carlsund (copied to Mr Mu), Mr Withnall made
clear that KS & RRR Pty Ltd did not accept that
minutes were accurate, and requested access to “any original
records” including “any physical or electronic
notes or any
recordings” that may
email to Mr Withnall dated 3 April 2023 (copied to Mr Mu and Mr Harris), and
after a telephone discussion with him on that day,
Mr Carlsund responded that
there were no such “original records” since his practice was to
discard notes of meetings
once minutes were drafted. Mr Carlsund continued that
Mr Withnall “may be referring to the attached document produced further
the meeting”, being the letter of commitment and assurance dated
16 March 2023 which was drafted and signed immediately
prior to the vote
for resolution 2.
Carlsund’s characterisation of the letter as being “further to the
meeting” is incorrect. The letter was not
“further to”, or
separate from (or after), the meeting. Objectively it was plainly integral to,
and part of what occurred
Accordingly it ought
to have been included in the minutes. Mr Carlsund did not do so because, like
the Body Corporate’s other
witnesses, he incorrectly believed that the
letter was merely a “letter of comfort” which was of “limited
relevance”.
cross examination Mr Carlsund accepted, with hindsight (given the
“scrutiny” at the hearing), that the letter of commitment
assurance “probably” ought to have been included in the
contemplated by resolution 2 (including in qualified form),
KS & RRR Pty Ltd approached the tenants seeking that they pay
increased cost of $21,814.61. The tenants were legally represented and,
unsurprisingly (given the exposition above), refused to pay
that cost. By
11 May 2023 KS & RRR Pty Ltd had been advised that
the tenants “would not pay the full amount of the increased
premiums” and “would challenge any such demand in
as contemplated by resolution 2 (including in qualified form),
KS & RRR Pty Ltd issued a notice to quit on
25 July 2023 about
the lack of planning approval for unit 3, which was
later withdrawn when approval was
email dated 26 July 2023, having endeavoured to recover the increased cost from
the tenants or evict them (as contemplated by resolution
2 in qualified form),
KS & RRR Pty Ltd’s solicitor, Mr Withnall,
formally complained to Mr Carlsund that the minutes were
“accurate”. Mr Withnall said that the minutes
“misdescribe” resolution 2 as irrevocably determining that
KS & RRR Pty Ltd must fully pay the increased cost of
$21,840.61 – as distinct from resolution 2 recognising that, if the
tenants refused to pay that sum, the question of liability would be finally
“determined” at a later meeting (ie with
resolution 2 revoked).
Mr Withnall emphasised that there was no “basis to hold
KS & RRR Pty Ltd entirely responsible for
the increased
premiums across all units in the
Mr Withnall
said, and it was not disputed, that the Body Corporate did not respond to this
complaint about the minutes (or otherwise
noted above, the Body Corporate issued further quarterly invoices dated 1 June
and 4 September 2023 seeking payment (inter alia)
of the sum of $7,573.00
(being the “Admin Insurance Premium Contribution”). A final notice
for payment of the “debt”
was issued on 1 November
Accordingly,
by application dated 24 November 2023 (as amended on 18 January 2024), and
pursuant to
and (4A)(a) of the
Unit Titles Act 1975
Corporate claimed the outstanding “sum of $22,719.00 or such other
amount” determined to be the “contribution
payable” or
“debt” due “as at 18 January
“debt” of $22,719.00 comprises the “Admin Insurance Premium
Contribution” of $7,573.00 for three quarters,
as per invoices issued on
17 March 2023, 1 June 2023, and 4 September
KS & RRR Pty
Ltd denies the claim on the basis that resolution 2 was never unanimously
agreed, or was qualified by the letter
of commitment and assurance
16 March 2023.
compulsory conference took place on 29 February 2024, but did not result in a
settlement of the dispute. Accordingly the proceeding
was set down for hearing
on 19 April 2024, with case management orders made for the filing of
evidence and written submissions.
Body Corporate’s position was that the three resolutions as recorded in
the minutes conclusively meant that the sum of $21,840.61
could be recovered
from KS & RRR Pty Ltd as a “debt” under
Unit Titles Act 1975
. Accordingly it did not file evidence
from its members, or Mr Carlsund, as to the members’ discussions at the
meeting. Nor
did the Body Corporate file the letter of commitment and assurance
dated 16 March 2023 which was drafted and signed by all attendees
immediately
prior to the vote on resolution 2, since the letter was incorrectly
regarded as of “limited relevance”.
19 April 2024 KS & RRR Pty Ltd sought that the hearing be
vacated on the basis that, since it disputed the accuracy of the
evidence was required from the attendees at the meeting on 16 March 2023 about
that question. To establish that this was
a live issue,
KS & RRR Pty Ltd relied on Mr Withnall’s email
correspondence with Mr Carlsund dated 31 March, 3 April and
26 July 2023 about
that question (see above). These emails were annexed to
KS & RRR Pty Ltd’s written submission dated
18 April 2024, however inadvertently the letter of commitment and
assurance dated 16 March 2023 (which was an attachment to Mr
email dated 3 April 2023) was not
Withnall relied on the letter as demonstrating that the minutes were not
accurate, including if it was actioned after the
Corporate’s legal representatives first became aware of Mr
Withnall’s email dated 26 July 2023 when KS &
Ltd’s written submission (and annexures) was received the previous day (ie
on 18 April 2024).
hearing was vacated, and rescheduled for 28 May 2024. The Body Corporate’s
oral application for costs thrown away was reserved.
The Body Corporate filed
declarations from its witnesses, but did not adduce the letter of commitment and
assurance on the basis
that it was of “limited relevance”.
hearing proceeded on 28 May 2024, with KS & RRR Pty Ltd now
represented
by Dr Kelly (who was retained the previous day). Mr Mu had
earlier signed a
declaration dated 3 May 2024 (which was filed by Dr Kelly),
which referred to the letter of commitment and assurance but did not annex
letter was first produced to the Tribunal by KS & RRR Pty Ltd
during the cross examination of Mr Harris on 28 May 2024, with
Corporate’s objection to its receipt on the basis of relevance overruled.
Mr Cozens properly conceded that the Body
Corporate was not prejudiced by the
receipt of the letter, and by way of assistance had appropriately proofed the
Body Corporate’s
witnesses about it prior to the hearing. The hearing
proceeded on that basis.
Consideration
consider the issues which arise in this matter under the following
subheadings.
Whether resolutions 1, 2 and 3 were endorsed on 16
the reasons explained above the evidence demonstrates that the Body
Corporate’s conduct of the meeting on 16 March 2023
in relation to
resolutions 1, 2 and 3 miscarried.
Mu believed that his support for resolution 2 was qualified by the letter of
commitment and assurance, on the basis explained above.
The other members
present, and Mr Carlsund, believed that they were voting for resolution 2
on the basis that it was not qualified
by the letter.
Consequently,
and contrary to the minutes which were circulated on 21 March 2023, there was no
unanimous support by the members for
resolution 2 (in unqualified form) –
because as a matter of fact Mr Mu did not support that resolution. Rather, on
KS & RRR Pty Ltd, Mr Mu supported resolution 2 on
the basis that it was qualified by the letter of commitment and assurance (on
the basis explained above). Considered objectively, it is wholly unsurprising
that he did so.
fact that the Body Corporate’s witnesses believed otherwise is not
determinative of Mr Mu’s actual belief or KS &
Ltd’s position. The confidence in which the Body Corporate has pursued
this application, and the insistence by its
witnesses that
KS & RRR Pty Ltd gave unqualified endorsement to resolution 2
(in unqualified form), demonstrates a lack of objectivity
in appreciating what
actually occurred at the meeting on 16 March 2023. The witnesses’ belief
appears to reflect in part an
unjustified level of certainty and conviction,
informed by the Body Corporate’s incorrect and misplaced
that the status quo for insurance which pertained prior to
the tattoo studio lease could readily be restored for all members.
follows, since resolution 3 was contingent on the endorsement of resolution 2
(in that it amended the budget and recorded altered
contributions for unit 3
purportedly under
s 36(4)(b))
, that it cannot be said that resolution 3 was
lawfully passed. The resolution only has effect if resolution 2 was endorsed,
was not the case.
3 was also contingent on the endorsement of resolution 1, in that it amended the
budget by inserting a line item entitled
“Insurance - Business
interruption” (under the heading ‘Expenditure’) in the sum of
$15,000.00.
Accordingly, and
given that all
three resolutions were “interconnected”
(essentially as part of a package), the better view is that resolution 1 was not
in fact endorsed at the meeting on 16 March 2023, although strictly it is not
necessary to decide this question insofar as the Body
Corporate’s claim to
recover a “debt” is concerned.
finding of fact, that KS & RRR Pty Ltd’s gave only
qualified support for resolution 2 at the meeting on 16 March 2023
(meaning that
it was not unanimously supported in unqualified form), is determinative of this
proceeding in favour of
Non-compliance with
regulatory time periods
30(1)(b)(i) and (ii) of Schedule 1 of the
Unit Titles (Management Modules)
Regulations 2009
requires that there be 21 working days’ notice to
members of a unanimous resolution (ie resolution 2) and
14 working days’
notice for other resolutions (ie resolutions 1
30(3) provides:
The proceedings at the meeting are not invalidated
only because notice of the meeting is not given in accordance with this
30(4) provides that where insufficient notice is given, the meeting must be
adjourned to a later date if a member so requests
(either before or at the
notice dated 8 March 2023 gave members only six working days’ written
notice of the general meeting on 16 March 2023, and
its proposed resolutions
– particularly nos 1, 2 and 3. As the Body Corporate conceded, this meant
that there was non-compliance
with the notice requirements in cl 30(1)(b)(i) and
Body Corporate submitted, first, that the non-compliance was merely
“technical”, meaning that pursuant to cl 30(3)
resolutions 1, 2 and
3 were “not invalidated” by the lack of notice, particularly since
there is no evidence that KS
& RRR Pty Ltd (or any
member) requested that the meeting be adjourned pursuant to cl 30(4). The Body
Corporate also characterised
meeting as “urgent” so as to justify an
abridgement of the regulatory time periods, since it was “imperative to
revise the budget and update the levy
do not accept this submission. The non-compliance with the regulatory time
periods occurred in circumstances where the resolutions
concerned issues which
were legally complex, with the Body Corporate members having markedly different
interests. The object of the
legislative periods is to ensure that there is
sufficient time for each member to consider proposed resolutions – who
enough may not be well versed in meeting procedure (as was the case here),
including by obtaining legal advice.
legislative object was not fulfilled here. In Mr Blenkinship’s words, the
resolutions concerned a “very, very hot
topic” which had a
differential effect on the members’ respective interests. It was incumbent
on the Body Corporate to
ensure that each member had sufficient time to
carefully consider the resolutions (including in light of
legal advice),
particularly by fully complying with the regulatory time periods.
fact that there was no request that the meeting be adjourned pursuant to cl
30(4) does not mean that the non-compliance with the
notice requirements must be
regarded as merely “technical”. Rather, that fact serves to confirm
that the attendees at
the meeting (including Mr Mu) were not well versed in
meeting procedure, which underscores that the regulatory time periods ought
have been complied with.
is it the case, as the Body Corporate submitted, that there is no evidence of
“any “substantial injustice” to
any member as a result of the
technical non-compliance”. In fact, in my view, the circumstances of this
matter demonstrate
that the regulatory non-compliance and conduct of the meeting
significantly contributed to injustice by limiting the capacity of
KS & RRR Pty Ltd to obtain legal advice about the
resolutions. Indeed the Body Corporate provided no opportunity at all to
& RRR Pty Ltd to obtain legal advice about the letter
of commitment and assurance which was drafted, and signed, during the meeting
(immediately prior to the vote on resolution 2).
the importance of revising the budget and updating levy notices did not
constitute urgency such that regulatory requirements
could be ignored (with the
members taken as having waived those requirements), particularly without any
formal notice to the members
that that was proposed. This subject matter is in
marked contrast to the Body Corporate’s extraordinary general meeting on
22 December 2022, where it was necessary for the members to promptly consider
and resolve that the Body Corporate would not insure
the strata complex for a
period of “up to 90 days” whilst an alternative insurer was
sourced – thus ensuring that
the Body Corporate did not (imminently)
Unit Titles Act
the Body Corporate submitted by reference to
Dargavel v Cameron
[2002] FCA 1234
per Goldberg J that cl 30(3) and (4) gave legislative form
to a “generally well understood governance principle” that
corporation’s omission to give sufficient notice is “cured”
where all members attend – “provided
that no member objects at the
meeting or requests an adjournment”.
submission overstates the principle identified by Goldberg J.
[80] his Honour discussed the capacity for “business being brought
forward” where all members are present and “consent”
requirements being waived. Contrary to the Body Corporate’s submission,
the omission of KS & RRR Pty Ltd (or
any member) to
object or request an adjournment does not demonstrate its “consent”
to the waiver of notice requirements.
The Body Corporate’s non-compliance
with regulatory time periods was not identified, or discussed, at the meeting.
In the circumstances
of this matter it cannot be said that the members present,
whether by word or by action (or omission), agreed that the requirements
waived for the three resolutions.
next question, having established that there was non-compliance with regulatory
time periods, is whether that resulted in invalidity
of the three resolutions.
Resolution of this question requires careful consideration of the legislation.
As the ACT Civil and Administrative
Tribunal explained in
Spedding v The
Owners Units Plan 3941 (Unit Titles)
[2025] ACAT 12
whether there is invalidity requires “application
of the principles of
statutory interpretation and the common law of meetings” –
particularly where the legislation does
not make “explicit
provision” about that question.
the High Court explained in
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting
[1998] HCA 28
and [93] (per Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ,
footnotes omitted):
An act done in breach of a condition regulating
the exercise of a statutory power is not necessarily invalid and of no effect.
it is depends upon whether there can be discerned a legislative purpose
to invalidate any act that fails to comply with the condition.
A better test for determining the issue of validity is to ask whether it was
a purpose of the legislation that an act done in breach
of the provision should
be invalid. This has been the preferred approach of courts in this country in
recent years, particularly
in New South Wales. In determining the question of
purpose, regard must be had to “the language of the relevant provision and
the scope and object of the whole statute”.
inclusion of cl 30(3) in the regulations demonstrates a legislative intent that
whilst a mere lack of notice does not result in
invalidity, that fact combined
with other circumstances may do so.
other circumstances must include where regulatory non-compliance significantly
contributes to injustice by limiting the capacity
of a member to obtain legal
advice about proposed resolutions (including a letter of commitment and
assurance which is drafted and
signed during a meeting). In my view, that was
the case for the Body Corporate meeting on 16 March 2023.
Accordingly
I consider that the Body Corporate’s regulatory non-compliance was a
substantial contravention of the legislative
mandate, such that resolutions 1, 2
and 3 are void ab initio due to contravention of cl 30(1)(b)(i) and (ii) of
Schedule 1 of the
Unit Titles (Management Modules) Regulations
Unit Titles Act 1975
provides that, for resolving a
dispute, the “Tribunal may make any orders the Tribunal considers
appropriate”.
s 106(4A)(d)
this includes an “order to confirm, vary or reverse a
decision” of the Body Corporate.
my factual finding that there was not unanimous support for resolution 2 at the
Body Corporate meeting on 16 March 2023 such
that it, and resolutions 1 and 3
(which were contingent on the validity of resolution 2), was not carried, the
appropriate order
is that the Body Corporate’s application be
conclusion that the Body Corporate’s substantial contravention of the
regulatory notice requirements for the meeting mean
that resolutions 1, 2 and 3
are void ab initio also means that the Body Corporate’s application must
be dismissed.
means, since resolutions 2 and 3 were never carried and/or are void, the Body
Corporate has not yet given “notice”
Titles Act 1975
of a determined “contribution” for the
“Admin Insurance Premium Contribution” (of $7,573.00 for unit 3)
was specified in the three quarterly invoices issued to
KS & RRR Pty Ltd on 17 March 2023, 1 June 2023, and
4 September 2023
(in sum being $22,719.00). This non-compliance with
renders each invoice invalid (at least insofar as the invoices concern
that item), and means there is no “recoverable debt”
of $22,719.00
which may be recovered by proceedings in the Tribunal under
Small Claims Act 2016
Accordingly
I order that the application is dismissed
note that if, contrary to my factual finding and regulatory construction,
resolutions 1, 2 and 3 are valid, in the circumstances
of this matter it would
be necessary to consider whether these three resolutions should be reversed with
effect from 16 March 2023,
by exercise of power under s 106(4A)(d). That
provision empowers the Tribunal, where “appropriate”, to
vary or reverse” a Body Corporate decision.
my view those circumstances, as set out above, would amply justify so exercising
that power, particularly given that the three
resolutions were based on
misplaced “advice” and an incorrect premise, and also given that the
Body Corporate’s
conduct of the meeting significantly contributed to
injustice by limiting the capacity of KS & RRR Pty Ltd
to obtain legal advice
assurance dated 16 March 2023.
it is not necessary to make any order under s 106(4A)(d) given my factual
finding that the three resolutions were not passed,
and my separate conclusion
that the resolutions are void ab initio due to non-compliance with regulatory
notice requirements. Indeed
there is no power to do so, since a Body Corporate
decision which never occurred or is void cannot be
Body Corporate applied for costs thrown away given the adjournment of the
original hearing on 19 April 2024, at which time I reserved
consideration of
this question.
that respect, as the Body Corporate noted in its amended application dated
18 January 2024 when seeking costs,
Unit Titles Act 1975
provides that a body corporate may recover incurred “expenditure” as
a “debt”, where that
“expenditure” was
“required or authorised” by that statute and was “rendered
necessary by reason of any wilful or negligent act or omission” by a
reject the Body Corporate’s application on several bases.
there is a presumption in s 131 of the
Northern Territory Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act
that parties should bear their own costs unless
the Tribunal orders otherwise after taking into account the considerations in ss
132 and 133.
considerations include that a party who has “substantially succeeded
against another party would normally recover”
the application fee
(s 132(2)(ba)(i)).
Body Corporate has not succeeded in its application; rather,
KS & RRR Pty Ltd has been wholly successful in its
the principal underlying error in this proceeding was the Body Corporate’s
insistence that the letter of commitment
and assurance dated 16 March 2023 was
of “limited relevance”. On that flawed basis the letter was not
adduced by the
Body Corporate, and it unsuccessfully objected to
KS & RRR Pty Ltd relying on the letter at the hearing on
28 May 2024.
is likely, if the hearing had proceeded on 19 April 2024, that it would have
been necessary to adjourn the hearing in any event
so that the Body
Corporate’s witnesses could formally give evidence about the letter.
these circumstances it is not appropriate that the Body Corporate recover its
costs thrown away on 19 April 2024.
for two reasons
Unit Titles Act 1975
does not alter, or
affect, that conclusion.
first reason is that, on any view,
is not engaged, since there has been no
“wilful or negligent act or omission” in breach of the statute by
Pty Ltd. My factual finding that the three
resolutions were not passed, and my separate conclusion that the resolutions are
ab initio due to non-compliance with regulatory notice requirements, means
that KS & RRR Pty Ltd did not breach the statute by
failing to pay its contributions.
second reason concerns the relationship between
Unit Titles Act
Northern Territory Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2014
Section 132(1)
empowers the Tribunal
to “make a costs order”, subject to taking into account the
considerations in subsection (2). Where
this occurs the presumption in
that “parties bear their own costs in the proceeding before the
Tribunal” is displaced.
a costs order is made, the sum identified or assessed may be recovered by a
successful party as a debt or “monetary order”
by filing it in the
Local Court
So appreciated, properly construed,
Titles Act 1975
does not apply to the question of costs, because, if so, it
would purport to determine the existence of a “debt”
the conduct of legal proceedings prior to the Tribunal
considering that question and determining the existence of a debt under ss
and 132 of the
Territory Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2014
Accordingly
I order below that the Body Corporate’s application for costs thrown away
on 19 April 2024 is
order as follows:
application is dismissed.
applicant’s application for costs thrown away for the originally scheduled
hearing on 19 April 2024 is dismissed.
20 JUNE 2025
TRIBUNAL MEMBER
Arenseear Pty Ltd purchased the
19 units from another owner at some time between 22 December 2022 (the date of a
Body Corporate meeting
attended by the former owner) and 6 February 2023 (the
date of a Body Corporate email copied to Mr Blenkinship (see hearing book
) 199 and 215). Subsequently Arenseear Pty Ltd purchased
another unit, and now owns 20 units in the
The Body Corporate
appointed Whittles at its annual general meeting on 24 November 2022 (motion 3,
minutes, HB 203).
annual adjustment as per the consumer price index, and market review (cl 5.3 and
5.4 of the lease).
Mu’s evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~4 hr 35 min 10
Noting that the body
piercing component of the business did not affect the availability, or cost, of
On 20 December 2022
the Body Corporate’s then insurer (CHU) advised that it would not offer
further insurance for the 2023/24
financial year due to the existence of the
tattoo studio in unit 3.
Declaration Andrea Daglas, branch manager, Whittles Body Corporate Management
Pty Ltd, 14 March 2024, at [7], HB 141). The estimate
of $56,890.00 comprises
the sum of an “indicative costing” of $53,570.00 (from the Body
Corporate’s then insurer,
CHU) and $3,320.00 (ie Marina Operator Liability
Insurance as purchased from QBE Insurance (Australia) on 23 December
Mr Mu’s evidence
(audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~4 hr 34 min 20
Email dated 20 December
2022 MGA Insurance Group to Mr Carlsund, which was forwarded to Mr Harris
and Mr Mu on that date (HB
Mr Blenkinship’s
evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~1 hr 54 min 16 sec). The purchase
occurred between 22 December 2022
and 6 February 2023 (see fn
entitlement” is “certified by a valuer” by reference to the
“improved capital value”
of each unit (see definitions in
Unit Titles Act 1975
See the definition of “unanimous resolution” in 7(4) of the
Titles Act 1975
precise, the UEV for unit 3 is 745 (out of a total unit entitlement of 5000),
which is also expressed in the Body Corporate’s
documentation as 0.149 (ie
14.9% of the total). Unit 3 has the highest valuation of any of the 26 units in
the strata complex (as
of 1 April 2022), and thus the highest UEV (HB
This quantum of
$3,250.38 (rounded up) is the Tribunal’s calculation from the evidence; it
was not articulated in the parties’
submissions. Additionally, under
, KS & RRR Pty Ltd is liable to pay 14.9% of the remaining annual
insurance cost of $56,890.00 (see fn 7), being $8,476.61 per
Corporate’s submission dated 14 April 2024 at [17] (HB 48)). Liability for
this payment is not in
The first limb of
resolution 2 replicates the UEV formula in
for the estimated cost (from
time to time) of insurance if there is no tattoo studio, with that replicated
formula having effect
s 36(4)(b).
Corporate’s submission dated 14 April 2024 at [1b)] (HB 43). The temporal
limitation of 18 January 2024 operates to further
amend the amended application,
which claimed “any additional amounts that may accrue” up to the
date of hearing (HB 24
and 26) – which subsequently occurred on 28 May
2024. So appreciated, the claim does not exceed the Tribunal’s
Small Claims Act 2016
limited to $25,000.00.
191 to 193. The quarterly sum of $7,573.00 multiplied by 3 is $22,719.00. The
invoices each constituted a “notice”
of the determined
“contribution” under
Unit Titles Act 1975
invoices also sought three quarterly payments of “Admin Contributions
Amended” ($1,315.00) and “Sinking Contributions”
which total $6,405.00. KS & RRR Pty Ltd paid that total sum
on 28 November 2023.
unit owners physically attended the meeting and countersigned the letter: ie Mr
Mu, Mr Harris, Mr Blenkinship, Mr Gollow; and
Mr Seth Chin (the then owner
of one unit). The owner of another unit, Lay & Sons Organisation
Pty Ltd represented by Mr Chris
Lay, attended the meeting by telephone, and
verbally endorsed the letter. The owners of the remaining unit, Mr Steve Compain
Mrs Cheryl Compain, attended by proxy, and provided a “Proxy Voting
Summary” dated 15 March 2023 which indicated their
support for resolution
2 (and other resolutions).
Mr Carlsund’s evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~3 hr 45 min 53
Mr Blenkinship’s
evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~1 hr 54 min 16 sec, ~2 hr 47 min 38
Mr Carlsund’s
evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~3 hr 2 min 15
Mr Carlsund’s
evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~3 hr 50 min 49
A motion is passed by
special resolution if a two thirds majority of the votes cast favour the motion,
and the UEV of the units for
votes cast against do not exceed 25% of the total
unit entitlements (s 8 of the
Unit Titles Act
Meeting minutes
16 March 2023 (HB 347).
Section 36(1)
Unit Titles Act 1975
empowers a body corporate to “determine” the amount required by way
of “contributions from its members” to
meet expenditure. Pursuant to
the body corporate then gives “notice” of the determined
“contribution” or “amount payable” to
its members. A
determined contribution which is not paid by the due date is “recoverable
as a debt” from the member
Blenkinship’s evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~2 hr 43 min 50 sec).
The formal “advice” was not in evidence,
and was said to be
“privileged”. Dr Kelly, for KS & RRR Pty Ltd, did
not call for that advice to be produced; it
was not integral to the cross
examination then occurring. There may be a question as to whether any privilege
has been waived since:
the content of the “advice” was conveyed by
Mr Harris to Mr Mu (and the other members present) at the meeting; the Body
Corporate relied on that “advice” as underpinning and justifying the
three resolutions; and the Body Corporate facilitated
“guidance” and
advice so that Mr Mu “could administer his rights under the lease”
(Mr Harris’s evidence,
audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~35 min 30 sec).
It is not necessary to resolve this
48(1)(b) of schedule 1 of the
Unit Titles (Management Modules) Regulations
requires that a body corporate keep accurate “minutes of general
meetings”. The minutes were circulated to members on
21 March 2023, and
were received into evidence although not under the “seal of the
corporation” – so as to be “evidence
of the facts”
stated therein (applying
Unit Titles Act 1975
turns on whether the minutes were under
HB 347. It is clear
from the text of resolution 3 (and the confirmatory “Note” included
in the minutes) that resolution
3 incorporates an attached revised budget,
which purports to alter the apportionment of contributions for each unit as per
2 (under the heading ‘Calculation of Contributions’) (HB
348 to 349).
Given that all
three resolutions were “interconnected” (essentially as part of a
package), the better view is also that
resolution 1 was not in fact endorsed on
16 March 2023, although strictly it is not necessary to decide this question
the Body Corporate’s claim to recover a “debt” is
Carlsund’s evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~3 hr 17 min 38 sec).
The resolutions are “interconnected”
in that they form a response to
the same subject matter; specifically, the expenditure and contributions
identified in resolutions
1 and 2 form amendments to the budget under resolution
Clause 30(1)(b)(i) and
(ii) of Schedule 1 of the
Unit Titles (Management Modules) Regulations
Corporate’s submission dated 20 June
Clause 30(3) of
Schedule 1 of the
Unit Titles (Management Modules) Regulations 2009
provides that the “proceedings at the meeting are not invalidated only
because notice of the meeting is not given in accordance
legislative notice periods.
Dargavel v Cameron
[2002] FCA 1234
Goldberg J discussed the
capacity for “business being brought forward” where all members are
present and “consent”
to notice requirements being
The remaining
resolution considered (and unanimously carried) at the meeting, no 4, authorised
Mr Harris to keep a dog at his unit.
Resolution 4 is not subject to this
proceeding, and I express no view about it or its
That is, in the
circumstances it would not be “appropriate” under
Unit Titles Act 1975
that the Tribunal instead order in this proceeding
that KS & RRR Pty Ltd is liable to pay the lesser sum of
$3,250.38, by reference
to the ‘default’ position about member
contributions in
Rather, the proper course is that the Body Corporate
further consider the question of insurance contributions under
future, a member does not pay a contribution determined by a valid resolution
and determination under that provision, the
Body Corporate may then recover that
amount as a “debt” under
Subject to annual
adjustment as per the consumer price index, and market review (cl 5.3 and 5.4 of
the lease).
Withnall’s advice to the Tribunal (audio of hearing 19 April 2024 ~1 hr 14
min 41 sec).
evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~4 hr 35 min 10
Meeting minutes 24
November 2022 (HB 202 ff).
An interim resolution may only be made for a motion that may be passed by an
ordinary resolution (cl 32(4) of the
Unit Titles (Management Modules)
Regulations 2009
). Mr Cozens advised the Tribunal that the interim
resolutions were subsequently confirmed pursuant to that process (audio of
19 April 2024 ~1 hr 46 min 53
HB 207, with the
“attached” budget at HB 210 ff. It follows that the Body Corporate
and its members also were not aware
of the prospect of an increased cost for
insurance in May 2022 when the tattoo studio lease
The UEV for unit
3 was recorded as “745”, which is 0.149 or 14.9% of the total unit
entitlement of 5,000 (HB
See: submission Owners
Corporation Network (ACT) 26 March 2025 p 3, ACT Legislative Assembly; Docklands
Renewing an owners’ corporation’s policy of insurance just
29 May 2024, Tom Bacon, Strata Title
Online article
Who Pays For Commercial Building Insurance On a Commercial Property?
May 2023, William Paull, Consolidated Insurance
Strata Schemes Management Act 2015
(NSW). This process also existed under
the preceding strata legislation:
Strata Schemes
Management Act 1996
Section 23A(3)(c)
Owners Corporations Act 2006
Unit Titles Act 1975
(NT) empowers a body corporate to recover
expenditure from a lot owner where the lot owner was at “fault” (eg
or negligent act or omission” by that lot owner), but that
does not cover increased insurance premiums from a changed use of
HB 212. CHU advised
that insurance cover was refused even if the joint tenants restricted their
business at unit 3 to body piercing
only, with “any Tattoo activity”
occurring elsewhere. Insurance cover would not have been refused if the business
restricted to body piercing
Declaration Andrea
Daglas, branch manager, Whittles Body Corporate Management Pty Ltd, 14 March
2024, at [7], HB 141). The estimate
of $56,890.00 comprises the sum of an
“indicative costing” of $53,570.00 (from the Body Corporate’s
then insurer,
CHU) and $3,320.00 (ie Marina Operator Liability Insurance as
purchased from QBE Insurance (Australia) on 23 December
That is, quite apart
from the tattoo studio, the cost of insurance had significantly
Meeting minutes
22 December 2022 (HB 199 ff). Five unit owners attended in person, with the
remaining two unit owners appointing
a “Proxy with voting summary”
(ie Lay & Sons Organisation Pty Ltd, and Mr and Mrs Compain). Arenseear
Pty Ltd (represented
by Mr Blenkinship) was not present since it was not then a
member of the Body Corporate; Arenseear Pty Ltd subsequently became a
when 19 units were purchased from a former owner (that owner was present at
the meeting).
those risks were damage from: “fire, lightning, tempest, earthquake and
explosion”; riot, civil commotion
and strikes; “malicious
damage”; burst or defective boilers, water tanks and pipes; and impact
from aircraft and road
Corporate’s submission dated 14 April 2024 at [10] (HB
This sum comprised
$71,589.61 (from One Underwriting Pty Ltd for 8 February 2023 to
8 February 2024), plus $3,795.00 (Marina Broadform
Public Liability
Insurance from the Territory Insurance Office) and $3,320.00 (Marina Operator
Liability Insurance from QBE Insurance
(Australia)) (both for 23 December
23 December 2023).
Declaration Andrea Daglas, branch manager, Whittles Body Corporate Management
Pty Ltd, 14 March 2024, at [7], HB 141). The estimate
of $56,890.00 comprises
the sum of an “indicative costing” of $53,570.00 (from the Body
Corporate’s then insurer,
CHU) and $3,320.00 (ie Marina Operator Liability
Insurance as purchased from QBE Insurance (Australia) on 23 December
evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~4 hr 34 min 20 sec). Further Arenseear
Pty Ltd was not apprised of the issue
when it purchased 19 units from another
corporate owner at some time between 22 December 2022 and 6 February
2023, albeit that by
22 December 2022 (the date of a general meeting attended by
all members which discussed the issue) the Body Corporate and its then
were apprised of it (Mr Blenkinship’s evidence, audio of hearing 28
May 2024 ~1 hr 54 min 16
HB 292 to 293. A fourth
motion considered (and unanimously carried) at the meeting, no 4, authorised Mr
Harris to keep a dog at his
unit. Resolution 4 is not subject to this
proceeding, and I express no view about
Mr Carlsund’s
evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~3 hr 17 min 38 sec). The resolutions are
“interconnected”
in that they form a response to the same subject
matter; specifically, the expenditure and contributions identified in
resolutions
1 and 2 form amendments to the budget under resolution
HB 348 to 350. The budget
for the annual general meeting on 22 November 2024 is at HB 210 to
That is $21,814.61,
rounded up (HB 253). The quoted expression “Once-off” was
capitalised, and in bold, in the original.
It referred only to a
“Once-off” annual payment allocated to unit 3, with a similar
payment also to be levied in subsequent
years while the tattoo studio lease
remained in place.
“total contributions” were comprised by the annual sum of unit
contributions ($68,386.80) and KS & RRR Pty Ltd’s
proposed payment of increased cost for insurance for unit 3 ($50,259.61), less
“Advances” of $14,319.00 received as
As explained in an
email dated 21 January 2025 from Ms Daglas, Whittles branch manager, to the Body
Corporate’s solicitor,
which was filed by the Body Corporate on 28 January
HB 344 ff (at 348).
The sum of $76,486.10 was comprised by the sum of $51,453.00 (ie total unit
contributions) plus $39,352.10 (ie
the increased cost of insurance for unit 3)
less “Advances” of $14,319.00 received as
Mr Carlsund
said that “there was no consideration or agreement at the meeting in
regard to increasing the total unit contributions
of $67,610.00 as endorsed on 1
October 2022 (motion no 9), to explain the error in resolution 3 being corrected
in the minutes and
budget forwarded to unit owners on 21 March 2023 (see Ms
Daglas’s email dated 21 January 2025 to the Body Corporate’s
solicitor, as filed on 28 January 2025). Nonetheless resolution 3 was said to
have been unanimously endorsed by the members on 16
March 2023, meaning that the
erroneous figure of $104,327.41 for anticipated income (particularly from unit
contributions) was also
endorsed. In this circumstance it was necessary that the
error be corrected by resolution at a subsequent general meeting. Given
conclusion below that resolution 3 is void, the need for such correction is
Mr Blenkinship’s
evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~2 hr 43 min 50 sec). The formal
“advice” was not in evidence,
and was said to be
“privileged”. Dr Kelly, for KS & RRR Pty Ltd, did
not call for that advice to be produced; it
was not integral to the cross
examination then occurring. There may be a question as to whether any privilege
has been waived since:
the content of the “advice” was conveyed by
Mr Harris to Mr Mu (and the other members present) at the meeting; the Body
Corporate relied on that “advice” as underpinning and justifying the
three resolutions; and the Body Corporate facilitated
“guidance” and
advice so that Mr Mu “could administer his rights under the lease”
(Mr Harris’s evidence,
audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~35 min 30 sec).
It is not necessary to resolve this
As stated above,
pursuant to the ‘default’ position in s 36(3)
KS & RRR Pty Ltd was liable to pay 14.9% of the increased
cost of $21,814.61 – being $3,250.38 (rounded
Mr Mu’s evidence
(audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~5 hr 13 min 50
Reg 4 and Form 1 Part A
(in the Schedule) of the
Business Tenancies (Fair Dealings) Regulations
Blenkinship’s evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~2 hr 37 min 1
In that respect, this
factual question as to the former owner’s disclosure is not determinative
of the outcome of this proceeding.
Rather, the principal issue is whether
KS & RRR Pty Ltd gave only qualified support for
resolution 2, meaning that there was
no unanimity amongst members such that it
was not passed. I conclude to that effect below. This factual finding determines
the proceeding
in favour of KS & RRR Pty Ltd.
Accordingly it was not necessary, for completeness and after the hearing, to
request that the
former owner’s disclosure to the tenants under
Business Tenancies (Fair Dealings) Act 2003
submission on behalf of the Body Corporate (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~5 hr
16 min 58 sec).
Kelly’s submission on behalf of KS & RRR Pty Ltd
(audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~5 hr 24 min 27 sec). Clause 18.4 of
“The Tenant must not do anything which may affect rights under any
insurance or which may increase an insurance premium payable
in connection with
the Premises, the Building, or Property in them without the Owner’s
consent. If the Owner consents in the
Tenant must pay any increased
By definition the terms “Premises” and
“Building” concern only unit 3, not the broader strata complex (cl
1.1 read with Part A).
Clause 18.4 of the lease (see fn 79) provides that the tenants must “not
do anything” which “may increase an insurance
premium payable in
connection with the Premises, the Building or Property in them [defined in cl
1.1 as unit 3]” (unless with
the “Owner’s
consent”). As a matter of construction the definition of
“outgoings” in cl 1.1 as including
all “levies and charges
imposed under strata, community title or similar legislation in respect of the
Land [defined as unit
3]” – which includes a
“contribution” under
or (4) of the
Unit Titles Act
, supports the view that the tenants’ reimbursement of the
landlord’s insurance is solely the subject of cl 10.1(a). However
even if the tenants’ obligation under cl 18.4 were to extend to an
increased “premium” for the Body Corporate’s
insurance policy
(as distinct from the landlord’s insurance policy), that provision does
not include any mechanism whereby
the Body Corporate itself can recover that
cost – since it is not a party to the lease. The “premium”
not directly incurred by the landlord; it is liable only for such
“contributions” as may be apportioned to it pursuant
“determination” under
or (4) of the
Unit Titles Act
, with a portion of a “contribution” equating with part of
the Body Corporate’s insurance “premium”.
Nor does a breach of
cl 18.4 trigger the tenants’ indemnification of the landlord under cl
18.5. That indemnity only applies
where the landlord incurs expense in
“doing anything which the Tenant must do under this lease but has not
done”. This
criterion is not fulfilled where the tenants continue to
operate the tattoo studio, being the “Permitted Use” which is
expressly authorised by the
submission on behalf of the Body Corporate (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~5 hr
22 min 18 sec).
However this
legal conclusion is not essential to the outcome of this proceeding. The
principal issue is whether KS & RRR Pty
Ltd gave only
qualified support for resolution 2, meaning that there was no unanimity amongst
members such that it was not passed.
I so conclude below, which is determinative
in favour of
KS & RRR Pty Ltd.
Clause 30(1)(b)(i) and (ii) of Schedule 1 of the
Unit Titles (Management
Modules) Regulations
Blenkinship’s evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~2 hr 20 min 54 sec
and ~2 hr 27 min 36 sec).
Dargavel v Cameron
[2002] FCA 1234
Goldberg J, as discussed
below. The remaining resolution considered (and unanimously carried) at the
meeting, no 4, authorised Mr
Harris to keep a dog at his unit. Resolution 4 is
not subject to this proceeding, and I express no view about it or its
Respectively at HB 340
to 341 and HB 299 to 302.
351 to 352. Mr and Mrs Compain also supported a fourth motion to authorise Mr
Harris to keep a dog at his unit, which is not relevant
(and was not
contentious). It was not necessary that the form identify the name of the
Whittles representative who would perform
the proxy role (see
Communications (Australia) Pty Ltd v The Communications Group Holdings Pty
[2005] NSWSC 1005
to [49] and the authorities
Clauses 40 and 41 of Schedule 1 of the
Unit Titles (Management
Modules) Regulations 2009
respectively provide for alternative methods of
voting, ie: by proxy, for any resolution; and by absentee vote for a resolution
must be unanimous or without dissent (but not otherwise). Pursuant to cl
40 a meeting notice is not required to enclose proxy forms
(although Mr Carlsund
appropriately did so on 8 and 15 March 2023), however where applicable an
“absentee voting form”
must be enclosed (cl 41(1)(a)). The Body
Corporate proceeded on the basis that the “Proxy Voting Summary” was
Mr and Mrs Compain’s proxy authorisation (which I accept),
rather than (in part) being an absentee vote for resolution 2 (a
resolution) (see email 28 January 2025 from the Body Corporate’s solicitor
to the Tribunal). This would mean that
the meeting notice did not comply with cl
41(1)(a) (vis-à-vis resolution 2) in that an “absentee voting
was not enclosed, but nothing turns on
Mr Mu’s evidence
(audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~4 hr 29 min 35
Meeting minutes 16
March 2023 (HB 347 ff).
Mr Harris’s evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~50 min 45
Mr Carlsund’s
evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~2 hr 57 min 43 sec and ~3 hr 33 min 30
declaration 3 May 2024 (filed at the hearing). Mr Gollow could not recall
whether Mr Carlsund sequentially read out
the resolutions, but agreed that the
latter was attentive or “quite pedantic” in ensuring that a response
was received
from every member about each resolution (audio of hearing
28 May 2024 ~4 hr 10 min 21 sec
The minutes do not
record a mover or seconder for any of the motions, and the oral evidence at the
hearing did not suggest otherwise.
At common law, although it is “usual
for the Chair not to accept a motion until it has formally been moved by a
person present
at the meeting, this is not a legal requirement” –
and a motion may be put, and voted upon, “even if it has not
been formally
proposed or seconded:
Re Horbury Bridge Coal, Iron and Waggon Co
[1879] UKLawRpCh 93
11 Ch D 109
Horsley’s Meetings Procedure, Law and Practice
4th Ed Butterworths 1998 by AD Lang at [10.10] p 105). Nonetheless the
practice of requiring a mover and seconder before a motion
is advantageous,
since it ensures formality which in turn reduces possible misunderstanding or
Meeting minutes
16 March 2023: see note to motion 3 (HB 347) and the amended budget (HB 348); cf
the original budget (HB 299). This
amendment was not discussed in oral evidence
at the hearing, but was the subject of subsequent submissions and evidence (see
Ms Daglas’s
email dated 21 January 2025 to the Body Corporate’s
solicitor, as filed on 28 January 2025). I accept that a resolution of
notice has been given, including a special resolution, may be amended during a
meeting provided that the amendment does not
“alter its nature”: see
Totally and Permanently Incapacitated Veterans Association of New South Wales
LTD v Gadd Matter
[1998] NSWSC 384
per Young J citing
Horsley’s Meetings Procedure, Law and Practice
3rd Ed Butterworths
1989 p 489 (and several authorities). His Honour did not follow a contrary
English authority which precluded
any amendment of special resolutions
Moorgate Mercantile Holdings Ltd
[1980] 1 All ER
Mr Lay, representing
Lay & Sons Organisation Pty Ltd (a unit owner), did not sign the letter
– since he attended the meeting
by telephone. However Mr Gollow recalled
that the letter was read out to Mr Lay, and the letter records that it was
supported by
the “members present” which included Mr Lay (Mr
Gollow’s evidence, audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~4 hr 14 min 55
Regulation 48(1)(b) of
schedule 1 of the
Unit Titles (Management Modules) Regulations 2009
requires that a body corporate keep accurate “minutes of general
meetings”. The minutes were circulated to members on
21 March 2023, and
were received into evidence although not under the “seal of the
corporation” – so as to be “evidence
of the facts”
stated therein (applying
Unit Titles Act 1975
turns on whether the minutes were under
Mr Mu’s evidence
(audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~4 hr 48 min 35
Mr Mu’s evidence
(audio of hearing 28 May 2024 respectively ~4 hr 31 min 34 sec, ~4 hr 32 min 13
sec, ~4 hr 37 min 14 sec,
~4 hr 40 min 7 sec,
~5 hr 31 min 15
Mr Carlsund’s
evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~3 hr 1 min 24 sec, and ~3 hr 3 min 2
Mr Carlsund’s
evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~4 hr 4 min 52
Mr Harris’s evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~1 hr 15 min 38
Mr Gollow’s
evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~4 hr 14 min 55 sec). On its face
the reference to “members present”
in the letter appears to exclude
the letter having also been endorsed on Mr and Mrs Compain’s behalf by
Mr Carlsund as their
agent pursuant to their proxy. This question was not
discussed at the hearing, or in submissions. Nothing turns on this factual
Cambridge online
dictionary. The Compact Oxford English Dictionary of Current English 3rd Ed
Oxford University Press 2005 likewise
defines a “commitment” as
“a promise to do
something”.
Oxford English Dictionary of Current English 3rd Ed Oxford University Press
evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~5 hr 13 min 16 sec
The better view is
that such an amendment “alter[ed] the nature” of the original
resolution, such that it ought to be
incorporated into an amended motion and the
subject of a formal notice for consideration at a subsequent meeting with 21
notice given (see fn 95). It was the responsibility of Mr Harris (as
the Chair) and Mr Carlsund (who “ran the meeting”)
to facilitate
that outcome, but that did not occur because they both believed that the letter
of commitment and assurance was of
“little substance” and merely a
letter of “comfort” with no legal effect. This was a serious error
conduct of the
Noting that at
common law this is not a legal requirement, albeit that the practice is
advantageous, (see fn
Mr Harris’s evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~1 hr 26 min 22
Mr Harris’s evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~1 hr 28 min 23
Mr Carlsund’s
evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~3 hr 1 min 55 sec and ~3 hr 45 min 53
Cambridge online
dictionary. The Compact Oxford English Dictionary of Current English 3rd Ed
Oxford University Press 2005 likewise
defines a “commitment” as
“a promise to do
something”.
Oxford English Dictionary of Current English 3rd Ed Oxford University Press
Blenkinship’s evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~1 hr 54 min 16 sec,
~2 hr 47 min 38 sec, ~2 hr 27 min 36 sec, ~2 hr
Blenkinship’s evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~1 hr 54 min 16 sec,
~2 hr 27 min 36 sec).
Blenkinship’s evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~2 hr 20 min 54 sec
and ~2 hr 27 min 36 sec).
Mr Blenkinship’s evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~2 hr 8 min 30
Blenkinship’s evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~2 hr 37 min 1
Mr Gollow’s
evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~4 hr 16 min 17
Mr Harris’s evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 1 hr 15 min 54 sec
and ~1 hr 21 min 26 sec).
HB 191 to 193. The quarterly sum of $7,573.00 multiplied by 3 is $22,719.00. The
invoices each constituted a “notice”
of the determined
“contribution” under
Unit Titles Act 1975
invoices also sought three quarterly payments of “Admin Contributions
Amended” ($1,315.00) and “Sinking Contributions”
which total $6,405.00. KS & RRR Pty Ltd paid that total sum
on 28 November 2023.
Corporate’s submission dated 14 April 2024 at [1b)] (HB 43). The temporal
limitation of 18 January 2024 operates to further
amend the amended application,
which claimed “any additional amounts that may accrue” up to the
date of hearing (HB 24
and 26) – which subsequently occurred on 28 May
2024. So appreciated, the claim does not exceed the Tribunal’s
Small Claims Act 2016
limited to $25,000.00.
Lay, representing Lay & Sons Organisation Pty Ltd (a unit owner), did
not sign the letter – since he attended the meeting
by telephone. However
Mr Gollow recalled that the letter was read out to Mr Lay, and the letter
records that it was supported by
the “members present” which
included Mr Lay (Mr Gollow’s evidence, audio of hearing 28 May 2024
~4 hr 14 min 55
Mu’s evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~4 hr 43 min 13 sec
evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~4 hr 43 min 13 sec
HB 236. This email
was annexed to Mr Withnall’s written submission dated 18 April 2024 (on
behalf of KS & RRR Pty Ltd),
but inadvertently the attached
letter of commitment and assurance was not included in the annexure. However it
is clear from the
nomenclature recorded in the email (ie
“20230316_BC_Commitment_to_Unit_3_Signed-3.pdf”) that the attachment
letter. Mr Withnall confirmed this was the case (audio of hearing 19
April 2024 ~52 min 15
The expression
“further to” is ordinarily “used in business letters to refer
to an earlier letter, conversation,
meeting, etc” (Cambridge online
dictionary). Here the expression conveys, incorrectly, that the letter was a
separate event
to the meeting, and thus that it is separate from resolution 2
and not relevant to it.
Mr Carlsund’s evidence (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~3 hr 54 min 55 sec).
Mr Blenkinship likewise agreed, with hindsight,
that the letter should have been
included in the minutes (audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~2 hr 45 min 6 sec).
Mr Harris said that he
could not comment about whether this was legally required
(audio of hearing 28 May 2024 ~1 hr 50 min
KS & RRR Pty Ltd’s application to join one of the
tenants dated 28 December 2023; it was not pursued (HB 16
Email dated 26 July
2023 from Mr Withnall to Mr Carlsund (HB 239 ff), which refers to
Mr Withnall’s meeting with one of the
joint tenants about payment of
the increased cost and planning approval in May 2023 (HB 240). In which
respect cl 23.3 provided that,
where the lease said that “approval or
consent must be obtained”, then KS & RRR Pty Ltd
“must not unreasonably
withhold its consent or approval unless this Lease
expressly says
otherwise”.
dated 26 July 2023 from Mr Withnall to Mr Carlsund, which refers to
Mr Withnall’s meeting with one of the joint tenants
the increased cost and planning approval in May 2023 (HB
Mr Withnall’s
written submission dated 18 April 2024 (on behalf of
KS & RRR Pty Ltd) at [5] (HB
Corporate’s submission dated 14 April 2024 at [1b)] (HB 43). The temporal
limitation of 18 January 2024 operates to further
amend the amended application,
which claimed “any additional amounts that may accrue” up to the
date of hearing (HB 24
and 26) – which subsequently occurred on 28 May
2024. So appreciated, the claim does not exceed the Tribunal’s
Small Claims Act 2016
limited to $25,000.00.
191 to 193. The quarterly sum of $7,573.00 multiplied by 3 is $22,719.00. The
invoices each constituted a “notice”
of the determined
“contribution” under
Unit Titles Act 1975
invoices also sought three quarterly payments of “Admin Contributions
Amended” ($1,315.00) and “Sinking Contributions”
which total $6,405.00. KS & RRR Pty Ltd paid that total sum
on 28 November 2023.
Withnall’s advice to the Tribunal (audio of hearing 19 April 2024 ~52 min
Mr Withnall
referred to the letter as “apparently” actioned “immediately
after” the meeting (audio of hearing
19 April 2024 ~12 min 4 sec). In that
respect, as discussed above, as Mr Carlsund’s characterisation of the
letter as being
“further to the meeting” accords with that timing.
It was not until the oral evidence of Mr Carlsund (and other Body
witnesses) on 28 May 2024 that it was appreciated to be common ground that the
letter was drafted and signed during the
Advice to the
Tribunal from Mr Cozens and Ms Lucy Zhau’s (solicitor) (audio of hearing
19 April 2024 ~52 min 21 sec, ~1 hr
8 min 19 sec). Although it was not then
in evidence, on 19 April 2024 Mr Cozens read out most of the text of the
second and final
sentence of the letter of commitment and assurance dated 16
March 2023. Specifically Mr Cozens read the following words: “That
the Body Corporate will meet for the purpose of amending the budget to
reallocate the difference in the cost of the insurance premium
to the Body
Corporate ...”, but excluding the final words “... should the owner
of Unit 3 request the meeting”
(audio of hearing 19 April 2024 ~53 min 40
Corporate’s submission dated 20 June
Corporate’s submission dated 20 June
Section 80(2)
Unit Titles Act 1975
mandates that a body corporate must be insured
regarding the strata complex, unless it unanimously resolves otherwise
The remaining
resolution considered (and unanimously carried) at the meeting, no 4, authorised
Mr Harris to keep a dog at his unit.
Resolution 4 is not subject to this
proceeding, and I express no view about it or its
That is, in the
circumstances it would not be “appropriate” under
Unit Titles Act 1975
that the Tribunal instead order in this proceeding
that KS & RRR Pty Ltd is liable to pay the lesser sum of
$3,250.38, by reference
to the ‘default’ position about member
contributions in
Rather, the proper course is that the Body Corporate
further consider the question of insurance contributions under
future, a member does not pay a contribution determined by a valid resolution
and determination under that provision, the
Body Corporate may then recover that
amount as a “debt” under
Strata Plan No. 60919 v Consumer Trader and Tenancy Tribunal & Ors
[2009] NSWSC 1158
, where the NSW Consumer Trader and Tenancy Tribunal
likewise considered, when reviewing an adjudicator’s decision, that
had no authority to "repeal" the by-law ab initio and he had no
authority to make the order he purported to make under s157(3) for
the payment
of compensation to the lot owners” – because the by-law was
Dos Santos v
Gallwey (No 2)
[2015] NTCAT 9
President Bruxner at
KS & RRR Pty Ltd has leave, should it consider it is
entitled to costs under the statutory scheme (which is summarised above),
apply to the Tribunal for such costs within 14 days of the date of this
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (36.3 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter