URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCAT/2024/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:17:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Un v Garden; Clee; King; Ravlich [2024] NTCAT 24; [2024] NTCAT 14 (18 November 2024)
Un v Garden; Clee; King; Ravlich;
DECISION NUMBER:
[2024] NTCAT 14
AMBER GARDEN
1ST RESPONDENT
2ND RESPONDENT
3RD RESPONDENT
MAKAYLIA RAVLICH
4TH RESPONDENT
MATTER TYPE:
Review Jurisdiction -
Local Government Act 2019
2024-00612-CT
HEARING DATE:
11 NOVEMBER 2024
DECISION OF:
MARK O'REILLY
DATE OF ORDERS:
15 NOVEMBER
APPEARANCES and REPRESENTATION (if any):
ERIC WITHNALL
ELENI LYMBERIS
CHRIS OSBORNE
REASONS FOR DECISION:
is a proceeding in NTCAT’s review jurisdiction. It concerns a review of a
decision made pursuant to section 127 of the
Local Government Act 2019
Initiating Application filed on 1 March 2024 named three individuals as separate
respondents.
10 May 2024, the Tribunal made an order adding a 4
Respondent to
the proceeding.
Respondents
1, 2 and 3 named in the Initiating Application are three members of a
“prescribed corporation panel” under
Local Government Act
That panel was the decision maker whose decision is under review in
this proceeding.
section 127(1)(a) of the NTCAT Act, for a proceeding in the Tribunal’s
review jurisdiction the decision maker is a party
to the proceeding.
section 127(3) of the NTCAT Act, where a decision maker is a party, the decision
maker’s statutory position rather than
the decision maker’s name is
to be used as far as is practicable. Accordingly, I will make an order that the
Respondents be substituted as
Respondent named as “a prescribed corporation panel
section 127
Local Government Act 2019
Respondent will become the 2
Respondent.
The Complaint
30 November 2023 the 2
Respondent lodged a Darwin City Council
Breach of Code of Conduct Complaint Form outlining a complaint against the
complaint alleged breaches of clauses 3, 4 and 5 of the Darwin City Council Code
of Conduct. Those clauses are set out in the
code of conduct as
A member must act with courtesy towards other members, council staff,
electors and members of the public.
4 Prohibition on bullying
A member must not bully another person in the course of performing official
5 Conduct towards council staff
A member must not direct, reprimand, or interfere in the management of,
council staff.
behaviour said to constitute the breaches of the Code of Conduct occurred on 30
November 2023. The same factual circumstances
are relied upon to make out all
of the breaches and are set out in the complaint as
“Councillor Un, who holds a position of influence
with a large social media following, has utilised her platform to engage in
inappropriate behaviour. This includes the use of my husband’s name and
photo in social media posts, which not only violates
his privacy but also have
the potential to place him and our children at risk.
The breach extends beyond mere privacy concerns, as Councillor Un has now
included a post that contains a photo of my daughter in
the comments on one of
her shared posts. This alarming escalation raises serious questions about
the councillor’s understanding of and adherence to the principles
outlined in the council’s code of conduct. Such actions
undermine the respect and
courtesy expected from elected officials but also pose a threat to the safety
and well-being of individuals involved.
...The misuse of social media to target and potentially endanger individuals
goes against the fundamental principles of responsible
governance and sets a
concerning precedent for the community...”
complainant’s husband is Reece Ravlich who was employed by the Council at
the relevant time as “Manager - Emergency
Response and
the lodgement of the Complaint the 2
Respondent provided further
detail to the 1
Respondent upon request. In that correspondence
Respondent referred specifically to and provided a copy of
the post shared by Ms Un on her FaceBook page on 30 November 2023 (the
complaint was considered by the 1
Respondent which published, on 1
February 2024, a Decision Notice to the effect that the Applicant had breached
all three of the
clauses of the Code of Conduct.
Review by NTCAT
Applicant seeks a review of that decision. Under section 327 and Schedule 2 of
Local Government Act 2019
the Tribunal has jurisdiction to review a
decision of a prescribed corporation panel in relation to a contravention of the
written submissions the Applicant asserts that the conduct of Ms Un is not
sufficiently serious to warrant a sanction for breach
of the code of
support of this contention the complainant asserts that “there is no
evidence to suggest that ...Ms Un...deliberately distributed
an image of the
complainant’s child so as to identify them or otherwise.” Further,
the photograph, they submit was “prominently
available on the
internet” and was linked to a particular article that the author of the
posts wished to refer to.
my view the Applicant’s confinement to the question of the intent behind
the publishing of the photograph misses the mark.
The inclusion of the
photographs is one particular aspect of the complaint which refers to
“inappropriate behaviour”
on social media which
“includes” the use of photographs.
Un was not the author of the offending post. Rather it was shared by her on her
Facebook page. The lengthy post purported to
set out a history of interactions
within the Council between Ms Un and other councillors/executive. According to
the post, in the
course of those interactions, Ms Un had made certain comments
on social media that had led to the issuing of a Trespass notice preventing
from attending at Darwin City Council buildings.
decision to issue the Trespass notice was made by Mr Ravlich ostensibly in his
capacity as a council employee responsible for
security issues.
offending post asserted that in a letter dated on or about 29 November 2023 Mr
Ravlich had extended the Trespass notice for a
period of 12 months. Ms Un had
apparently previously posted a copy of that letter to her Facebook page.
offending post shared by Ms Un is a lengthy, politically partisan tirade filled
with personal invective. It identifies Mr Ravlich
and includes intemperate and
nasty attacks on his character. The post includes a link to a photograph of Mr
Ravlich and superimposes
his photograph on a mocked up satirical poster which is
directly critical of him.
offending post prompted a series of comments on Ms Un's Facebook page. One such
comment, with a link to an article about Mr Ravlich,
includes a thumbnail
photograph of Mr Ravlich and his and the complainant’s
or not there is any basis for the criticisms of Mr Ravlich and his actions in
issuing the Trespass notice is not a matter
for this Tribunal to determine. The
author of the posts is entitled to his opinions and free to disseminate them
within the confines
of the law.
question for the Panel and for this Tribunal is whether or not Ms Un was in
breach of the Code of Conduct by sharing the post.
my mind there is no doubt that she was. By sharing the post Ms Un amplified and
apparently adopted the commentary described in
paragraph 20 above. She did not
disavow the tone or sentiment of the post and by sharing it facilitated further
negative commentary.
In my view, it is quite clearly not the way the Code of
Conduct anticipates an elected Councillor should respond to a perceived
an oral hearing of the proceeding on 6 November 2024, there was some discussion
between the parties about the mechanics of FaceBook.
In particular there was
discussion about whether or not Ms Un was able to vet, block or remove comments
from her FaceBook page.
I am confident that Ms Un had the ability to remove
comments from her own FaceBook page and to block individuals from
commenting.
took neither of those actions in response to commentary that had been initiated
by her act in sharing the offending post. Neither did she distance herself
from the offending post.
if I am wrong about Ms Un’s ability to manage comments and/or posts on her
own page, the primary act of sharing the offending post was deliberate and
in breach of clauses 3 and 5 of the code of conduct.
is no suggestion that Ms Un did not deliberately share the post. She was in a
position to vet it and to make a decision about
the appropriateness of sharing
it. She was also in a position to consider whether the inclusion of the
photographs was appropriate.
The offending behaviour of Ms Un was not simply
the publishing of photographs but the publishing of overtly critical and
material relating to Mr Ravlich. That behaviour was exacerbated by her
inaction in curating her FaceBook page.
my view it does not matter that Mr Ravlich and the complainant may have provided
consent for their daughter’s photograph
to be published on the internet in
a different context. There was clearly no permission or consent to have the
photograph published
in the context of a public grievance aimed at Mr Ravlich as
a staff member of the Council.
agree that the sharing of the post was discourteous toward at least Mr Ravlich
and his family.
Applicant complains that the Panel incorrectly found that Mr Ravlich was acting
in “[the performance] of duties within the
course of the staff
member’s employment.” She argues that Mr Ravlich was not acting
within the course of his employment
a number of bases he was not properly authorised to issue the Trespass notice;
decision to issue the Trespass Notice was infected by apprehended or actual
submission of the Applicant is that the Panel was in error in finding that the
conduct of Mr Ravlich in issuing and/or extending
the Trespass order formed part
of his “duties within the course of the staff member’s
employment.” This submission
is based broadly on a view that Mr Ravlich
was not properly authorised under the
Trespass Act 2023
to issue any
warning to stay off the Council premises.
do not consider it necessary to closely analyse the Applicant’s
submissions on these points for the purpose of coming to any
position regarding
whether or not the Trespass Notice was valid. NTCAT has no jurisdiction to
determine the validity or otherwise
of a Trespass Notice. It is clear that the
Notice was ostensibly issued by Mr Ravlich in the course of his employment with
the Council.
correspondence provided to the Tribunal by the Applicant, her legal
representative wrote to Mr Ravlich on 22 August 2023 in an
email which
“your purported notice to stay off is misconceived both in fact and at
law. I anticipate instructions to file an urgent case
in the Supreme Court
seeking declarations that Alderman Un is a person authorised by law to
attend the meetings of Council.”
any such application was made I do not know, but it was certainly within the
Applicant’s rights to challenge the Trespass
Notice in any way open to
her. That did not give the Applicant licence to air her grievances publicly in
a way that contravened
the Code of Conduct. It did not reduce the need for her
to act with courtesy or to refrain from reprimanding a staff
short – it does not matter whether Mr Ravlich was or was correctly
performing duties in the course of his employment. Ms
Un’s behaviour in
sharing the post which berated and shamed him amounted to a very public
reprimand and was consequently a
breach of the code of conduct.
Applicant also asserts error on the part of the 1
Respondent on the
basis of an apprehension of bias. That submission is based solely on the fact
that the panel constituted by the
same members had considered similar and
related complaints against Ms Un.
written submissions the 1
Respondent asserts that “On 6
December 2023, five identical Code of Conduct complaints against the Applicant
under section
124(3) of the Act were referred to the Local Government
Association of the Northern Territory (
). One of those five
complaints was the complaint...The five complaints were essentially identical
and all related to the same Facebook
posts published by the Applicant on 30
November 2023. The Respondent Panel considered and determined all five
complaints.”
Respondent submits, the High Court in
Ebner v Official
Trustee in Bankruptcy
considered the application of the apprehended bias
test and held that:
“First it requires the identification of what is said to lead a judge
(or juror) to decide a case other than on its legal and
factual merits. The
second step is no less important. There must be an articulation of the logical
connection between the matter
and the feared deviation from the course of
deciding the case on its merits. The bare assertion that a judge (or juror) has
an “interest”
in litigation, or an interest in a party to it, will
be of no assistance until the nature of the interest, and the asserted
with the possibility of departure from impartial decision making, is
articulated. Only then can the reasonableness of the asserted
apprehension of
bias be assessed.”
“the proposition that a mere similarity of factual issues, even between
same parties, is not sufficient to give rise to a relevant and
reasonable apprehension
of bias, was affirmed by the High Court in
Finance Sector Union of Australia; ex parte Illaton Pty Ltd
(1992) 107 ALR
Applicant has not articulated any logical connection between the fact that the
Panel considered a number of complaints arising
from a similar factual matrix
contemporaneously, with any likelihood of a deviation from deciding the case on
its merits.
circumstances where multiple similar complaints were required to be considered
by a limited pool of potential decision makers,
it would seem appropriate that
they should be considered together.
I have found that clauses 3 and 5 of the Code of Conduct were breached, I am
less convinced that the sharing of the post amounted
to the Human Rights Commission website, “Bullying is when people
repeatedly and intentionally use words or actions
against someone or a group of
people to cause distress and risk to their wellbeing...” There is no
definition of bullying
in the Code of Conduct.
Respondent found that bullying was made out, the decision
does not explain the basis upon which this finding was arrived at. It
consider what is required to establish bullying under the Code. In
circumstances where the actions of Ms Un were confined
to a single instance of
sharing a post, I am not satisfied that the action falls within the generally
accepted definition of bullying
which includes repeated
Northern Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
after reviewing a decision in its review jurisdiction the Tribunal
(a) Confirm the decision; or
(b) Vary the decision; or
(c) Set aside the decision and:
(i) Substitute its own decision; or
(ii) Send the matter back to the decision maker...
the reasons above I am not satisfied that a breach of clause 4 of the Code of
Conduct has been established. In my view the correct
decision is to find that
clauses 3 and 5 of the Code of Conduct have been breached. I will vary the
decision to that extent.
Nevertheless
I consider that the sanctions imposed by the 1
Respondent remain an
appropriate response to the actions of Ms Un in breaching clauses 3 and 5. I do
not intend to interfere with
either the reprimand or the requirements that she
apologise and undertake a refresher training on the Code of Conduct and social
Accordingly I will order that:
Respondent are substituted as
Respondent by “a prescribed corporation panel under
section 127
Local Government Act 2019
Respondent is substituted as the 2
Respondent.
decision of the 1
Respondent dated 1 February 2024 is varied by
dismissing the complaint insofar as it relates to a breach of clause 4 of the
of Conduct.
be clear, the decision of the 1
Respondent dated 1 February 2024 is
confirmed insofar as it relates to breaches of clauses 3 and 5 of the Code of
Conduct and in
regards to the sanctions imposed under
section 127(5)(b)
Local Government Act 2019
15 November 2024
MARK O'REILLY
[2000] HCA 63
Commissioner of Taxation, Re
[2013] AATA 423
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (13.9 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter