URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTSC/2025/76.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:23:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The King v Hunt [2025] NTSC 76 (17 October 2025)
The King v Hunt
PARTIES: THE KING
HUNT, Timothy
TITLE OF COURT: SUPREME COURT OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: 22314625
DELIVERED: 17 October 2025
HEARING DATES: 30-31 July 2025
JUDGMENT OF: Brownhill J
CATCHWORDS:
EVIDENCE – Admissibility and relevance -
Evidence (National Uniform
Legislation)
ss 97(1), 102(2) - Whether testimonial evidence relating to the
accused cutting the deceased's throat and making a threat to cut the
throat of a
witness admissible as tendency evidence – Single incidence of conduct in
addition to charged conduct – Tendency
evidence made up of a single
instance of conduct in addition to alleged conduct may have significant
probative value – Whether
tendency to apply bladed weapons to throats of
others or make threats to do so makes it more likely that the accused cut the
throat – Tendency to apply bladed weapons to the throats
of others or threaten to do so found to make it more likely that the
accused cut
the deceased’s throat with a knife – Proposed tendency evidence
found to have significant probative value
– Probative value found to
outweigh unfair prejudice to accused – Proposed tendency evidence found to
be admissible
EVIDENCE – Admissibility and relevance –
Evidence (National
Uniform Legislation) Act
ss 81, 85, 90, 137, 138 -
Police Powers and
Responsibilities Act 2000
- Admissibility of
admissions made to Police whilst in custody – Whether recorded police
interview should be excluded from
evidence on the basis that it was obtained
improperly – Where police interview is conducted in another jurisdiction
Erroneous assumption by Police that different jurisdictional
entitlements would apply - Failure to inform the accused of his entitlement
speak to a friend, relative or lawyer to try to arrange for them to be present
during Police interview – Failure to delay
Police interview to permit the
accused to arrange for a lawyer to be present - Accused willing to proceed with
interview without
a lawyer present – Accused received legal advice and
aware of right to silence
Admissions in recorded statement not
found to have been obtained improperly – Accused lied to police and denied
any involvement
with death of deceased during Police interview - Probative
value and importance of recorded interview found to be considerable –
Probative value of the recorded interview found not to be outweighed by the
danger of unfair prejudice to the accused – Recorded
police interview
found to be admissible
EVIDENCE – Admissibility and relevance –
Evidence (National
Uniform Legislation) Act
ss 90, 137 - Admissibility of recorded conversation
between Police and accused where accused is unaware conversation is being
– No impropriety on the part of Police officers – No
intention nor expectation that the accused would provide any information
might be admissible as evidence - Recording of interactions during
transportation found to be standard practice – Probative
value of recorded
conversation not outweighed by danger of unfair prejudice to the accused - Two
portions of recorded conversations
with the accused during transportation found
to be admissible
EVIDENCE – Admissibility and relevance –
Evidence (National
Uniform Legislation) Act
ss 85, 90 137 - Consciousness of guilt evidence-
Where post offending conduct includes setting fire to the body of the deceased,
threatening eye witnesses and lying about involvement with the deceased’s
death for a significant period of time - Whether
evidence of post-offending
conduct admissible as evidencing consciousness of guilt – Whether
post-offence conduct admissible
as an admission of murder as opposed to
manslaughter – Post-offending conduct found to not be equally consistent
with the offences
of murder and manslaughter – Rational to rely on
post-offending conduct to establish consciousness of guilt in respect of murder
rather than manslaughter - For the jury to decide whether post-offence conduct
evidences consciousness of guilt in respect of murder
as opposed to manslaughter
– Evidence for post-offending conduct found to be admissible to establish
consciousness of guilt
Hughes v The Queen
[2017] HCA 20
(2017) 263 CLR 338
IMM v The Queen
[2016] HCA 14
257 CLR 300
Nguyen v The Queen
(2020) 94 ALJR 686
The Queen v
(2016) 258 CLR 308
The Queen v Downs
[2019] NTSC 7
The Queen v Lisoff
[1999] NSWCCA 364
The Queen v White
Aravena v The Queen
[2015] NSWCCA 288
(2015) 91 NSWLR 258
BD v The Queen
Cornwell v The Queen
[2010] NSWCCA 59
CV v Director of
Public Prosecutions
[2014] VSCA 58
CW v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 288
Derwish v The Queen
[2016] VSCA 72
Director of Public Prosecutions v
[2024] HCA 15
(2024) 98 ALJR 644
Ebborn v The King
[2025] NTCCA 2
[2024] TASCCA 3
HML v The Queen
[2008] HCA 16
(2008) 235 CLR 334
v The Queen
[1988] HCA 50
(1988) 165 CLR 292
Kadir v The Queen
[2020] HCA 1
(2020) 267 CLR 109
Martin v The Queen
[2015] ACTCA 38
Mole v Prior
(2016) 36 NTLR
NAM v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 95
Parker v Comptroller-General of
(2009) 252 ALR 619;
Police v Williams
[2014] SASC 177
(2014) 246 A Crim R
[2009] ACTSC 98
(2009) 212 A Crim R 442
RH v The Queen
[2014] NSWCCA 71
(2014) 241 A
TB v The Queen
[2019] NSWCCA 224
The King v Marcus
[2025] NTSC 39
The Queen v AW
[2018] NTSC 29
The Queen v Bauer
[2018] HCA 40
(2018) 266 CLR 56
The Queen v Ciantar
[2006] VSCA 263
[2006] 16 VR 26
The Queen v
(1998) 45 NSWLR 442
The Queen v FE
[2013] NSWSC 1692
The Queen v Grech
[2017] NSWCCA 288
The Queen v Jennings
The Queen v Layt
[2018] NTSC 36
The Queen v Visagie
[2021] NTSC 73
Tim Barr Pty Ltd v Narui Gold Coast Pty Ltd
[2009] NSWSC 769
Vagg v The Queen
[2020] NSWCCA 134
, referred to
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
Criminal Code 1983
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation) Act
(NT) ss 81, 85, 90, 97,
98, 101, 102, 137, 138
Police Powers and Responsibilities Act 2000
Judicial college of Victoria,
Criminal Charge Book
Stephen Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
(Thomson Reuters, 19
REPRESENTATION:
Crown: D Mandie with D Jones
Accused: M Aust SC with N Goodfellow
Solicitors:
Crown: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Accused: Bryson Kelly
Judgment category classification: B
Judgment ID Number: Bro2513
Number of pages: 113
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
The King v Hunt
[2025] NTSC 76
No. 22314625
TIMOTHY HUNT
CORAM: BROWNHILL J
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 17 October 2025)
[1] The accused
is charged with the murder of Tony Rowe (‘deceased’). The parties
sought pre-trial rulings on the admissibility
of various evidence to be relied
on by the Crown at trial.
[2] The Crown
sought to rely on coincidence evidence in the form of: (a) the evidence of the
two witnesses present at the time of
the deceased’s killing, Keith Waldock
and Jazmine Shier, that, immediately after the accused had done so, the accused
them he had just cut the deceased’s throat; (b) the evidence of Keith
Waldock that the accused had placed a sharp object against
his throat and
threatened him; (c) the evidence of an intercepted telephone conversation in
which the accused told his mother that
he would cut Jazmine Shier’s throat
and put her in the boot too; and (d) the evidence of the recorded conversation
transportation by police of the accused in which the accused said he
had threatened to cut the throat of his ex-partner’s father.
The Defence
objected to this evidence on the basis that it did not have significant
probative value and that the probative value
of the proposed coincidence
evidence did not outweigh the danger of unfair prejudice to the accused.
[3] The Crown
sought to rely on tendency evidence in the form of: (a) the evidence relating to
the charged act which involved cutting
the deceased’s throat with a
Stanley knife; and (b) the evidence of Keith Waldock about the accused placing a
sharp object
against his throat and threatening him. The Defence objected to the
admissibility of the proposed tendency evidence on the bases
that the proposed
tendency evidence did not have significant probative value and that the
probative value of the proposed tendency
evidence did not outweigh the danger of
unfair prejudice to the accused.
[4] The Crown
sought to rely on things said by the accused during an interview with Northern
Territory Police whilst he was in Queensland
as admissions and lies evidencing
consciousness of guilt. The Defence objected to the admissibility of any
admissions or lies on
the basis that the evidence was improperly obtained
because the Northern Territory Police did not afford the accused the rights he
was entitled to under the
Police Powers and Responsibilities Act 2000
(Qld), the accused was not properly cautioned, did not understand his right to
silence and consequently did not voluntarily participate
in the interview with
police. Further, the Defence argued that it would be unfair to the accused to
permit the Crown to adduce the
evidence and its probative value was outweighed
by the danger of unfair prejudice to the accused.
[5] The Crown
sought to rely on two portions of a conversation between the accused and
Queensland Police officers, recorded without
the accused’s knowledge, as
the Police transferred him from the prison to the Queensland Police Station
where he was interviewed.
One portion of the conversation is said to be a lie
evidencing consciousness of guilt and the other is part of the coincidence
referred to above. The Defence objected to the admission of that
evidence on the basis that it would be unfair to the accused to
permit the Crown
to adduce the evidence given that he was unaware that it was being
[6] The Crown
sought to rely on the above evidence and other evidence of lies by the accused
and various other post-offence conduct
as evidence of consciousness of guilt and
as lies going to the jury’s assessment of his credibility. The Defence
objected to
the admission of the evidence for these purposes on the basis that,
at the voir dire, the accused pleaded guilty to the charge of
manslaughter of
the deceased, with the effect that the evidence is not probative of the facts in
issue, arguing that the only fact
in issue is whether the accused intended to
kill or cause serious harm to the deceased.
[7] On 31 July
2025, I ruled that the evidence sought to be relied on by the Crown was
admissible, with reasons to follow. These are
[8] The accused
is charged by an indictment dated 20 February 2025 with the murder of Tony Rowe,
contrary to s 156 of the
Criminal Code 1983
[9] The Crown
case is that the deceased and Keith Waldock (‘Waldock’) had known
each other for about 12 years and were
good mates. They were also related to
each other in an Aboriginal way. Waldock and the deceased worked together on a
commercial fishing
boat. Waldock knew the deceased’s family well,
including his sister, SR, and his mother, AL.
[10] The accused
met the deceased through the deceased’s sister, NR. The accused and the
deceased had known each other for about
six months prior to the alleged
offending. They socialised together in the months leading up to the alleged
offending. The accused
had driven the deceased around as the deceased did not
have a car.
[11] Jazmine
Shier (‘Shier’) was 20 years old at the time of the alleged
offending. She had moved to the Northern Territory
from Perth about eight months
before the alleged offending occurred.
[12] In around
mid-May 2022, the deceased asked a friend to introduce him to someone who could
supply him with cannabis. The deceased
told that friend that he and a guy called
‘Tim’ were looking to sell the cannabis in an Aboriginal
[13] On 24 May
2022, the accused and Shier began communicating on the Tinder online dating
application, then on the SnapChat application.
They met in person that night.
The next day, they began communicating via text message and speaking on the
phone. On 26 May 2022,
they spent the night together at an Airbnb
[14] On 27 May
2022, AL drove the deceased to Francis Bay to collect some things from a fishing
boat and the deceased ran into Waldock
there. AL drove them both back to her
reluctantly agreed.
After they arrived at AL’s home, the accused arrived
there in his car, a silver Ford Falcon (‘Ford’). Up to this
the accused and Waldock did not know each other. AL joked that she wished the
accused would drive the deceased and Waldock
to Katherine to get Waldock’s
car. The accused agreed. Before they left, the accused showed Waldock an axe he
had, which he
said he usually kept in the Ford, on the driver’s side of
the car. The accused left the axe and a number of other belongings
Ford at AL’s home before departing for Katherine.
[15] For some of
the trip to Katherine, Waldock sat in the front passenger seat of the Ford. He
noticed a number of box cutters lying
in the centre console, including a grey
Stanley knife. Upon arrival in Katherine, the accused dropped Waldock at his car
at Waldock’s ex-partner’s home. Waldock drove his car back
to Darwin. The deceased and the accused drove back to Darwin
in the Ford.
Waldock arrived in Darwin, he did not want to leave his car at his
brother’s home. The accused suggested he park it
at the residence where
the accused was staying in Staghorn Court (‘Staghorn Court’), which
was around the corner. Waldock
agreed. He drove to Staghorn Court and parked his
car. Three people lived at Staghorn Court: JM1, JM2 and HL.
accused, the deceased and Waldock spent the rest of the day together, driving
around Darwin in the Ford. Thereafter, the
deceased was dropped off at
AL’s home and Waldock and the accused returned to Staghorn Court. At
around 4am, Waldock went to
sleep in his car. The accused stayed at the Staghorn
Court residence.
[18] On 28 May
2022, at around 11am, the accused drove the Ford to AL’s home with Waldock
where they collected the deceased.
The accused also collected the axe he had
left there the day before. Just after midday, the accused drove Waldock and the
to a bottle shop where they bought a carton of beer. They all then went
to Rapid Creek and drank the beer. They spent the day together.
The deceased and
Waldock drank a lot of alcohol and became significantly intoxicated. At around
1.30pm, they drove in the Ford to
a residence where SR was present. The deceased
asked SR for some ‘weed’ for ‘Timmy’. The Police were at
same residence for an unrelated reason, so the accused, the deceased and
Waldock drove away together. At around 3pm, the deceased
called AL and told her
he would be ‘going bush’ soon.
[19] Between
then and around 6.30pm, the accused, the deceased and Waldock drove to
SR’s home. The deceased was drunk. He asked
SR if she knew anyone who had
lots of ‘marijuana’. She told him he does not even smoke and to go
away, go to bed and
stop drinking. When the accused got out of the Ford, the
deceased yelled at him to get back in the car and not come into SR’s
The deceased also twice telephoned the friend he had earlier asked about
cannabis, but the calls went unanswered.
[20] Later, the
accused, Waldock and the deceased went to a shopping centre in Palmerston. The
accused and the deceased had an argument
which started to get physical. The
accused claimed the deceased owed him $10,000. Waldock said he was hungry, so
they drove to a
Tavern in Leanyer (‘Tavern’).
[21] At around
6.45pm, the accused called Shier and spoke to her for a few minutes.
[22] At around
7.45pm, the accused dropped the deceased and Waldock off at the Tavern and left
to pick up Shier. The deceased and
Waldock were refused service at the Tavern
because of their intoxication. They were ejected from the bar. The deceased went
beer garden and spoke to other patrons. Waldock played on the poker
machines, then went and waited out the front of the Tavern for
the others. The
accused returned in the Ford with Shier. Waldock met them in the car park and
told them that he and the deceased
had been refused entry to the Tavern. This
was the first time Shier had met Waldock. Waldock said he was staying in the
Ford to drink
more beer. Waldock stood in the car park, smoking and drinking.
The accused and Shier went into the Tavern and had a drink.
[23] At around
8pm, the deceased was asked to leave the beer garden because of his
intoxication. He was escorted through the bar area
and saw the accused with
Shier. This was the first time Shier had met the deceased. Security then asked
the group to leave. The accused
had the deceased’s phone and held it out
towards him. The deceased snatched the phone from him. The accused and the
had a heated verbal argument after which the accused physically removed
the deceased from the Tavern by pushing him outside. At some
point, the accused
again took the deceased’s phone from him. The accused pushed the deceased
to the Ford in the car park, yelling
and arguing. He pushed the deceased into
the Ford and walked away. Waldock spoke with the deceased for some time then got
[24] Just after
8pm, the accused returned to the Tavern and he and Shier finished their drinks.
They exited the Tavern and walked
to the Ford. The accused gave Shier his keys
and told her to drive. He said they were going to his friend’s house.
into the driver’s seat, the accused was in the front passenger
seat and Waldock and the deceased were in the back seat. At
around 8.20pm, they
left the Tavern in the Ford.
[25] The accused
told Shier to drive from the car park, heading for Staghorn Court. As they
drove, the deceased said to Shier that
he thought he knew her from somewhere.
The accused became defensive and told the deceased he did not know Shier and no
one knew her
because she was only new to the Northern Territory.
[26] The accused
and Waldock spoke about a trip they intended to make over the next couple of
days to a community to sell cannabis,
and about how the accused had wanted the
deceased to organise the purchase of two kilograms of cannabis for that trip,
but the accused
had not done so. The accused said he should have dealt with SR
instead of the deceased because SR was ‘higher up’. The
demanded the passcode to the deceased’s phone. The deceased refused to
provide the passcode, which agitated the accused.
The accused said the deceased
owed him between $7,000 and $10,000 for not organising the cannabis. The
deceased was highly intoxicated.
He opened a beer from the carton in the back
seat. The accused turned around, knocked the beer from the deceased’s hand
hit him with his hand, leaning against Shier to do so. Shier asked if she
should pull over. The accused told her to keep driving.
[27] Shier drove
the Ford to an area near the Thorak Cemetery. The accused and the deceased
continued to argue about the passcode
to the deceased’s phone and the
money that the accused claimed the deceased owed to him. Waldock asked where
they were and
the accused said words to the effect of: ‘At the fucking
cemetery, where this cunt should be’. They pulled over. Shier
remained in
the Ford. The accused and the deceased got out of the Ford, arguing and engaging
in a physical scuffle. The accused continued
to demand the passcode to the
deceased’s phone. He pushed the deceased back inside the Ford.
[28] The accused
directed Shier to turn off the road they were on, pull into an area off the road
and turn off the car. They were
on a gravel area on the road going toward the
cemetery, not far from the Campbell Road turnoff. They were at this location
from around
8.30pm to 9.30pm.
[29] Whilst
still seated in the front passenger seat of the Ford, the accused turned around,
grabbed the deceased and demanded the
passcode to his phone. Waldock told the
deceased they need the passcode now. The accused and Waldock got out of the
Ford. The accused
opened the rear door, grabbed the deceased by the ankles and
pulled him out of the car, causing him to hit his head on the chassis
open car door. The accused told Shier to stay in the Ford where she was.
deceased was standing against the rear passenger side of the Ford. The accused
and Waldock started punching and kicking the
deceased to the head, chest and
stomach, demanding the passcode to his phone so they could speak to SR. This
assault continued for
around 20 minutes, during which the accused and Waldock
punched and kicked the deceased at least 40 times. Waldock hit the deceased
than once. The deceased had blood on his face, was holding his ribs and
struggling to talk. The accused and Waldock told the
deceased he owed them
money, he had ruined ‘the whole run’ and people who were counting on
them to do the run would be
coming after them.
[31] The accused
walked to the driver’s side of the Ford, opened the driver’s door
and picked up his axe from the floor
space between the door and the
driver’s seat. He returned to the deceased and started hitting the ground
with the back of the
axe, attempting to scare the deceased into providing the
passcode to his phone. The accused did this about five times, screaming
deceased owed him money and to give the passcode so SR could organise it.
[32] The accused
went back to the driver’s side of the Ford. He took a pair of wire cutters
from the pocket in the driver’s
door and used them to cut the
deceased’s little toe off. The accused put his head through the front
passenger door and told
Shier he had cut the deceased’s toe off. The
accused was laughing and said words to the effect of: ‘He took it like a
man, he didn’t even flinch. He didn’t even make a noise.’
[33] When the
accused took out the wire cutters, Waldock became uncomfortable, looking like he
did not want to be there. Toward the
end of this period, Waldock walked off,
looking shocked and like he was going to be sick. Waldock said to the accused:
him alone, he’s had enough already’ and:
‘That’s enough, that’s enough, leave him. We will pick him
when he wakes up in the morning’.
[34] The accused
said that if anyone finds out that he cut the deceased’s toe off, SR would
send people after him and he would
be dead. The accused returned to the Ford and
took a Stanley knife from the driver’s door. He went back to the deceased
the Ford, picked him up and was standing over him, holding him in a
headlock position. The accused used the Stanley knife to cut
deceased’s throat open. The deceased fell face first onto the ground and
was not moving. The accused said to Waldock: ‘Get
back in the fucking car.
The debt’s been cleared. I’ve just cut the cunt’s
[35] The accused
went to the front passenger door, with the Stanley knife still in his hand, and
told Shier he had cut the deceased’s
throat and knew for a fact he had hit
a main artery. The accused said: ‘It’s done, it’s done,
we’re going’.
[36] The accused
got back into the front passenger seat of the Ford with the Stanley knife in his
hand and told Shier he could still
hear the deceased breathing but he was
choking, ‘drowning on his own blood’, that the accused ‘knew
for a fact’
that he had ‘hit a main artery’ and that the
deceased ‘wouldn’t live for long’, he was dead.
accused told Shier to start the Ford but then asked her to stop. The accused got
out of the Ford and dragged the deceased’s
body by the legs into the trees
in the bushland nearby, then kicked dirt over the deceased’s blood and
drag marks to hide the
signs of what had happened.
[38] Around
the time the accused had cut the deceased’s throat, Waldock was
‘freaking out’ and had urinated himself.
He also took a couple of
steps kicking dirt over his urine and the blood on the ground. The accused and
Waldock did this for about
five minutes. The accused was also searching for the
deceased’s toe.
[39] The accused
said to Waldock: ‘I’m not going to tell you again, get back in the
fucking car’ and Waldock got
back into the rear seat of the Ford on the
passenger side. The accused got into the front passenger seat and told Shier to
directing her to Staghorn Court.
they were half-way down the road, the accused turned around to Waldock in the
back seat, put the blade of a sharp object (an
axe or a Stanley knife) hard up
against Waldock’s throat and said that if he ever goes to ‘the
coppers’ or says
anything to anyone about this, the accused would go to
Katherine and kill Waldock’s partner and father-in-law. The accused
‘You saw what I just done to [the deceased]. Don’t make me go to
Katherine and do your family’ or ‘...do
your partner and
father-in-law’. The accused also said that if SR found out what had
happened there would be trouble.
[41] At around
9.35pm, the accused, Waldock and Shier drove to Staghorn Court. They were
arrived at Staghorn Court at around 9.45pm. While still in the Ford, the accused
and Waldock talked about taking the deceased’s
body on a fishing trip and
using him as ‘croc bait’. The accused said he was going to chop him
up but his axe would not
be sharp enough.
[43] When they
arrived at Staghorn Court, JM1, JM2 and HL were present. The accused met JM1 at
the residence’s door and when
she asked what happened, the accused told
her they had hit a kangaroo. The accused asked JM1 for a tarp and opened the
boot of the
Ford. Everyone went inside. Shier was given a joint to smoke.
[44] Everyone
else went into the back room of the residence and started moving things around.
The accused took everything from the
boot of the Ford into the back room. The
accused took his axe into the house and filled up the bath. He asked JM1 if she
chemical cleaner, and she said she did not. The accused used laundry
liquid or something similar and soaked the axe in the bath.
He used his
multi-tool knife to peel layers off the handle of the axe. He told Shier that he
was trying to wash blood off the handle
as it was visible. He also washed his
accused had the deceased’s phone with him. He asked HL if he could unlock
and clear it so they could sell it. When
HL saw that it was an iPhone, he told
the accused it could be tracked and to ‘get rid of it’. The accused
snapped the
deceased’s phone and smashed the screen, destroying it. The
last time the deceased’s phone connected to the phone service
9.43pm in the Woodroffe area.
[46] Waldock
was keen to leave Staghorn Court and stayed about 20 minutes. He had collected
his things from the Ford. The accused
and Shier walked to the Ford and Waldock
was standing there too. The accused told Waldock to remember what he had just
done to the
deceased and threatened him again, saying words to the effect of:
‘Don’t make me come looking for you or your family’
‘If you go to the coppers, or anyone, I’ll do your family’.
Waldock was panicking, pacing, fidgeting and breathing
fast, saying he was
worried about his wife and kids. The accused was calm, assuring Waldock this
would not fall on him.
[47] At around
10.08pm, Waldock got into his car and left Staghorn Court. He drove around the
corner to his brother’s house.
He parked there and slept briefly, leaving
at around 1.30am with his cousin-sister, to drive to the fishing boat. Waldock
left Darwin
on the fishing boat at around 9-10am the following morning. The
boat’s shore manager asked Waldock where the deceased was.
Waldock told
him he had left the deceased with his mate Tim. Waldock said this because he was
afraid of the accused and of the threats
the accused had made.
[48] The accused
and Shier remained at Staghorn Court. The accused told Shier to stay in the back
room. She fell asleep for a period
then began to say she wanted to go home.
gave the accused a large tent with no poles in response to his request for a
tarp. The accused laid that tent in the empty
boot of the Ford. The accused told
Shier they had to go. He got into the driver’s seat of the Ford, with
Shier in the passenger
seat. They left Staghorn Court at speed at around
[50] The accused
drove back to the location of the deceased’s body. As he drove, he was
looking all around for Police. He drove
past the spot a few times first, talking
to Shier about drones. He told Shier to sit in the Ford and stay there because
she did not
need to ‘see this’.
[51] The accused
dragged the deceased’s body from the trees. He searched for the
deceased’s toe but could not find it.
He gave up saying: ‘The dogs
will take care of him’.
accused wrapped the deceased’s body in the tent material and put it into
the boot of the car. He then got into the
driver’s seat and began driving
away at speed. Around this time, the accused asked Shier where his phone was as
he could not
find it. He used Shier’s phone to make numerous calls to his
phone to locate it. He drove back to the original location trying
to find it.
Ultimately, he found it in the back seat of the Ford. Mobile phone data locates
the accused and Shier in this vicinity
from around 12.30am until 2.00am.
[53] The accused
drove to Weddell. Along the way, the accused stopped near some tracks and threw
the deceased’s snapped phone
[54] The accused
told Shier he had to burn the body. He stopped the car, took out a jerry can,
some pieces of clothing and five small
bottles from the back seat of the Ford.
He filled the bottles with petrol that he syphoned from the Ford’s fuel
tank. The accused
put the jerry can and the bottles onto the back seat of the
Ford and kept driving. At a railway crossing, the accused turned off
along the railway track for some time before stopping. He stopped at the
bushiest tree he could find.
[55] The accused
got out and tried to open the boot. He could not open it and broke the latch on
the boot by pulling it off to get
the boot open. He dragged the deceased’s
body from the boot, still wrapped in the tent, and over to the tree. He told
to get the bottles from the Ford. He poured petrol onto the tent, lit a
cigarette, had a couple of puffs and then put it into the
mouth. He said he was going to give the deceased ‘one last smoke’,
but the cigarette went out.
accused took some paper rubbish from the Ford, lit it on fire and told Shier to
start the Ford. She reached over from the
passenger seat and did so. The accused
threw the lit material and ran to the Ford, got in the driver’s seat and
started reversing.
There was a loud ‘bang’ and the tree next to the
deceased’s body caught on fire. The accused started laughing.
[57] Shier told
the accused that she wanted to go home. The accused told her she could not and
he would drop her off in the morning.
She was terrified of him.
[58] The accused
drove back to Staghorn Court along back roads, arriving around 4am. On the drive
back, the accused said to Shier
words to the effect of: ‘You can’t
leave me now, you can’t tell anyone about this.’
[59] When they
got back to Staghorn Court, HL and JM1 were there. At first, JM1 did not want to
open the door, but the accused told
her words to the effect of:
‘It’s sorted’ and she let them in. The accused kept both his
and Shier’s phones.
Shier was left alone in the lounge room and fell
asleep. The accused later woke her up, saying he was going to bed and would take
her home in the morning.
[60] When Shier
woke up in the morning, she asked the accused a number of times if she could go
as they had to ‘do some stuff’.
Hours passed. JM1 and HL later left Staghorn Court.
accused moved the Ford into the driveway, opened the boot and took out
everything that was inside, including the carpet,
the spare wheel and a piece of
wood. He washed the inside of the Ford, using the hose to try and get the
deceased’s blood out
of the boot lining. A lot of blood had collected in
the bottom of the boot in the wheel well. The accused was laughing and telling
Shier about how he had the deceased in the boot. The accused said he needed to
get the blood out of the Ford, to give it a really
good clean, because it was
easily recognisable. When the water going down the driveway turned red with
blood, the accused moved the
Ford onto the grass to clean it there. The accused
removed the obvious signs of blood from the Ford and was angry that the tent
to line the boot and carry the body had not prevented the blood from
seeping through into the carpet and the spare wheel well.
[62] At some
point, the accused broke the spoiler from the Ford, either when he was at
Staghorn Court or when he was trying to get
the deceased’s body out of the
Ford. The accused gave up on cleaning the carpet and rolled it up and threw it
and the spoiler
against a fence at Staghorn Court. CCTV footage from the Tavern
on 28 May 2022 shows the Ford with the spoiler on it, but CCTV footage
Palmerston area at 8.18am on 29 May 2022 shows the Ford without a spoiler.
[63] Later that
day, the accused and Shier left Staghorn Court supposedly to take Shier home.
After they left, the accused said they
needed to go to Bunnings. They arrived at
Bunnings around 4pm. Both the accused and Shier walked through Bunnings
together. The accused
asked Shier: ‘What gets rid of blood?’ and she
replied that she did not know. They took two bottles of bleach and two
of acetone to the checkout. The accused told Shier he had no money but would be
paid next week. Shier paid for the bottles.
They then drove back to Staghorn
accused then scrubbed the Ford with the bleach, acetone, a hose and a scrubbing
brush, focussing on the boot area. He said
to Shier: ‘[The deceased] was a
bleeder’. This took around 20 minutes.
cleaning the car, the accused drove Shier to her home. He told her to
‘watch’ herself, that ‘people aren’t
find’, that he knew she had ‘no one up here’, that he was part
of a ‘bikie gang’ and knew where
she lived and worked. Shier went
into her room and cried.
30 May 2022, at around 2pm, AL called the accused and asked him where the
deceased was. She had called the deceased a number
of times and had no answer.
The accused told AL that the deceased had run off into the bush in Palmerston.
AL thought the accused
sounded panicky and scared. AL then reported to Police
that the deceased was missing. The accused and AL had three conversations
which he told her that the deceased had left the Ford at three different
the days that followed, the accused called and messaged Shier numerous times,
telling her to go back to work and keep doing
whatever she was doing. When Shier
left work, the accused called her or was there or was at her house or telling
her to meet him
somewhere. Shier interpreted this as the accused trying to prove
she could not get away from him, he was watching her and she had
to do whatever
he said. The accused threatened Shier, telling her he knew where she lived and
worked, that she had no car to get
around, that he was a bikie and was from
Darwin. Shier feared he knew bikies and would send them around to visit
[68] On 30 May
2022, the accused picked Shier up after work and took her to the beach. They
went to wash the car at a car wash and
the accused yelled at Shier that she had
missed spots.
or around 30 May 2022, the accused conducted a Google search on his phone for
‘what happens when an animal dies at the
31 May 2022, the accused called Shier and told her he was coming to pick her up,
she needed to jump in the Ford quickly and
not ask any questions. She did as he
said. He told her they were going to Tennant Creek for his work and he would
give her the Ford
to return in. That evening, the accused and Shier met up with
JM1 and HL at a caravan car park and collected some of the accused’s
belongings from them.
[71] At around
10.30pm, the accused and Shier stopped in Berry Springs, at the residence of an
associate of the accused, AD. The accused
had previously stored some of his
belongings at AD’s property. Earlier that day, AD had received messages
from the accused’s
former partner asking for some of her belongings. AD
had forwarded those messages to the accused and the accused had said he would
collect the items that afternoon.
AD’s property, the accused asked AD how to get rid of blood. The accused
and AD joked about moving the body and burying
him on AD’s large property.
The accused told AD that he was leaving the Northern Territory, was going to
take the Ford to the
beach and burn it, but then he would not have a car, he
could leave the keys in the Ford and hope it would be picked up by locals
burnt or he could burn the back of the Ford and hope someone takes it and
crashes it. The accused did not want to do this as
the Ford was the only thing
he owned, but burning the Ford was the only way, because if Police got the Ford,
he was guaranteed to
get charged.
[73] The accused
opened the boot of the Ford and AD saw that it was empty, the carpet lining and
spare tyre had been removed and the
boot had been freshly cleaned. The accused
told AD that he had someone in there and he is not far from here, he needed to
Ford disappear, and asked if he could leave the Ford on the property
and how to get rid of blood. The accused told AD that when Shier
Ford, someone was being a smart ass and was in the back seat so the accused had
leant over and ‘done something’.
The accused said that someone had
been reported missing by the missing person’s mother. The accused said no
one would know
if the missing person was actually missing because it would be
two weeks until the boat returned. AD asked where the person he had
‘bashed’ was and the accused said ‘around here’ and
changed the subject.
31 May 2022, AL was told by her friend, who had been at the Tavern on 28 May
2022, that he had seen the deceased, the accused
and others at the Tavern the
same evening.. AL called the accused and told him she knew that they had been at
the Tavern. The accused
told AL that he had ‘bought a whore’ and the
boys were in the Tavern while he ‘rooted’ her. He said he never
inside the Tavern. He said that after leaving the Tavern with the deceased and
Waldock, they drove towards Palmerston and dropped
Waldock off somewhere. The
deceased had argued with someone on the phone and then ran away on foot
somewhere near the Palmerston
Hospital, but he did not know exactly where.
[75] On 1 June
2022, during the drive of the accused and Shier to Tennant Creek, the accused
yelled at Shier to cover the Ford with
a sheet so it would not be recognised in
Katherine, to stay in the Ford as he fuelled it up, and to get back in the Ford
at a service
station because they were being followed. When Shier said she
wanted to go back to work, the accused said she was trying to abandon
told her to grab her ‘shit’ and ‘fuck off’. She got into
the Ford and started driving. The accused
threw his pocket knife at her in the
Ford. The accused got into another car, telling the driver that his Ford had
been stolen. He
chased Shier and sent her a text saying: ‘I am behind you
... pull over please’. When Shier pulled over and the other
driver left,
the accused grabbed Shier by the throat and yelled at her, emptied out the boot,
sat in the front seat and smashed the
Ford’s front window with his fist.
[76] During
the drive to Tennant Creek, the accused behaved erratically. He yelled at Shier
that she and her father ‘were next’.
He carried his axe and took it
into their accommodation, putting it in a pillow.
[77] When they
arrived at a hotel in Tennant Creek, the accused told Shier to stay in the room
and that women cannot be trusted. When
Shier said she needed to go home, the
accused lost his temper again.
[78] The accused
met a truck driver in connection with his work. He told Shier to drive the Ford
accused sent Shier a message saying that he
gave full ownership of the Ford to her. Shier drove the Ford straight home,
on 5 June 2022. She parked the Ford outside her residence. On the drive
back, the accused called her repeatedly.
[79] Once at
received a phone call and told her housemate
the call was from
‘Tim’s aunty’, telling her he had been arrested and to remove
the numberplates from the Ford,
which she did.
[80] After Shier
left Tennant Creek, the accused collected a truck and drove to Queensland.
3 June 2022, after viewing CCTV footage of the accused, the deceased, Waldock
and Shier at the Tavern, a Police officer (‘Trease’)
accused. The accused admitted he had been at the Tavern with the deceased and
Waldock, but said that after leaving the
Tavern, they went to the Gateway area
on the Stuart Highway, then pulled up near Howard Springs or Coolalinga where
the deceased
and Waldock got out of the Ford and only Waldock returned. He said
they went to the accused’s sister’s house in Moulden
and Waldock
left as soon as they arrived.
[82] Trease
asked about the unidentified female from the Tavern. The accused said she was a
‘Tinder root’, he did not
know her name, and they were no longer
matched on Tinder with the consequence that the name disappears.
[83] The accused
agreed to make a formal statement with Queensland Police about the matter when
he arrived.
[84] Northern
Territory Police arranged for Queensland Police to take the accused’s
statement in Mt Isa.
[85] On 4 June
2022, the accused was arrested by Queensland Police on unrelated matters. At the
time of his arrest, Police seized
an axe matching the description given by Shier
from the truck in which the accused had been travelling.
4 June 2022, at the watchhouse, the accused had a recorded conversation with
Police during which he admitted that: (a) he
knew the deceased and they were
close, although he had not known him for long; (b) the deceased was thrown out
of the Tavern for
being drunk and the accused had put him in the Ford with
Waldock; (c) the accused had been trying to have a drink with a female at
Tavern; (iv) they all left the Tavern together; and (v) the accused and the
deceased were trying to buy some ‘weed’
to sell but had not managed
to obtain it.
accused also said that: (a) he did know a 20 year old woman who was originally
from Perth named ‘Jazz’ who he
had seen a few times, but he did not
know the female he was with at the Tavern on 28 May 2022, she was just
‘some bitch off
Tinder’, he had never seen her before or since, they
were unmatched on Tinder so the contact was gone, he could not even remember
what that female looked like, she was ‘just some Tinder hookup from
Darwin’; (b) he did not know what had happened to
the deceased, who knows
some ‘shady people’, his sister is a ‘bikie’, and they
were threatening the accused
(c) the last time he saw the deceased was that night when they pulled up on the
side of the Stuart Highway between Howard Springs and Coolalinga, and he had
dropped Waldock off at his car at his sister’s
house and maybe Waldock
picked the deceased up; (d) the deceased had been depressed and crying that
night because his wife had left
him and people were saying he had killed
himself; (e) the deceased had just disappeared into the bush, he walks off like
he is ‘pissed’; (f) AL told the accused that the deceased
had been talking to someone from a Parap pub, the deceased
had been calling
someone and getting really worried and anxious, which is why the deceased and
the group got drunk that night; (g)
the female from the Tavern drove the Ford up
the road to a bus stop near the pools, got out and walked across the road, that
the last time he had seen her and he does not know where she lives; (h) the
deceased got out of the car and disappeared into the
bush; and (i) by repeatedly
asking where the deceased was, impliedly said that he did not know.
5 June 2022, the accused gave a written statement to Queensland Police in which
he repeated the admissions and lies told to
Police on 4 June 2022.
[89] On 6 June
2022, Police located the Ford outside Shier’s residence. They published a
media release showing an image of the
female depicted on the CCTV footage from
the Tavern seeking to identify her. Shier contacted Police to ask that her image
down. On 7 June 2022, Shier identified herself to Police as the female
in the image. Shier gave statements to Police but was too
afraid of the accused
and Waldock to disclose what she had witnessed. She was also afraid that they
would seek to implicate her.
She did inform Police about Staghorn Court. With
her consent, Police conducted an initial search of the Ford.
[90] On 8 June
2022, with the consent of Shier, Police seized the Ford. It later underwent
forensic examination. Shier led Police
to Staghorn Court as the location she,
the deceased, the accused and Waldock had gone on 28 May 2022. Shier informed
Police that
the accused had threatened her and that she was in fear for her
safety. Police went to Staghorn Court and located the spoiler from
the Ford, as
well as the empty bottles of acetone and bleach which were seized with the
consent of the residents.
[91] On 9 June
2022, Police executed a search warrant at Staghorn Court.
[92] On 10 June
2022, forensic testing of stains in the spare wheel well in the boot of the Ford
tested weakly positive to a presumptive
test for blood.
[93] On 11 June
2022, Shier provided Police with her phone, which underwent digital forensic
examination. Police provided Shier with
an audio recording device to record
phone conversations between herself and the accused.
[94] On 13 June
2022, forensic testing of the middle seat on the left side of the Ford tested
weakly positive to a presumptive test
for blood. A sample from a tape lift from
the middle seat was confirmed to be human blood and DNA testing of this sample
a mixed DNA profile from the accused and the deceased. The rear
passenger seat on the left side tested weakly positive to a presumptive
blood. A tape lift from the rear left passenger seat was confirmed to be human
blood and DNA testing of this sample returned
a mixed DNA profile from the
accused and the deceased.
15 June 2022, Shier and the accused had a phone conversation which she recorded.
The accused said that he was going to have
to buy her a new phone, her phone
would have to be smashed very soon because she had it on her when they
‘went for a drive’
and her ‘location says everything’.
He told her that if anyone tried to take her phone, she should smash it and the
she would get is a charge for destruction of evidence, he would pay the
fine and that was ‘better than the alternative’.
[96] On 16 June
2022, Shier informed Police she was departing Darwin for Perth as she had
pre-booked flights. She was escorted to
the airport by Police and went to
19 June 2022, the accused had a phone conversation with his mother, which was
lawfully intercepted and recorded. He said that
Shier was not talking to him
anymore, they had ‘shared history’, it was ‘what we’ve
done’, which was
nothing to do with ‘rooting’,
‘it’s old mate’.
20 June 2022, the accused had a phone conversation with his mother, which was
lawfully intercepted and recorded. He said that
Shier was not talking to him, he
had not heard from her all day, so: ‘Fuck the little dog. I’ll go up
there and cut her
throat and put her in the boot too’.
[99] On 22 June
2022, the swab from the stain in the spare wheel well of the Ford was confirmed
to be human blood and DNA testing
returned a DNA profile from the deceased.
[100] On 22 June
2022, the accused had a phone conversation with his mother, which was lawfully
intercepted and recorded. The accused
said he had been calling and messaging
Shier repeatedly and was receiving no reply. He said he wanted the Ford back and
to her house in Darwin and get it.
[101] Later that
day, the accused had a phone conversation with his mother, which was lawfully
intercepted and recorded. The accused
said Shier would not talk to him and said
he would ‘bash’ her.
[102] On 24 June
2022, the accused had a phone conversation with his mother, which was lawfully
intercepted and recorded. The accused
said Shier was not talking to him,
‘just being a dog’, he had not heard from her and might call her at
[103] On 24 June
2022, the accused had a phone conversation with a female associate which was
lawfully intercepted and recorded. She
said she thought the phone was
‘tapped’, he said it is ‘tapped’ and he would have to
get a new one, she said
Police would be contacting everyone he contacted that
night and if they came to her, she had removed all of their conversations and
would hide her phone and pretend she does not have one, and he said the Police
have his phone and his car.
[104] On 24 June
2022, the accused had a phone conversation with an associate, JM, which was
lawfully intercepted and recorded. He
said that Police had his car, ‘that
girl’ had given it to them, the phone was ‘bugged’, and he had
the battery out of his phone but hung onto it. JM said that when he took
the battery out of his phone, that would show his last location.
The accused
said he had bought another phone with a VPN location set to Perth, and he was
going to set it to America.
[105] On 25 June
2022, the accused had a phone conversation with an associate, WF, which was
lawfully intercepted and recorded. He
said that there was a good chance his
phone was ‘bugged ... cos of old mate going missing’.
[106] On 26 June
2022, the accused had a phone conversation with JM which was lawfully
intercepted and recorded. He said that he thought
‘buckled’, he had told her ‘stick with me ... you’ll be
right; go against me and you’re fucked’.
JM said he was told
Shier’s image had been taken down. The accused said he would Google that
because if it had been taken down
then she was cooperating with them.
1 July 2022, the accused had a phone conversation with an associate, TL, which
was lawfully intercepted and recorded. He
said that his phone was bugged, he
would look for a payphone, that ‘we’ were ‘on the piss’
and his mate walked
off into the bush and has not been seen since and now it was
a murder investigation.
[108] On 3 July
2022, Shier had a phone conversation with her father which was lawfully
intercepted and recorded. Shier described
her fear of the accused and panic
attacks triggered by knowing the accused was not in custody and Police did not
know where he was.
She said when the accused told her he was on his way to
Darwin she almost passed out.
[109] On 5 July
2022, the accused had a phone conversation with JM1 which was lawfully
intercepted and recorded. He said: ‘don’t
talk too much on this
phone’, the phone was bugged, Shier would not talk to him and she gave the
Ford to Police.
5 July 2022, the accused had a phone conversation with an associate, RT, which
was lawfully intercepted and recorded. He
said that he had bought the Ford from
bikies in Tasmania and hoped they did not do anything ‘sketchy’ in
it, like hurt
anybody or put anyone in the boot or bashed anyone in it and apart
from that, he was not worried. Police traced the previous owner
of the Ford,
which the accused had purchased in Tasmania, who did not have any association
with a bikie gang or criminal activity.
5 July 2022, the accused had a phone conversation with a Police officer
(‘Humphries’) which was lawfully intercepted
and recorded. The
accused said that he bought the Ford from bikies, that the deceased had said he
was going to Europe to get a European
woman, that the deceased had said he was
going back on the boat but then was not doing that because of some
‘Kiwi’ that
worked on the boat.
[112] On 21 July
2022, the accused had a phone conversation with his ex-partner, LR, which was
lawfully intercepted and recorded.
He said that his phones are
‘hot’, he is under investigation for murder. LR said she did not say
anything about that
and would not, and the accused cut her off and said he did
not know what she was on about and told her to ‘shut the fuck
[113] On 22
September 2022, the accused had a phone conversation with his mother, with LR
speaking in the background, which was lawfully
intercepted and recorded. To LR,
the accused said ‘I am cutting your fucking stepdad’s
[114] On 23
September 2022, the accused had a phone conversation with KT which was lawfully
intercepted and recorded. He said that
he had the feeling the Police want him
‘away for a while’, and they had something on him somewhere. KT said
do ‘with that car situation’. The accused said:
‘yeah that fucking other car’, ‘that fucking blue car’.
KT said the police had something from that car and the accused agreed. KT said
she told the accused to burn it or get rid of it in
general and the accused
[115] On 14
October 2022, Shier had a phone conversation with her friend, DD, which was
lawfully intercepted and recorded. Shier said
she was an anxious person since
‘that Darwin thing’ which had just ‘fucked me’, she was
still having nightmares
thinks she is over it, something else comes up, no one wants to know the truth,
various things would trigger her, they had not
found the deceased and she did
not know where he was, but what if he is found and it all ‘backfires on
me’, she was terrified
she would wake up with Police at the door and she
would be locked up, she was worried about being framed, if ‘he’ had
something to do with his mate disappearing, what would he have done to her, a
person he did not even know, she could have been murdered
and ended up in the
boot of ‘his’ car and no one would have known.
29 March 2023, the accused was transported from a correctional centre in
Queensland to the Rockhampton Police Station for
an interview with Northern
Territory Police. Two Queensland Police officers (‘Clark’ and
‘Stanborough’) escorted
the accused. Clark covertly recorded their
conversation with the accused. During the journey, the accused referred to
issues with
his former partner which led to her father threatening to cut the
accused’s throat, and the accused said: ‘I will cut
your throat you
maggot before I get my throat cut’. The accused also said he was the last
person to see the deceased. He also
said he was still holding out hopes that the
deceased was ‘holed up somewhere with some sheila’ or
29 March 2023, the accused participated in a recorded interview with Northern
Territory Police at the Rockhampton Police
Station. During the
(a) The accused denied that he knew Shier, saying he could not remember her
name, the ‘bird’ he picked up lived locally,
she did not attend
Staghorn Court after the Tavern on 28 May 2022 and he had no continued contact
with her. When he was told that
the Ford was handed to Police by Shier, and
asked what he could tell Police about her, he said: ‘Nothing’.
(b) The accused said that after leaving the Tavern, he pulled up on the Stuart
Highway at Humpty Doo or Howard Springs for a ‘piss’,
after which
the deceased walked off and did not come back out of the bush. At this time
there was only himself, the deceased and
Waldock in the Ford. After the deceased
walked off, he assumed Waldock was going to pick the deceased up.
(c) The accused said he went to AD’s property on the way to Tennant Creek
with someone that the accused had arranged to take
the Ford back to Darwin.
Referred to AD saying the boot liner of the Ford was not there and the boot was
clean, the accused said
it was clean because he had to put LR’s
‘shit’ in there. Earlier in the interview, he had said he had thrown
of LR’s things out the window and indicated animosity towards LR.
(d) The accused admitted that: (i) on 28 May 2022, he was drinking with the
deceased and Waldock at various pubs; (ii) they were
trying to buy
‘weed’ which he and the deceased wanted to sell ‘out
bush’ and smoke; (iii) he owned the Ford
then held by Police and when
shown photos of the Ford said there should be a spoiler on it, but it might have
fallen off; (iv) he
had been friends with the deceased for around six months;
(v) the deceased drank a lot, gets arrogant and disappears; (vi) on 28
2022, he was with a female at the Tavern with Waldock and the deceased; (vii) he
parked the Ford in the car park at the Tavern,
which then had the spoiler on it;
(viii) the deceased was being rude, agitated, ‘going off’ and
‘blind drunk’,
they were all ‘pretty fucking pissed’;
(ix) the deceased got evicted by bar staff and the accused removed him from the
venue, pushing him outside; (x) after leaving the Tavern, the female drove the
Ford, with the accused, the deceased and Waldock in
the passenger seats; (xi)
his phone was a Samsung and he had an application on it called ‘Who
Touched My Phone’ which
took photos when someone unlocked the phone; (xii)
he ‘should have’ had his phone on him the night the deceased
disappeared;
(xiii) he knew AD, who had set up a job for him in Queensland after
the deceased’s disappearance; and (xiv) he drove to Tennant
Creek in the
Ford and someone else drove it back to Darwin.
(e) The accused told Police that he did not have any real memory as to what
happened after leaving the Tavern, he was not sure if
he went to the Noonamah
area on that night. Asked what he did on 29 May 2022, he said he did not know,
he probably slept. He did
not recall going to Staghorn Court.
(f) The accused recalled a conversation with AL in which she told him to look
for the deceased, but he did not know where to look.
(g) The accused explained the recorded conversation with Shier referred to in
above by saying hers was
an iPhone and he was a lifetime Samsung user.
(h) Asked about cleaning the Ford, the accused said he washed it at the car wash
after going to the beach. Asked if he cleaned it
any other time or at any other
locations, he said he did not know. The accused said he was not sure if he went
to Bunnings on 29
May 2022 and purchased acetone and bleach and could not recall
(i) When told Shier had told Police she was with him when they went to Staghorn
Court, the accused said he was genuinely not sure,
confused and did not know.
(j) The accused explained the recorded conversation with his mother referred to
in paragraph
above by saying that
comment was taken out of context, and it was ‘just a twisted sense of
(k) Told that blood found in the wheel well and on the back seat of the Ford
matched with the deceased’s DNA, the accused said
he could not understand
the result in the wheel well but was not surprised about the back seat because
the deceased had an injury
to his hand or foot and was always lying down in the
back seat of the Ford.
(l) The accused did not know why he had undertaken the Google search referred to
in paragraph
above, said he is a
‘curious person’ and that he did not remember Googling that.
[118] On 29
March 2023, immediately after the formal recorded interview, the accused told
Police that he had expected the Police to
talk more about Waldock but there was
no mention of him, which was frustrating and suspicious.
[119] On 29
March 2023, the accused was transported back to the correctional centre by Clark
and Stanborough. Clark covertly recorded
their conversation, during which the
accused said there were three of them confirmed to be the last to be with the
deceased, but
only two of them had been mentioned and the other person had been
left out of it, AL had told the accused he did not sound guilty
because he still
talked to her, whereas Waldock did not talk to anyone, visit or check in with
the family, and that was the ‘fella’
that had not been mentioned at
[120] On 29
March 2023, the accused called LR from the correctional centre, which was
lawfully recorded. The accused discussed the
Police interview and told LR that
he had not been charged yet, discussed the evidence shown to him, and said he
was trying to work
out why Police found the deceased’s blood in the boot
of the Ford.
[121] Later that
day, the accused called LR again and discussed the interview further, denying he
did anything. He said Police were
looking at him and Shier as having ‘done
it’ and said he told Police that they had it all wrong and they should
investigate
properly. When LR said: ‘instead of investigating the wrong
people’, the accused said that they were not really because
last to be seen with the deceased, so they are looking at the right people in a
way, that he is not the wrong person to
look at because it ‘looks bad,
ugly’. He said he was part of it because the deceased was out drinking
[122] Later that
day, the accused called LR again and said that at some point there had been
carpet lining the boot of the Ford, but
it had disappeared.
10 May 2023, a warrant was issued for the accused’s arrest. He was
arrested in Queensland by Clark, who recorded the
arrest on a voice recorder.
The accused said that he had not done this, they have the wrong person, it was
Waldock, and he, the accused,
did not do anything.
[124] On 17 May
2023, the accused was extradited to the Northern Territory on a flight
accompanied by Police officers (‘Hutchinson’
‘Wheeler’). Hutchinson recorded their conversations and told the
accused that she was doing so. During the conversations:
(a) The accused told Hutchinson to speak to Waldock, and said he does not trust
(b) The accused said he had a bit of a scuffle with the deceased at a shopping
centre near Landmark, had bought him a dummy because
he was ‘a bit of a
sook’, the deceased had ‘just flipped’, they had ended up with
their shirts off and the
deceased kept getting mad at the accused because he
would not take the dummy out of his mouth.
(c) The accused said he was trying to get ‘weed’ with the deceased
from a ‘shady guy’ from the boat.
(d) The accused said the ‘main’ evidence was blood in the boot of
the Ford and he had the deceased climb in the boot
in the past, and it did not
surprise him that there was possibly blood as the deceased had cut himself, it
does not take much to
bleed, the deceased was always drunk and you bleed more
when you are drunk. When Hutchinson mentioned the deceased’s DNA, the
accused said the deceased had an injury on his hand, wrist or ankle and asked if
it was a drop or a bucket, and it would have to
be substantial.
(e) The accused said Police seem pretty confident the deceased is deceased,
Hutchinson agreed, and the accused said he thought so
(f) The accused asked Hutchinson what Shier was charged with and asked what if
Shier threw the accused under the bus without him
having the opportunity to
throw someone under the bus. He admitted he lied about dropping Shier home.
(g) The accused denied using bleach to clean the Ford but said he had used
acetone to clean ‘bat shit’ off the car and
used it inside the Ford
to remove the residue from a sticker.
(h) The accused said AD could not have seen inside the boot of the Ford to say
there was no carpet in it because there were no lights
there and he would have
seen there was never carpet in the boot. He wondered why AD would have thrown
him under a bus, possibly because
of a run in they had had.
(i) The accused referred to the phone conversation between him and his mother
above, saying it was just a
‘sick sense of humour’ and his mother watches crime shows and he
tries to say disturbing
things to keep her on her toes.
(j) The accused said he told Shier to smash her phone to cover up his throwing
of LR’s property onto the Stuart Highway.
(k) The accused said Police should be looking at Waldock.
[125] During the
flight, Wheeler heard the accused tell Hutchinson that he did not want the
bleach, ‘she did’ and, in
relation to acetone, that red dirt gets
stuck under the polish and he cleaned ‘bat shit’ off the Ford and to
take raised
lettering off it.
[126] Between 19
September 2022 and 7 March 2023, various searches were conducted for the
deceased’s body by Police. The searches
were unsuccessful.
[127] On 20 May
2023, Waldock had a series of phone conversations with his former partner, SC,
which were lawfully intercepted and
recorded. They discussed the deceased and SC
urged Waldock to tell Police or threatened to tell Police herself about Waldock
what had happened to the deceased. Waldock said he does not know the
owner or driver of the Ford, but he is the deceased’s
good mate. Waldock
denied knowing anything to SC, did not want to discuss it on the phone and asked
why SC was making trouble for
him. This occurred after SC was visited by
[128] On 26 May
2023, Shier was arrested and extradited to the Northern Territory from Western
[129] On 26 May
2023, Shier gave a detailed statement to Police about the matter. Shier directed
Police to where she said the deceased’s
body was left. She was in clear
distress. At that location, Police found human bones scattered across a wide
area. A crime scene
was declared. On 27 May 2023, forensics officers attended
and the human bones were collected, as were pieces of burnt fabric and
An autopsy later found that 86% of the skeleton was present, including the
skull. There were skeletal defects in the cranium,
jaw, two ribs and the right
arm, showing characteristics of peri-mortem blunt force trauma. The skull showed
trauma from three impacts
and the fracture to the forearm had the appearance of
self-defence type injuries. DNA samples from the human bones matched the
[130] On 30 May
2023, Shier directed Police to the location of the murder, adjacent to the
Robertson Barracks in Holtze on the road
towards the Thorak Cemetery.
[131] On 2 June
2023, Police executed another search warrant at Staghorn Court and seized
various items, including tent poles located
without the tent. On 5 June
2023, the Ford was searched and a tool kit missing a pair of pliers was located.
[132] On 7 June
2023, Waldock was arrested.
[133] On 16 June
2023, Shier returned to Western Australia.
[134] On 4 March
2024, Waldock had a phone conversation with his brother that was recorded on the
prison telephone system. Waldock
said he knew what really happened that night
and if anyone listened to his story he would be released. He said he was fearing
his own life and other lives from knowing what he knows, and yet he was in
there with the murderer. He said ‘the girl’
was out because she is a
liar. Waldock said he had his reasons why he did not talk, no one knows how he
felt, everything he said
was the truth from the start ‘just parts left out
because of fear’.
Defence case
[135] At the
voir dire, the accused pleaded not guilty to murder, but guilty to
manslaughter.
Proposed coincidence evidence
Crown filed a notice of its intention to adduce the following evidence as
coincidence evidence:
(a) Evidence of Waldock that he saw the accused holding the deceased in a
headlock, then saw the deceased fall to the ground face
first, and heard the
accused say words to the effect of: ‘Get in the fucking car. The
debt’s been cleared. I just cut
the cunt’s throat’.
(b) Evidence of Shier that she saw the accused get into the front passenger seat
of the Ford, holding a Stanley knife, and heard
the accused say words to the
effect that he could still hear the deceased breathing, but he was choking,
drowning in his own blood,
that he knew for a fact he had hit a main artery, and
that the deceased would not live for long, he was dead.
(c) Evidence of Waldock that, immediately after the killing, when Shier was
driving the Ford away from the scene, the accused placed
a sharp object, being
the blade of an axe or possibly a Stanley knife, hard up against Waldock’s
throat and threatened him,
SC and her father.
(d) The phone conversation referred to in paragraph
above, in which the accused said to
his mother that Shier was not talking to him, so: ‘Fuck the little dog.
there and cut her throat and put her in the boot too’.
(e) The recorded conversation referred to in paragraph
above, in which the accused said to
Flynn about LR’ss father that he had said: ‘I will cut your throat
you maggot before
I get my throat cut’.
[137] The fact
in issue to which the proposed coincidence evidence relates is whether the
accused caused the death of the deceased
by intentionally cutting his throat.
The requirements for admission of coincidence evidence
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
Evidence Act
’) provides that evidence that two or more
events occurred is not admissible to prove that a person did a particular act or
had a particular state of mind on the basis that, having regard to any
similarities in the events or the circumstances in which they
occurred, or both,
it is improbable that the events occurred coincidentally unless: (a) the party
seeking to adduce the evidence
gave reasonable notice of its intention to do so;
and (b) the court thinks that the evidence will, either by itself or having
to other evidence adduced or to be adduced by the party seeking to adduce
the evidence, have significant probative value.
[139] No issue
is taken by the Defence with the Crown’s coincidence notice.
[140] It has
been accepted that the same analysis in assessing the probative value of
tendency evidence under s 97 of the
Evidence Act
applies to the
requirement for significant probative value in relation to coincidence evidence
value’ means the extent to which the evidence could rationally affect the
assessment of the probability of
the existence of a fact in
tendency evidence, coincidence evidence will have significant probative value if
it could rationally affect the assessment
of the probability of the existence of
a fact in issue to a significant
A ‘significant’
probative value is a probative value which is important or of
consequence.
‘significant’ connotes something more than mere relevance but less
than a substantial degree of relevance, and
requires a judicial evaluation of
whether the hypothetical jury would rationally think it likely that the evidence
is important in
relation to the determination of a fact in
assessment of the probative value of the evidence is to be determined by a trial
judge on the assumption that the jury will
This does not involve any
assessment of the credibility or reliability of the evidence except in an
extreme case in which the evidence
is so inherently incredible, fanciful or
preposterous that it could not be accepted by a rational jury and so does not
meet the criterion
of relevance.
was not suggested by the Defence that the proposed coincidence evidence fell
within that category. Nor does assessment of the
probative value of coincidence
evidence involve assessing the significance of the possibility of collusion or
concoction which ‘should
be left to an occasion when it is raised in a
concrete factual
value of proposed coincidence evidence
evidence of Waldock and Shier set out in paragraphs
(a) and (b) above about what the
accused said he had just done to the deceased permits the inference that he had
just cut the deceased’s
throat with a Stanley knife. The similarities in
Shier’s and Waldock’s evidence about what the accused said he had
and the circumstances in which those things occurred make it highly
improbable that Waldock and Shier, who are apparently independent
would have told the same lie
In making this
assessment, the possibility of collusion, collaboration or innocent infection is
not relevant, unless those possibilities
rise to a level where it would not be
open to the jury rationally to accept
possibility was identified by the Defence. Consequently, it is most unlikely
that those two witnesses would give such similar
accounts unless those accounts
were both truthful and accurate. The evidence of Shier and Waldock about this
conduct has strong probative
value in making more likely the mechanism of the
deceased’s death and the accused’s state of mind at that time, both
of which are facts in issue.
Defence oral submission that coincidence evidence cannot be used to bolster the
credibility of witnesses is inconsistent
with the authorities referred to in
footnote 9 above. It is clear that coincidence evidence can be used to do
exactly that, as the
Criminal Charge Book published by the Judicial College of
Victoria makes clear in providing a direction to be given to the jury when
coincidence evidence is used to bolster the credit of
evidence of Waldock set out in paragraph
(c) above about what the accused did
to Waldock also has significant similarity to the accused’s conduct
towards the deceased
as described by Waldock and Shier. Both involved the
accused applying a bladed weapon (an axe or a Stanely knife) to the same body
part, the throat, with a state of mind of menace, namely an intention to harm or
cause fear.
Defence argued that there was no significant similarity because one act involved
a mere threat to do something and the other
involved actually doing something
and actually inflicting serious harm. This was said to have the effect that it
was entirely plausible,
or even likely, that the events occurred
coincidentally.
[147] I do not
accept that. A ‘striking similarity’ between events or conduct, or a
‘system’ or ‘pattern’
or an ‘underlying
unity’ is not a pre-requisite to coincidence evidence having significant
probative value.
acknowledging that the accused’s conduct towards Waldock did not extend to
actually cutting his throat, whereas the accused’s
statements to Waldock
and Shier were to the effect that he had cut the deceased’s throat, there
is a high degree of similarity.
The application of a bladed weapon to
Waldock’s throat is a positive act, an assault, involving the same kind of
another bladed weapon, with an intention to cause fear that what was
threatened by that conduct would be carried out. The weapon,
the body part and
the intent of menace are very similar, albeit that the conduct against the
deceased went beyond that to actually
cutting the deceased’s throat.
satisfied that it is highly improbable to have been a coincidence that the
accused said what Shier and Waldock attribute
to him and then, shortly after, he
applied a bladed weapon (an axe or a Stanley knife) to Waldock’s throat,
and made threats
to Waldock.
evidence set out in paragraph
above, about the accused saying to his mother that he would cut Shier’s
throat and put her in the boot too also has significant
similarity to the
accused’s statements about his conduct towards the deceased, as described
by Waldock and Shier. This conversation
occurred some three weeks or so after
the alleged conduct towards the deceased, making the two events quite proximate
in time. It
is the case that this statement involved a threat, rather than an
action. Nevertheless, the reference to the cutting of Shier’s
very similar to the alleged conduct against the deceased. Further, it is not in
dispute that the accused put the deceased’s
body into the boot of the
Ford, meaning there is similarity in that respect as well. Further, the use of
the word ‘too’
is important. It could readily be construed as a
reference to having cut the deceased’s throat.
satisfied that it is highly improbable to have been a coincidence that the
accused said what Shier and Waldock attribute
to him about his conduct towards
the deceased and then, three weeks later, he threatened to cut Shier’s
throat and put her
in the boot too.
evidence set out in paragraph
above about the accused saying he had said he would cut the throat of LR’s
father also has significant similarity to the
accused’s statements about
his conduct towards the deceased, as described by Waldock and Shier. This
statement was made around
10 months after the alleged conduct and again involved
a threat rather than action. By itself, it would not have had significant
probative value as coincidence evidence. However, having regard to the other
proposed coincidence evidence, it has significant probative
value because the
similarity in the references to the cutting of a person’s throat as a
threat or menacing behaviour makes
it highly improbable to have been a
coincidence that the accused said what Shier and Waldock attribute to him about
his conduct towards
the deceased and then, shortly after, applied a bladed
weapon (an axe or a Stanley knife) to Waldock’s throat and threatened
and then three weeks later threated to cut Shier’s throat and put her in
the boot too, and then 10 months later spoke
of his ex-partner’s father.
proposed coincidence evidence therefore satisfies the requirements of s 98
Evidence Act
Probative value outweighs the danger
of unfair prejudice to the accused
[153] Section
101(2) of the
Evidence Act
provides that coincidence evidence adduced by
the prosecution cannot be used against the accused unless the probative value of
evidence outweighs the danger of unfair prejudice to the accused. This
involves a balancing exercise assessing and weighing the probative
value of the
evidence against any potential prejudicial effect it may have on the accused.
undertaking this balancing exercise, the dominant consideration is to ensure
that the accused is not deprived by prejudice
The notion of prejudice
in this general context ‘means the danger of improper use of the evidence.
It does not mean its legitimate
tendency to
inculpate.’
Something more
is required, such as the possibility that the evidence may be misused by the
jury in some respect.
[155] In the
context of tendency evidence, the plurality in
explained the kinds
of potential prejudice within s 101(2) that can arise in a criminal
In criminal
proceedings in which the prosecution seeks to adduce tendency evidence about the
imposes a further restriction on admissibility: the evidence
cannot be used against the accused unless its probative value substantially
outweighs any prejudicial effect that it may have on the accused. The reception
of tendency evidence in a criminal trial may occasion
prejudice in a number of
ways. The jury may fail to allow that a person who has a tendency to have a
particular state of mind, or
to act in a particular way, may not have had that
state of mind, or may not have acted in that way, on the occasion in issue. Or
the jury may underestimate the number of persons who share the tendency to have
that state of mind or to act in that way. In either
case the tendency evidence
may be given disproportionate weight. In addition to the risks arising from
tendency reasoning, there
is the risk that the assessment of whether the
prosecution has discharged its onus may be clouded by the jury’s emotional
to the tendency evidence. And prejudice may be occasioned by requiring
an accused to answer a raft of uncharged conduct stretching
back, perhaps, over
many years.
requirement for danger of unfair prejudice is not satisfied by the mere
possibility of such prejudice. There must be a real
risk of prejudice by reason
of the admission of the
[157] Section
Evidence Act
obliges the court to refuse to admit evidence
adduced by the prosecutor if its probative value is outweighed by the danger of
prejudice to the accused. Given the identical language used in
s 101(2), which applies specifically to coincidence evidence, there
utility in the Defence’s additional reliance on s 137 to exclude the
proposed coincidence evidence.
Defence argued that the proposed coincidence evidence would have a prejudicial
effect on the accused arising from the jury
hearing evidence of other
criminality or threats by the accused unrelated to the offending. I reject that
submission. First, the
proposed coincidence evidence referred to in paragraphs
(a), (b) and (c) above is not
unrelated to the offending, it relates specifically to the alleged killing of
the deceased by the accused
and the accused’s threat to Waldock very
shortly afterwards not to tell the Police about the alleged killing. It is
to imagine a closer relationship to the alleged offending. The
proposed coincidence evidence referred to in paragraph
(d) above is relied on by the Crown
as an implied admission by the accused to the alleged offending. Because of its
terms, it has
a clear and direct relationship with the alleged offending.
Secondly, the Crown case involves brutal treatment of the deceased by
accused and a gruesome mode of killing. In that context, there is no real risk
of the jury having any additional emotional reaction
to evidence that the
accused made threats to people and thereby committed some criminal act.
[159] Consequently,
the danger of unfair prejudice to the accused from the proposed coincidence
evidence is virtually non-existent,
and its probative value is strong. Its
probative value outweighs the danger of unfair prejudice by a substantial
proposed coincidence evidence is not inadmissible by operation of s 101(2)
Evidence Act
Conclusion in relation to proposed
coincidence evidence
[161] For the
above reasons, the proposed coincidence evidence is admissible pursuant to
ss 98 and 101(2) of the
Evidence Act
tendency evidence
[162] The Crown
filed an amended notice of its intention to adduce the following evidence as
tendency evidence:
(a) Evidence of Waldock that he saw the accused holding the deceased in a
headlock, then saw the deceased fall to the ground face
first, and heard the
accused say words to the effect of: ‘Get in the fucking car. The
debt’s been cleared. I just cut
the cunt’s throat’.
(b) Evidence of Shier that she saw the accused get into the front passenger seat
of the Ford, holding a Stanley knife, and heard
the accused say words to the
effect that he could still hear the deceased breathing, but he was choking,
drowning in his own blood,
that he knew for a fact he had hit a main artery, and
that the deceased would not live for long, he was dead.
(c) Evidence of Waldock that, immediately after the killing, when Shier was
driving the Ford away from the scene, the accused placed
a sharp object, being
the blade of an axe or possibly a Stanley knife, hard up against Waldock’s
throat and threatened him,
SC and her father.
alleged tendencies the Crown sought to prove by the proposed tendency evidence
were tendencies of the accused to:
(a) act in a particular way, namely, to engage in violence against a male friend
or acquaintance, specifically by the use of a bladed
weapon applied to the
male’s throat when angered; and
(b) have a particular state of mind, namely a willingness to be violent or
threaten a male friend or acquaintance with violence by
the use of a bladed
weapon applied to the male’s throat when angered.
[164] The fact
in issue to which the proposed tendency evidence relates is whether the accused
caused the death of the deceased by
intentionally cutting his throat.
The requirements for admission of tendency evidence
[165] Section
97(1) of the
Evidence Act
provides that evidence of (relevantly) the
conduct of a person is not admissible to prove that a person has or had a
tendency to
act in a particular way, or to have a particular state of mind
unless: (a) the party seeking to adduce the evidence gave reasonable
its intention to do so; and (b) the court thinks that the evidence will, either
by itself or having regard to other evidence
adduced or to be adduced by the
party seeking to adduce the evidence, have significant probative value.
[166] No issue
is taken by Defence with the Crown’s amended tendency notice.
requirements of the test of ‘significant probative value’ are set
potential probative value of tendency evidence was explained by the High Court
Hughes v The Queen
probative value of evidence is the extent to which the evidence could rationally
affect the assessment of the probability of the
existence of a fact in issue.
Tendency evidence will have significant probative value if it could rationally
affect the assessment
of the probability of the existence of a fact in issue to
a significant extent. The trier of fact reasons from satisfaction that
has a tendency to have a particular state of mind, or to act in a particular
way, to the likelihood that the person had
the particular state of mind, or
acted in the particular way, on the occasion in issue. ... The starting point in
either case requires
identifying the tendency and the fact or facts in issue
which it is adduced to prove. The facts in issue in a criminal proceeding
those which establish the elements of the offence.
[169] Assessing
the probative value of proposed tendency evidence is therefore a two-stage
process. As the plurality said in
assessment of whether evidence has significant probative value in relation to
each count involves consideration of two interrelated
but separate matters. The
first matter is the extent to which the evidence supports the tendency. The
second matter is the extent
to which the tendency makes more likely the facts
making up the charged offence. Where the question is not one of the identity of
a known offender but is instead a question concerning whether the offence was
committed, it is important to consider both matters.
By seeing that there are
two matters involved it is easier to appreciate the dangers in focusing on
single labels such as “underlying
unity”, “pattern of
conduct” or “modus operandi”. In summary, there is likely to
be a high degree of
probative value where (i) the evidence, by itself or
together with other evidence, strongly supports proof of a tendency, and (ii)
the tendency strongly supports the proof of a fact that makes up the offence
plurality in
held (at [31]) that commonly, tendency evidence will
bear similarity to the conduct in issue, but the admission of tendency evidence
is not conditioned on that similarity. Further, the probative value of tendency
evidence will vary depending on the issue that it
is adduced to prove.
[171] As set out
in paragraph
assessment of probative value does not involve any assessment of the credibility
or reliability of the evidence except
in an extreme case in which the evidence
is so inherently incredible, fanciful or preposterous that it could not be
accepted by a
rational jury and so does not meet the criterion
submissions that Waldock was a criminally concerned witness within the meaning
of s 165 of the
Evidence Act
and his ‘inconsistent’
account that the bladed weapon was either a knife or an axe, ultimately it was
not submitted by
the Defence that the proposed tendency evidence fell within
that category. Consequently, Waldock’s status as a criminally concerned
witness and his reference to either an axe or a knife can be put to one side. So
too can the Defence submission that Waldock’s
narrative ‘may or may
not be accepted by a jury’.
Defence argued that the proposed tendency evidence does not have significant
probative value because it ‘is bootstraps’,
a submission which
Defence counsel was unable to explain in oral submissions. The Defence also
argued that the proposed tendency
evidence is ‘purely transactional in
nature’, i.e. a threat, and therefore not demonstrative of a
‘tendency or
intent to cause serious harm or death’ to another
[173] The latter
submission misses the point of the tendency reasoning to be relied on by the
Crown, namely that the tendency evidence
satisfies the jury that the accused has
a tendency to act in the particular way, or have the particular state of mind,
referred to
in paragraph
to determining the likelihood that the accused acted in the particular way or
had the particular state of mind on the
That process
of reasoning is similar to the manner in which an assessment of the probative
value of the evidence is undertaken by
the trial judge for the purpose of
determining its admissibility, namely by first assessing the strength of the
evidence in establishing
the tendency and then considering the extent to which
the tendency makes more likely the elements of the
[174] As to
whether the proposed tendency evidence is capable to a significant extent of
establishing the alleged tendencies, the
Defence argued that there is only a
single instance of conduct in addition to the alleged conduct relied on.
[175] It is
clear that direct evidence of a charged act can be used as part of the body of
evidence relied on by the Crown to support
It is clear that
conduct after the alleged offending may be used as part of the body of evidence
relied on by the Crown to support
It is clear that
tendency evidence may have significant probative value although it is made up of
a single instance of conduct in
addition to the charged
It is clear that the
probative value of tendency evidence is strengthened by close proximity in time
between the instance(s) of other
conduct and the conduct in
proposed tendency evidence is capable, to a significant extent, of establishing
the alleged tendencies. It comprises two
instances of conduct, within minutes of
each other, in which the accused applied a bladed weapon to the throat of a male
acquaintance with anger and menace. Even in the context of an alleged
murder, such conduct is unusual and not
commonplace.
The first stage of
the process identified in
[177] As to
whether the alleged tendencies are capable to a significant extent of making
more likely that the accused cut the deceased’s
throat with a knife, the
fact that the proposed tendency evidence comprising the accused’s conduct
against Waldock was a threat
rather than an act of cutting his throat does not
deny that those tendencies would be capable to a significant extent of
establishing
that the accused, with menace, also applied a bladed weapon to the
throat of the deceased. That conduct would make it significantly
more likely
that the accused cut the deceased’s throat with a knife as the accused
could not have done so unless he applied
a bladed weapon to the throat of the
deceased. In other words, the second stage of the process identified in
[178] Consequently,
the proposed tendency evidence has significant probative value.
proposed tendency evidence therefore satisfies the requirements of s 97 of
Evidence Act
Probative value outweighs the danger of
unfair prejudice to the accused
Defence argued that the prejudicial effect of the proposed tendency evidence was
‘overwhelming’, particularly
because there was no forensically
determined cause of death. Again, I did not understand that submission and it
was not adequately
explained in oral argument. The submission appeared to be no
more than a complaint that the proposed tendency evidence did not have
significant probative value and could inculpate the accused, a matter which is
not the subject of s 101(2) of the
Evidence Act
. That appearance was
supported by the submission that the proposed tendency evidence was admissible
as a ‘transactional narrative’,
but not for tendency purposes.
[181] Consequently,
the danger of unfair prejudice to the accused from the proposed tendency
evidence is virtually non-existent and
its probative value is significant. Its
probative value outweighs the danger of unfair prejudice by a significant
[182] Again,
having relied on s 101(2) to exclude the proposed tendency evidence, there
is no utility in the Defence’s additional
reliance on s 137 to
exclude it.
proposed tendency evidence is not inadmissible by operation of s 101(2) of
Evidence Act
Conclusion in relation to proposed
tendency evidence
[184] For the
above reasons, the proposed tendency evidence is admissible pursuant to
ss 97 and 101(2) of the
Evidence Act
Electronically
recorded interview of the accused on 29 March 2023
[185] As set out
in paragraph
above, the accused
was interviewed by Northern Territory Police officers Flynn and Wheeler in
Queensland. At the time, the accused
was a sentenced prisoner in Queensland for
unrelated matters.
[186] Flynn and
Wheeler gave evidence on the voir dire. I watched the recording of the interview
and was provided with a transcript
Admissibility of the
recorded interview as containing admissions
underlying basis for admissibility of the recorded interview, despite its
characterisation as hearsay, is that it contained
admissions. Section 81(1) of
Evidence Act
provides (relevantly) that the hearsay rule does not
apply to evidence of an admission. The term ‘admission’ is defined
to mean a previous representation that is: (a) made by a person who (relevantly)
is or becomes a defendant in a criminal proceeding;
and (b) adverse to the
person’s interest in the outcome of the
proceeding.
[188] In his
leading text, Stephen Odgers states
acknowledgement of some relevant fact that tended to establish guilt, or
liability, would be an admission. Indeed, any representation,
adduced by the
prosecution and capable of rationally affecting the assessment of the
probability of the existence of facts asserted
by a prosecution witness in
relation to an alleged offence would constitute an
[189] Section
81(2) of the
Evidence Act
provides that the hearsay rule does not apply
to evidence of a previous representation: (a) that was made in relation to an
at the time the admission was made or shortly before or shortly after
that time; and (b) to which it is reasonably necessary to refer
in order to
understand the admission.
intention behind this provision was to permit the admission into evidence of
assertions which qualify or modify an admission
to ensure, in fairness to the
defendant, that the admission is considered in
Nguyen v The Queen
the High Court observed (at [22]) that:
It is to be expected that
exculpatory statements made in a record of interview which also contains
admissions will usually satisfy
the requirements of s 81(2)(a) and (b). In
the event that there is some doubt about the connection between an exculpatory
and an admission, it should be borne in mind that what is to be made
of a mixed statement is a matter for the jury, which might attach
degrees of credit to different parts of it. It has been observed that, under the
Uniform Evidence Acts, provided relevant
evidence is rationally capable of
acceptance, questions of credibility and reliability are to be seen as squarely
within the province
of the jury. Considerations of this kind suggest that no
narrow approach should be taken to the relationship between exculpatory
statements and admissions. [citations omitted]
[192] What is
‘shortly before’ or ‘shortly after’ the admission is to
be determined by reference to whether
the admission and the other
representation(s) were made on a ‘single occasion’, or within such
time as excludes the intervention
of self-serving after-thought, reconstruction
or alteration.
There is no issue
recorded interview were made shortly before
or shortly after the alleged
admissions within s 81(2).
[193] Section
85(2) of the
Evidence Act
provides that evidence of an admission is not
admissible unless the circumstances in which it was made were such as to make it
that the truth of the admission was adversely affected.
[194] Section 85
Evidence Act
is concerned with whether the circumstances adversely
affected the ‘truth of the admission’. It is not directly concerned
with whether the evidence has been improperly or illegally obtained, or general
considerations of fairness, and nor is the provision
concerned with the
voluntariness of the admission, except to the extent that it might bear on the
assessment of reliability in the
[195] No issue
was raised by Defence in reliance on s 85(2), thereby effectively conceding
that the requirements of s 85(2) were satisfied.
objection to admissibility
Defence objected to the admissibility of the recorded interview on a number of
bases, ultimately that:
(a) it should be excluded under s 138(1)(a) of the
Evidence Act
evidence of a statement made during questioning obtained improperly or in
contravention of the
Police Powers and Responsibilities Act 2000
Q Police Act
’), or in consequence of an impropriety or
contravention of that law, because:
(i) the accused’s participation in the recorded interview was not
voluntary because he was in custody in Queensland and did
not understand that he
was free not to participate;
(ii) the accused’s participation in the recorded interview was not
voluntary because he did not understand the caution or his
right to silence;
(iii) the accused was entitled under the
Q Police Act
to be informed that
he was entitled to contact a relative or friend or a legal representative and
arrange to have either present
during the questioning, he was not so informed,
he asked to have a legal representative present and his request was refused;
(b) it should be excluded under s 90 of the
Evidence Act
having regard to the circumstances in which it was made, it would be unfair to
the accused to use the evidence; and
(c) it should be excluded under s 137 of the
Evidence Act
probative value was outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to the accused.
Evidence obtained improperly or in contravention of the law
[197] Section
138(1) of the
Evidence Act
provides that evidence that was obtained
(relevantly) improperly or in contravention of an Australian law, or in
consequence of an
impropriety, is not to be admitted unless the desirability of
admitting the evidence outweighs the undesirability of admitting evidence
has been obtained in the way the evidence was obtained.
Evidence Act
does not contain a general or specific definition of
‘impropriety’. In this context, the method or conduct in issue will
only be ‘improper’ in the relevant sense if it is clearly
inconsistent with the minimum standards which society should
expect and require
of law enforcement officers.
[199] Section
138(2) provides that evidence of an admission that was made during or in
consequence of questioning is taken to have
been obtained improperly if the
person conducting the questioning: (a) did, or omitted to do, an act in the
course of the questioning
even though he or she knew or ought reasonably to have
known that the act or omission was likely to impair substantially the ability
the person being questioned to respond rationally to the questioning; or (b)
made a false statement in the course of the questioning
even though he or she
knew or ought reasonably to have known that the statement was false and that
making the false statement was
likely to cause the person who was being
questioned to make an admission.
[200] Section
139(1) of the
Evidence Act
provides that, for the purposes of
s 138(1)(a), evidence of a statement made by a person during questioning is
taken to have been
obtained improperly if: (a) the person was under arrest at
the time; (b) the questioning was conducted by an investigating official
at the time empowered to arrest the person; and (c) before starting the
questioning the investigating official did not caution
the person that the
person does not have to say or do anything but that anything the person does say
or do may be used in evidence.
Section 139(3) provides that the caution must be
given in, or translated into, a language in which the person is able to
communicate
with reasonable fluency.
The factual background and
the recorded interview
[201] On 29
March 2023, the accused was a sentenced prisoner at a correctional centre in
Queensland.
[202] Wheeler
made arrangements with Queensland Police to assist with retrieving the accused
from the correctional centre for the
purpose of conducting an interview with the
[203] Queensland
Police officers Clark and Stanborough were aware that Flynn and Wheeler were
investigating a murder, following up
leads and speaking to witnesses and were
planning to conduct an interview with the
Clark made the
application for the removal order referred to
Flynn and Wheeler did not
speak a great deal about the investigation with Clark and
Stanborough.
Flynn conceded it
was possible that he had mentioned to Clark and Stanborough the fact that the
accused had given a previous statement
in which he said he knew nothing about
the deceased’s
disappearance.
As far as Wheeler
could recall, there were no such discussions between him and Clark or him and
Stanborough.
Flynn had prepared
a written plan for how he would conduct the interview with the
To Flynn, the accused
seemed like a talker.
he was not in the habit of pressing a suspect who indicated an unwillingness to
participate in an interview because that
would call into question the
voluntariness of the
[204] On 24
March 2023, a Queensland magistrate issued a removal order (‘Removal
Order’) pursuant to s 401 of the
Q Police Act
, ordering the
person in charge of the correctional centre in which the accused was detained to
release the accused for a period of
eight hours into the custody of Queensland
Police and ordering the accused to be returned to the correctional centre as
soon as reasonably
practicable after the detention period of eight hours
Removal Order identified Clark as the Police officer who would have control of
the accused whilst absent from the correctional
centre, stated that the accused
was suspected of having committed the indictable offence of murder under the
Northern Territory
Criminal Code
, and stated that the purpose of the
removal of the accused into Police custody was for questioning about the
indictable offence at
Rockhampton Police Station.
[206] On 29
March 2024, Clark and Stanborough retrieved the accused from the correctional
centre and transported him to the Rockhampton
During the recorded
interview, Clark and Stanborough remained outside but close to the room in which
the recorded interview was
[207] On the
drive with Clark and Stanborough to the Police station, the accused told them
that his family was in Western
He later asked if he
could call the deceased’s mother to give her his condolences and was told
by Clark: ‘No, there’ll
be no phone
The accused then
asked whether he was allowed to call his mother and was told by Clark: ‘No
social calls’. The accused
said that his mother was his ‘mental
health person’ and was one of his major supports. He then said he would
like a lawyer present.
[208] Flynn’s
understanding was that, because they were interviewing a person about Northern
Territory offences, the accused
was likely to be returned to a Northern
Territory court and Flynn was a Northern Territory detective, the interview
would be conducted
in accordance with Northern Territory policy and
understanding was that the accused was in the custody of the Queensland Police,
but he thought it was a Northern
Territory Police matter, so they would be
following the Northern Territory Police question and interview
[209] Prior to
the recorded interview commencing, the accused asked to speak to a
In response to that
request, Flynn and Wheeler facilitated a phone call between the accused and a
lawyer from Northern Territory
That was not a lengthy
conversation,
which lasted some
seven minutes.
After that phone
call, the accused indicated he would participate in a recorded interview, but
would exercise his right to silence
in response to some
[210] Just prior
to commencement of the formal interview, the accused asked to have a legal
representative present in the interview
The accused said the only
lawyer known to him was in Western Australia and he did not know their name or
Flynn told the
accused that it would be impracticable for a lawyer to attend from Western
Australia and the accused indicated he
was willing to proceed in their
[211] At the
outset of the recorded interview, the accused was told that everything in the
room was being recorded.
accused stated that he had spoken to a lawyer over the phone, and the lawyer
said it was in his best interests to remain silent
and let Flynn and Wheeler
Flynn told the accused
that he was well entitled to the right not to speak to them, and he was not
obliged or required to answer
any of their questions unless he wished to do so.
The accused said he did not understand why he could not have a lawyer present in
the interview room. Flynn responded that he could not have a lawyer present
because his lawyer was based in Western Australia. The
accused asked if he could
just have any lawyer, a Legal Aid lawyer. Flynn responded that they did not have
access to a lawyer that
could physically sit in the room or be on the phone
throughout the interview, and said that was not the usual process that
accused said the lawyer had got him on edge by telling him to say nothing. Flynn
responded that he could understand the accused’s
concern. The accused said
he was not concerned, he was happy to speak to Police, even though it was scary
that he was a suspect.
recorded interview then proceeded as follows:
Flynn: ... [L]ike I
said you are well entitled to exercise your right to silence. You don’t
have to speak with us, ok? ... I
understand that a conversation took place
previously between you and the lawyer. And that was an instruction you received
time. So, whether you ... exercise your right to silence, that’s
entirely up to you. Um – we’re not in a position
to put a lawyer in
the room today. Um – that’s just not our process. We don’t
have access to one, ok? So ... like
I said, this – this is a voluntary
– ah – interview. You do not have to participate, ok?
Accused: OK.
Flynn: So it’s really important that you understand that. All
Accused: I will sit here quietly then.
Flynn: OK. Yep. All right. Um – so the reason why we’re having
this interview today – um – is an allegation
I guess that between
of May – um – that you were
involved in the death of Tony Rowe. OK? So, this is 2022 ... So, that’s
speaking to you today. Do ya understand that?
Accused: I understand yes.
Flynn: Yep. OK. Now, as I explained to you but I’ll go through it in
better detail now, before either myself or Chris ask you
any questions in
relation to this matter, I must inform you that you’re not obliged to say
or do anything, unless you wish
to do so. So what this means is you don’t
have to speak to us today. OK?
Accused: Mm-hmm.
Flynn: All right. So if I ask you a question, what can you do?
Accused: Say nothing, or answer the question.
Flynn: Yeah, correct. ... So you’re under no obligation to answer my
questions. You’re under no obligation to answer Chris’
here OK? Now, whatever you do say or do will be recorded and like I explained to
you before, we’ve got a video camera
here on the desk. We’ve got the
machine itself and you can see that what we’re saying and doing is now
being recorded.
OK? Now, these recordings can be presented as evidence in court.
All right. Do ya understand that?
Accused: Mm-hmm.
Flynn: All right. So, do ya understand what evidence is?
Accused: Yeah it’s – ah – yeah.
Flynn: Yep. OK. So, the main points being that you don’t have to speak
to us, and whatever you say – um – can be
used as evidence. Do ya
understand all of this?
Accused: Yep.
Flynn: ... And how do you feel that you’ve been treated?
Accused: Pretty good, apart from the no lawyer being present.
Flynn: And like I said to you – um – it’s not that
we’re trying to deprive you of – of that opportunity,
just that we don’t have access to a lawyer to sit in this room today at
this time. OK? So, like I said, we –
we facilitated that phone call. So we
put you through to a lawyer, to speak with them. Ah – and that’s the
we can do, OK?
Accused: Yeah.
Flynn: Right now it’s really important that ya understand that
you’re not under arrest. OK, for this matter.
Flynn: ... Well, so do ya understand that you’re not under arrest for
this matter? [accused nodded] Yep? OK. However, you are
currently in lawful
custody. Yeah, so you’re in the ...custody of the corrections at the
moment, I guess. Um – and that’s
in relation to unrelated matters.
OK? This means that you’re free to leave this interview. At any time.
Accused: But I’m not free to leave the ---
Flynn: That’s right, yeah.
Accused: Yeah.
Flynn: So as a courtesy to us, just tell us if you don’t wanna
participate, all right, any longer. OK we can terminate the recording
notify the Queensland detectives and they can take you back to the prison OK?
Now are you happy to be here by yourself?
I know that you said you wanted a
lawyer present but that’s not possible.
Accused: A lawyer would be great but ---
Flynn: Yep.
Accused: --- if I can’t have a lawyer then, yeah I guess I’ll sit
here and hear you guys out.
[213] Neither
Flynn nor Wheeler made any enquiries as to whether it was possible for a
Queensland based legal aid solicitor to come
and sit in the interview, nor did
they ask the Queensland Police if there was a Queensland entitlement to have a
lawyer present.
understanding of the accused’s requests for a lawyer to be present was
that the accused had been informed of
his rights and understood that his
participation in the recorded interview was entirely
It was Flynn’s
perception that the accused wanted to participate in the recorded interview to
hear what Police had accumulated
in terms of evidence, and that the accused was
arrogantly feeling that he could discount that evidence by telling a fictitious
[214] Flynn and
Wheeler had some restrictions by travel timings and flight bookings, but there
was no urgency or flight risk such
that inquiries could not have been made about
the accused having a lawyer sit with him in the
recorded interview with the accused was the first interstate interview Flynn had
done in his then 14 years as a Police officer,
and the only interstate interview
Wheeler had done in his 11 years as a Police
accused’s participation in the recorded interview was voluntary
Defence argued that the accused was under arrest because he was in the custody
of Queensland Police for the purpose of being
questioned by Northern Territory
Police in relation to an extradition offence and was not free to leave. That
argument is addressed
Defence argued that, whether he was under arrest or not, his participation in
the recorded interview was not voluntary because
he did not understand that he
was free not to participate (given he was in custody), he did not understand the
caution and did not
understand his right to silence.
[218] I reject
these submissions.
[219] It is
clear from what was said to and by the accused in the recorded interview that he
well understood that he was not under
arrest in relation to any involvement in
the death of the deceased. He was expressly told that, twice, and he nodded when
second time. He was expressly told, and acknowledged, that he was free
to leave the interview at any time, and if he said he did
not wish to
participate, the recording would be terminated and the Queensland Police would
take him back to the correctional centre.
facts I find are that:
(a) The accused was advised by the lawyer on the phone to remain silent, which
he stated to be his understanding of that advice.
(b) The accused was told a number of times he did not have to speak to the
Northern Territory Police or answer their questions.
(c) The accused confirmed that he knew, if asked a question, he could say
nothing or answer it.
(d) The accused was told, twice, that the interview was being recorded.
(e) The accused was told the recording could be presented as evidence in
(f) The accused acknowledged his understanding of that and that he understood
what evidence is.
(g) The accused had no difficulties in communicating or understanding what was
said in English, which I infer from my own observations
of his communication
during the recorded interview and the following:
(i) The accused was able to indicate where he did not understand something and
sought clarification.
(ii) The accused was asked directly about his occupation, his schooling, his
ability to read and write in English, his ability to
understand everything that
Flynn was saying and whether English was his first language, which he
(h) The accused exercised his right to silence numerous times during the
recorded interview by answering ‘no comment’
to questions.
[221] It is
abundantly clear from these facts that the accused understood the caution and
his right to silence.
[222] That the
accused was well-aware that he was free to terminate the interview and return to
the correctional centre, and understood
the caution and his right to silence,
but affirmed his willingness to participate in the recorded interview, on three
separate occasions
demonstrates that his participation in the recorded
interview, including answering the questions he chose to answer, was
accused’s requests to have a lawyer present, and the refusals of those
requests, do not lead to any different view.
After receiving legal advice, the
accused expressly elected to proceed in the absence of a lawyer. In his own
words: ‘A lawyer
would be great but if I can’t have a lawyer then,
yeah I guess I’ll sit here and hear you guys out’. He made that
choice expressly and voluntarily.
Power of Territory Police to
question a person in Queensland
[224] There is
no express power conferred by the
Police Administration Act 1978
NT Police Act
’) on Territory Police officers to question
suspects in another jurisdiction.
[225] Whether a
power of Northern Territory Police officers to question suspects in another
NT Police Act
or the common law is a
complex legal question. That question was not argued before me, and it is not
necessary to decide it, for
the reasons set out below.
Defence argued that whilst the accused was in the custody of Queensland officer
Clark pursuant to the Removal Order, the
accused was questioned by Northern
Territory officers Flynn and Wheeler pursuant to s 374(3) of the
. The Crown did not resist that submission.
Removal Order was made under Ch 15, Part 2, Div 2 of the
Q Police Act
specifically s 401. Div 2 applies to a person who is suspected of having
committed an indictable offence and is in custody under
(relevantly) the
Queensland corrective services legislation (relevantly) under a sentence for a
term of imprisonment (s 399(1)).
Section 401 permits a magistrate to make a
removal order if satisfied the custody of a Police officer is reasonably
necessary for
(relevantly) questioning the person about the offence. A removal
order is an order for the removal of the person in custody in a
prison to the
custody of a police officer for (relevantly) questioning the person about the
offence (s 399(2)). A removal order must
state, amongst other things, the
name of the police officer who will have control of the person while the person
is absent from the
prison (s 402(c)). The Removal Order stated that that
person was Clark.
[228] Consequently,
it is correct to say that the accused was in the custody and control of Clark
from the time that he was collected
at the correctional centre to the time that
he was returned thereto.
[229] Section
Q Police Act
applies to an offence (referred to as an
‘extradition offence’) that is an offence against the law of another
State (which
includes the Northern
) and in that other
State is an indictable offence for which the maximum penalty is at least two
years imprisonment (s 374(1)).
[230] Section
374(2) provides that it is lawful for a police officer, without warrant, to
arrest a person the police officer reasonably
suspects (relevantly) has
committed an extradition offence. The term ‘police officer’ is
defined to include (relevantly)
a police officer of a police force or service of
another State or the Commonwealth
for Chapters 11 and 13, or only if
such an officer is performing duties for the Queensland Police Service (Sch 6).
Section 374 is
contained in Chapter 14 of the
Q Police Act
[231] Section
374(3)(b) provides that ‘the person’ may be detained in custody
under Chapter 15 and questioned in relation
to the extradition offence by
(relevantly) a member of the police force of the State where the offence
happened as if the offence
had been committed in Queensland.
[232] It appears
from the words ‘
person’ and ‘
extradition
offence’ in s 374(3)(b) that the power to detain a person under
Chapter 15 and question them in relation to an
extradition offence applies to a
person who has been arrested pursuant to s 374(2).
Defence argued that, despite being informed by the Northern Territory Police
officers that he was
under arrest for involvement in the death of the
deceased, he was in fact under arrest, thereby bringing him within s 374(3)
Q Police Act
[234] The term
‘arrest’ is not defined in the
Q Police Act
. At common law,
the requirements for a lawful arrest without warrant comprise: (a) words of
arrest; (b) an act of arrest (or submission
to arrest); and (c) informing the
person of the reason for the arrest, which is subject to some limited exceptions
which do not appear
[235] There was
no evidence of any of these things in the ordinary sense. There was only the
Removal Order which placed the accused
into the custody of Clark for the purpose
of questioning about the indictable Northern Territory offence of murder. Again,
was not fully argued before me, and it is not necessary to decide
whether that brought the accused within s 374(2) and (3) of the
because the Crown was prepared, for the purposes of the voir dire, to
assume that it did.
Entitlements of a person being questioned
under Queensland law
[236] Chapter
15, Part 3 of the
Q Police Act
is headed: ‘Safeguards ensuring
rights of and fairness to persons questioned for indictable offences’.
Part 3 applies
only to indictable offences (s 414) and applies to a person
if the person is in ‘the company’ of a police officer for
purpose of being questioned as a suspect about the person’s involvement in
the commission of an indictable offence (s 415(1)).
[237] Section
418(1) provides that, before a police officer starts to question a person for an
indictable offence, the police officer
must inform the person that they may: (a)
telephone or speak to a friend or relative to inform the friend or relative of
their whereabouts
and ask the friend or relative to be present during
questioning; and (b) telephone or speak to a lawyer of the person’s choice
and arrange, or attempt to arrange, for the lawyer to be present during the
questioning.
[238] Section
418(2) provides that the police officer must delay the questioning for a
reasonable time to allow the person to telephone
or speak to a person mentioned
in s 418(1). What is a reasonable time to delay questioning to allow the
person to speak to a friend,
relative or lawyer will depend on the particular
circumstances (s 418(5)).
[239] Section
418(3) provides that if the person arranges for someone to be present, the
police officer must delay the questioning
for a reasonable time to allow the
other person to arrive. What is a reasonable time to allow a friend, relative or
lawyer to arrive
depends on the particular circumstances (s 418(4)).
[240] Section
419(1) provides that if the person asks to speak to a friend, relative or
lawyer, the investigating police officer must:
(a) as soon as practicable,
provide reasonable facilities to enable the person to speak to the other person
and; (b) if the other
person is a lawyer and it is reasonably practicable, allow
that to happen where the conversation cannot be overheard.
[241] Section
419(2) provides that if the person arranges for another person to be present
during questioning, the investigating police
officer must also allow the other
person to be present and give advice to the person during the questioning. The
other person may
be excluded from being present if they are unreasonably
interfering with the questioning (s 419(3)).
The accused was
denied his entitlements under Queensland law
[242] Contrary
to s 418(1)(a) of the
Q Police Act
, the accused was not informed
that he may contact a relative or friend to inform them of his whereabouts and
to ask them to be present
whilst he was being questioned.
[243] The Crown
argued that this entitlement did not apply to the accused because he had
previously been arrested by Queensland Police
for unrelated offences and would
have on that occasion been informed as required by s 418(1)(a). I reject
that submission. The provision
is directed to the suspect informing a relative
or friend that they are in the company of a Police officer for questioning and
that relative or friend to be present during the questioning. Being
informed about such contact at the time of an earlier unrelated
arrest does not
fulfil the requirements of the provision.
accused had, in fact, asked Clark and Stanborough if he could call his mother,
which was refused. From what the accused
said, his intention in wanting to call
her was not for the purpose of making her aware of his whereabouts and asking if
be present. It was for her general support of his mental health. The
accused’s mother was in Western Australia and, in all
probability, could
not have attended herself. Nevertheless, the accused may have had some other
relative or friend available to him
who could have attended if he had been made
aware of his right to make a call.
[245] Further,
contrary to s 418(1)(b), the accused was not informed that he may contact a
lawyer of his choice to arrange, or attempt
to arrange, for them to be present
whilst he was being questioned.
[246] These
failures to inform were contraventions of an Australian law within s 138 of
Evidence Act
accused did indicate a wish to speak to his lawyer, but that lawyer was from
Western Australia and the accused could not
remember his name or contact
details. The accused did speak to a lawyer, and was advised to remain silent,
but that lawyer was from
the Northern Territory. The accused did ask to have a
lawyer present whilst he was being questioned, but was told, without any
being made, that that could not be facilitated.
entitlement under s 419(2) to have a lawyer present during questioning only
arises if the person to be questioned arranges
for their lawyer to be present.
There was no evidence about any arrangements between Queensland Police and the
relevant legal aid
services in Queensland for the provision of legal
representatives to be present when a suspect is being questioned.
[249] Nevertheless,
the failure to inform the accused of his entitlements under the
meant that no steps were taken, or enquiries made, to permit him to
arrange, or attempt to arrange, to have a lawyer present during
questioning.
Given the entitlements under the
Q Police Act
, that was inconsistent with
the minimum standards which society should expect and require of law enforcement
officers. It was, therefore,
an ‘impropriety’ within s 138 of
Evidence Act
The recorded interview was not obtained
improperly, in contravention of Australian law or in consequence of an
impropriety
[250] Section
138(1) requires a chain of causation to be shown between the impropriety or
contravention and the obtaining of the
It has been held that
it is appropriate to apply the ‘but for’ test of
[251] For the
reasons set out in paragraphs
above, I do not accept that there
was any causal link between the contraventions and impropriety referred to above
and the obtaining
of the things the accused said in the recorded interview. I am
not satisfied that but for the contraventions and impropriety, the
accused would
not have participated in the recorded interview and the things the accused said
would not have been said. Based on
my own observations of the recorded
interview, and the things the accused said in it, I agree with Flynn’s
perception that
the accused wanted to participate in the recorded interview to
hear what Police had accumulated in terms of evidence against him.
Contrary to
the Defence submission, I do not accept that that perception had any bearing on
Flynn’s conduct of the interview
other than his forming the view, with
which I agree, that the accused’s participation in it was voluntary and he
freely chose
to answer questions or not as he saw fit.
[252] Furthermore,
I am not satisfied that either Flynn or Wheeler: (a) knew or ought reasonably to
have known that their failures
to inform the accused of his entitlements under
Q Police Act
and to make enquiries about whether the accused’s
requests for a lawyer to be present could be facilitated were likely to impair
substantially the ability of the accused to respond rationally to the
questioning; or (b) made a false statement about the accused’s
entitlements even though they knew or ought reasonably to have known that the
statement was false and that the false statement was
likely to cause the accused
to make an admission. That is, I am not satisfied that any admissions in the
recorded statement are taken
to have been obtained improperly by operation of
s 138(2) of the
Evidence Act
[253] I find
that Flynn and Wheeler were unaware of the entitlements of a person being
questioned under the
Q Police Act
. I find that they were not matters
which Flynn and Wheeler ought reasonably to have known, given the uncertainties
of the relevant provisions to the accused’s
situation to which I have referred above. Their assumption that the Northern
law and policies applied to their questioning of the accused in
relation to a Northern Territory offence was reasonable in the circumstances.
That finding is supported by the expressed understanding of Queensland Police
officer Clark that the interview was not being conducted
and those entitlements did not
[254] For the
above reasons, the recorded interview does not fall within s 138 of the
Evidence Act
Desirability of admitting the evidence
outweighs the undesirability of admitting evidence obtained in that way
[255] Given my
conclusions above, it is not strictly necessary to consider further the
operation of s 138. Nevertheless, lest I be
wrong about those conclusions,
I will do so briefly on the assumption (contrary to my conclusions above) that I
found that there
was a causal link between the contraventions and/or the
impropriety referred to above and the accused’s participation in the
recorded interview and the things he said in it.
[256] Once an
accused has satisfied the court that evidence was obtained improperly, the Crown
must persuade the court that the balance
favours the admission of the
conducting that balancing exercise, s 138 is not expressly concerned with
ensuring a fair trial and is not directed to relieving
the accused from
unfairness resulting from the relevant
impropriety.
The prejudice to
the individual accused will almost always be present but will rarely be
The fundamental
concern of the section is to ensure that the impropriety involved in obtaining
the evidence is balanced against the
public interest in successfully prosecuting
alleged offenders.
[258] Section
138(3) provides a non-exhaustive list of the matters the court may consider in
the exercise of the discretion. The most
important consideration in a case such
as the present will be the nature and seriousness of the improper conduct
engaged in by the
The authorities draw a
distinction between the two extreme categories of case. At one end of the
spectrum there are those improprieties
which constitute ‘isolated and
merely accidental non-compliance’, and at the other end of the spectrum
are cases in which
the incriminating statement has been procured by a deliberate
or reckless disregard of the law on the part of the law officers concerned.
impropriety in this case was constituted essentially by: (a) a failure to inform
the accused of his entitlements to speak
to a friend, relative or lawyer to try
to arrange for them to be present during the interview; and (b) a failure to
delay the interview
to permit the accused, who asked to have a lawyer present,
to seek to arrange for a lawyer to be present.
[260] The right
to silence is a fundamental civil liberty, as reflected in the fact that
Art 14.3 of the
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights 1966
recognises the privilege against
self-incrimination and the right to silence. At the level of principle, any
impropriety which denies
or affects a suspect’s right to silence is
This part of my reasons
assumes that the impropriety affected the accused’s right to silence.
[261] However,
the strength of the causal link between the contravention or impropriety and the
evidence bears on the weighing of
the public interest in not giving curial
approval or encouragement to the unlawful
For the reasons
referred to above about the accused’s willingness to participate without a
lawyer present, I find that if there
is a causal link, it is tenuous at best,
making its admission unlikely to convey curial approval or encouragement of the
contraventions
and impropriety.
certainly cannot be said that the contraventions and impropriety were deliberate
or even reckless in nature. There was no
on the part of the
Police officers. This was not an unlawfully compelled interrogation going to the
very root of the administration
Nor was it a case of
persistent Police importunity after the subject of the questioning had
repeatedly indicated he or she was exercising
the right to silence, and that
right was undermined and otherwise
At the outset of the
recorded interview, the accused was clearly indicating a willingness to proceed
with the interview, with an
expressed intention to stay silent. At that point,
he was in no way declining to proceed. That he subsequently chose not to stay
silent in response to some questions, but not others, was an informed choice he
made based on, it may be inferred, the subject matter
of the questions.
the probative value and importance of the recorded interview are considerable in
these proceedings. The assessment of probative
value requires an analysis of the
extent to which the evidence could rationally affect the proof of facts. Here,
in a formal and
recorded interview conducted some 10 months after the
deceased’s death, the accused persisted in numerous lies denying any
involvement in the death and denying any attempt to cover up his involvement,
including in the face of evidence obtained by Police
which was inconsistent with
his lies. It is powerful evidence demonstrating consciousness of guilt (as dealt
with below) and impacting
upon the jury’s assessment of the
accused’s credibility if he were to give evidence.
charged offence is most serious. The mandatory penalty for the offence is
imprisonment for life.
reasons for the non-compliance in this case were that Flynn and Wheeler were
interviewing a suspect in another jurisdiction
which had a different legal
entitlement to that which applied in the Northern Territory, they erroneously
assumed that the Northern
Territory entitlements would apply and failed to make
enquiries to confirm that position. There was no considered intention to flout
the relevant requirement, and this is not repeated or ongoing conduct on the
part of Northern Territory Police. As both Flynn and
Wheeler indicated, this was
the first and only interview of a suspect they had conducted in another
[266] For the
above reasons, I would have been satisfied that the desirability of admitting
the evidence outweighs the undesirability
of admitting evidence obtained in this
Not unfair to the accused to admit the recorded
Defence argued that the Court should exercise its discretion to refuse to admit
the recorded interview under s 90 of the
Evidence Act
provides that the court may refuse to admit evidence of an admission if it is
adduced by the prosecution and, having regard
to the circumstances in which it
was made, it would be unfair to the accused to use the evidence. While s 90
acts as a final or ‘safety
net’ provision, questions relating to
reliability and illegality or impropriety are covered by ss 85, 138 and 139
Evidence Act
addition to the matters already considered under those sections, the basis for
the Defence submission was that the accused
was dressed in prison greens and was
wearing handcuffs and leg shackles, an appearance which would unduly prejudice
the jury against
the accused, divert them from their task of considering all of
the evidence in the case and influence their assessment of his character
[269] While
some risk of that nature may be accepted to arise from the admission of the
recorded interview, that risk can be adequately
addressed by clear directions to
the jury that they must disregard the fact that the accused was in custody and
put that from their
minds, they must not draw any adverse inference against the
accused because he was at that time in custody, they must not speculate
why the accused was in custody, they cannot reason that he must be a person of
bad character and that makes it more likely
that he committed the charged
offence and that his situation at that time is irrelevant and has no bearing on
what they must decide
in the trial.
Probative value of the
recorded interview outweighs danger of unfair prejudice to the accused
Defence argued that the Court must refuse to admit the recorded interview under
s 137 of the
Evidence Act
because its probative value is outweighed
by the danger of unfair prejudice to the accused.
[271] As set out
in paragraph
above, the probative
value of the recorded interview is considerable. As set out in paragraph
above, any danger of unfair
prejudice to the accused because the jury may misuse the recorded interview can
be addressed by appropriate
directions to the jury.
[272] Consequently,
the probative value of the recorded interview is not outweighed by the danger of
unfair prejudice to the accused
within s 137 of the
Evidence Act
Conclusion in relation to electronically recorded interview of
the accused on 29 March 2023
[273] For the
above reasons, the electronically recorded interview of the accused on 29 March
2023 is admissible pursuant to s 81
Evidence Act
rendered inadmissible by ss 85(2), 90, 137 or 138.
conversation with the accused on 29 March 2023
[274] As set out
in paragraph
above, pursuant to
the Removal Order, the accused was transported by Queensland Police officers
Clark and Stanborough from a correctional
centre to a Police station to be
interviewed by Flynn and Wheeler. Clark covertly recorded that conversation.
[275] The Crown
relies on two portions of the recorded conversation. The first is the portion
relied on as coincidence evidence as
set out in paragraph
(e) above. The second is the portion
in which the accused said he was still hoping the deceased was ‘shacked
up’ somewhere
with a ‘sheila’, which the Crown says is a lie
consciousness of guilt.
[276] Clark and
Stanborough gave evidence on the voir dire. I listened to the recorded
conversation and was provided with a transcript
Admissibility of the recorded interview as containing
[277] Again, the
underlying bases for admissibility of these portions of the recorded
conversation, despite their characterisation
as hearsay, is that they are
admissions. Given the way the Crown seeks to rely on them, they are clearly
adverse to the accused’s
interest in the outcome of the proceeding.
[278] Again, no
issue was raised by Defence in reliance on s 85(2), thereby effectively
conceding that the requirements of s 85(2)
Bases of objection to admissibility
Defence objected to the admissibility of these portions of the recorded
conversation on a number of bases, ultimately that:
(a) they should be excluded under s 90 of the
Evidence Act
having regard to the circumstances in which the recorded conversation was made,
it would be unfair to the accused to use
the evidence; and
(b) they should be excluded under s 137 of the
Evidence Act
probative value was outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to the accused.
Factual background and the recorded conversation
[280] On 20
March 2023, Clark was tasked with assisting Northern Territory Police to have
the accused made available from the correctional
centre for a recorded interview
to be conducted by them.
sought and obtained approval for that assistance including a removal order from
the Detective Inspector of the Queensland Homicide
Investigation
Clark’s evidence was
that the approval was subject to the conditions that two armed investigators
from the Homicide Investigation
Unit would escort and remain with the accused,
who would be restrained for the duration of his removal, and that any contact
the accused would be recorded via audio and/or
Stanborough’s
understanding was that the decision to record the transport was made before they
arrived at the correctional
Stanborough said he
could not exactly remember when the decision was made, but it was a decision
that he and Clark made together.
Stanborough said that potentially his boss might also have been involved in the
decision, but he did not
[281] Pursuant
to the Removal Order which Clark had obtained, Clark and Stanborough took the
accused into their custody at the correctional
centre and transported him to the
Police Station in a police
[282] Clark made
an audio recording of the drive to the Police Station with the accused, of which
Stanborough was aware.
recording was for the purposes of transparency of the investigation, to show
that the accused was treated fairly and not questioned
by Queensland Police in
relation to the alleged murder offence whilst he was in their
[283] Clark and
Stanborough considered their role to be safely transporting the accused to where
Northern Territory Police could offer
the accused the opportunity to take part
in a recorded interview.
had no intention of interviewing the accused during the
transportation.
[284] Clark’s
reasons for recording the conversation during the transportation were that
recording was one of the requirements
of the approval, there were rules
requiring no rewards, benefits or anything the accused was not allowed to have
to be given to a
prisoner, it was a serious investigation and he did not want
any allegations to be made that they had questioned him, and the accused
be treated fairly and looked after by them, all of which the recording would
Stanborough’s
understanding was that the recording was made to ensure they could not be
accused of any impropriety towards
the accused, they did not question him and he
could not make any accusations against them in relation to their
[285] Recording
the transport of prisoners is an ordinary and regular occurrence, Clark had done
it countless times and Stanborough
had done it ‘a
It was standard
practice in Queensland to record the transportation of
[286] Clark did
not inform the accused that the transport was being audio recorded, saying there
is no requirement to inform a prisoner
He said it was common
for him not to inform prisoners of that, it was lawful to record a conversation
in Queensland and it was simply
for the purposes of transparency to address any
false allegations that might be made by the
Clark said that if
the accused had been suspected of a Queensland murder charge and was being
transported, he would not have informed
him he was recording the
Stanborough said
that he does not normally inform transported people that they are being recorded
as it is his experience that people
expect to be
[287] Stanborough
said that after the accused asked for access to a lawyer at the correctional
centre, he did not tell the accused
that they were recording the transport and
anything he said could be used against him in a criminal
proceeding.
He did not say
that because they were not questioning him in relation to the offence he was
going to be asked about by the Northern
Stanborough said they
made small talk with the accused on the 30 minute drive, nothing
It was put to
Stanborough that the accused had provided a number of pieces of information
relating to an incident in respect of which
he was suspected of murder and
Stanborough said he had no idea what the accused was talking about and whatever
he said meant nothing
Stanborough.
[288] Clark had
not included any reference to the audio recording in his Police notebook or his
statement of September 2023 because
he did not think that the recording
contained any evidence relevant to the
He informed Flynn
Clark denied that
he had not made a statement about it until very recently, and when he did had
noted that recording conversations
by a party to them is lawful in Queensland,
because he was concerned that what he had done was
He said that he
added that part to the addendum statement because this was a Northern Territory
matter, he would not have mentioned
the lawfulness in relation to a Queensland
matter because it is known in Queensland, and he wanted to make sure it was
Northern Territory
[289] When the
accused was met by Clark and Stanborough at the correctional centre, Stanborough
told the accused they were not going
to question him as he did not know things
in detail about their
investigation.
He explained
that Northern Territory Police had engaged them to remove him and he would be
returned to the correctional centre by
4pm. The accused volunteered that he knew
what it was about, it was about his mate who
disappeared.
Stanborough told
him that they were just facilitating his removal and were not questioning him
know about the offence. The accused said
there was no offence. Stanborough said that they were not questioning him, but
Territory Police were in Queensland to talk to him.
accused asked if he was allowed to have a lawyer present and Stanborough said
that is a conversation he needs to have with
the Northern Territory Police.
accused volunteered that he guessed it was real, they have not found
‘him’, ‘he’ is not coming
The accused volunteered
that he knew he would be questioned at some point because he was one of the last
people to see ‘him’,
but he was still holding out hopes that
‘he’ was ‘holed up somewhere with some sheila or something
like that’.
[292] Clark
asked the accused what the correctional centre was like, what he did during the
day, what happens at the prison farm,
where the accused’s family were, and
how his health was. The accused responded to those questions.
response to the last question, the accused said that his mental health was not
the greatest due to having his ‘ex’
stand up in court and admitting
that she pushed him to breaking point where he ‘sort of snapped’.
main claim was she’s gonna get her dad to cut my throat. Um, so like it
was the, the camel, the straw, the straw that
wrote [sic] the camel back was me
saying: ‘I’ll cut your throat you maggot before I get my throat
cut.’ Which doesn’t
sound good.
conversation went on for a further 22 pages of transcript, but it is only the
portions set out in paragraphs
above that the Crown sought
to rely on and tender.
Not unfair to the accused to admit the
two portions of the recorded conversation
Defence argued that the Court should exercise its discretion to refuse to admit
the recorded interview under s 90 of the
Evidence Act
having regard to the circumstances in which the two statements were made, it
would be unfair to the accused to use the evidence.
Defence argued that the recorded conversation in its entirety was prejudicial to
the accused (for example because he discussed
the criminal matters for which he
had been sentenced) and it was impossible to isolate the portions the Crown
seeks to rely on and
extract them out of context. I disagree. The two portions
are not preceded or followed by any significant explanatory content and
easily understandable without the remainder of the conversation.
Defence also argued that it would be unfair to the accused to use the evidence
in circumstances where he was not told, from
the very beginning of the
transport, that his conversations with police were being recorded and anything
he said might have been
used in evidence against him.
[299] I do not
accept that. I make the following findings on the basis of the evidence recited
[300] First,
there was, reasonably on the part of Clark and Stanborough, neither an intention
nor an expectation that the accused
would provide them with any information
which might be admissible against him as evidence. Their sole purpose was to
transport the
accused to a Police station for questioning by Northern Territory
Police officers.
[301] Secondly,
the recording of interactions during transportation of prisoners by Queensland
Police is lawful, routine and standard
practice and it is ordinarily done, not
to gather evidence that might fall from the mouth of the person being
transported, but to
ensure an independent record of those interactions in order
to meet any allegations of unfair or improper treatment of the person
transported. It was for this reason that Defence did not press any argument in
reliance on s 138 of the
Evidence Act
[302] Thirdly,
it was a condition of the approval given by the Detective Inspector of the
Homicide Investigation Unit to obtain the
Removal Order that the accused’s
interactions with Clark and Stanborough during the transportation be recorded. I
do not accept
the Defence submissions that the evidence about this was
‘confused’ or ‘wishy-washy’. Stanborough acknowledged
that his recollection about this was not clear, but Clark’s evidence was
clear and unshaken in cross-examination. I infer that
this condition of the
approval was essentially for the same purpose as recordings of transportations
are made generally.
[303] Fourthly,
it is common or usual that Queensland Police do not inform people they are
transporting that their interactions are
being recorded. I infer that to be the
case because the purpose of the recording is not to gather evidence, the
officers transporting
are not engaging in questioning of the suspect and it is
not expected that, in the ordinary course, a person being transported would
volunteer information which may be used in evidence. Again, I anticipate that it
was for this reason that Defence did not press any
argument in reliance on
s 138 of the
Evidence Act
[304] Fifthly, I
do not accept that there was any basis upon which to infer that Clark or
Stanborough knew or feared that they had
done the wrong thing in not informing
the accused that they were recording. As I have found, they did not do the wrong
thing in recording
the interaction with the accused or not informing him that
they were doing so; they followed standard operating procedures. Furthermore,
there was nothing untoward in the disclosure of the recording by Clark in his
addendum statement made in July 2025. The fact of the
making of the audio
recording was disclosed in Stanborough’s statement made in September 2023,
and the fact of the audio recording
was disclosed to Flynn shortly after the
recorded interview.
[305] Sixthly,
the accused volunteered the two statements sought to be relied on by the Crown.
They were not said in response to any
questions by Clark or Stanborough.
[306] Seventhly,
Clark and Stanborough were not in any position to know, and did not know, that
the two statements made by the accused
were relevant or significant in the
investigation or the alleged offence of murder the subject of the investigation.
Aside from the
fact that the Northern Territory Police were investigating a
murder, they were not aware of any of the details of the investigation.
the first statement was, effectively, a denial of any involvement in the
deceased’s disappearance and the second statement
was, on its face, wholly
unrelated to the alleged offence of murder.
[307] For these
reasons, s 90 is not enlivened.
Probative value of the
recorded interview outweighs danger of unfair prejudice to the accused
Defence argued that the Court must refuse to admit the recorded interview under
s 137 of the
Evidence Act
because its probative value is outweighed
by the danger of unfair prejudice to the accused.
probative value of the first statement by the accused in the recorded
conversation is not substantial, but it does have
some value as a lie told by
the accused some 10 months after the deceased’s death to Police officers
on a separate occasion
from that of the recorded interview. Given that the Crown
seeks to rely on the number of lies told by the accused over an extended
of time to establish consciousness of guilt, the probative value of this lie is
not insignificant.
[310] As set out
in paragraph
above, having regard
to the other proposed coincidence evidence, the second statement has significant
probative value.
[311] Essentially,
the only danger of unfair prejudice to the accused identified by the Defence was
that referred to in paragraph
which I have already rejected.
[312] Consequently,
the probative value of the two statements in the recorded conversation is not
outweighed by the danger of unfair
prejudice to the accused within s 137 of
Evidence Act
Conclusion in relation to portions of
recorded conversation with the accused on 29 March 2023
[313] For the
above reasons, the two portions of the recorded conversation with the accused on
29 March 2023 during the transport
are admissible pursuant to s 81 of the
Evidence Act
and are not rendered inadmissible by ss 85(2), 90, 137
Consciousness of guilt evidence
Crown sought to rely on the evidence referred to in paragraphs
above as evidence of post-offending
conduct, essentially hiding evidence of the deceased’s death, including
moving and disposing
of the deceased’s body, threatening eye witnesses and
telling lies, as evidencing his consciousness of guilt.
[315] Essentially,
the Defence argued that none of the above evidence was admissible as an
admission to the offence of murder, as
opposed to conduct which could reasonably
be explained by the accused’s involvement in an unintended killing of the
which he had admitted by his plea of guilty to manslaughter on the
Queen v Baden-Clay
High Court cited with approval (at [73]) the following passage from
As a general rule, it will be for the jury to decide, on the
basis of the evidence as a whole, whether the post-offence conduct of
accused is related to the crime before them rather than to some other culpable
act. It is also within the province of the jury
to consider how much weight, if
any, such evidence should be accorded in the final determination of guilt or
innocence. For the trial
judge to interfere with that process will in most cases
constitute a usurpation of the jury’s exclusive fact-finding role.
[317] The High
Court added (at [74]) that there may be cases where post-offence conduct, such
as the accused’s flight or concealment,
is so out of proportion to the
level of culpability involved in a lesser offence that it might be found by the
jury to be more consistent
with the more serious offence charged. There may be
cases where an accused goes to such lengths to conceal the death or to distance
himself or herself from it so as to provide a basis on which the jury might
conclude that the accused had committed an extremely
serious crime and so
warrant a conclusion beyond reasonable doubt as to the responsibility of the
accused for the death and the concurrent
existence in the accused of the intent
necessary for murder. The High Court added that there is no hard and fast rule
that evidence
of post-offence concealment and lies is always intractably neutral
as between murder and manslaughter.
[318] The High
Court held (at [76]) that it was open to the jury in the case to regard the
lengths to which the respondent went to
conceal his wife’s body and to
conceal his part in her demise as beyond what was likely, as a matter of human
experience, to
have been engendered by a consciousness of having unintentionally
killed his wife.
Defence sought to distinguish the decision in
from the present
case on the basis that, in
, the accused had given evidence
denying any role in the death of his wife, whereas here, the accused had entered
a plea of guilty
to manslaughter.
[320] That is
not any sensible basis for distinction. The High Court’s decision and the
principle cited from
The Queen v White
did not turn on the
respondent’s denial of any involvement in killing his wife.
the Tasmanian
Court of Criminal Appeal rejected an argument very similar to that of the
accused. The applicant in that case submitted
that the evidence of his
post-offence conduct was equally consistent with his crime having been
manslaughter rather than murder.
Reference was made (at [25]-[27]) to
Queen v White
[322] Reference
was also made (at [28]) to a decision of the Victorian Court of Appeal in
Queen v Ciantar
case, the appellant contended that evidence of his flight from the scene of a
fatal collision was equally consistent with
a consciousness of guilt of less
serious driving offences such as drink driving. The Court of Appeal held (at
[39]) that, even allowing
that a possible explanation of the post-offence
conduct was that he was conscious he had committed one or more lesser offence as
opposed to the offence charged, it does not follow that the post-offence conduct
could not be left to the jury as something which
was capable of supporting an
inference that the applicant was conscious that he had committed the offence
charged. The Court of Appeal
added (at [40]) that there may be some cases in
which post-offence conduct is equally consistent with two or more possible
or is otherwise intractably neutral and it may then not be open on the
totality of the evidence to draw an inference that the accused
consciousness of guilt of some particular conduct. But where such lies or
conduct are considered in the context of all of the
evidence, it is not to be
assumed that it will usually be so. Indeed, in the scheme of things, it is not
likely to be so in many
[323] In this
case, considered in the context of the other evidence in the case, particularly
the direct evidence from Shier and Waldock
deceased, this is not a case in which the accused’s post-offence conduct
is equally consistent
with the offences of murder and manslaughter or otherwise
intractably neutral. It is a rational inference that the accused moved
fire to the deceased’s body, threatened the eye witnesses to prevent them
from reporting the death to Police, and lied
deceased’s death for a lengthy period of time because of an awareness that
the injury he had inflicted
to the deceased (a cut throat) implicated him in a
murder rather than an unintentional death.
[324] Consequently,
it is properly for the jury to decide, on the basis of the evidence as a whole,
whether the post-offence conduct
of the accused is related to the crime of
murder rather than to the crime of manslaughter, and to consider how much
weight, if any,
such evidence should be accorded in the final determination of
guilt or innocence. To omit this evidence on the basis relied on by
the Defence
would, in this case, constitute a usurpation of the jury’s exclusive
fact-finding role.
evidence sought to be relied on by the Crown as evidence of consciousness of
guilt is admissible for that purpose.
Section 85(2) –
Circumstances were such as to make it unlikely that the truth of the admission
was adversely affected
Defence objected to the admissibility of, essentially, the lies told by the
accused to Police officers on the basis that
they were ‘made to [a] person
in authority and not an honest account in an attempt to avoid
submission misunderstands the operation and effect of s 85(2) of the
Evidence Act
[328] Section
85(2) provides that evidence of an admission is not admissible unless the
circumstances in which it was made were such
as to make it unlikely that the
truth of the admission was adversely affected. By s 85(3), the court may
take into account (relevantly)
any relevant condition or characteristic of the
accused (including age, personality, education, any mental, intellectual or
disability); and the nature of the questions and the manner in which
they were put.
referred to above, s 85 of the
Evidence Act
is concerned with
whether the circumstances adversely affected the ‘truth of the
admission’. It is not directly concerned
with whether the evidence has
been improperly or illegally obtained, or general considerations of fairness,
and nor is the provision
concerned with the voluntariness of the admission,
except to the extent that it might bear on the assessment of reliability in the
relevant sense.
enquiry also does not raise any consideration of whether the admissions made
were, in fact, true.
case of an admission comprising a confession, the relevant enquiry is whether
circumstances such as the accused’s personal
characteristics and the level
of compliance with procedural safeguards may have affected the truth of the
confession.
operation of the provision and the relevant factors and considerations were
identified by Barr J in
(at [30]) in the
following terms:
The prosecution in the present case must satisfy
the court on the balance of probabilities that the admissions relied on were
in circumstances that were not likely to affect their truth adversely
Bin Sulaeman v R
[2013] NSWCCA 283
]. As trial judge, I must
determine whether the reliability of the admissions may have been impaired by
the way in which they were
obtained. In this exercise, I need to consider all
the circumstances. Those circumstances include the characteristics of the
person making the admission, including age, personality, education and
any mental, intellectual or physical disability affecting
him. The circumstances
would also include, where they exist, misconduct by those interrogating, the
procedural safeguards adopted,
and whether there was any impairment of the
ability of the person making the admission to make a rational decision.
[332] In other
words, the enquiry is whether the circumstances were such that it was unlikely
that the accused made a false
confession.
[333] It has
been held that the provision applies to both admissions per se (i.e. inculpatory
statements) and admissions comprising
lies evidencing a consciousness of guilt
(i.e. exculpatory statements relied on as lies). In
The Queen v
the NSW Court
of Criminal Appeal held that:
If upon the evidence led on the voir
dire ... a question legitimately arises as to whether the circumstances were
such that the truth
(or untruth) of the admission might have been adversely
affected, then it falls to the Crown to establish upon a balance of
probabilities
that it was unlikely that this was the case. The inquiry
undertaken by the judge is not concerned with the question whether the admission
was in fact made, or whether it was true (or untrue); each is for the
[334] Nothing
has been identified by the Defence that
gave rise to any particular issue
affecting the truth, or untruth, of the admission.
repeated submission, without particular reference to anything, that it was
reasonable for the accused to have been considered
a suspect at the time of an
admission to a Police officer and cautioned at that time has no basis in the
evidence on the voir dire
and is not a sufficient basis upon which the Court
could be satisfied that a question legitimately arises as to whether the
circumstances
were such that the truth or untruth of the admissions made on any
particular occasion might have been adversely affected.
[336] Section
85(2) of the
Evidence Act
is not a barrier to the admissibility of any of
this evidence.
No unfairness to the accused or danger of unfair
prejudice to the accused
Defence argued that the Court should refuse to admit the evidence because it
would be unfair to the accused to use it within
s 90 of the
and/or the Court must refuse to admit the recorded interview under
s 137 of the
Evidence Act
because its probative value is outweighed
by the danger of unfair prejudice to the accused.
Defence written submission on this point was as follows:
absence of any specific probity to the charge on indictment, the risk of the
danger of unfair prejudice arising from a direction
and usage purported by the
Crown, whilst some of the evidence will be transactional in nature and before
the jury, no direction as
to such use should be given to the jury.
understood it, this was a submission that it would be unfair to the accused to
permit the Crown to use the evidence and/or
it would give rise to a danger of
unfair prejudice to the accused to admit the evidence because it has no
probative value as evidence
of consciousness of guilt to the offence of
understood, it is merely a repetition of the submission that the evidence is
incapable of establishing consciousness of the
accused’s guilt for the
offence of murder. I have already rejected that submission.
[341] Sections
90 and 137 of the
Evidence Act
Conclusion in relation to the proposed consciousness
of guilt evidence
[342] For the
above reasons, the evidence referred to in paragraph
above is admissible for the purpose
for which the Crown seeks to rely upon it and is not rendered inadmissible by
ss 90 or 137.
Other evidence objected to
[343] In written
submissions, the Defence made objections to the admissibility of evidence of
various other statements made by the
accused as referred to under the heading
‘Crown case’ above. Those objections were in the following
... do not assist the jury in deciding fact in issue
(intention to kill as opposed to manslaughter) and are unfair to [the accused].
Excluded pursuant to s 90 and/or s 137.
[344] No other
submission was made, in writing or orally, to explain the specific content of
any particular statement and how it was
irrelevant to a fact in issue or the
asserted unfairness. Understandably, no submission was made by the Crown in
response. I do not
propose to address those objections. If pressed at the trial,
the admissibility of that other evidence could be addressed
------------------------
Derwish v The Queen
[2016] VSCA 72
per Weinberg AP, Redlich and Kyrou JJA.
Evidence Act
Dictionary, Part 1.
Hughes v The Queen
[2017] HCA 20
263 CLR 338
at [16] per Kiefel CJ, Bell,
Keane and Edelman JJ.
IMM v The Queen
[2016] HCA 14
per French CJ, Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ
BD v The Queen
[2017] NTCCA
per Grant CJ, Kelly and Barr JJ.
at [51]-[52], [54];
The Queen v Bauer
[2018] HCA 40
(2018) 266 CLR 56
at [38]-[39], [41],
Ibid at [59].
Hoch v The Queen
[1988] HCA 50
165 CLR 292
at 295 per Mason CJ, Wilson and Gaudron JJ;
NAM v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 95
per Maxwell P (Buchanan and Nettle JJA agreeing).
The Queen v Bauer
[2018] HCA 40
(2018) 266 CLR 56
per Kiefel CJ, Bell, Gageler, Keane, Nettle, Gordon
and Edelman JJ.
Judicial college of Victoria,
Criminal Charge Book
, [4.18.1].
CW v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 288
per Maxwell P, Buchanan and Neave JJA;
Director of Public Prosecutions
[2014] VSCA 58
per Redlich, Osborn
JJA and Sifris AJA, citing
Phillips v The Queen
[2006] HCA 4
(2006) 225 CLR 303
The Queen v AW
per Grant CJ.
HML v The Queen
[2008] HCA 16
235 CLR 334
; OAE v The Queen
[2008] HCA 16
(2008) 235 CLR 334
per Gleeson
The Queen v Lisoff
[1999] NSWCCA 364
per Spigelman CJ, Newman and Sully JJ.
Hughes v The Queen
[2017] HCA 20
(2017) 263 CLR 338
at [16] per Kiefel CJ,
Bell, Keane and Edelman JJ (citations omitted).
Ibid at [41].
at [38]-[39], [41],
Director of Public
Prosecutions v Roder
[2024] HCA 15
(2024) 98 ALJR 644
per the Court, citing
Ebborn v The King
’) at [66]-[74] per the Court, citing
at [35] and
Potter v The King
[2024] SASCA 108
Doyle and David JJA (Kourakis CJ agreeing).
RH v The Queen
[2014] NSWCCA 71
(2014) 241 A Crim R 1
per Ward JA (Harrison and RA Hulme JJ
TB v The Queen
[2019] NSWCCA 224
, [104] per Ward JA (Harrison and RA Hulme JJ agreeing);
Vagg v The Queen
[2020] NSWCCA 134
per Simpson AJA (Rothman and N Adams JJ agreeing).
Aravena v The Queen
[2015] NSWCCA 288
(2015) 91 NSWLR 258
per the Court.
at [99] per the
Court, citing
TL v The King
[2022] HCA 35
(2022) 275 CLR 83
at [87]-[92] per
See Part 1 of the
Dictionary.
Stephen Odgers,
Evidence Law
(Thomson Reuters, 19
ed, 2020) [EA.81.60].
The Queen v W
[1999] NSWCCA 116
per Wood CJ at CL (Barr and James JJ agreeing).
The Queen v Visagie
[2021] NTSC 73
per Brownhill
See Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Evidence (Interim) Report
(Report 26, Vol 1) [755], extracted
in Stephen Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
(Thomson Reuters, 19
ed, 2020) [EA.81.240].
(2020) 94 ALJR 686
CJ, Bell, Gageler, Keane and Gordon JJ.
Tim Barr Pty Ltd v Narui
Gold Coast Pty Ltd
[2009] NSWSC 769
(2009) 258 ALR 598
, [50] and [54] per Barrett
Queen v Downs
[2019] NTSC 7
) at [29] per Grant
Mole v Prior
(2016) 36 NTLR 171
at [30] per Riley CJ, Kelly and Hiley JJ, citing
v Woolworths Ltd
[2005] NSWCCA 426
(2005) 158 A Crim R 546
per Basten JA (Barr J
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 8 (Flynn).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 10 (Flynn).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 10 (Flynn).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 10 (Flynn).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 11 (Flynn).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 28 (Wheeler).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 12 (Flynn).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 13 (Flynn).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 14 (Flynn).
Exhibit P7.
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 9 (Flynn); p 28 (Wheeler).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 9 (Flynn), p 29 (Wheeler).
Transcript of recorded
conversation, p 4.
Transcript of recorded
conversation, p 5.
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 16 (Flynn).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 29 (Wheeler).
Statement of Flynn made on 15
August 2023 (Ex P1), [38].
Statement of Flynn made on 15
August 2023 (Ex P1), [38]; Statement of Wheeler made on 11 April 2024, [34];
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 18 (Flynn), p 30 (Wheeler).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 30 (Wheeler).
Official Diary Extract of Clark
(Ex P6); Statement of Stanborough made on 10 September 2025 (Ex P8), [11].
Statement of Flynn made on 15
August 2023 (Ex P1), [39].
Statement of Flynn made on 15
August 2023 (Ex P1), [40]; Transcript, 30 July 2025, p 17 (Flynn).
Statement of Flynn made on 15
August 2023, [40]; Transcript, 30 July 2025, p 17 (Flynn).
Statement of Flynn made on 15
August 2023, [40]; Transcript, 30 July 2025, p 17 (Flynn).
Transcript of recorded
interview, p 1.
Transcript of recorded
interview, p 2.
Transcript of recorded
interview, p 3.
Transcript of recorded
interview, p 4.
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
pp 18, 20 (Flynn), pp 31-32 (Wheeler).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
Transcript 30 July 2025,
p 32 (Wheeler).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
pp 6, 9 (Flynn), p 27 (Wheeler).
Transcript of Recorded
Interview, p 3.
Transcript of Recorded
Interview, p 7.
Acts Interpretation Act
Police v Williams
[2014] SASC 177
246 A Crim R 317.
See, for example,
Kadir v The Queen
[2020] HCA 1
(2020) 267 CLR 109
per Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane, Nettle and Edelman JJ;
Cornwell v The Queen
[2010] NSWCCA 59
per McClellan CJ at CL [292] per Simpson J (Johnson J agreeing);
[2009] ACTSC 98
(2009) 212 A Crim R 442
Martin v The Queen
[2015] ACTCA 38
per Refshauge, Burns and Ross JJ.
The Queen v
[2017] NSWCCA 288
per Ward JA; Price, Beech-Jones JJ.
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
v Comptroller-General of Customs
(2009) 252 ALR 619 at [28].
King v Marcus
[2025] NTSC 39
per Grant J.
Ibid, citing
The Queen v Flemming
[2007] NSWCA 328
The King v Marcus
per Grant J.
The King v Marcus
per Grant J.
Kadir v The Queen
[2020] HCA 1
(2020) 267 CLR 109
, [51] per Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane, Nettle and
Edelman JJ;
Slater v The Queen
[2019] VSCA 213
per the Court.
See, for example,
(a pseudonym) v Commonwealth DPP
[2018] HCA 53
(2018) 93 ALJR 1
. In that case,
the impropriety was a grossly negligent abrogation of statutory responsibilities
by way of invocation of a statutory
power of questioning where the right to
silence was limited, for a purpose other than the specific, identified statutory
or which did not accord strictly with the statute: at [101].
See, for example,
The Queen v
[2013] NSWSC 1692
, [68], [134]. That involved holding the
accused, a youth, in a room and telling her she was not allowed to leave, and
questioning
her when she had not been cautioned or arrested, on a subsequent
occasion, after her arrest, providing a support person she did not
had English language difficulties, and conducting a recorded interview with her
even though she unequivocally informed
Police that she did not want to be
interviewed or recorded, her lawyer had confirmed that to Police in writing, the
accused had unequivocally
reiterated to Police that she did not want to be
interviewed and was told she had to, and the accused did not understand the
The Court held (at [68]) that the accused did not understand her right
to silence or that she was entitled to refuse to answer questions,
Police took advantage of her youth, her vulnerability and her support
person’s limited education and English, which
ill-equipped her to protect
the accused’s rights.
Queen v Layt
[2018] NTSC 36
, [61]-[62] per Grant CJ;
The Queen v Jennings
[2020] NTSC 71
per Grant CJ.
Statement of Clark made on 28
September 2023 (Ex P4), [3].
Addendum Statement of Clark made
on 23 July 2025 (Ex P5), [9].
Addendum Statement of Clark made
on 23 July 2025 (Ex P5), [10].
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 51 (Stanborough).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 52 (Stanborough).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 55 (Stanborough).
Statement of Clark made on 28
September 2023 (Ex P4), [4]-[7].
Addendum Statement of Clark made
on 23 July 2025 (Ex P5), [11]; Statement of Stanborough made on 10 September
2023 (Ex P8), [8],
Addendum Statement of Clark made
on 23 July 2025 (Ex P5), [11].
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 38 (Clark), p 50 (Stanborough).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 38 (Clark), p 50 (Stanborough).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
pp 38-39 (Clark).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 51 (Stanborough).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 39 (Clark); p 57 (Stanborough).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 52 (Stanborough).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 41 (Clark).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 57 (Stanborough).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 53 (Stanborough).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 53 (Stanborough).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 54 (Stanborough).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
p 55 (Stanborough).
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
Transcript, 30 July 2025,
Transcript of recorded
conversation, p 1.
Transcript of recorded
conversation, p 2.
Transcript of recorded
conversation, p 3.
Transcript of recorded
conversation, p 5.
The Queen v Baden-Clay
(2016) 258 CLR 308.
The Queen v White
[1998] 2 SCR 72.
Gale v Tasmania
The Queen v Ciantar
[2006) 16 VR 26.
The Queen v Downs
[2019] NTSC 7
) at [29] per Grant CJ.
Ibid at [30].
Ibid at [30], citing
(2015) 35 NTLR 117
(2015) 35 NTLR 117.
at [30] per Grant CJ, citing
R v Esposito
(1998) 45 NSWLR 442
(Unreported, NSW
Court of Criminal Appeal, Newman, Levine and Barr JJ, No 60550/96,
2 September 1997).
Queen v Esposito
(1998) 45 NSWLR 442
at 459 per Woods CJ.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (720 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter