URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTSCFC/2009/38.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:23:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Queen v PDW [2009] NTSCFC 38; [2009] NTSC 38 (31 July 2009)
The Queen v PDW
2009] NTSCFC
PDW v The Queen
[2009] NTCCA 10
PARTIES: THE QUEEN
TITLE OF COURT: FULL COURT OF THE
SUPREME COURT OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
EXERCISING TERRITORY JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL FROM THE SUPREME COURT EXERCISING TERRITORY JURISDICTION
FILE NOS: (20713041)
CA 3 of 2009 (20713041)
DELIVERED: 31 July 2009
HEARING DATE: 6 July 2009
JUDGMENT OF: MARTIN (BR) CJ, RILEY and SOUTHWOOD JJ
CATCHWORDS:
REFERENCE TO THE FULL COURT – INTERPRETATION OF s 131A CRIMINAL CODE
– “three or more illegal acts” –
evidence of maintenance
of a relationship of a sexual nature not required – autrefois convict not
available – double
punishment – court may intervene to avoid
KBT v The Queen
[1997] HCA 54
(1997) 191 CLR 417
KRM v The Queen
[2001] HCA 11
[2002] VSCA 54
(2002) 129 A Crim R 479
Pearce v The Queen
[1998] HCA 57
(1998) 194 CLR
, considered
Connelly v DPP
[1964] AC 1255
R v Kent-Newbold
[1939] HCA 37
(1939) 62 CLR
Maxwell v The Queen
(1996) 184 CLR 501;
Rogers v The Queen
[1994] HCA 42
(1994) 181 CLR 251
S v The Queen
[1989] HCA 66
(1989) 168 CLR 266
; R v Stone
[2005] NSWCCA 344
(2005) 64 NSWLR 413
Williams v Spautz
[1992] HCA 34
(1992) 174 CLR 509
Supreme Court Act
Sentencing Act
(NT) s 78BB
Criminal Code
(NT) s 31, s 131A, s 339
CRIMINAL LAW – APPEAL – opinion as to the veracity of the witness
should have been allowed – opinion evidence of
veracity of witness should
have been left to the jury – allowing prejudicial evidence given by the
complainant to go to the
jury may have led to impermissible reasoning by members
of the jury – verdict of the jury was not unreasonable on the evidence
– appeal allowed – retrial ordered
[2009] VSCA 28
Bell v The Queen
[1985] FCA 454
(1985) 7 FCR 555
[1967] 2 NSWR 717
R v Richardson; R v Longman
[1969] 1 QB
, referred to
Supreme Court Rules r 86.08
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: I Read
Respondent: M Stoddart
Solicitors:
Applicant: Northern Territory Legal Aid Commission
Respondent: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Judgment category classification: A
Judgment ID Number: Ril0911
Number of pages: 30
IN THE FULL COURT
OF THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
The Queen v PDW
[2009] NTSC 38
PDW v The Queen
[2009] NTCCA 10
Nos (20713041)
CA 3 of 2009 (20713041)
Applicant/Respondent
Respondent/Appellant
CORAM: MARTIN (BR) CJ, RILEY and SOUTHWOOD JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 31 July 2009)
MARTIN (BR) CJ:
[1] I agree with
the answers proposed by Riley J and with his Honour’s reasons. For the
reasons given by Riley J, I also agree
that the appeal should be allowed and a
retrial ordered.
[2] The Court
constituted as both the Full Court and the Court of Criminal Appeal heard a
reference from the learned trial Judge and
an appeal against conviction at the
The Reference
[3] Pursuant to
s 21 of the
Supreme Court Act
the Full Court heard a reference relating
to the interpretation of s 131A(2) of the
Criminal Code
[4] On 16 March
2009 the accused was arraigned before a jury panel and pleaded not guilty to six
charges contained in the one indictment.
The charges all related to the one
victim, a female child under the age of 16 years, and were as
(a) indecently dealing with the child by touching his penis
to her vagina contrary to s 132(2)(a) of the
Criminal Code
(b) gross indecency upon the child by ejaculating on her leg contrary to
s 192(4) of the
Criminal Code
(c) sexual intercourse, namely cunnilingus, with the child without her
consent contrary to s192(3) of the
Criminal Code
(d) sexual intercourse, namely digital/vaginal penetration, with the child
without her consent contrary to s192(3) of the
Criminal Code
(e) indecently dealing with the child by touching her breast contrary to
s132(2)(a) of the
Criminal Code
(f) maintaining a relationship of a sexual nature with the child who was
under the age of 16 years with circumstances of aggravation
contrary to
s 131A(2) and (4) of the
Criminal Code
[5] Before the
respondent was called upon to plead his counsel objected to count 6 in the
indictment on the basis that the three or
more acts particularised by the Crown
and upon which the Crown intended to rely in order to support count 6, were any
three or more
of counts 1 to 5 in the indictment. The learned trial Judge
overruled the objection and the respondent then entered a plea of not
all counts.
[6] Following
the trial the jury returned a verdict of not guilty in relation to count 1,
guilty in relation to counts 2, 4, 5 and
6 and they were unable to agree in
relation to count 3. The learned trial Judge has not yet recorded a conviction
in relation to
[7] After the
verdict, and before proceeding to sentence, the learned trial Judge posed the
following questions for the consideration
of the Full
In the circumstances, was I correct in allowing the charge against
s 131A(2) to be left to the jury where:
(a) the acts constituting the offence relied upon by the prosecution were all
pleaded as counts in the indictment;
(b) no evidence was led of an act constituting an offence of the kind
referred to in s 131A(1) which was not the subject of a charge
indictment;
(c) there were no three acts constituting an offence referred to in
s 131A(1) which were substantially the same or against the same
the Criminal Code?
If the answer to each part of (the previous question) is yes,
(a) as the acts constituting the offences to which the prisoner has been
found guilty in relation to counts 2, 4 and 5 are the same
acts which constitute
the finding of guilt in relation to count 6, should I now call upon the
prosecution to elect before recording
a conviction?
(b) if the answer to (a) is no, am I obliged to record a conviction and
impose a mandatory sentence of imprisonment in relation to
the findings of guilt
concerning count 6, as well as record convictions and impose mandatory sentences
of imprisonment in relation
to counts 2, 4 and 5?
The offence under s 131A
[8] Section 131A
Criminal Code
creates the offence of maintaining a relationship of
a sexual nature with a child under the age of 16 years. Although described
those terms the section goes on to provide that the offence is not committed
unless it is shown that the offender has “done
an act defined to
constitute an offence of a sexual nature in relation to the child on 3 or more
occasions". Section 131A
is in the following terms:
(1) For the purposes of this section,
offence of a sexual nature
means an offence defined by section
127, 128, 130, 132, 134, 188(1) and (2)(k), 192 or 192B.
(2) Any adult who maintains a relationship of a sexual nature with a child
under the age of 16 years is guilty of a crime and is liable
to imprisonment for
(3) A person shall not be convicted of the crime defined by this section
unless it is shown that the offender, as an adult, has, during
the period in
which it is alleged that he maintained the relationship in issue with the child,
done an act defined to constitute
an offence of a sexual nature in relation to
the child on 3 or more occasions, and evidence of the doing of any such act
admissible and probative of the maintenance of the relationship
notwithstanding that the evidence does not disclose the dates or
circumstances of those occasions.
(4) If in the course of the relationship of a sexual nature the offender
committed an offence of a sexual nature for which the offender
is liable to
imprisonment for at least 7 years but not more than 20 years, other than an
offence against section 192(8) or 192B,
the offender is liable in respect of
maintaining the relationship to imprisonment for 20 years.
(5) If in the course of the relationship of a sexual nature the offender
(a) an offence against section 192(8) or 192B; or
(b) an offence of a sexual nature for which the offender is liable to
imprisonment for more than 20 years,
the offender is liable in respect of maintaining the relationship to
imprisonment for life.
(6) It is a defence to a charge of a crime defined by this section to
(a) the child was of or above the age of 14 years; and
(b) the accused person believed on reasonable grounds that the child was of
or above the age of 16 years.
(7) A person may be charged in one indictment with an offence defined by this
section and with any other offence of a sexual nature
alleged to have been
committed by him in the course of the relationship in issue in the
first-mentioned offence and he may be convicted
of and punished for any or all
of the offences so charged.
(8) Where the offender is sentenced to a term of imprisonment for the offence
defined by this section and a term of imprisonment for
an offence of a sexual
nature, an order shall not be made directing that one of those sentences take
effect from the expiration of
deprivation of liberty for the other offence.
(9) An indictment for an offence against this section shall be signed by the
Director of Public Prosecutions.
(10) Section 12 does not apply to the child with respect to whom an offence
against this section is committed.
absence of authority I would have regarded s 131A(2) of the
Criminal Code
as creating an offence of maintaining a relationship of a sexual nature with a
child under the age of 16 years. Section 131A(3)
provides that a person "shall
not be convicted" of the crime of maintaining a sexual relationship with a child
under 16 "unless it
is shown" that he has “done an act defined to
constitute an offence of a sexual nature in relation to the child on three or
more occasions”. The evidence regarding such acts "shall be admissible
and probative of the maintenance of the relationship".
I would have considered
that for a conviction to be recorded under the section there is required, in
addition to the three relevant
acts stipulated by s 131A(3), the
maintenance of an unlawful sexual relationship with the child. However, there
is authority to
the contrary.
the High Court
discussed the Queensland provision, which is in pari materia to the Northern
Territory section. In their joint judgment
the majority (Brennan CJ, Toohey,
Gaudron and Gummow JJ at 422) concluded "that the actus reus of (the) offence is
the doing, as
an adult, of an act which constitutes an offence of a sexual
nature in relation to the child concerned on three or more occasions".
actus reus of the offence is as specified in that requirement "rather than
maintaining an unlawful sexual relationship". The
offence is made out if the
jury is agreed as to the commission of the same three or more acts constituting
offences of a sexual nature.
the High Court
considered a similar, although differently worded, provision from Victoria. In
that case the relevant section provided
that "a person who maintains a sexual
relationship with a child under the age of 16 to whom he or she is not married
and who is under
his or her care, supervision or authority is guilty of an
indictable offence". The section then went on to provide:
prove an offence under subsection (1) it is necessary to prove -
(a) that the accused during a particular period (while the child was under
the age of 16 and under his or her care, supervision or
authority) did an act in
relation to the child which would constitute an offence under a particular
provision of this Subdivision
or Subdivision (8A) or (8B); and
(b) that such an act also took place between the accused and the child on at
least two other occasions during that period.
McHugh J, likewise,
observed that the Victorian offence requires the proof of three acts
constituting offences and it is proof of
those acts and not the maintaining of a
relationship that constitutes the actus reus of the offence. Similar
observations were made
by Gummow and Callinan
[13] Whilst it
is possible to distinguish the provision in the Victorian legislation from s
131A of the
Criminal Code (NT)
that is not the case in relation to the
Queensland provision discussed in
For present purposes
there is no material difference between the wording of the Queensland provision
and the wording of the Northern
Territory provision. In the circumstances it is
appropriate for the offence created by s 131A(2) of the
Criminal Code
be subject to the same interpretation. It follows that the actus reus of the
offence created by s 131A(2) of the
Criminal Code
is the doing, as an
adult, of an act defined to constitute an offence of a sexual nature in relation
to a child on three or more
occasions. It is not the maintaining of an unlawful
sexual relationship with the child.
[14] Accepting
that the actus reus of the offence is the doing on at least three occasions of
"an act defined to constitute an offence
of a sexual nature" in relation to a
child, the question then arises as to what is meant by that expression. The
"act" must "constitute
an offence of a sexual nature". An offence of a sexual
nature is defined by reference to the various sections set out in s 131A
Criminal Code
. A relevant "act" must be an "offence" of a sexual nature
as identified in that section rather than an act per se.
[15] To obtain a
conviction for an offence under s 131A(2) of the
Criminal Code
prosecution must establish the presence of the actus reus and that the accused
had the necessary intention. Section 131A of
the Code is not a Schedule 1
offence or a declared offence for the purposes of Part IIAA of the Code and the
provisions of that Part
relating to physical elements and fault elements do not
have application. Section 31 of the Code has application and provides that
person will be excused from criminal responsibility for an act, omission or
event unless it was intended or foreseen by him as
a possible consequence of his
[16] The actus
reus of the offence created by s 131A(2) of the
Criminal Code
High Court has determined, the doing, as an adult, of an act which constitutes
an offence of a sexual nature in relation
to the child concerned on three or
more occasions. The offence comprises the presence of the actus reus as
identified together with
the presence of the necessary intention. In order to
obtain a conviction it is necessary for the prosecution to establish that the
appellant had the necessary intention, or had the applicable foresight, in
relation to the actus reus. It is apparent that it is
not necessary for the
prosecution to show any intention on the part of the accused to maintain an
unlawful sexual relationship with
circumstances in which the legislation was introduced and the second reading
speech of the Attorney-General
it clear that the introduction of s 131A(2) was not intended by the legislature
to create a new offence because of any concern
of the legislature that proof of
substantive sexual offences against a child provided an inadequate reflection of
criminal conduct
where the offences were indicative of an offender establishing
a sexual relationship with the child. The purpose of the new provision
create an offence which could be established in circumstances where the
prosecution evidence was incapable of proving substantive
offences by reason of
lack of particularity sufficient to comply with the requirements identified
meaning of "three or more occasions"
[18] The first
issue for determination is what is meant by the requirement that the offender
has "done an act defined to constitute
an offence of a sexual nature in relation
to the child on three or more occasions". The respondent contends that the
prosecution
must establish three identical crimes before the provision can take
effect. On the other hand the applicant contends that it is
not necessary for
the Crown to prove the accused committed three similar or like offences to
succeed in a prosecution under the section.
[19] Re-ordering
the words of the section reveals that what must have occurred on "three or more
occasions" was "an act defined to
constitute an offence of a sexual nature".
There is nothing in the wording of the section to require that it must be the
a similar act on each occasion. In my view, there is no basis for
importing those qualifying words into the section. To do so would
significant impediment to the prosecution of offenders who over time commit
different types of sexual assault against children.
It would tend to defeat the
purpose of s 131A.
[20] Contrary to
the submission of the respondent, the observations in the majority judgment of
the High Court in
do not suggest
There the Court resolved that in order for a person to be
convicted under the equivalent Queensland provision, the jury must be "agreed
to the commission of the same three or more illegal acts". That does not
suggest that the "three or more illegal acts" must be
the same act on each
occasion only that the jury must be agreed as to the individual acts that make
up the number necessary for a
conviction.
[21] Absent any
legislative provision to the contrary it would be arguable that a person
convicted of an offence under s 131A(2) of
Criminal Code
able to change his plea of not guilty and plead autrefois convict in relation to
charges on the same indictment that constituted
one of the three or more
offences of a sexual nature amounting to the actus reus of the offence under
131A(7) specifically addresses the issue and permits both the conviction and
punishment of the person for any or all
of the offences of a sexual nature
charged in the indictment.
Double punishment
[22] The effect
of s131A(7) is to permit what would otherwise be impermissible because of
duplicity. However, the subsection does
not exclude the power of the court to
consider an application to quash the indictment or stay the proceedings pursuant
to s 339 of
Criminal Code
and to consider whether, for the matter to
proceed in all of the circumstances, including the terms of the subsection,
would amount
to an abuse of process.
[23] An effort
is made to ameliorate one aspect of the apparent unfairness of the provision by
providing in subsection (8) of the
section that:
(8) Where the
offender is sentenced to a term of imprisonment for the offence defined by this
section and a term of imprisonment for
an offence of a sexual nature, an order
shall not be made directing that one of those sentences take effect from the
expiration of
deprivation of liberty for the other offence.
[24] Notwithstanding
the ameliorating effect of s 131A(8) of the
Criminal Code
unfairness may
arise and, depending upon the circumstances of the individual case, the offender
may be liable to double punishment
for the same act.
[25] Section
131A(7) provides that a person "may be convicted" of any or all offences in the
indictment. In a case such as the present,
where the offences contained in the
indictment are all "sexual offences" as defined in the
Sentencing Act
the mandatory provisions of that Act have application. Section 78BB(1) of the
Sentencing Act
is in the following terms:
(1) Where a court
finds an offender guilty of a sexual offence, the court must record a conviction
and must order that the offender
(a) a term of actual imprisonment; or
(b) a term of imprisonment that is suspended by it partly but not wholly.
[26] Where a
court finds an offender guilty of a sexual offence the section requires the
court to impose a conviction and sentence
the offender to a term of actual
imprisonment notwithstanding the fact that the person will be subject to double
punishment as discussed
Pearce v The
It is apparent that
in many cases of this kind the elements of the individual offences charged will
overlap to a significant extent,
and in some cases wholly, with the elements of
an offence charged against s 131A(2) of the
Criminal Code
matter under consideration is one such case.
Pearce v The Queen,
in a joint judgment, McHugh, Hayne and Callinan JJ made the following
observation:
To the extent to which two offences of which an
offender stands convicted contain common elements, it would be wrong to punish
offender twice for the commission of the elements that are common. No
doubt that general principle must yield to any contrary legislative
but the punishment to be exacted should reflect what an offender has done; it
should not be affected by the way in which
the boundaries of particular offences
are drawn. Often those boundaries will be drawn in a way that means that
offences overlap.
To punish an offender twice if conduct falls in that area of
overlap would be to punish offenders according to the accidents of
legislative
history, rather than according to their just deserts.
Honours went on to observe that making sentences wholly concurrent did not
necessarily resolve the problem. Double punishment
may remain for what is, in
truth, a single act. However, as their Honours noted, the general principle
against double punishment
must yield to a contrary legislative intention.
Addressing the unfairness
[29] Legislation
to similar effect has been passed in other jurisdictions. In relation to the
equivalent legislation in Victoria
Winneke P observed in
legislation was introduced to overcome perceived deficiencies in criminal
pleading exposed in the decision of the High Court
His Honour went on
However, as this Court noted in
provisions of section 47A have a tendency to "cut across time-honoured concepts
of procedural fairness" in the administration
of the criminal law which have
long established that a person accused of a serious criminal offence is entitled
to know with particularity
the offence he is said to have committed and the
occasion upon which and the circumstances in which he is said to have committed
it. It is no doubt these facets of the offence which have caused it and its
counterparts in other States, to become the subject
of close scrutiny.
[30] In the
second reading speech of the Attorney-General of the Northern Territory it was
made clear that the purpose of s 131A(2)
Criminal Code
overcome the perceived deficiencies in criminal pleading exposed in the decision
of the High Court in
The deficiencies
were identified by the Attorney-General as follows:
The decision in
S v The Queen
has made it very difficult to prosecute successfully a
sexual assault case under the existing law where the victim is very young at
commencement of the period of the violations, those violations have occurred
regularly over an extended period, there is no distinction
between the separate
violations, and no complaint has been made for some time after the commencement
of the series of events.
[31] As was
observed by Winneke P in
in relation to
the Victorian legislation
the provisions of the section have a tendency
to cut across time-honoured concepts of procedural fairness. It seems the
Territory section, when read with the
Sentencing Act
the additional effect of requiring double punishment in some circumstances.
[32] Whilst some
of the particular unfair consequences that have emerged may not have been
anticipated by the legislature it is apparent
from the second reading speech of
the Attorney-General that the potential for injustice to the accused was
recognized. The Attorney-General
observed that "without sufficient
particularity as to time, place or occasion to identify any particular act
relied upon to constitute
the offence charged it is extremely difficult for an
accused to mount a proper defence". He went on to say:
To safeguard
against abuse of this provision, an indictment charging the offence must be
signed by the Director of Public Prosecutions.
prospect that unfairness would occur as a result of the passing of the section
was recognized and addressed in two ways.
The first safeguard was provided in
the requirement that the indictment be signed by the Director of Public
Prosecutions. The second
safeguard is found in the ameliorating effect of s
131A(8). In addition, and importantly for present purposes, the operation of
Criminal Code
and the inherent jurisdiction of the court to
avoid an abuse of process remain intact.
opinion where, notwithstanding the presence of the identified safeguards,
proceedings under s 131A(2) would amount to an
abuse of process, the court may
intervene to prevent the abuse. The court may do so in the exercise of the
power contained in s
Criminal Code
or in the exercise of its
inherent power. A superior court has an inherent jurisdiction to stay
proceedings which are an abuse of
process. The jurisdiction to grant a stay of
a criminal prosecution has the dual purpose of preventing an abuse of process or
prosecution of a criminal proceeding which will result in a trial which is
The exercise of the
inherent power in such circumstances as are found in the present matter would be
consistent with the apparent
concern of the legislature to avoid abuse arising
from the special measures adopted to meet the “deficiencies”
categories of abuse of process are not closed. There will be an abuse where the
conduct amounts to vexation, oppression
and unfairness to the accused and where
tolerance of it will bring the administration of justice into
[36] In a case
such as the present where the offence under s 131A(2) of the
consists of three identified acts, each of which has been the subject
of a finding of guilt, and where the mandatory sentencing provisions
Sentencing Act
require the recording of a conviction and the imposition
of a sentence of actual imprisonment leading to double punishment, relevant
abuse is apparent. In the event of the Director of Public Prosecutions choosing
to proceed with both the charge under s 131A(2)
Criminal Code
and with the three or more individual sexual offences identified as
comprising the charge, it would be open to the court to grant
a stay. Whether a
stay would be granted must depend upon all of the circumstances of the
particular case.
Question 1: Leaving the charge to the
[37] The learned
trial Judge asked whether he was correct in allowing the charge against s
131A(2) to be left to the jury in the circumstances.
By reference to s 131A(7)
Criminal Code
it is apparent that:
(a) An indictment
may charge an offence of maintaining a relationship of a sexual nature with a
child under 16 years (s 131A(2));
(b) the same indictment may also charge "any other offence of a sexual
nature" alleged to have been committed in the course of the
relationship;
(c) the accused person may be convicted of any or all offences so charged in
the one indictment; and
(d) the person may be punished for any or all of the offences upon a finding
opinion, and contrary to the submission of the accused, the reference to "an
offence defined by this section" in s 131A(7)
is a reference to the offence of
maintaining a relationship of a sexual nature with a child as defined in s 131A.
What is meant by
"any other offence of a sexual nature" is found in s131A(1)
where such offences are identified by reference to relevant sections
Criminal Code
. Provided the offence identified in s 131A is alleged
to have occurred in the course of the relationship in issue, such an offence
be charged in the one indictment together with an offence contrary to s 131A
and, further, an offender may be convicted of, and
punished for, any such
offence so charged.
[39] In the
present case the exposure of the accused to double punishment provided a basis
for a stay application on behalf of the
accused. Reliance upon s 131A(2)
was not necessary for the presentation of the case against the accused. It
amounted to prosecutorial
oppression and harassment. All of the individual
offences relied upon to provide the elements of the offence under s 131(A)(2)
the subject of direct evidence from the complainant as to specific
identifiable events. This was not a case where the complainant
specify the circumstances of the particular acts. It was not a case where it
was necessary to rely upon the provision
to overcome the perceived deficiencies
in criminal pleading exposed in the case of
The direct evidence
satisfied the pleading requirements identified in
S v The Queen.
[40] The accused
has been found guilty of the offences of gross indecency (count 2), sexual
intercourse without consent (count 4)
and indecent dealing (count 5). The
combination of the findings of guilt in relation to those offences, and nothing
more, constitutes
the offence of maintaining an unlawful sexual relationship
with the child (count 6). The imposition of an appropriate penalty for
individual counts (2), (4) and (5) would lead to a sentence proportionate to the
offending of the accused. To then impose a
further penalty in relation to the
offence under s 131A(2) of the
Criminal Code
would be to again sentence
the accused in relation to the identical conduct.
situation may have been different had the elements of the offence under s
131A(2) of the
Criminal Code
included the requirement for proof of the
maintenance of a relationship of a sexual nature with the child. However, that
[42] In my view
the learned Judge should not have allowed both the charge against the accused
under s 131A(2) and the other offences
alleged in the remaining counts to be
left to the jury. This was because:
(a) the acts constituting the
offence under s 131A(2) relied upon by the prosecution were all pleaded as
counts in the indictment;
(b) no evidence was led of an act constituting an offence of the kind
referred to in section 131A(1) which was not the subject of
a charge in the
indictment;
(c) there were none of the problems of proof of the kind referred to in
v The Queen.
opinion, in the circumstances of this matter, the learned trial Judge should
have intervened at the commencement of the
proceedings. That not having
occurred, at the close of the case for the prosecution his Honour should have
required the prosecutor,
who had the responsibility for presenting the case, to
elect between proceeding in relation to the offence under s 131A(2) or the
individual offences in counts 1 to 5. Finally, if earlier intervention did not
occur, upon a verdict of guilty in relation to the
offence under s 131A(2) or,
alternatively, to the three or more of the individual offences in counts 1 to 5,
his Honour should have
granted a stay in relation to the balance of the
indictment. To take a verdict or verdicts on the balance of the indictment
lead to double punishment. In the circumstances double punishment was not
justified by the need to meet the perceived deficiencies
in criminal pleading
identified in
and, therefore,
was an abuse of process.
Question 2(a): Is the prosecution
required to elect?
[44] In relation
to the first of the remaining two questions posed in the reference to the Full
Court it is my view that the question
need not be answered in light of the
answer to question 1.
[45] Should the
power to grant a stay not be available either generally or in the circumstances
of a particular case then, in light
of that conclusion and upon a finding of
guilt having been made, there is no basis upon which the learned trial Judge
upon the prosecution to elect before recording a conviction. The
learned trial Judge must act in accordance with s 78BB of the
Question 2(b): The recording of a conviction
question need not be answered in light of the response to question 1. Should
the power to grant a stay not be available
either generally or in a particular
case then I would answer this question as follows.
[47] The finding
of guilt having been made, sentencing is governed by the relevant provisions of
s 78BB of the
Sentencing Act
and by s 131A(8) of the
. The provisions of the
Sentencing Act
require the sentencing
Judge to record a conviction and impose a mandatory sentence of imprisonment in
relation to each of the "sexual
offences”. The only legislative prospect
for amelioration of those requirements is to be found in the part of the section
which provides that the Judge is precluded from directing that one of the
sentences take effect from the expiration of the deprivation
of liberty for the
other offence. The power to order concurrency provides some scope for
ameliorating the prospect of double punishment.
[48] At the time
of hearing argument in relation to the reference the appellant pursued various
grounds of appeal. The third ground
of appeal was not pressed. The first
ground of appeal was that the verdict was unreasonable or could not be supported
having regard
to the evidence. I will first address the remaining grounds of
Ground 2: The exclusion of evidence as to complainant's
credibility
Ground 5: The directions as to the evidence regarding the credibility of
the complainant
convenient to consider these grounds of appeal together.
[50] The second
ground of appeal was that the trial Judge erred in excluding evidence sought to
be called from a witness, SW, impeaching
the complainant's credibility and in
particular disallowing a question whether, in the opinion of the witness, the
complainant was
to be believed upon her oath.
[51] SW is the
mother of the complainant. She was called to give evidence by the prosecution
and she was cross-examined by counsel
for the accused. In the course of cross
examination she was asked:
Would you believe what (the complainant)
says under oath in this court?
The question was the subject of an objection and without providing reasons
the learned Judge ruled that the question should be disallowed.
[52] On the
hearing of the appeal reference was made to the decision of the Victorian Court
of Appeal in
decision delivered on 12 March 2009 by a bench consisting of five Justices of
Appeal. In that case Vincent and Weinberg JJA
reviewed the relevant
authorities on this issue and stated that the modern formulation of the
applicable rule is to be found in Archbold,
Criminal Pleading, Evidence and
Practice 2009 in the following passages:
Whether a witness has or
has not been convicted, witnesses may be called to speak as to his general
character, although not as to
any particular offence of which he may be guilty
.... In order to impeach the credit of a witness for veracity, witnesses may be
called by the other side to prove that his general reputation is such that they
would not believe him upon his oath ... In practice
the question usually put is
"from your knowledge of the witness would you believe him on his oath"?
The impeaching witness may not, in examination in chief, give his reasons for
his belief, but he may be asked for his reasons in cross-examination,
answers in cross-examination cannot be contradicted. (References omitted).
Honours went on to refer to the judgment of the Court of Criminal Appeal in
v Richardson; R v Longman
where Edmund Davies LJ (with whom Widgery and Lyell JJ agreed) summarised the
position as follows:
witness may be asked whether he has knowledge of the impugned witness’s
general reputation for veracity and whether (from
such knowledge) he would
believe the impugned witness’s sworn testimony.
witness called to impeach the credibility of a previous witness may also express
his individual opinion (based upon his personal
knowledge) as to whether the
latter is to be believed upon his oath and is not confined to giving evidence
merely of general reputation.
whether his opinion as to the impugned witness’s credibility be based
simply upon the latter's general reputation for veracity
or upon his personal
knowledge, the witness cannot be permitted to indicate during his examination in
chief the particular facts,
circumstances or incidents which formed the basis of
his opinion, although he may be cross-examined as to
This method of attacking a witness’s veracity,
though ancient, is used with exceeding rarity. Nevertheless it was sought to
made use of in the present case... .
[54] It was
observed that the rule as stated had been applied by other courts for example
the Full Court of the Federal Court in
authorities were not drawn to the attention of the learned trial Judge.
respondent to the appeal accepted that the position as formulated above was
applicable in this jurisdiction, although it
was argued that the exclusion of
the question occurred in circumstances where the opinion of the witness that the
complainant was
not to be believed, was in any event before the jury. Reference
to the transcript of the evidence of the mother confirms that to
be so. At the
time of the trial, and when the mother was not on speaking terms with her
daughter, she told the jury that her daughter
would "lie... about things" and
went on to identify some of the claimed lies. The adult friend HM also gave
evidence that she initially
did not believe the complainant and was then unsure
of her veracity at the time of trial. The appellant in his evidence identified
the complainant as a person who told lies. Counsel for the accused said in his
address to the jury:
It is fairly obvious that (the mother) doesn't
believe her. It is fairly obvious that the -- that the witness (the mother) has
a view that she is certainly capable of telling a lie.
[57] Although
the learned trial Judge prevented counsel for the accused from asking the
identified question the information sought
to be elicited in that question was
in any event effectively before the jury. Had the matter rested there, whilst
accepting that
the learned trial Judge erred in failing to allow the question, I
would have been inclined to dismiss the ground of appeal.
[58] However, in
ground 5, the accused also complained that the learned trial Judge erred in his
directions to the jury in relation
to the evidence regarding the veracity of the
complainant. In the course of his address the learned trial Judge
Now, you have also heard evidence from HM (an adult friend)
that she thought that she was lying at the time and now she is not sure
she is telling the truth or not. (HM’s) opinion on that subject is not
evidence and you should ignore it. What (HM)
thought about the child is neither
here nor there. It is your duty to find out whether what she told (HM) is the
truth. It is your
duty to find out whether what she told you is the truth.
Other people's opinions about her are not evidence. That goes to whether
a liar or whether she is not a liar.
[59] Later in
the address the learned trial Judge said:
Mr Maley pointed out that
it is fairly obvious that (the mother and HM) did not believe (the complainant).
That may be so, but as
I have told you, it is irrelevant whether they believe
her or not. It is your task to decide whether she is to be believed.
[60] To the
contrary the evidence was admissible and therefore was available to be
considered by the jury as part of their deliberations.
The direction that the
opinions were irrelevant and to be ignored was in error. It is to be assumed
that the jury obeyed the direction
to ignore the evidence. The evidence may
have been important in this case where the credibility of the complainant was of
importance.
[61] Further,
the evidence of HM was capable of being of assistance to the jury in another
way. Her evidence went to the demeanour
of the complainant at the time of her
discussion with HM. HM asked the complainant questions and said of the
complainant that she
was "not really responsive" and "sat there doing her blank
stare that she normally does". Such a response may have induced the jury
conclude that the complainant was acting in a manner consistent with the serious
allegations she was then making. However, subsequent
evidence from HM may have
provided another explanation for her demeanour. HM suggested that the demeanour
of the complainant was
not different from how she often appeared on other less
serious occasions. The direction of the learned trial Judge to ignore her
evidence may have led the jury not to consider this available explanation for
the demeanour of the complainant at the time of her
discussions with HM.
[62] I would
allow the appeal on these grounds.
Ground 4: The prejudicial
evidence of the complainant
[63] During the
cross-examination of the complainant it was put to her that the appellant had
never behaved inappropriately towards
her. The complainant gave the following
non responsive answer which, the parties acknowledge, was audible to the
He has. And he has done it to my friends, too, the
[64] The cross
examination continued without interruption. Counsel for the appellant did not
apply for a discharge or a direction
to the jury. There was no further mention
of the answer before the jury by counsel or the Judge.
evidence was prejudicial. Taken in context it asserted that the accused had
committed sexual offences against other children.
The information was not
relevant to the facts in issue in the proceedings and it was likely to have had
a detrimental impact upon
the assessment by the jury of the character and credit
of the accused. Further, the information was unchallenged before the jury
was open to be accepted by them. In the absence of a direction from the trial
Judge, the evidence may have led to impermissible
reasoning by members of the
jury that the accused is the sort of person who would commit the offence with
which he is charged.
objection was taken at the trial to the omission of the learned trial Judge to
direct the jury in relation to this evidence.
By operation of r 86.08 of the
Supreme Court Rules
it is necessary for the accused to obtain leave to
appeal on this ground. In my opinion leave to appeal on this ground should be
granted and the appeal allowed.
Ground 1: The verdict was
unreasonable or could not be supported having regard to the evidence
[67] Having
reviewed the whole of the evidence, I am of the view that it could not be said
that the verdict was unreasonable or could
not be supported having regard to the
[68] It was
submitted on behalf of the appellant that there was no real difference in the
nature and detail of the evidence of the
complainant in respect of each and
every count on the indictment. It followed, so it was submitted, that the
verdict of the jury
of guilty in relation to counts 2, 4, 5 and 6, whilst
finding the appellant not guilty in relation to count 1 and being unable to
reach a verdict in relation to count 3, suggested that the verdict was unsafe
and unsatisfactory.
[69] A review of
the evidence reveals a clear basis upon which the jury may have distinguished
between both count 1 and count 3 and
the remaining counts.
[70] Count 1
related to an allegation by the complainant that the appellant touched her with
his penis whilst they were in a “swag”
in the lounge room of their
and in the course of that
evidence HM was asked whether the complainant referred
to the appellant touching her with his "penis or doodle". HM said she
specifically
asked the complainant that question and the complainant respondent
"no, only fingers". The evidence of the complainant before the
jury, whilst
identifying the incident in terms of place and circumstance, was otherwise vague
and uncertain. She could not recall
how she came to be naked and she could not
recall how she came to be in the swag. There was a basis upon which the jury
concluded that they could not be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of
the guilt of the appellant in relation to this particular complaint.
[71] Reference
was also made to count 3 where the jury was unable to reach a unanimous verdict
and was discharged in relation to that
count. The allegation was that the
appellant had committed cunnilingus on the complainant. A real issue may have
arisen as to whether
the evidence established that cunnilingus occurred. The
description of the incident provided by the complainant was firstly “that
he raped me” and when asked for detail she said that the appellant "licked
me ... on my vagina ... it was just a lick". No
further information as to the
alleged offending was provided and there was a basis upon which the jurors may
have disagreed.
[72] The verdict
in relation to count 1 and the failure to reach a verdict in relation to count 3
do not, in my view, reflect an inconsistency
when compared with the verdicts of
guilty in relation to counts 2, 4, 5 and 6 considered in light of the evidence
available to the
[73] For the
reasons expressed above, the appeal should be allowed.
opinion, there was evidence which could sustain a verdict of guilt in relation
to the matters where the jury returned a
verdict of guilty. Upon the whole of
the evidence it was, in my view, open to the jury to be satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that
the accused was guilty in relation to those matters.
[75] I would
order a retrial.
SOUTHWOOD J:
[76] I too agree
with the answers proposed by Riley J and with his Honour’s reasons. For
the reasons given by Riley J, the
appeal should be allowed and a retrial
-------------------------------------
[1997] HCA 54
(1997) 191 CLR
[2001] HCA 11
(2001) 206 CLR
[2001] HCA 11
(2001) 206 CLR 221
[2001] HCA 11
(2001) 206 CLR 221
[2001] HCA 11
(2001) 206 CLR 221
[1997] HCA 54
(1997) 191 CLR
(see par [30]
[1989] HCA 66
(1989) 168 CLR
[1997] HCA 54
(1997) 191 CLR 417
R v Kent-Newbold
[1939] HCA 37
(1939) 62 CLR 398
at 409-410;
[2005] NSWCCA 344
(2005) 64 NSWLR 413
Connelly v DPP
[1964] AC 1255
at 1331 and 1341;
Maxwell v The
(1996) 184 CLR 501 at
[1998] HCA 57
(1998) 194 CLR
[1998] HCA 57
(1998) 194 CLR 610
[2002] VSCA 54
(2002) 129 A Crim R
[1989] HCA 66
168 CLR 266.
[1989] HCA 66
(1989) 168 CLR
[2002] VSCA 54
(2002) 129 A Crim R
[1992] HCA 34
(1992) 174 CLR 509
[1989] HCA 66
(1989) 168 CLR
Rogers v The
[1994] HCA 42
(1994) 181 CLR 251
[1989] HCA 66
(1989) 168 CLR
[1989] HCA 66
(1989) 168 CLR
[1989] HCA 66
(1989) 168 CLR
[2009] VSCA
(at paragraphs 27 to
[1969] 1 QB 299
[1985] FCA 454
(1985) 7 FCR
[1967] 2 NSWR 717.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (237 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter