URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCAT/2024/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:17:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Environment Centre Northern Territory (ECNT) v Tamboran B2 Pty Ltd; Minister for Environment, Climate Change and Water Security [2024] NTCAT 19 (27 November 2024)
Environment Centre Northern Territory (ECNT) v Tamboran B2 Pty Ltd;
Minister for Environment, Climate Change and Water Security;
DECISION NUMBER:
[2024] NTCAT 19
ENVIRONMENT CENTRE NORTHERN TERRITORY (ECNT)
MINISTER FOR ENVIRONMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE AND WATER SECURITY
1ST RESPONDENT
TAMBORAN B2 PTY LTD
2ND RESPONDENT
MATTER TYPE:
Review Jurisdiction -
Petroleum Act 1984
2024-02309-CT
HEARING DATE:
22 NOVEMBER 2024
DECISION OF:
MARK O'REILLY
DATE OF ORDERS:
27 NOVEMBER 2024
APPEARANCES and REPRESENTATION (if any):
Counsel for the Applicant:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
The Hon. Adam Searle
Johnson Legal
Counsel for 1
Respondent:
Solicitor for 1
Respondent:
Counsel for 2
Respondent:
Solicitor for the 2
Respondent:
Lachlan Spargo-Peattie
Monica Moloney
Solicitor for the Northern Territory
Hamish Baddeley SC
Squire Patton Boggs (AU)
REASONS FOR DECISION:
23 May 2024 the then Minister for Environment, Climate Change and Water Security
approved an Environment Management Plan (EMP)
under regulation 11(2)(a) of the
Petroleum (Environment) Regulations 2016
(the Regulations)
decision to approve the EMP was announced on 6 June 2024.
6 July 2024 the Applicant filed an Initiating Application seeking a review of
the Minister’s decision to approve the EMP.
An Amended Initiating
Application was filed on 20 September 2009 and a Further Amended Initiating
Application was filed on 25 September
applicant seeks the following orders in the substantive
proceeding:
(1) An order that the Original Decision is set aside and substituted with a
decision that the Tribunal member is not satisfied that
the information provided
in the EMP is sufficiently compliant with the
Petroleum (Environment)
Regulations 2016
(NT), including in relation to:
of wastewater spills; and
in relation to inter-aquifer connectivity.
(2) An order that the EMP should be referred to the NT EPA for an independent
assessment.
(3) (In the Alternative) An order that varies the Original Decision and
establishes conditions in the EMP in relation to each of the
risks articulated
below at Part G.
risks articulated at Part G are:
Interaquifer
connectivity.
26 September 2024 the Applicant filed an Ordinary Application seeking orders
under section 44 of the
Northern Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(the NTCAT Act). The orders sought were:
(1) Pursuant to
Northern Territory Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2014
NTCAT Act),
a stay of the decision
of the former Minister for Environment, Climate Change and Water Security, the
Hon Kate Worden MLA, to approve
the Shenandoah South Exploration & Appraisal
Program EP98 and EP117 (
) Environmental Management Plan on 23 May
Original Decision),
until the hearing and determination by the
Tribunal, of the Applicant’s Initiating Application 2024-02309-CT.
(2) Or, in the alternative to (1) stay the Original Decision pursuant to s
44(2)(a) of the NTCAT Act, insofar as it authorises any
hydraulic fracturing in
connection with the Project, until the hearing and determination by the
Tribunal, of the Applicant’s
Initiating Application 2024-02309-CT.
44 of the NTCAT Act is contained within Part 3 Division 3 Subdivision 2 –
Information about a reviewable decision.
It provides
44 Effect of review proceeding on decision
(1) The commencement of a proceeding in the Tribunal’s review
order is made under subsection (2).
(2) The Tribunal or decision maker may make an order staying the operation of
the decision:
(a) until the Tribunal makes its decision on the proceeding; or
(b) until another time specified in the order.
(3) The Tribunal or decision maker may do so:
(a) at any time after the commencement of the proceeding; and
(b) on application or on its own initiative.
parties broadly agree that the following principles apply to the grant of a stay
under section 44:
(a) Whether the material before the tribunal indicates that there is a serious
issue to be tried on the substantive application;
(b) Whether any prejudice would be suffered by any party if a stay was not
(c) Whether public safety or the public interest would be imperilled if a stay
is granted; and
(d) Whether the substantive application would be pointless or rendered nugatory
if the stay is not granted.
principles were enunciated earlier in the decision of
John Morgan and
Construction Occupations Registrar (Occupational
Discipline)
. In that matter
the Tribunal noted that the “last three factors can be characterised as
related to a broader consideration
of the balance of
convenience.”
the material before the tribunal indicates that there is a serious issue to be
tried on the substantive application:
starting point under section 44(1) of the NTCAT Act is that the commencement of
a proceeding in the Tribunal’s review jurisdiction
does not affect the
operation of the original decision.
circumstances where a party has applied for a stay, the onus is on that party to
demonstrate that a stay is required.
applicant must establish that there is a serious issue to be
Applicant made public written comments on the EMP to the Minister pursuant to
regulation 8B of the Regulations. As described
“The Applicant’s submission [to the Minister] was detailed and
raised a number of issues with the Draft EMP. Among them
were concerns about
the impact of the project on groundwater, surface water and associated ecosytems
consistent with the grounds
of review now pressed in the substantive proceeding.
The Applicant’s submission to the Minister was supported by expert reports
by Professor Matthew Currell, who has also provided expert evidence for the
Applicant in the substantive proceeding, and Dr Christopher
Ndehedehe.”
I understand the Applicant’s position on the substantive proceeding, it
will be argued that, on the basis of the material
that was before the Minister
(and potentially further material), the EMP does not adequately minimise risks
relating to wastewater
spills and interaquifer connectivity. Accordingly, the
risks associated with the 2
Respondent’s activities are not
as low as reasonably practicable or acceptable.
support of both the substantive application and the application for a stay, the
Applicant relies on a further report and addendum
of Matthew Currell dated 9
September and 22 October 2024 respectively. Those documents were not before the
Minister when the original
decision was made.
note that under section 46(2) of the NTCAT Act, a proceeding in the
Tribunal’s review jurisdiction will include an examination
of the evidence
or the material that was before the original decision maker. It may also
include any further evidence or material
that the Tribunal decides to admit for
the purposes of the substantive proceeding, no decision has been made about the
consideration of further evidence or material.
Nevertheless,
I am satisfied that the Applicant raises serious issues for determination by the
it is established that “an application for a stay is no occasion for any
detailed consideration of the merits of the underlying
, there is a need to
make some assessment of the merits of the substantive application. That is so
“There is a relationship between the serious issue to be tried and the
balance of convenience considerations. In Bullock v
Federated Furnishing Trades
Society of Australasia (No 1) (1985) 5 FCR 464, at 472, Woodward J, with whom
Smithers and Sweeny JJ
agreed, said that the serious issue to be tried and
balance of convenience factors: ‘need not be considered in isolation from
each other. Thus an apparently strong claim may lead a court more readily to
grant an injunction when the balance of convenience
is fairly even. A more
doubtful claim (which nevertheless raises a ‘serious question to be tried)
may still attract interlocutory
relief if there is a marked balance of
convenience in favour of
“Other things being equal, the Tribunal is more likely to make a stay
order where it is obvious the applicant’s case has
good prospects of
success, or substantial success, at the final hearing. An applicant with an
unpromising case is much less likely
to find favour in a stay application. As a
practical matter, it is usually difficult to make a confident assessment of the
applicant’s
prospects because stay hearings are typically held at an early
point in the review. It is not appropriate to conduct a mini-trial
point...An arguable case may not count for or against a
earlier detailed public comments of the Applicant and the reports of Matthew
Currell and a co-author were considered by the Minster
when the original
decision was made. Those reports were also available to and considered by the
NT Environment Protection Authority
(NT EPA) from whom the Minister sought
a recent decision of the Supreme Court of the Northern Territory, Chief Justice
Grant considered the provisions of the
Petroleum Act 1984
(the Act) and
the Regulations relating to EMP’s and role of the NT EPA under the
Environment Protection Act 2019
He held that:
“The legislative scheme described above contemplates that the statutory
decision-maker, the proponent of the proposed action
and the NT EPA may each
have different views on the potential impact on the environment and the question
of whether a referral is
required. The NT EPA’s view is determinative of
the issue within the confines of the statutory scheme, both in the sense that
may compel a proponent to refer a proposed action and, once a proposed action
has been referred, that it must determine whether
it has the potential to have a
significant effect on the environment.
That determination has a number of features and incidents.
and often will be, a conflict of evidence and opinion
concerning the issue. The resolution of any conflict is a matter which lies
within the province of the NT EPA’s special expertise. The members of the
NT EPA are appointed on the basis that they have
skills, knowledge and
experience in,
inter alia,
environmental science, environmental and
natural resource management and environmental
material that was before the Minister and considered by the NT EPA included
material supplied by the Applicant which at least
substantially raised the
concerns which form the grounds of the substantive review. In at least broad
terms the further reports
sought to be introduced raise similar concerns.
Taking all of that into account within the legislative regime I am not persuaded
that it is obvious that the Applicant’s case has a good prospect of
success or substantial success. In my view the case as
currently set out by the
Applicant counts neither for nor against a stay.
Whether any
prejudice would be suffered by any party if a stay was not granted
I am satisfied that a stay of the decision of the Minister will result in
prejudice to the 2
Respondent. The operation is clearly a
commercial one involving many and sometimes complex contractual obligations. By
way of example
I have been provided with information regarding contracts with
obligations commencing between the date of the Minister’s decision
application for a stay. The 2
Respondent has significant
commercial and regulatory obligations. A delay in the commencement of the
operations will impact negatively
in financial terms in a significant
Applicant has not proposed or pointed to any means of ameliorating the financial
prejudice to the 2
Respondent. I accept the submission of the
Respondent that in regards to questions of undertakings as to
damages or security for costs:
“the correct framework is not to ask whether the Tribunal can or should
the Applicant to provide such an undertaking. Given the undisputed
prejudice to [the 2
Respondent], the Tribunal may consider it is
unable to assess the balance of convenience in favour of the Applicant without
an undertaking being
While I would not be minded to make such an order, the fact remains that the
Respondent has established a financial prejudice that must be
weighed in the balance of convenience. It weighs more heavily in circumstances
where nothing has been proposed to by way of counter-balance to offset that
particular prejudice.
am also satisfied that the prejudice experienced by the 2
Respondent has been somewhat exacerbated by the timing of the application for a
stay. The decision of the Minister was publicised
on 6 June 2024. The
Application for review was filed on 4 July 2024. While the Initiating
Application has undergone two amendments
since that time, the current orders
sought were included in the original version as were the current grounds for the
application.
the Applicant is seeking that the decision of the Minister is set aside and
substituted with a decision that the EMP is
not sufficiently compliant with the
Act and Regulations. A decision of that nature by the Tribunal would mean that
Respondent could not commence or continue activities at least
until such time as a compliant EMP had been approved. That would have
clear to the Applicant at the time the first version of the Initiating
Application was filed. Nevertheless the application
for a stay was not filed
until 26 September 2024.
is not to say that the Applicant should have filed an application for a stay at
the time. Whether or not they did was entirely
a matter for them. I accept the
submission of the Applicant that under section 44(3)(a) an application for a
stay may be made at
any time after the commencement of the proceeding. I also
accept that the Applicant wanted to secure and file further material prior
applying for a stay. I also accept that prior to filing the stay application the
Applicant unsuccessfully sought an undertaking
Respondent. The nature and timing of the application for a stay were a matter
for the applicant. The fact that the application
for a stay was not sought at
the outset of the substantive proceeding does not weigh against the
. There is no punitive
component involved in weighing the balance of convenience.
fact remains though, that between the filing of the Initiating Application and
the Application for a Stay, the 2
Respondent was entitled to and
did rely on the decision of the Minister. Had the stay application been filed
with the Initiating
Application, it may be that the prejudice to the
Respondent would be less. The task of the Tribunal is to
consider prejudice to the parties at the time the application for a stay
note that the application for stay was listed for a further hearing on 22
November 2024. The catalyst for the further listing was
that information had
come to light that hydraulic fracturing in connection with the 2
Respondent’s activities was to be delayed until the first quarter of
of the delay in those aspects of the proposed activities under the EMP, I remain
satisfied that a stay would result in
prejudice to the 2
Respondent. I accept that there are a number of variables which may impact on
the timing of those activities from time to time.
It remains unclear when the
hydraulic fracturing will begin but it may be before January 2025 or soon after.
A stay would be required
for some months beyond that point and would result in
Applicant submits that “any prejudice suffered by the Second Respondent is
a necessary incident of the merits review process
contemplated by the
Legislative Assembly.”
my view that submission is at odds with the basic principle under section 44(1)
that an application for merits review does not interfere with the decision
at first instance. The Legislative Assembly seems to have
contemplated that a
party in whose favour a decision has been made will not suffer prejudice unless
a decision is stayed. In other
words, prejudice to a party relying on a
decision is not a necessary incident to the merits review process. Indeed,
quite apart
from assuming that a party in the 2
Respondent’s
position will suffer prejudice, section 44 has the effect of shielding it from
prejudice unless and until the
Tribunal orders a stay. The decision as to
whether or not a stay order should be made necessitates a consideration of the
and balance of that prejudice.
from the public interest factors considered below, the Applicant has not pointed
to any prejudice flowing from a refusal of
a stay specific to
Whether public safety or the public interest would be
imperilled if a stay is granted
Applicant raises the potential for environmental damage as a public interest and
public safety issue that weighs heavily in favour
of a stay. The Applicant
submits on the basis of the evidence of Professor Currell that activities
undertaken by the 2
Respondent:
”risk contamination of three major water sources in the Territory and
the ability of these water sources to support existing
ecosystems and water
uses. The EMP does not explicitly commit to the requirements in clause B.4.3.2
Code of Practice: Onshore Petroleum Activities in the Northern
Territory.”
The Applicant does, however, concede that the Code of Practice
“mandates” compliance with minimum standards.
strength of the Applicant’s case is relevant to this consideration.
Whether or not the EMP achieves the appropriate level
of risk is the question
for the Tribunal in the substantive proceeding. On the face of the material,
though, the Minister and the
NT EPA have considered the level of risk and
determined that it is within what is envisaged under the Act and Regulations.
consideration of public interest and public safety concerns must be considered
in the context of the relevant legislation. The
legislative regime contemplates
a possible tension between potentially competing public interests. The
objectives of the Act
the public benefit of encouraging the exploration and development of petroleum
“so that the optimal value of the
resource is returned to the
Territory.” It also recognises the public interest in allowing that
process to occur in a way
that “provides protection to the environment of
the Territory” and “promotes principles of ecologically sustainable
development.” More specifically, the legislative regime requires
“that activities associated with exploration for, or
production of,
petroleum are carried out in a manner in which environmental impacts and risks
of the activities are reduced to a
level that is: (i) as low as reasonably
possible; and (ii) acceptable.”
Central Australia Frack Free Alliance Inc v Minister for Environment Chief
Justice Grant
observed that:
“it is plain from the stated legislative objective that the
Petroleum Act
is designed to encourage active exploration for an
development of petroleum product. Environmental considerations do not take any
particular primacy in the achievement of that
objective...”
the context of the Act and Regulations, I am not satisfied that the Applicant
has established that the public interest in avoiding
risk outweighs the public
interest in facilitating exploration.
circumstances where the legislative and regulatory scheme has been informed by
and amended following the Scientific Inquiry into
Hydraulic Fracturing; where
the Minister has ostensibly adhered to that regulatory scheme; where minimum
standards and conditions
apply; and where there is an obligation to remedy any
environmental damage, it is not clear to me that the level of risk described
the Applicant is beyond what is contemplated as being acceptable under the
Applicant also points to the public interest in a “thorough and accessible
merits review process” and submits that:
“It would undermine the public interest in this regard if the first
merits review proceeding of this kind was determined only
after the fracking
activities in question had already
commenced.”
Applicant also submits that the
Petroleum Act
Amendment Act 2022
“specifically contemplates public interest organisations such as the
Applicant seeking merits review in NTCAT of decisions by
the Minister to approve
is apparent that the amendments to the legislative regime following the
Scientific Inquiry into Hydraulic Fracturing, were in part
designed to allow
wider merits review of certain decisions and to increase transparency and
scrutiny. Those amendments, however,
do not change the starting point under
section 44(1) of the NTCAT Act that decisions subject to review continue to have
Had the Legislative Assembly intended that an Application for Review of a
decision of this kind by the Minister would suspend the
operation of that
decision, provisions to that effect could have been included in the amending
legislation.
Accordingly
the principles relevant to the granting of a stay are those outlined earlier in
these reasons.
Whether the substantive application would be
pointless or rendered nugatory if the
stay is not granted.
am not persuaded that the substantive application will be rendered nugatory if a
stay is not granted. The subject matter of the
substantive proceeding is the
decision of the Minister to approve the EMP. In the absence of a stay there is
no suggestion that
there will be no utility in the Tribunal’s review of
that decision.
KMD and CEO (Department of Health NT) & Ors
Gleeson J refused an
application for a stay of a decision of the Northern Territory Court of Criminal
Appeal (NTCCA) relating to
a non-custodial supervision order. In considering
the need to preserve the subject matter of the litigation he held that:
“Most importantly KMD has not demonstrated that a stay of the
NTCCA’s orders is necessary to effectuate the exercise of
Court’s appellate jurisdiction. The subject matter of the proposed appeal
is the legality of the NCSO. KMD’s capacity
to prosecute her appeal and
to obtain the benefits of a successful appeal is unaffected by whether or not
she remains in custody
pending the determination of the
my view that principle applies in the circumstances of this case. A stay is not
necessary to effectuate the Tribunal’s review
of the decision of the
practical terms the decision of the Minister impacts activities over a five year
period. The substantive proceeding is likely
to be heard in the first half of
next year. Professor Currell’s opinion is that “the environmental
risks of the activities
proposed in the EMP are most likely to be realised in
the initial stages of the
addressed, it is not clear to me at this stage of the proceeding that those
risks are beyond what is contemplated by the
legislative
the above reasons I am not satisfied that the Applicant has established that the
balance of convenience lies in favour of granting
a stay. The Application for a
stay will be dismissed.
orders for the progress of the proceeding will be made through the NTCAT
registry in consultation with the parties.
27 November 2024
MARK O'REILLY
Hocking v Medical Board of
[2015] ACAT 22
cited with approval by NTCAT in
Psychology Board of Australia
[2015] NTCAT 35
[2011] ACAT
Applicants submissions
filed on 22 October 2024 at paragraph
Xipolitas v Bonfini
[2016] NTCAT 509
National Union of Workers v Davids Distribution Pty Ltd
[1998] FCA 1530
Anderson v Australian
Securities and Investments Commission,
[2022] AATA 339
Central Australian
Frack Free Alliance Inc v Mister for Environment
[2024] NTSC 75
Respondent’s Submissions filed on 28 October 2024 at
See Applicant
submissions filed on 22 October 2024 at
Applicant’s
Submissions filed 22 October 2024 at
[2024] NTSC 75
Applicant submissions
filed 22 October 2024 at
Ibid at [10.
[2024] HCASJ 40
Applicant’s
submissions filed 22 October 2024 at [55].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (13.9 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter