URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTLC/2023/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:20:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rigby v Ross [2023] NTLC 1 (6 February 2023)
CITATION: Rigby v Shane Ross
[2023] NTLC 1
PARTIES: Kerry Rigby
TITLE OF COURT: LOCAL COURT
FILE NO(s): 22134038
DELIVERED ON: 6 February 2023
DELIVERED AT: Darwin
HEARING DATE(s): 29 & 30 August 2022 and 20 January 2023
DECISION OF: Greg Macdonald
CATCHWORDS:
Public and Environmental Health Act 2011
force that is
necessary and
Police Administration Act 1978
– Criminal Code Act 1983
(NT) – ss 26, 27,
29, 43BU, 65 and 189A – “
reasonable excuse
Summary Offences Act 1923
Interpretation Act 1978
provided by
Public and Environmental Health Act
Criminal Code Act 1983
Summary Offences Act
Police Administration Act 1978
Evidence (National
Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
Interpretation Act 1978
Court (Criminal Procedure) Act 1928
Woolmington v DPP
Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd v the Commonwealth
177 CLR 106
Lange v ABC
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520
Coleman v Power
[2004] HCA 39
(2004) 220 CLR 1
George v Rockett
[1990] HCA 26
(1990) 170 CLR 104
Queen v Gehan
[2019] NTSC 91
[2014] VSC 52
[2016] NSWDC 422
The King v Amital
[2022] NTSC 74
Bolton; Ex Parte Beane
[1987] HCA 12
(1987) 162 CLR 514
Plaintiff S
Commonwealth
[2003] HCA 2
(2003) 211 CLR 476
Al-Kateb v Godwin
[2004] HCA 37
Momcilovic v The Queen
(2011) 245 CLR 1
[2020] NTSC 50
Queensland Bacon Pty Ltd v Rees
[1966] HCA 21
Mangurra v Rigby
[2021] NTSC 6
Cintana v Burgoyne
[2003] NTSC 106
Burkhart v Bradley
[2013] NTCA 05
Whittington
[2017] NTSC 66
Christie v Leachinsky
[1947] UKHL 2
Adams v Kennedy
[2000] NSWCA 152
Majindi v Balchin
[2011] NTSC 40
Ashley v Millar
[2015] NTSC 63
Jenkins v Todd
[2016] NTSC 4
Dowling v Bowie
[1952] HCA 63
(1952) 86 CLR 136
(1976) 50 ALJR 728
Taikato v The Queen
[1996] HCA 28
(1996) 186 CLR
Chugg v Pacific Dunlop Ltd
[1990] HCA 41
(1990) 170 CLR 249
[2014] NTSC 54
Azzopardi v The Queen
[2001] HCA 25
(2001) 205 CLR
Whitehorn v The Queen
[1983] HCA 42
(1983) 152 CLR 657
R v Apostilides
[1984] HCA 38
(1984) 154 CLR 563
The Queen v Cook & Ors
Watson v Trenerry
[1998] NTCCA 22
Barrington v Austin
[1939] SAStRp 38
[1939] SASR 130
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant: Ms K Ranjith
Defendant: Ms S Robson SC
Solicitors:
Complainant: DPP brief
Defendant: Direct brief
Decision category classification: B
Decision ID number:
2023 NTLC 1
Number of paragraphs: 59
IN THE LOCAL COURT
AT DARWIN IN THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY OF
No. 22134038
Kerry Rigby
Complainant
REASONS FOR DECISION
(Delivered 6 February
JUDGE MACDONALD
The Charges
29 August 2022 Shane Ross (the Defendant) pled not guilty to 5 criminal charges
alleged by NT Police following an incident which
took place on 6 November 2021
in Darwin on the footpath contiguous with East point Road.
charges were, firstly, contravention of an emergency declaration, then take part
in a riot, assault a member of police, disorderly
behaviour and, fifthly, resist
police in the execution of duty. The charges are alleged to be contraventions of
Public and Environmental Health Act 2011
(NT) (PEHA),
and s 189A of the
Criminal Code Act
1983 (NT) (Code),
Summary Offences Act 1923
(NT) (SOA) and
Administration Act 1978
(NT) (PAA), respectively.
charges had their genesis in members of NT Police forming a cordon to halt or
interrupt the passage of a group of protesters who
were walking along the
footpath parallel to East Point Road near Darwin Middle School on Bullocky
Point. That impediment imposed
by NT Police, which was described by the
Defendant as a “blockade”, was in purported enforcement of
directions given
by the Chief Health Officer (CHO) on 5 November 2021 in
relation to a perceived public health threat posed by Covid-19 (C19). It
establishment of the police cordon which precipitated all counts, such that the
lawfulness or otherwise of the cordon and
NT Police actions which flowed from
that are a seminal focal point from which the charge alleging contravention of
of the PEHA and other charges must be considered.
to the evidence at hearing commencing, counsel informed the court by consent
that the particulars alleged by the prosecution
in relation to the charge of
contravening a direction, was failure to wear a mask. Further, in relation to
the charge of assault
police; that the Defendant alone physically manhandled or
wrestled with Sgt Kirkby, including him punching and/or elbowing Sgt Kirkby,
” being constituted by pain experienced by that
officer. In relation to the charge of riot, the same conduct as alleged for
assault, being the physical altercation or interaction between the Defendant and
Sgt Kirkby.
bears repeating that a defendant to criminal charge is innocent until proven
guilty, with the Crown bearing the onus of proof from
beginning to end, to the
standard of beyond reasonable
That position is subject to
legislated exceptions, and the position in relation to defences is discussed
concerning the facts and circumstances which arose on 6 October 2021 are set out
below. Those findings, when considered in
light of various Territory laws, give
rise to four principal issues for determination, namely;
(i) Were members of NT Police empowered to establish a cordon on the footpath at
Bullocky Point?
(ii) If so, did NT Police authority extend to preventing or halting protesting
pedestrians’ passage at the point of the cordon?
(iii) If so, did members of NT Police act within or without their powers in
interacting with the Defendant?
(iv) Did the Defendant contravene any of the alleged provisions of the PEHA,
Code, SOA or PAA in acting as he did?
subsidiary issues for consideration and decision arise within the four principal
issues. Those are also set out in the discussion
Evidence and facts found
18 March 2020 the CHO declared a “
public health emergency
(the Declaration) under the PEHA.
On 5 November 2021 the CHO gave or made C19 Directions No. 67 of 2021
(Directions) under s 52 of the Act, in
The parties agreed that
the court should take judicial notice under
Evidence (National
Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
(ENULA) of the Declaration and the
Directions.
Directions sought to put in place what was referred to as a
” for the Darwin area, including the “
government area
” described as “
City of Darwin
with various features of the lockout prescribing restrictive public health
measures intended to contain or limit the spread
of C19. The effect of the
Directions may be simply described as requiring;
(i) any person who had not received two doses of an approved C19 vaccine
(“unvaccinated person”) was prohibited from
leaving their residence
(except for various reasons which are irrelevant to the proceeding);
(ii) all persons were to wear a face mask except at their residence or when in a
private vehicle (but subject to some other exceptions
discussed below); and
(iii) no unvaccinated person could arrange to meet or attend a gathering with
any other person(s) anywhere other than their residence.
addition to the Directions, an instrument of direction entitled
Assistance of Police Officers
” issued or made by the CHO on
22 March 2020 was also tendered and became Exhibit P10
(direction).
That direction
relevantly provided that police officers “
must assist me in exercising
my powers under
, Division 2
[of the PEHA]
including to ensure, by
means I consider necessary, appropriate or desirable, compliance with any
directions made by me under that
...”. As is now common, the
direction then proceeded to provide examples of the assistance contemplated.
Those included “
closing a place
entry to a place or exit from a place
addition to the instruments referred to, the evidence at hearing included oral
evidence from various members of NT Police present
at the scene of the incident
of 6 November 2021, together with body worn footage (BWF) from some
members’ devices, and some
footage recorded by protesters then downloaded
from Facebook by investigating
is the evidence of Sgt Paul Kirkby, being the officer who first physically
engaged with the Defendant, which is determinative of
many of the issues in
dispute. His evidence was, in some respects, ambiguous, confused and
contradictory. Ascertaining the true situation
would have been assisted if BWF
from any device worn by Sgt Kirkby had been available in evidence. Nonetheless,
Sgt. Kirkby’s
evidence included that he did not say anything to the
Defendant prior to laying hands on him, and that in doing so he was not
his power of arrest, each of which I accept. I find that immediately
following the Defendant breaching the cordon by walking between
two officers,
Sgt Kirkby moved in front the Defendant to block his passage, said nothing, then
laid hands on him, followed by placing
an arm around his neck. That coercive
force was apparently in the context of the Defendant being noncompliant with
what on any objective
view was a requirement of him (and other protesters) to
stop and be spoken to. The engagement quickly led to a tussle in which Sgt
Kirkby was the protagonist, resulting in both men going to
situation was not assisted by actions of other noncompliant, unruly and
aggressive protesters in the immediate vicinity. However,
I also find no
acceptable evidence to the necessary standard that the Defendant punched or
elbowed Sgt Kirkby.
do note that the evidence of the two most senior officers in command on 6
November 2021 at Bullocky Point, being Supt Shean and
Sgt Kirkby, included that
NT Police’s objective was to target and “
protest. The officers also appeared to have held a uniform view on 6 November
that the protest was illegal.
is no doubt that some of the protesters were not complying with the Directions
(particularly by being mask-less in public).
In my view, members of NT Police
would, with proper enquiry, have readily established sufficient
reasonable grounds to believe
” that one or more of the
protesters were “
committing an
power of arrest conferred by
of the PAA would have, on its face, been
available in relation to such a
However, as should be
expected, at least a proportion of the protesters were complying with the
Directions, cooperative with officers
at the point of the cordon, and were
permitted to pass through the cordon following substantiating their
phrase or operational strategy described as “
often appropriately used by law enforcement bodies in relation to organised
crime. However, in the context of execution
of duty by members of NT Police in
relation to protesters, it has a flavour of the “
” discussed in
Similarly, various
rights recognised at international law may also have been relevant to the
situation which arose on 6 November
2021, and evidence adduced at
However, the Defendant
did not seek to raise
of the ENULA or submit that the court should
exercise its discretion to exclude evidence in reliance on that provision.
the Defendant did not elect to give evidence at hearing, as is his
right, he sought to deal fully and frankly with the entirety of
the evidence
adduced by the prosecution.
Defendant’s written submissions described the police perspective informing
their actions at the cordon as one of “
characterisation is equally apt to many of the protesters’ perspectives.
However, each protester was entitled to individual
consideration, and to be
treated according to law, including with their rights in mind.
addition to the findings of fact set out above, I also find that on 6 November
2021, upon Sgt Kirkby stepping into the path of
the Defendant towards halting
his passage (noting that Sgt Kirkby did not say anything to the Defendant), he
did not stop. Rather,
he determined to continue on his journey by seeking to
push past Sgt Kirkby. I also find the Defendant was well aware that members
NT Police were expecting and requiring him and other protestors to stop and
was at that point that Sgt Kirkby laid hands on the Defendant then placed his
arm around the Defendant’s neck in what may
be described as a headlock.
Lastly, I accept the evidence given by Sgt Kirby that protestors were free to
leave the area, but not
by proceeding through the cordon unless they satisfied
the mask and vaccination conditions provided by the
Directions.
The Legislation and Directions
relevant offence provision created by 56 of the PEHA provides;
Contravention
of emergency declaration or direction
(1) A person
commits an offence if:
(a) the CHO takes an action under
section 52(1)
that involves giving a
direction, whether oral or written and whether specified in
section 52(3)
otherwise; and
(b) the person engages in conduct that results in a contravention of the
Fault elements:
The person:
(a) intentionally engages in the conduct; and
(b) is reckless as to whether the conduct would result in a contravention of
the declaration or direction.
Maximum penalty: 400 penalty units.
(2) It is a defence to a prosecution for an offence against
subsection (1) if the defendant establishes a reasonable excuse.
can be seen, potential criminal liability is expressed to include recklessness,
with the commonly found defence of “
reasonable excuse
Defendant contended on various bases that he could not be found to have
contravened
Much turned on the proper construction and application of the
PEHA, the Directions and the direction to the circumstances of the
Defendant’s interaction with Sgt Kirkby. In addition to the authorities
relied on by the Defendant concerning infringements
on personal liberty, in my
view the principle of legality must apply in the construction and application of
provisions of the PEHA.
application must also extend to statutory instruments made under a relevant Act,
so the Directions and direction in this case.
considering the allegation of the offence created by s 56, various other
provisions of the PEHA are relevant to the Defendant’s
situation and
determination of the charges alleged. Namely, the definition of
” in s 4, together with ss 52, 53, 76, 79, 80 and
Those sections relevantly
emergency powers
(1) If an emergency declaration is in
force, the CHO may take the actions (including giving oral or written
directions) the CHO considers
necessary, appropriate or desirable to alleviate
the public health emergency stated in the declaration.
(2) The actions the CHO may take include any of the following:
(e) preventing persons accessing or entering into an area or a particular
(f) controlling the movement of vehicles within an area.
(3) The directions the CHO may give include directions requiring any of
the following:
(b) a stated person to remain in, or move to or from, a stated area or place
immediately or within a stated period;
(d) a stated person to provide oral or written information relating to the
Appointment
and powers of authorised officer during public health
(2) An authorised officer assisting the CHO may use the force that is
necessary and reasonable to do any of the following:
(b) prevent entry into or close off an area or place;
(c) remove a person from an area or place;
(3) An authorised officer taking action to assist the CHO:
(a) may take the action at any time of the day; and
(b) is not required to give notice to any person of the officer's intention
to take the action; and
(c) is not required to obtain consent to take the action from any person
concerned or the owner or occupier of any area or place concerned;
Enforcement
of any CHO directions made under the PEHA falls to an “
”. Section 76 of the PEHA confers that office on each of the
CHO, Chief Executive Officer of any “
enforcement agency
police officer exercising or purporting to exercise the powers,
or performing or purporting to perform the functions, of an authorised
”. Unlike with other persons appointed as an
authorised officer
”, those conferrals are not conditioned on
any qualifications, knowledge, skills or experience approved by the
Similarly, any police
officer in uniform is not required to carry the identity card prescribed by s 78
of the PEHA.
functions and powers of an authorised officer are provided by s 79 of the PEHA
relevantly as follows;
(1) An authorised officer has the following
(a) to ensure this Act is being complied with;
(b) the other functions imposed on the officer by this or another Act.
(3) The CHO may impose conditions and limitations on the exercise of
powers, or the performance of functions, by an authorised officer
or a class of
authorised officers.
(4) When exercising a power or performing a function, an authorised
officer is:
(c) if a police officer – subject to the directions of the Commissioner
80 and 84 of the PEHA then furnish detail to those functions and powers,
relevantly as follows;
Division 4 Powers of entry, inspection,
inspection and seizure
(2) For the performance of an authorised officer's functions under this
Act, an authorised officer may enter a place ... other than
residential premises
at any reasonable time
(3) An authorised officer who enters a place under subsection (2) may do
any of the following:
(c) require a person who is at the place to state the person's name and
(f) require production of any registration or exemption that relates to the
owner or occupier of the place;
(g) require a person at the place to answer questions, produce a document or
thing kept there under the person's control or give any
other assistance the
officer requires to carry out the inspection;
(l) seal or close off the place;
(4) The officer may not do anything authorised by this section unless the
officer reasonably believes doing so may disclose evidence
of, or otherwise
relates to, an offence against this Act or is otherwise necessary for this
(5) The officer may exercise powers under subsection (2) or (3):
(a) with the force that is necessary and reasonable; and
(b) either alone or with the number of persons to assist the officer that is
necessary and reasonable.
84 then confers more specific powers, directed to authorising enquiries to be
made of any person the subject of their
Requirement
to provide information
For performing an authorised
officer's functions under this Act, the officer may stop a person and require
the person to do any of
the following:
(a) give the person's full name and residential or business address;
(b) give details of any authorisation to do an activity or exemption under
(d) provide any other information relating to public health reasonably
required for this Act.
Kirkby was an “
authorised officer
” for the purpose of the
PEHA and the Directions.
PEHA confers broad legislated powers on an “
”, however s 79(3) expressly enables the CHO to limit,
circumscribe or condition those powers or functions as she or he sees
may be noticed that the Directions made 5 November 2021 are narrower in their
terms than the legislated provisions, and I
consider that may have been the
product of such an exercise. Nonetheless, holding the office of
authorised officer
” does not remove the sworn powers and
obligations of a member of NT
Application
of the law to the issues
court had the benefit of written and oral submissions of
The Defendant contended
that members of NT Police had no sufficient authority to establish the cordon
across the footpath at Bullocky
Point. That proposition is closely associated
with the second issue for determination, but is readily addressed. Paragraph
Schedule 1 to the Directions prescribed any
police services
essential workers
”, so they were entitled to go about their
duties. It was also common ground that the footpath on Bullocky Point was a
place and thoroughfare, which status gave rise to the Defendant’s
position in relation to the second issue. Regardless of the
breadth of the
definition of “
” in the PEHA, in my view no reliance on
the authority provided by s 80(2) of the PEHA to enter onto and establish a
at Bullocky Point was
also consider that the attending members of NT Police on 6 November 2021
retained the powers and obligations conferred by the PAA
and other Territory
legislation (and at common law), despite that the execution of their duty on the
day was specifically referable
to the PEHA, the Directions and the direction
which became Exhibit P10. Both s 79(1)(b) of the PEHA and a member of NT
fundamental duty through the oath provided by the Schedule to the
PAA support this position. This conclusion is particularly relevant
Defendant’s position concerning the actions of the members forming the
cordon, so determination of the second issue.
with the first issue, the Defendant’s submissions included;
Nothing in s 84 empowers the police, as authorised officers, to close
off a public street and purport to stop and detain hundreds
of people until such
time as they can get around to checking each individual’s Covid-19 bona
”. It is accepted that the power conferred by s 84, when read in
conjunction with the Directions, is
in personam
. However, the analysis
advanced by the Defendant ignores
Interpretation Act
more than one officer sought, in some fashion, to engage with the Defendant.
That analysis also, studiously or otherwise,
ignored that
of the PEHA
relevantly defines “
” to include “
a part of a place
”, and the possible
application of the direction which became Exhibit 10, and the breadth of
(2), 79(1), and 80(3) and (5) of the PEHA, to the circumstances
on 6 November 2021.
that s 84 expressly empowers an officer to “
” a person, I
also consider that in any circumstance where an officer has power to require a
question or enquiry to be answered,
there will generally be an implicit
requirement that the subject stop or stand in order to satisfy that
the officers’ use of the cordon to halt the protestors bears close
consideration. Firstly, I consider that the ‘principle
of legality’
must apply to both the PEHA, the Directions and the direction comprising Exhibit
Second, on one view the
relevant Directions are the product of the CHO imposing limitations through s
79(3) of the PEHA on the exercise
of powers by an authorised officer, which the
members of NT Police were at the time. The Directions do not expressly authorise
an authorised officer or a member of NT Police to stop or impede any
person for the purpose of investigation of contravention or
enforcement of the
Directions. On their face, the powers provided by
(2), 79(1),
80(3) and (5) and 84 of the PEHA would provide clear authority to members of NT
Police to halt the protestors and prevent
their passage beyond the point of the
cordon, including unless and until any precondition consistent with the
Directions were met.
However, the Directions do not expressly go so
Nonetheless,
on a strict reading the direction made 22 March 2020 provided authority to
members of NT Police to prevent any person’s
entry to a place or
exit from a place
consider that instrument, when read in conjunction with the relevant sections of
the PEHA and the definition of “
”, provided lawful
authority to members of NT Police to effectively close a public thoroughfare. In
this case, by cordon of
Bullocky Point and stopping the protesters and
preventing their progress, albeit only until they satisfied relevant conditions
by the Directions. Although it is not my conclusion that the
officers’ actions amounted to effecting ‘temporary detention’,
in my view a “
clear statutory mandate
” existed through the
direction and the PEHA to establish the cordon and to prevent or halt the
protestors for the purpose of
ensuring compliance with the PEHA and
Directions.
of the Defendant’s contention was that, even if a lawful power to stop and
enquire existed in relation to a person, the
breadth of NT Police’s
blanket action in cordoning Bullocky Point and halting the whole of the protest
was unlawful. In particular,
that it was impossible for both NT Police and the
protestors to comply with the process put in place by NT Police’s actions
in any realistic, reasonable or practical fashion. It is noted that early on in
the events giving rise to the charges, various compliant
protestors were
permitted to pass through the cordon, but that within a very short period of
time physical conflict arose between
officers and protestors. The situation
which quickly arose prevented any evidence against which the Defendant’s
might be considered or tested.
the conclusion in relation to the direction comprising Exhibit P10 were
incorrect, it would be necessary to then consider other
powers of members of NT
third issue for determination concerns Sgt Kirkby’s actions in relation to
the Defendant. The facts found in relation to
the essential actions of both the
Defendant and Sgt Kirkby are set out above. The preceding discussion of the
Directions, and sections
of the PEHA together with Exhibit P10, are also
17 of the Directions provided that all persons in the “
” must wear a mask unless one of the exceptions prescribed by
paragraph 19 applied. It was plain that the Defendant presented
at the cordon
not wearing a mask, so Sgt Kirkby had good reason to conclude that the Defendant
may have been in breach of the Directions
and therefore contravening
was also irresistibly clear in my view that upon reaching the cordon, protesters
were required to stand and engage with the members
of NT Police. I have already
found that the officers had lawful authority to establish the cordon and prevent
the passage of protesters,
even if only pending the satisfaction of prescribed
conditions. It is apparent from the evidence that many of the protesters had
different view.
the evidence before the court may not record the word ‘stop’ being
used in relation to the Defendant (or others),
he and a young man wearing an
orange T-shirt were first told by members forming the cordon and seeking to
prevent their passage,
you need to be wearing a
Although that
was an incomplete proposition, the Defendant was aware of the general
requirement.
79 of the PEHA includes “
to ensure this Act is being complied
” in an officer’s functions. Regardless of what protestors
considered NT Police were lawfully entitled to do, Sgt Kirkby
had an obligation
in the proper execution of his duty to seek to ascertain whether the Defendant
was not wearing a mask in contravention
of the Directions. That entailed making
enquiry of the Defendant under one of various provisions of the PEHA and/or
paragraph 20
of the Directions.
The power to ‘request and require’ provided by paragraph 20 is
couched in permissive terms, however Sgt Kirkby could
not have reasonable
any offence against the PEHA was being committed
unless and until that enquiry was
In any event, Sgt
Kirkby’s evidence was that at the time his physical tussle with the
Defendant commenced (by laying hands
on and then wrapping his arm around the
Defendant’s neck), he was not seeking to exercise his power of arrest. In
my view that
was the true
is accepted that the Defendant’s recalcitrant behaviour, and the
aggressive and violent behaviour of other protesters in
close proximity,
rendered Sgt Kirkby’s task in making immediate enquiry under the
Directions very difficult. However, the found
facts are that he said nothing to
the Defendant, then proceeded to physically engage him as described, with the
interaction then
escalating.
Some communication was necessary, even to the extent of a direct warning to stop
or risk arrest.
52(2) and 80(5) of the PEHA empower an officer to use “
force that is
necessary and reasonable
” in the exercise of various powers and
functions under the Act. The Directions do not expressly refer to any such
power, however assuming ‘necessary and reasonable’ force to
be permitted in their enforcement, in my view the force used
by Sgt Kirkby at
the beginning of his physical interaction with the Defendant was neither
necessary nor reasonable in the
circumstances.
Likewise, the
court could not be satisfied to the necessary standard that, from the point at
which Sgt Kirkby laid hands on then
placed his arm around the Defendant’s
neck, he was acting in the execution of his
It follows that none of ss
26, 27 or 29 of the Code could apply to Sgt Kirkby’s
Immediately
prior to Sgt Kirkby’s application of force, the Defendant had sought to
push past Sgt Kirkby. That was in circumstances
where Sgt Kirkby had said
nothing to him, although the Defendant was aware of a general requirement to
stop and engage. Had Sgt Kirkby
first given the Defendant an instruction then
exercised his power of arrest, my conclusion concerning the initial application
force may well have been
However, in the
absence of that exercise, the apprehension was unlawful until an arrest was
effected following the tussle.
Although I consider any arrest for contravention of s 56 of the PEHA would have
been unlawful, reasonable grounds to believe that
the Defendant had contravened
s 158 or 159 of the PAA existed, albeit at a relatively low level. That is, by
the Defendant seeking
to push past Sgt Kirkby towards continuing on his
the circumstances, including having regard to the acceptable evidence concerning
his actions in relation to Sgt Kirkby, the Defendant
is not guilty of Count 3
alleging a contravention of s 189A of the Code.
remains to be considered whether the Defendant contravened any of the provisions
under which the remaining 4 charges were brought.
As previously observed, all
charges had their genesis in NT Police’s response to the protest, in
forming a cordon at Bullocky
Point. The first of the 5 charges was contravening
s 56 of the PEHA by failing to wear a mask.
Defendant contended that to prove a contravention of s 56 of the PEHA, the
prosecution bore an onus from beginning to end to prove
beyond reasonable doubt
that none of the exceptions prescribed by paragraph 19 of the Directions applied
to the Defendant. Those
exceptions relevantly included situations where the
has a physical or mental health illness or condition, or
disability which makes wearing a face mask
support of that position the Defendant pointed to an officer’s power under
paragraph 20 of the Directions to “
request a person who is not wearing
a mask as required by these Directions to state the person’s reason for
not doing so
written submissions also provided a range of authorities, none of which are
determinative in the prosecution (or defence)
of the alleged contravention of
s56 of the PEHA.
particularly due to Part IIAA of the Code prescribing criminal responsibility
for contraventions of the
56(2) of the PEHA provides that; “
It is a defence to a prosecution for
an offence against subsection (1) if
the defendant establishes
reasonable excuse
added). Section 7 of the PEHA
provides; “
Part IIAA of the Code applies to an offence against this
43BU of Part IIAA provides “
A defendant who wishes to rely on any
exception, exemption, excuse
, qualification or justification provided by
the law creating an offence ...
bears an evidential burden
in relation to
Unlike as first appeared
Chugg v Pacific Dunlop Ltd
(supra), I consider s 43BU constitutes
clear legislative intent that a defendant bears the onus to bring themselves
within any “
exception, exemption or
That is only
to the standard of an evidentiary threshold, following which the prosecution
would then bear a legal burden of disproof
to the standard of beyond reasonable
hearing on 29 and 30 August 2022 the Defendant gave no evidence, as is his
However, in those
circumstances and in the absence of any other evidence adduced in compliance
with prosecutorial duties,
evidential burden of proof could be satisfied by the Defendant. That is despite
the officer’s power to enquire (which was
not exercised), and in
circumstances where no objective observation would reveal any basis within the
Directions for the Defendant’s
failure to wear a mask.
with these issues,
I consider a
material and substantive difference exists between the situation of a person
being subjected to the requirements of
the PEHA and statutory instruments as
occurred on 6 November 2021, compared with that of a defendant to a prosecution
in a contested
hearing in the Local Court. Just as the ‘right to
silence’ does not apply to an exercise of an officer’s power
134 of the PAA, it may be assumed that no such right exists in relation to an
officer’s request under paragraph 20
of the Directions. Conversely, the
‘right to silence’ in the Local Court is, subject to any legislated
modification,
absolute. That is, unless and until a defendant elects to give
evidence, the right does not rely on the potential for any answer
incriminate.
the basis of the evidence adduced and facts found, the physical and fault
elements essential to any finding of guilt on the charge
of contravening s 56 of
the PEHA have been proven beyond reasonable doubt. That is at least to the
extent that the Defendant was
relation to count 2, ‘taking part in a riot’, for the reasons
contended by the Defendant’s written submissions,
I find him not guilty of
that charge.
3, ‘assault police’, has already been dealt with.
relation to count 4, ‘disorderly behaviour’, I do not accept the
Defendant’s submission that; “
Plainly, if the defendant is
acquitted or found guilty of the assault or riot charges he cannot be
prosecuted, convicted and punished
for an offence of disorderly behaviour. The
same conduct forms the basis for the defendant’s criminality in each
.” For example, it is conceivable that the Defendant could have
engaged in disorderly conduct prior to or during his initial
interaction with
the NT Police cordon, so before breaching that line and encountering Sgt Kirkby.
Proof of the three offences referred
to also involve some difference in
essential elements.
may also be accepted that proving any contravention of s 47 of the SOA involves
nuances, particularly where the exercise of rights
in the form of protest or
demonstration is involved.
Obviously “
” is not simply an antonym for
‘orderly’, and one consideration is whether a defendant’s
behaviour was “
sufficiently serious to warrant the interference of the
criminal law
warranted the sanctions of the criminal
relevantly, whether any particular conduct amounts to
” is a question of fact and degree in all the
circumstances. I note the Defendant’s presentation on the BWF prior to and
immediately before his interaction with Sgt Kirkby. He was obdurate,
single-minded and determined to continue on his journey, despite
the presence of
the cordon, but was not yelling, threatening or unruly. On the basis of the
available evidence, the Defendant’s
behaviour was not disorderly to the
extent that it warrants the interference of the criminal law, even at the point
of contact with
Sgt Kirkby.
Defendant’s behaviour was, however, physically resistant against Sgt
Kirkby in the execution of that officer’s duty.
As previously found, the
officer was empowered to ensure the PEHA (and Directions made under it) was
being complied with
”, and to “
person for that purpose, and to use “
force that is
necessary and
” to effect those objectives. Sgt Kirkby’s purpose in
stepping into the Defendant’s path was to stop him, and was
both lawful
and in the execution of duty. The Defendant sought to push past Sgt Kirkby and,
in doing so, there is no reasonable doubt
he contravened s 158 of the PAA, so is
guilty of count 5.
20 January 2023 formal findings on counts 1 to 5 inclusive were given
, with written reasons to be published. These are those reasons. The
findings on 20 January were;
(i) Having regard to the definition of “
” provided by s
4 of the PEHA, each of sections 53, 79, 80 and 84 of the PEHA (when read with
the Directions and direction)
provided authority to the officers to form a
cordon and halt the pedestrian passage of the Defendant on 6 November 2021.
(ii) Section 7 of the PEHA provides that Part IIAA of the Code applies in the
prosecution of any alleged contravention of section
56 of the PEHA.
(iii) At hearing, the Defendant bore an evidential burden of proof through s43BU
of the Code in relation to any matter not within
the knowledge or observation of
an officer. That burden was not discharged in any sense.
(iv) The Defendant is guilty of contravening section 56 of the PEHA, in that he
was not wearing a mask at the relevant time and place
in compliance with the
Directions.
(v) The Defendant is not guilty of taking part in a riot, or of assaulting a
member of police, or of disorderly behaviour. None of
those charges have been
proven beyond reasonable doubt.
(vi) Lastly, the Defendant is guilty beyond reasonable doubt of resisting an
officer in the execution of their duty. In particular,
by seeking to continue on
his journey in circumstances where an officer was clearly and lawfully requiring
the Defendant to stop,
and he did not do so. That finding does not extend to the
physical exchange which then ensued following the officer seeking to restrain
the Defendant, and taking him to ground.
Woolmington v DPP
AC 462 at 481. That onus is logically associated with the right to
Presumably under s48
of the PEHA; see the Preface to C19 Directions (No. 67) 2021, which became
exhibit P8. Although the Declaration
was not tendered into evidence,
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
provides for judicial
notice to be taken of such
instruments.
empowers the CHO to take “
” they consider
necessary, appropriate or desirable to alleviate the public health
emergency stated in the declaration
”, including “
written directions
C19 Directions (No 5) 2020
evidence from Supt Daniel Shean, Sgts Paul Kirkby and Wayne Miller, and S Consts
Ben Davies and Nathan Mayo, but no BWF of either
officers Shean or
Which may ignore the
right implied through
Constitution
and authorities such as
Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd v the Commonwealth
(1992) 177 CLR
Lange v ABC
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520
Coleman v Power
[2004] HCA 39
George v Rockett
[1990] HCA 26
(1990) 170 CLR 104
Noting that arrest is a last resort, and that NT Police generally consider
various factors prior to exercise of the power, including
whether a Summons or
Notice to Appear is the course most appropriate to the circumstances.
is also an offence for which an Infringement Notice may be issued under the
Public and Environmental Health Regulations
The Queen v
[2019] NTSC 91
Section 138(3)(f) of
the ENULA includes consideration of any behaviour which is inconsistent with or
contrary to rights recognised
International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights 1980
[2014] VSC 52
[2016] NSWDC 422
The King v Amital
[2022] NTSC 74
and [116] for example.
Submissions dated 28 August 2022 at
So the officers were
preventing entry to a place
‘authorisation, justification and excuse’ provisions of
The Defendant
Re Bolton; Ex parte Beane
[1987] HCA 12
[1987] 162 CLR 514
at 528. See
Plaintiff S
Commonwealth
[2003] HCA 2
(2003) 211 CLR 476
Al-Kateb v Godwin
[2004] HCA 37
(2004) 219 CLR 562
Momcilovic v The
(2011) 245 CLR 1
abui v The Queen
[2020] NTSC 50
The King v Amital
[2022] NTSC 74
The particulars of
charge referred only to the “
” aspect of the Directions,
so vaccination status through s 85 of the PEHA was irrelevant, and no allegation
of failure to comply
with s 86 existed. I also consider ss 70 to
to an authorised officer who is “
”, so irrelevant to
the situation the subject of the
The CHO or any
enforcement agency
" have power to appoint any person to the office of
authorised officer
" under s 76 and
respectively, however those
appointments are conditioned on criteria.
It may be noticed that the
Defendant was not charged with any contravention of either ss 86 or 87 of the
PEHA. Further, that the
information provided by the prosecution in
particularisation of the charge of contravening
extended simply to a
failure to wear a mask. Consequently, no issue concerning s 85 or the
Defendant’s vaccination status
And the direction
which became Ext P10. Section 79(1) (f) of the PEHA effectively deems a member
of NT Police to be an "
authorised officer
" where purporting to exercise
powers or functions under that Act, such that no "
appointment
Which conclusion
is consistent with s 79(1) (b) of the PEHA, noting that the Directions do not
expressly call up the entirety of
powers conferred by Division 4 of Part 6 of
From the Defendant
dated 29 August and 21 September 2022, and the Prosecution dated 20 September
Section 4 of the PEHA
relevantly defines “
” to include “
a part of a
of the PEHA provides that Part IIAA of the Code applies to offences against that
Act, with other provisions providing a
range of powers and
example is in the exercise of and compliance with the s 134 ‘name and
address’ power.
authorities at footnote 14
Paragraphs 11 and 12 of
the Defendant’s written submissions. The requirements of
Re Bolton; Ex
parte Beane
[1987] HCA 12
[1987] 162 CLR 514
were satisfied, including because ss 52 and
53 are contained in Division 2 of Part 5 of the PEHA, to which the direction
79(3) of the PEHA preserves functions imposed on an “
”, which Sgt Kirkby as a member of NT Police was, “
another Act
Exhibit 1 - Body Worn Footage of Constable
Sections 52(3) (d),
80(3)(g), 80(b) and (d), and paragraph 20 of the Directions all empower an
officer to request and require information
concerning failure to wear a mask in
compliance with the Directions. The circumstances also invited a request under s
PAA for the Defendant’s name and
Bacon Pty Ltd v Rees
[1966] HCA 21
(1996) 115 CLR 266
George v Rockett
[1990] HCA 26
(1990) 170 CLR 104
at 115 concerning the distinction between
Both the common law requirement to inform a person that they are under arrest
and the requirement of s 127 of the PAA to inform the
arrestee of the offence
for which they are arrested would need to have been complied with in the
circumstances.
previously, BWF from any device operated by Sgt Kirkby could have been of
significant assistance.
powers and obligations conferred by s 127 (in conjunction with s 123) and 134 of
the PAA are legislated examples of conduct expected
and required of members of
Namely, where Sgt
Kirkby said nothing to make clear the Defendant’s obligation, or that he
would be arrested.
Mangurra v Rigby
[2021] NTSC 6 for a recent discussion of the
authorities.
[2003] NTSC 106
Burkhart v Bradley
[2013] NTCA 05 and
Thyer v Whittington
[2017] NTSC 66
, and authorities cited
In relation to ss
158 or 159 of the PAA, requiring consideration of authority such as
v Leachinsky
[1947] UKHL 2
[1947] AC 573
Adams v Kennedy
[2000] NSWCA
[2011] NTSC 40
Ashley v Millar
[2015] NTSC 63
[2016] NTSC 4
Mangurra v Rigby
[2021] NTSC
Sgt Kirkby’s
designation as an “
authorised officer
” did not obviate his
duties and powers under the PAA or other Territory legislation (or at common
law), despite that it provided
the starting point in consideration of his
execution of duty on the day. Section 79(1) (b) of the PEHA seeks to confirm
this position.
None of the
other prescribed exceptions, including whether the person "
is engaged in
vigorous exercise
" would appear to have any potential
application.
August, 20 September and 21 September 2022.
Dowling v Bowie
[1952] HCA 63
(1952) 86 CLR
Hammond v Lavender
(1976) 50 ALJR 728
, being examples of
application of strict compliance with legislated prescription, and
[1996] HCA 28
(1996) 186 CLR 454
, which simply goes to exercise of curial
evidence of “
reasonable excuse
being adduced.
Chugg v Pacific Dunlop Ltd
[1990] HCA 41
(1990) 170 CLR 249
instructive on the conclusion reached here, and I do accept that
Local Court (Criminal Procedure) Act
simply deals with acceptable
drafting of Complaints by the
Section 7 of the PEHA
makes clear that
of the Code
Although the
concept of "
a direction
" provided by
of the PEHA is particularly
broad (including "
"), I take the Directions (and the direction) to be
statutory instrument
" within the meaning of
Interpretation Act 1978
(NT), such that their content, through
of that Act, amounts to "
provided by the
This is consistent
with and reinforced by the phrase “
defendant establishes
s 56(2) of the PEHA. A recent Territory example on broader considerations is
Talbot v Malogorski
[2014] NTSC 54
Due to s 43BW, it could
be concluded that the evidential burden on a defendant may be less than balance
of probability, following
which ss 43BR and 43BS would
Azzopardi v The
[2001] HCA 25
(2001) 205 CLR 50
Whitehorn v The
[1983] HCA 42
(1983) 152 CLR 657
R v Apostilides
[1984] HCA 38
(1984) 154 CLR
Paragraphs [6]
to [14] of the Defendant’s Supplementary Submissions dated 21 September
Paragraph [39] of
submissions dated 29 August 2022, including
The Queen v Cook &
[1994] QCA 227.
Watson v Trenerry
[1998] NTCCA 22
per Angel and Mildren
Watson v Trenerry
(supra) per Angel J and Mildren J at pages 7 and 32 respectively, relying on
Barrington v Austin
[1939] SAStRp 38
[1939] SASR 130.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (303 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter