URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTRTCmr/2015/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:22:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hendy -v- Tshibongu [2015] NTRTCmr 24 (22 May 2015)
REASONS FOR THE ORDER OF THE COMMISSIONER OF TENANCIES
INQUIRY - Wednesday, 25 February 2015 and Wednesday, 13 May
ELHAMY HENDY AND MERVAT HENDY (“THE
LANDLORDS”)
PEDRO TSHIBONGU AND REBECCA TSHIBONGU (“THE
RT1415-0396
is a determination of an application by the Landlords,
Elhamy Hendy and
Mervat Hendy, seeking orders for compensation pursuant to section 122 of the
Residential Tenancies Act
(NT) (“the Act”). The application
is made in respect of premises being 35 Bernier Court, Karama in the Northern
of Australia (“the premises”). The Inquiry was conducted
on 25 February 2015 and 13 May 2015.
Notice of Inquiry dated 20 January 2015 was posted to the parties.
The tenancy agreement
the basis of the documentary and oral evidence before the Inquiry, I find there
is a tenancy agreement within the meaning of and
subject to the provisions of
the Act on the following terms:
Premises: 35 Bernier Court Karama
Commencement Date: 9 December 2013
Expiring: 9 June 2014 (initial extension to 09/09/14 via MOV dated
24/05/14 then to 09/09/15 via MOV dated 24/08/14)
Landlord: Elhamy Hendy and Mervat Hendy
Tenant: Pedro Tshibongu and Rebecca Tshibongu
Rent: $600.00 per week payable fortnightly in advance
Security Deposit $2,400.00
Procedural history
proceedings commenced when the landlords made application on 7 January 2015 for
compensation under section 122 of the Act for
loss of rent that the tenants
would have been liable to pay under a tenancy agreement had the tenants not
abandoned the premises,
the rent differential payable under the tenancy
agreement entered into by the new tenant and that payable by the tenants and
water charges payable under the tenancy agreement.
inquiry was conducted on Wednesday, 25 February 2015 (‘initial
hearing’) during which evidence was taken from the
landlords, Elhamy Hendy
and Mervat Hendy (via telephone). The tenants, Pedro Tshibongu and Rebecca
Tshibongu appeared at the hearing
and sought leave to be represented by Mr Arbi
Jain of Darwin Community Legal Service. The landlords provided their consent to
occurring and evidence was taken from the tenants with the assistance of Mr
the course of the initial hearing the tenants alleged that they entered into the
Memorandum of Variation (dated 24 August 2014)
extending the tenancy agreement
by a further twelve month term expiring on 9 September 2015, under duress and on
the basis of undertakings
given by the landlords in relation to early
termination without penalty.
a result I adjourned the initial hearing and made the following
Respondent to make written submissions by no later 04/03/15 in respect of their
claim that they entered into the Memorandum
of Variation (dated 24/08/14)
extending the tenancy agreement by a further twelve month term expiring on
09/09/15, under duress and
on the basis of undertakings given by the Landlord in
relation to early termination without penalty.
Applicant to provide any written submission in response to the
Respondent’s submission by no later than 11/03/15.
(3) The matter
is adjourned and decision reserved.
2 March 2015 the tenants sought additional time for the filing of their
submission. I granted an extension to COB 11 March 2015
for the tenants to lodge
their submission and granted an extension to COB 25 March 2015 for the landlords
to provide any written
a result of the submissions received in response to the orders, the hearing
resumed and was completed on 13 May 2015 (‘final
hearing’). The
landlords again appeared via telephone and the tenants appeared in person
represented by Mr Jain.
6 December 2013 the tenants, who were recent migrants to Australia, with the
assistance of the Melaleuca Refugee Centre, entered
into a tenancy agreement
with the landlords for the premises. This initial tenancy agreement was for a
six month period commencing
on 9 December 2014 and ending on 9 June 2014 with an
option for extending for a further 6 months.
to the lease agreement expiring discussions took place between the tenants and
the landlords resulting in the tenants signing
a Memorandum of Variation (MOV)
on 24 May 2014 extending the lease term by a further three months expiring on 9
September 2014 (all
other terms of the tenancy agreement remained
unchanged).
or about 30 August 2014 the tenants signed a further MOV (‘the disputed
MOV’) that extended the lease term by a further
twelve months expiring on
9 September 2015 (all other terms of the tenancy agreement remained unchanged).
It is noted that the MOV
has a printed date of 24 May 2014 on its face which has
been hand altered to read 24 August 2014 and initialled by the landlords
circumstances surrounding the signing of the disputed MOV are the subject of
significant dispute between the parties.
tenants assert that they were induced to sign the disputed MOV on an oral
promise by Mr Hendy that the tenants would be permitted
to terminate the tenancy
agreement after signing at any time without any penalty to them.
tenants therefore argue that this assurance is what induced them to sign the
disputed MOV and as such should be considered as
a term in an oral collateral
contract agreed by the parties.
consequence of my finding in favour of the tenants in this regard would mean
that the landlords’ claim for compensation
would necessarily fail in
respect of all but the claim for excess water charges.
evidentiary material
evidence before me at the initial and final hearing consisted of the oral
evidence of the parties and the following documentary
material kept on the
Commissioner of Tenancies file numbered RT1415-0396:
documents submitted by the landlords in support of their application;
tenants’ submission in response to the landlords’ application which
includes three Statutory Declarations attesting
to the circumstances surrounding
the signing of the disputed MOV (one from each tenant and one from their Case
Worker at Melaleuca
Refuge Centre, Ms Esther Canmue); and
landlords’ submission in response to the tenants’
submission.
following chronology has been drawn from the evidence before the Inquiry with
the comments in italics relating to this evidence:
(1) 24/8/14
Mr Hendy wrote to the tenants inviting them to extend
their lease which was due to expire on 9/9/14.
Although this document is referenced in Mr Hendy’s response to the
tenants’ submission it was not provided at the Inquiry.
Its existence has not been challenged by the tenants.
(2) 29/8/14
Mr Hendy visited Darwin to meet with the tenants and
to discuss with them a tenancy agreement extension. The tenants and Ms Canmue
were aware in advance of his visit.
Mr Hendy asserts that it was his expectation that the tenants had made a
decision prior to him meeting with them about a tenancy
agreement extension in
light of his letter to them of 24/8/14.
There is no dispute among the parties as to there being prior knowledge
of Mr Hendy’s visit.
(3) 30/8/14
The tenants advised Mr Hendy in a telephone
conversation that they would not be extending the tenancy agreement as they had
another premises that they wished to move into.
Mr Hendy phoned the tenants back the same day and advised that he wished to
meet with them to discuss the matter.
Mr Tshibangu phoned Ms Canmue to advise her of the interactions with Mr
Ms Canmue advised Mr Tshibangu that she was aware of what had occurred as
she had also received a phone call from Mr Hendy.
Mr Hendy visited the tenants that evening and provided them with the
disputed MOV to sign. The tenants refused to sign and again
advised Mr Hendy
that they were moving, having found a property in Leanyer. They advised Mr Hendy
that they would not sign the document
in the absence of Ms Canmue.
Mr Hendy advised the tenants that he was returning to Adelaide later that
evening and he required the disputed MOV to be signed before
he went back.
The parties did not dispute that the events up to this point had
The tenants’ assert that Mr Hendy further advised them that if they
signed the disputed MOV and then found a house to move
to, or Ms Canmue did not
agree with the terms of the lease, the tenants could inform him accordingly and
he would cancel the lease
and there would be “no problems”.
Mr Hendy strongly denies that he gave these undertakings.
The parties signed the disputed MOV.
(4) 31/8/14
Mrs Tshibangu phoned Mr Hendy and advised him that
they were moving out.
Mr Hendy advised her that this would be fine and then commenced a discussion
on the terms of the disputed MOV in an attempt to induce
the tenants to remain
in the premises.
In consideration of these negotiations the tenants did not proceed with the
tenancy agreement on the Leanyer property and this property
was ultimately
leased to someone else.
The negotiations did not result in a satisfactory outcome so the tenants
formed the view that it was in their best interests to move
The parties did not dispute that these events occurred.
Mr Tshibangu telephoned Ms Canmue to advise her that
Mr Hendy had contacted him to renegotiate the terms of the tenancy.
Mr Hendy had also phoned Ms Canmue and left a message to ascertain what the
tenants wanted.
Ms Canmue phoned the tenants to discuss the matter with them. She was
advised by Mrs Tshibangu that if Mr Hendy reduced the rent
by $50.00 per week
they would be able to afford to remain in the premises.
Ms Canmue phoned Mr Hendy and advised him of the tenants’ request.
The parties did not dispute that these events occurred.
Ms Canmue received a text message from Mr Hendy
stating that he was doing all he could as a good landlord to support the tenants
was doing what they wanted and that he did not appreciate Ms Canmue advising
the tenants to find another property.
Although this text message was not provided at the Inquiry, Mr Hendy did
not deny sending such a text message.
(7) 12/9/14
Mrs Tshibangu telephoned Ms Canmue and advised that
she had called Mr Hendy to notify him of the tenants’ intention to vacate
the premises.
Mr Hendy offered to reduce the excess water charges payable under the
tenancy agreement from 80% of usage to 50% of usage and to
reduce the rent
Mr Tshibangu advised Mr Hendy that the tenants would look for another
premises unless the excess water charges were removed entirely.
The parties did not dispute that these events occurred.
(8) 12/9/14
Mr Hendy received a phone call from Mrs Tshibangu
advising him of the tenants’ intention to vacate.
It is common ground that this telephone conversation occurred.
Mr Hendy asserts that he advised Mrs Tshibangu that the tenants’ could
vacate but that they would then be breaking the tenancy
agreement and liable for
all relevant costs.
Mrs Tshibangu denies that this occurred.
(9) 14/9/14
The tenants assert that Mr Hendy phoned and gave
them one week’s notice to move out as he had found a new tenant and this
prospective
tenant would view the premises on 16/9/14.
Mr Hendy asserts that he phoned the tenants to advise that he may have
someone interested in taking over the tenancy on the premises
if they still
wished to leave. However this person needed to move in within a week. He left
the decision up to the tenants to call
him back if they wished him to proceed
with this arrangement. They didn’t call him back after several days and
the arrangement
did not proceed.
Whilst it is common ground that this telephone conversation occurred the
parties are clearly in disagreement on the content of the
conversation.
(10) 15/9/14
Mrs Tshibangu telephoned Ms Canmue and advised that
that Mr Hendy had given one week’s notice to vacate.
(11) 16/9/14
Ms Canmue met Mrs Tshibangu who was upset and
stressed by Mr Hendy’s behaviour.
Mrs Tshibangu advised Ms Canmue that Mr Hendy had offered to reduce the rent
to $580.00 per week if they stayed.
Mrs Tshibangu indicated to Ms Canmue that the tenants had advised Mr Hendy
that he was confusing them and that they were actively
looking at properties in
light of him having provided them with one week’s notice to vacate.
(12) 16/9/14
Mr Hendy asserts that he sent a letter to the
tenants setting out their obligations in the event that they broke the tenancy
The letter stated that meeting the costs associated with breaking the
tenancy agreement would be a financial burden on them and he
was happy to
discuss any concerns they had in regard to the tenancy. The letter asked for a
response within 72 hours. None was forthcoming.
This document was included with the landlords’ application and its
authenticity was not challenged by the tenants at the initial
At the final hearing I inquired as to what action they took upon receiving
this letter which was totally inconsistent with their understanding
commitment that had been given to them by Mr Hendy at the time they signed the
disputed MOV.
The tenants claim that they never received the letter.
(13) 19/9/14
Mr Hendy proceeded to advertise the premises in the
NT News. As a result of the advertisement, three parties inspected the premises
but none expressed interest in a tenancy agreement.
Mrs Tshibangu informed Ms Canmue that Mr Hendy had advertised the premises
and that a number of parties had viewed the premises with
one party telling the
tenants that they wished to move in to the premises as soon as possible. The
tenants felt more pressure to
vacate as soon as possible.
It is common ground that these events occurred.
(14) 30/9/14
Mrs Tshibangu texted Mr Hendy and provided him with
one week’s notice of the tenants’ intention to vacate the
It is common ground that this occurred.
(15) 1/10/14
Mrs Tshibangu received a text message from Mr Hendy
that a Property Manager would be visiting to inspect the premises.
It is common ground that this occurred.
Findings of fact
note that the factual matters regarding the signing of the 12 month tenancy
agreement extension commencing on 9 February 2014 are
disputed by the parties.
tenants’ position is that they signed the disputed MOV based on an
assurance provided to them verbally by Mr Hendy that
they would be permitted to
terminate the tenancy agreement at any time after it was entered into without
any penalty.
landlords’ position is that they consistently advised the tenants that if
they abandoned the premises after signing the
disputed MOV it would be treated
as a 'lease break' situation and attract a claim for compensation. They further
assert that this
was the reason why they attempted to accommodate the tenants'
wishes following the disputed MOV coming into effect by being prepared
renegotiate some of the terms of the tenancy agreement and attempting to secure
a new tenant. A number of options were offered
but none came to fruition.
have taken the approach that findings of fact should only be made where the fact
is supported by corroborative evidence, that is
evidence over and above the
evidence of either the tenants alone or the landlords alone.
heard the oral evidence of the parties, and having received and considered their
documents and submissions, including the various
statements, I make the
following relevant findings of fact.
tenants rely solely upon the evidence of their representative Ms Canmue to
corroborate their version of the circumstances surround
their signing of the
disputed MOV. She was not present when the document was signed by the parties
and her evidence in this regard
is hearsay evidence.
Hendy offered no independent third party corroboration of his version of the
circumstances. I note he tendered the letter dated
16 September 2014 which he
says he sent to the tenants. This letter presents a position which is
inconsistent with the tenants’
evidence that the landlords would permit
the tenancy agreement to be terminated early without penalty. I further note
that the tenants
deny receiving this letter.
tenants need to satisfy me on the balance of probabilities that what they allege
transpired. This simply means that they must
prove that their assertion is more
likely than not to be true. If the scales tip in their favour, however slight,
they have proved
their assertion. But if the probabilities are equal, they have
failed to prove their assertion.
have carefully considered the oral and written testimony of each party, and the
submissions made. I am not satisfied on the balance
of probabilities that the
tenants’ version of events is more likely than not to be true.
that basis the tenants have failed to prove their claim that they signed the
disputed MOV under duress or on the basis of Mr Hendy’s
undertakings.
such I find that the tenants terminated the tenancy in accordance with section
82(1)(c) of the Act.
Compensation for Lost Rent
($5,400.00)
premises was vacated on 8 October 2014 and according to the Rent Ledger provided
at the inquiry rent was paid up to 12 October
2014 by the tenants.
premises was relet on 15 December 2014.
landlords are claiming compensation for “lost rent” for the period
13 October 2014 to 14 December 2014 (ie 63 days)
and calculated as follows:
Weekly Rent - $600
Daily Rent - $85.714 per day
Number of Days – 63
Amount Claimed - $85.741 x 63 = $5,400.00
considering the amount of compensation to be awarded, the Commissioner is
required to have regard to whether a landlord has mitigated
his or her loss and
any other relevant matters as set out in section 122(3) of the Act (see also
section 120).
of loss involves the person who has suffered the loss taking reasonable action,
where possible, to reduce the loss and
to avoid additional loss. In a lease
break situation, a landlord is required to make reasonable attempts to relet the
premises, such
as through advertising of the premises (at a reduced rental, if
necessary), in order to secure replacement tenants
as soon as possible
and thus minimise the amount of rent lost over the remainder of the original
lease term. Failure to take such steps can reduce the
amount of compensation
that may be recovered by a landlord.
being advised of the tenants’ intention to break the tenancy agreement the
landlords commenced the process of seeking new
tenants. A prospective tenant was
suggested to the tenants on 14 September 2014 but I believe that due to a
breakdown in communications
between the parties this did not come to fruition.
landlords then advertised the premises in the NT News on or about 16 September
2014. Whilst the advertisement attracted some interest,
nothing came from
2 October 2014 the landlords engaged Ray White NT Property Management to
accelerate the process of securing a new tenant and to
manage the premises on an
ongoing basis.
detailed statement from Ray White indicating the action they took to secure new
tenants was provided to the initial inquiry. Actions
taken included extensive
online advertising of the premises, an advertisement placed in the Saturday
edition of the NT News, open
inspections of the premises twice weekly for up to
8 weeks and private showings.
asking rental was reduced three times before a replacement tenant was finally
tenants argue in their submission in response to the landlords’
application that the market had moved significantly since
they signed the
disputed MOV and rent rates had come down. They included examples of
advertisements for comparable properties in
the same location with lower rent
tenants further argue that the pool fence did not comply with relevant standards
in that the pool has no full isolation fencing.
They believe that this meant
that prospective tenants with children may have viewed the premises in an
unfavourable light.
put this to the landlords at the final hearing and asked them to produce the
relevant pool fencing compliance certificate. This
was provided by the landlords
on 13 May 2015. The certificate states that the pool complies with the
“nonstandard safety provisions”.
pool fencing is compliant.
find that the evidence supports the view that the landlords advertised the
premises at a rent rate above the market rate and needed
to progressively reduce
the rate to the market level to secure a tenant.
the basis of the evidence before me I am not satisfied that the landlords have
sufficiently demonstrated that they have mitigated
their loss.
believe that the 63 day period to source a new tenant has in part arisen due to
the landlords’ decision not to advertise from
the start at a rent rate
near or below the market level at that time.
propose to only award compensation for a 21 day period which I think is a more
realistic timeframe for the premises to have been
re-let if the advertised rent
rate was in line with the market.
such I find that the landlords are entitled to compensation of
for lost rent.
Compensation for Rent Differential
landlords are also seeking compensation for the difference between $600.00 per
week which was the operative rent under the breached
tenancy agreement and the
rent of $578.00 per week paid by the incoming tenant from when the new tenancy
agreement commenced.
landlords value this at $572.00 and are seeking compensation in this
are a number of precedents in decisions made by the Commissioner for Tenancies
and on the part of the courts for the awarding
of compensation for such a
circumstance.
Accordingly
I award compensation in the amount of
for the rent differential.
Compensation for costs incurred by the landlords in securing
new tenants ($1,373.79)
section 112(6)(b) of the Act a landlord may seek compensation pursuant to
section 122 of the Act for the loss caused to the
landlord in securing new
tenants for the premises.
to engaging the services of Ray White NT Property Management the landlords, who
reside in South Australia, self-managed the
in the landlords’ documentation in support of their application is an
invoice provided by Ray White showing total charges
of $1,373.79 which are being
claimed by the landlords by way of compensation for loss incurred in securing a
new tenant.
only component of this invoice that is identifiable as a direct expense
associated with securing a new tenant is an advertising
charge of $88.00.
is no identifiable ‘letting fee’ component although the invoice does
contain an entry titled “Annual Fee”.
The landlords were unable to
give any indication if this was in fact the letting fee component.
remainder of the invoice lists charges by Ray White for the management of the
premises. These charges are not associated with
securing the new tenancy
the basis of the evidence before me I am only prepared to allow compensation in
the amount of
for this element of the landlords’ claim.
Compensation for excess water usage ($251.00)
118 of the Act provides that a tenant is only required to pay the landlord for a
charge payable by the owner for water supplied
to the premises during the
tenancy if the tenant is required to do so under the tenancy agreement and if
the premises is individually
metred for the service.
tenancy agreement in question contains the following provision under the Special
Conditions section:
“The tenants are responsible to pay for
the water they use. But when the front and backyard are always green they pay
their water use.”
tenants have not previously been invoiced by the landlords for excess water
usage pursuant to the terms of the tenancy agreement.
The landlords are seeking
compensation under section 122 in the amount of $251.00 for excess water usage
for the following periods/usage
(based on Power and Water invoices for these
5/12/13 to 7/3/14 (the tenants moved in on 9/12/13) – total invoice from
PWC was $41.33 with the portion allocated to
the tenants on a pro-rata basis
being an amount of $35.00;
8/3/14 to 6/6/14 in the amount of $76.32;
7/6/14 to 5/9/14 in the amount of $63.85; and
6/9/14 to 10/12/14 (new tenants moved in on 15/12/14) – total invoice from
PWC was $47.23 with the portion allocated
to the tenants on a pro-rata basis
being an amount of $40.00.
advised the landlords at the final hearing that their calculation for the second
period was incorrect. The landlords had billed
the tenants the total water
charges on the PWC invoice for that period (which is made up of usage of $7.29
and a fixed daily charges
component totalling $69.03). The tenants should only
be responsible for the usage component of this invoice of $7.29.
Taranellos and McCann v Ward
Tribunal only allowed the landlord to recover the last quarter’s excess
water charges from the tenants on the basis the
landlord had an implied duty to
provide these accounts to the tenants and demand payment as the bills were
adopt the same reasoning for the invoices in respect of the periods 5/12/13 to
7/3/14 and 8/3/14 to 6/6/14 and
this component of the
landlords’ claim.
relation to the landlords’ claim for compensation for water usage I find
that the landlords are entitled to compensation
in the amount of
(ie $63.58+$40.00 = $103.58 x 80%) for the water used by the tenants during the
tenancy in respect of the periods 7/6/14 to 5/9/14
and 6/9/14 to 10/12/14
Accordingly,
I order that:
tenants are liable to pay to the landlords compensation pursuant to section 122
of the Act in the total amount of $2,542.86.
this Friday, 22 May 2015
Andrew Macrides
Delegate of the
Commissioner of Tenancies
NSWCTTT 176
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (184 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter