URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCA/2023/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:16:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sherrington v ICAC & Ors [2023] NTCA 11 (10 November 2023)
Sherrington v Independent Commissioner Against Corruption &
[2023] NTCA 11
PARTIES: SHERRINGTON, Jennifer
INDEPENDENT COMMISSIONER AGAINST CORRUPTION
FLEMING, Kenneth
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: AP 10 of 2022 (22230913)
DELIVERED: 10 November 2023
HEARING DATE: 30 June 2023
JUDGMENT OF: Kelly, Barr and Reeves JJ
CATCHWORDS:
CIVIL APPEAL — Court of Appeal – Appeal against decision refusing
leave to the appellant to commence proceedings alleging
bad faith under
Independent Commissioner Against Corruption Act 2017
Whether the Supreme Court unnecessarily constrained interpretation of
‘bad faith’ – Whether the Supreme Court variously,
misunderstood, summarily rejected or outright failed to engage with the majority
of the appellant’s case - Whether the Supreme
Court applied too onerous a
standard of ‘substantial reasons’ for belief in applying
- No grounds reveal appellable error in the primary judgement -
Appeal dismissed.
Income Tax Assessment Act
Independent Commissioner Against Corruption Act 2017
Local Government Act NSW
Police Administration Act 1978
s 148F(2)(b)
Supreme Court Act 1979
Youth Justice Act
Three Rivers District Council v Bank of England (No 3)
[2001] All ER
Nyoni v Shire of Kellerberrin
[2017] FCAFC 59
(2017) 248 FCR 311
Bankstown City Council v Alamdo Holdings
[2005] HCA 46
(2005) 223 CLR
Campbell v NTA (No 3)
[2021] FCA 1089
Mid Density
Developments Pty Ltd v Rockdale Municipal Council
[1993] FCA 408
(1993) 44 FCR 290
, relied on
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
Banditt v R
[2005] HCA 80
(2005) 224 CLR 262
Brett Cattle Co v
Minister for Agriculture
[2020] FCA 732
(2020) 274 FCR 337
Cannane v J Cannane Pty
(1998) 193 CLR 557
Commonwealth v Fernando
[2012] FCAFC 18
Construction, Forestry, Mining & Energy Union v Boral
Resources (Vic) Pty Ltd
[2015] HCA 21
(2015) 256 CLR 375
Crimmins v Stevedoring
Industry Finance Committee
[1999] HCA 59
(1999) 200 CLR 1
Federal Commissioner of
Taxation v Futuris Corporation Limited
(2008) 237 CLR 147
Gaykamangu v
Northern Territory
[2016] NTSC 26
George v Rocket
[1990] HCA 26
(1990) 170 CLR
Mengel v Northern Territory
(1995) 185 CLR 307
Nyoni v Shire of
Kellerberrin
[2017] FCAFC 59
(2017) 248 FCR 311
O’Shea v Northern Territory of
[2018] NTSC 73
Plaintiff M83A v Morrison (No 2)
[2020] FCA 1198
Rush v Commissioner of Police
[2006] FCA 12
(2006) 150 FCR 165
Sanders v Snell
(1998) 196 CLR 329
Secretary v Northern Territory of
[2019] NTSC 73
Sherrington v Independent Commissioner Against
Corruption (NT) & Ors
[2022] NTSC 67
Spencer v Commonwealth
[2010] HCA 28
(2010) 241 CLR 118
; referred to
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: T Moses
Respondents: S Free SC with L Peattie
Solicitors:
Appellant: Piper Grimster Jones
Respondents: Hutton McCarthy
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 71
IN THE COURT OF APPEAL
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Sherrington v Independent Commissioner Against Corruption
& Ors (No 2)
[2023] NTCA 11
AP 10 of 2022 (22230913)
JENNIFER SHERRINGTON
INDEPENDENT COMMISSIONER AGAINST CORRUPTION
First Respondent
KENNETH FLEMING
Second Respondent
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
Third Respondent
CORAM: KELLY, BARR and REEVES JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 10 November 2023)
[1] This is an
appeal against a decision of the Supreme Court refusing leave to the appellant
to commence proceedings alleging bad
faith under
Independent Commissioner Against Corruption Act 2017
December 2021 the appellant commenced proceedings against the respondents by
writ and statement of claim seeking judicial
review of the decision by the
Independent Commissioner Against Corruption (“the ICAC”) to publish
an investigation report
and public statement released by the respondent
Mr Fleming in July 2021 and bringing a claim of misfeasance in public
office against
Mr Fleming.
[3] As the claim
for misfeasance in public office alleges bad faith, leave of the Court is
required to commence so much of the proceedings
as depend on that allegation by
virtue of s 155(5) of the
The relevant parts of
s 155 provide:
(4) If a person is alleged to have acted in bad faith when acting, or
purportedly acting, in an official capacity, a civil or criminal
proceeding for
the act may only be brought by leave of the Supreme Court.
(5) The Supreme Court is not to grant leave unless satisfied there are
substantial reasons for believing the person acted in bad
September 2022 the Supreme Court refused leave to the appellant to commence
proceedings pursuant to
decision of the Supreme Court refusing leave to commence proceedings pursuant to
s 155(5) of the
was an interlocutory decision, leave to
appeal against that decision is required by
Supreme Court
February 2023 leave to appeal was granted by a single judge.
appellant’s grounds of appeal may be summarized as
(a) The Supreme Court adopted and applied an unnecessarily constrained
interpretation of ‘bad faith’. This narrow view
resulted in the
Court disregarding evidence showing that Mr Fleming made no real attempt to
determine whether or not the appellant
had engaged in the corrupt conduct
pleaded at para [50] of the statement of claim.
(b) The Supreme Court variously, misunderstood, summarily rejected or outright
failed to engage with the majority of the appellant’s
case before the
Supreme Court. The appellant relies on seven sub-grounds, being components of
the appellant’s case which,
the appellant contends, the Supreme Court did
not properly engage with.
(c) The Supreme Court applied too onerous a standard of ‘substantial
reasons’ for belief in applying s 155(5).
appellant seeks an order setting aside the orders of Burns J dated
30 September 2022 and in their place an order granting
the appellant leave
to commence proceedings under
background to the proceeding is set out in the judgment of the Supreme
Between October 2015 and
January 2020 the appellant was the appointed principal of Milingimbi School
(“the School”),
which is a remote government-funded school on
Milingimbi Island. The School caters to students from preschool to Year
[10] Between
26 September 2019 and 13 December 2019 the ICAC received reports
alleging improper conduct by the appellant. The reports
generally alleged that,
between 2015 and December 2019, the appellant had engaged in improper conduct
and misapplied public resources
through the inaccurate reporting of student
data, nepotism and inappropriate use of Department of Education
(“DOE”) resources.
consequence, the ICAC commenced an investigation into the allegations in January
2020. Pursuant to s 38 of the
, that investigation was
conducted jointly with the DOE.
[12] On or about
17 January 2020, the Chief Executive of the DOE directed the appellant not
to attend the School or to contact any
staff member of the School and the
appellant was involuntarily transferred to alternative duties in Darwin. On or
2020, the ICAC gave the appellant notice of a joint
investigation into the appellant’s conduct.
23 June 2020, Mr Fleming, as ICAC, issued a notice pursuant to
s 34(1) of the
requiring the appellant to appear before him
for examination on 4 August 2020. The notice informed the appellant that
be questioned in relation to her role in the financial management of
the School during the period that she held the role of principal.
On the same
date, the ICAC, under the hand of Mr Fleming, issued a direction to the
appellant pursuant to s 147 of the
that she not disclose to
any person the existence of the joint investigation, or any information given to
her by the ICAC.
examination did not proceed before Mr Fleming on 4 August 2020 as
anticipated. On 3 August 2020, Mr Fleming delegated all
investigative powers and functions under the
Wild QC (“Mr Wild”) as Deputy Commissioner. The same day,
a revised notice was issued to the appellant requiring
her to attend before
Mr Wild for examination. The appellant was examined by Mr Wild on
4 August 2020 to 6 August 2020, and on 29
October 2020 to
30 October 2020 with the assistance of counsel assisting. As part of the
investigation, Mr Wild received 73 exhibits
and heard evidence from 12
[15] On or about
31 October 2020, the appellant provided to the ICAC, through her lawyers, a
number of documents addressing those
areas of questioning that the appellant
understood to be the key subjects of the investigation. These included a list
of purchases
made by the appellant using her personal credit card and the School
debit card which she said were made for official School purposes,
addressing allegations of nepotism in employment within the School and documents
setting out the challenges which the
appellant faced in her role as a principal
of a remote school.
November 2020, the appellant’s lawyers provided an interim response to the
matters put to her during her examination.
This interim response was addressed
to Mr Wild as the Deputy Commissioner.
[17] By letter
dated 6 May 2021, the ICAC gave the appellant notice that he intended to prepare
an investigation report pursuant to
s 50 of the
in which he
was considering making adverse findings against her. The appellant was provided
with a draft copy of the proposed investigation
report and was invited to
provide a response by 31 May 2021. That letter was signed by
Mr Fleming.
[18] On 12 May
2021, the appellant’s lawyers wrote to the ICAC requesting the full
transcript of the appellant’s examination
as well as copies of all
exhibits. In response to that request, a list of 52 documents was provided to
the appellant on 17 May 2021
and the appellant was invited to make arrangements
to attend the office of the ICAC to inspect those documents.
[19] On 27 May
2021, the appellant’s lawyers wrote to Mr Fleming requesting an
extension of time of two weeks for the appellant
to respond to the draft
investigation report. By email dated 28 May 2021, Mr Fleming responded,
refusing that application, but granting
an extension of time for the appellant
to respond to the draft investigation report by 9 June 2021.
[20] On 4 June
2021, the appellant’s lawyers sought access to certain exhibits that were
tendered by the appellant during the
examination. Those materials were provided
the same day. On the same day, the Chief Executive of the DOE was provided with
of the draft investigation report.
[21] On 9 June
2021, the appellant’s lawyers provided a 241 page response to the draft
investigation report consisting of a
five page cover letter, a copy of the draft
investigation report marked-up with the appellant’s response to each
allegation,
and 13 appendices containing additional information.
[22] On 2 July
2021, the ICAC provided the Chief Executive of the DOE with a copy of the final
investigation report pursuant to s
. This section
empowers the ICAC to provide an investigation report to a responsible authority
for a public body or public officer
whose conduct is the subject of the
investigation. In summary, the investigation report concluded that the
appellant had engaged
in “corrupt conduct” within the meaning of
s 10(2) of the
through various aspects of her financial
management of the School, manipulation of student attendance figures to inflate
future funding,
misuse of publicly funded travel, failure to comply with
policies of the DOE about school governance, and failure to properly manage
conflicts of interest when employing family members at the School.
[23] On 5 July
2021, a public statement about the investigation and its outcome was published
on the ICAC’s website. Section
permits the
publication of a public statement for one or more purposes specified in that
section. The public statement was not identical
to the investigation report,
but contained largely the same content.
The appellant’s
claim in the proceeding
appellant claims that the publication and promotion of the public statement to
the general public caused her to suffer loss.
She alleges that this loss was
suffered as a result of misfeasance in public office by the second respondent,
Mr Fleming.
appellant’s claim against Mr Fleming in the statement of claim (which
is the basis for her claim against all of the respondents)
is summarised in the
judgment of the Supreme
(a) The appellant pleads that the public statement contains allegations against
the appellant that are false or misleading, in particular:
allegation that the appellant falsified student attendance records;
allegation that the appellant diverted and misapplied school funds away from
educational resources and towards personal use;
allegation that the appellant undertook unjustified or improper travel at the
School’s expense;
allegation that the appellant failed to provide leadership and exhibited
controlling behaviour, in that the School Council failed
to hold a number of
required Council meetings in 2018 and 2019, and failed to maintain proper and
accurate minutes; and
allegation that the appellant employed four immediate family members under
conditions or in circumstances that were unfavourable
to the DOE or the School
(b) The appellant pleads that:
Fleming either knew these allegations were false or misleading, or was reckless
as to that fact;
was not provided with full and adequate particulars sufficient for her to
understand what was alleged against her and to provide
a comprehensive
failure to provide these particulars “was made deliberately”;
public statement and the investigation report do not articulate any basis upon
which it could be concluded that the appellant’s
denials of the
allegations were unbelievable.
(c) The appellant also pleads that Mr Fleming denied her procedural fairness
a decision to publish the public statement to the public at large without giving
the appellant prior notice and an opportunity
to be heard in relation to whether
it should be published;
giving the appellant a reasonable opportunity to respond to the draft
investigation report; and
including a fair summary of the appellant’s responses to the draft
investigation report in either the final investigation
report or the public
(d) The appellant pleads that the publication of the public statement was
unlawful by reason of the above matters and also because:
was not issued for a purpose authorised by s 55(2) of the
contained adverse findings against the appellant, which is not permitted by
s 55(2) of the
publication of the public statement was an unreasonable exercise of power under
s 55(2) of the
Fleming failed to consider relevant material, namely the appellant’s
responses to the allegations made in the draft investigation
(e) The appellant pleads that:
making of the investigation report was unlawful because of the above matters and
because Mr Fleming failed to consider relevant
material, namely the
appellant’s responses to the allegations made in the draft investigation
reason of the matters pleaded, Mr Fleming engaged in the tort of misfeasance in
public office in publishing and promoting the public
publication
of the public statement has caused the appellant harm;
Fleming intended to cause the appellant harm or was recklessly indifferent to
causing her harm;
Fleming did not act in good faith as he made no real attempt to establish
whether the allegations were true before publishing the
public statement, and he
made no real attempt to comply with the applicable law, including the
requirement for procedural fairness;
appellant also alleges that Mr Fleming had ulterior motives of
“convenience and efficiency” in preparing the investigation
and public statement, and in publishing the public statement.
Ground 1: Unnecessarily constrained interpretation of ‘bad
[25] In Ground 1
of the appeal, the appellant contends that the Supreme Court adopted and applied
an impermissibly narrow meaning
of bad faith concerned exclusively with
Mr Fleming’s subjective state of mind.
appellant contends that “bad faith” is open to a range of meanings
and in the context of s 155(5) of the
is capable of being
satisfied by showing that Mr Fleming made no real attempt to determine whether
or not the serious allegations
against the appellant were true before publishing
them. The appellant contends that the Supreme Court considered only the
of Mr Fleming’s subjective state of
and only as to whether or not
he was acting in accordance with the
and that in doing so, the
Supreme Court failed to engage with the substantial reasons showing that
Mr Fleming made no real attempt
to determine the truth.
[27] I deal
first with the contention that the Supreme Court adopted and applied an
impermissibly narrow meaning of bad faith concerned
exclusively with
Mr Fleming’s subjective state of mind.
reviewing the authorities on “good faith” and “bad
faith”, and analyzing the statutory scheme in
the Act, the primary judge
satisfied that the terms “good faith” and “bad faith”,
as they apply to the investigative and reporting
functions of the ICAC relevant
to the present application, refer to a purely subjective state of mind on the
part of the ICAC. The
ICAC, in performing those functions, will be acting in
good faith where he or she honestly believes that they are acting in accordance
with the terms of the
. Conversely, he or she will be acting in
bad faith where they do not hold such an honest belief. A demonstrated failure
to conscientiously
perform his or her functions as the ICAC may evidence that
the ICAC does not honestly believe that they are acting in accordance
terms of the
, but such a failure does not, of itself, establish
[75] The question posed in the present application then becomes: are there
real reasons (as opposed to ephemeral or insubstantial
reasons) for believing
that Mr Fleming did not honestly believe that he was acting in accordance with
at the time he did those things of which the applicant
appellant contends that the concept of “bad faith” includes an
objective standard of behavior, relying on
Mid Density
Developments
Pty Ltd v Rockdale Municipal
in which the
Full Court of the Federal Court held that, in the context of a statutory good
faith defence provision similar to
s 155(1), good faith was
not satisfied by “
honest ineptitude
”; rather, there must be
at least a “
real attempt
” by the authority to exercise its
exercise of caution and diligence to be expected
of an honest person of ordinary
rejecting that argument in the court below, the primary judge said (inter
[71] It would
be inconsistent with this statutory framework to hold that, in order for the
ICAC to be performing his or her functions
in good faith, he or she must conduct
their investigation in a certain way or to a certain judicially determined
standard. This speaks
strongly against adopting a broad interpretation of the
terms “good faith” and “bad faith” and incorporating
objective element such as that which was held to apply in Mid Density
Developments. In addition, the incorporation of an objective
standard, the
content of which is judicially formulated with the benefit of hindsight, into
these terms would be likely to have a
dampening effect on the ICAC’s
efficacy in achieving its statutory object.
[31] In my view,
there is no error in this reasoning or the conclusion reached by the primary
judge at [74] – [75]. His Honour
correctly stated that the meaning to be
given to “bad faith” in the context of a statutory immunity
provision will depend
on the nature of the act or omission alleged and the
elucidation of the purpose of the statute, particularly as it pertains to the
alleged acts or omissions; and that it was therefore “impossible to
attempt to succinctly define the concepts of ‘good
‘bad faith’ in s 155 without recourse to the statutory context and
the acts or omissions alleged by the
appellant.”
followed a careful analysis of the relevant statutory
leading to the
analysis and conclusions at [70] to [75].
appellant’s submission relies on authorities relating to the meaning of
“good faith” in the context of
statutory defences similar to that in
s 55(1) of the
which provides:
(1) A person is not civilly or criminally liable for an act done or omitted to
be done by the person in good faith when acting, or
purportedly acting, in an
official capacity.
submission assumes that anything that does not amount to affirmative “good
faith” for the purpose of the protective
provision in s 155(1) must,
ipso facto, amount to “bad faith” for the purpose of the leave
provisions in sub-sections
155(4) and (5). That assumption is not appropriate:
the protective provision in s 155(1) and the leave provisions in
s 155(4) and
(5) serve different purposes. The fact that “
” has been held not to be sufficient to establish
“good faith” for the purpose of a statutory good faith defence
provision similar to s 155(1), does not mean that someone who demonstrates
honest ineptitude
” must necessarily be acting in “bad
faith” for the purpose of the leave provisions in ss 155(4) and (5). None
of the authorities cited by the appellant support the notion that a person who
engaged in an honest attempt to exercise power, albeit
incompetently, can be
said to have “acted in bad faith”.
[34] In any
event, as counsel for the respondents pointed out in written submissions, this
argument is largely irrelevant to the appellant’s
case. The statement of
claim filed by the appellant does not allege honest ineptitude or failure to
exercise the caution and diligence
to be expected of an honest person of
ordinary prudence, or breach of any other objectively defined standard of
conduct. The appellant
pleads that Mr Fleming did not act in good faith as
he made no real attempt to establish whether the allegations were true before
publishing the public statement, and he made no real attempt to comply with the
applicable law, including the requirement for procedural
fairness; also that Mr
Fleming had ulterior motives of “convenience and efficiency” in
preparing the investigation report
and public statement, and in publishing the
public statement, and that he intended to cause the appellant harm or was
indifferent to causing her harm (ie he foresaw
These are all
subjectively defined allegations of bad faith. Accordingly, even if the primary
judge erred in his analysis (and
in my view he did not) he was not in error in
holding that that “bad faith” was concerned with a subjective state
mind when applied “to the investigative and reporting functions of the
ICAC relevant to the present application”.
[35] In this
context I note that on the hearing of the appeal, counsel for the appellant
conceded (appropriately) that the appellant’s
claim was for misfeasance in
public office. I have had the benefit of reading a draft of the judgment of
Reeves J and respectfully
agree with his Honour’s analysis of the
tort of misfeasance in public office, his reasoning and conclusion that the
has not satisfied the onus of establishing the pre-condition in
[36] It follows
that the primary judge did not “hold the appellant to an unnecessarily
onerous standard of proving the subjective
state of mind of Mr Fleming
before even commencing proceedings” as contended by the appellant. Not
only did the primary judge
not err in holding that for the purposes of the
present proceeding, “bad faith” was concerned with a subjective
of mind; the primary judge did not require the appellant to prove the
subjective state of mind of Mr Fleming before commencing proceedings.
Honour said:
should not be taken as suggesting that the Court must be satisfied that a
proposed defendant has acted in bad faith. Such a finding
can only be made, if
appropriate, after a hearing of the merits of the substantive proceedings has
appellant contends further that taking this unduly narrow view of what is meant
by “bad faith” resulted in the
Court disregarding evidence showing
that Mr Fleming made no real attempt to determine the truth of the serious
allegations of corrupt
conduct levelled against the appellant; made no real
attempt to comply with the law; and acted with an ulterior motive. This
has not been made out.
[38] First, the
primary judge directed himself to the correct enquiry under s 155(5),
namely, whether he was satisfied that there
were substantial reasons for
believing the person (Mr Fleming) acted in bad faith. There is no error in
the primary judge’s
formulation of the
The question
posed in the present application then becomes: are there real reasons (as
opposed to ephemeral or insubstantial reasons)
for believing that Mr Fleming did
not honestly believe that he was acting in accordance with the
at the time he did those things of which the applicant complains?
[39] Second, the
primary judge did not disregard evidence showing that Mr Fleming made no
real attempt to determine the truth of the
serious allegations of corrupt
conduct levelled against the appellant; made no real attempt to comply with the
law; and/or acted
with an ulterior motive. His Honour addressed the
appellant’s complaints in the following
applicant’s complaint is that the ICAC either knew that the allegations
were false or was recklessly indifferent to the
truth or falsity of the
allegations. I accept that if the applicant shows that there are substantial
reasons for believing that the
ICAC had one of those states of mind at the
relevant time, then leave under s 155(5) should be granted. I would, however,
caveat that proof that the ICAC could (or even, in my estimation,
should) have arrived at a different conclusion regarding the allegations
the applicant does not, of itself, demonstrate bad faith on the part of the
ICAC. The present application is not a form of
merits review of the ICAC’s
decision. It must be accepted, however, that if all the evidence was one way, in
favour of the
innocence of the applicant, and the ICAC nevertheless determined
that the applicant was guilty of misconduct, this may be relevant
to drawing an
inference that the ICAC had acted in bad faith.
The allegations to which the applicant refers are, of course, those made
against her and about which adverse findings were made against
her in the IR and
PS. These allegations are set out at paragraph (a) at [16] above. The applicant
submitted the following “critical
circumstances” demonstrate that
there are substantial reasons to believe that the ICAC held one of the required
states of mind:
(a) the nature and extent of the false and misleading content in the IR and
(b) the irrational or incomplete reasoning contained in the IR and PS in support
of the allegations;
(c) the general and conclusory way in which the allegations are expressed in the
IR and PS without reference to specific incidents
or factual allegations;
(d) the ease with which the respondents could have checked the truth and
accuracy of the content of the IR and PS by reference to
the extensive
investigative powers of the respondents, and the persons and records identified
by the applicant as relevant;
(e) the steps taken within the investigation which prevented the applicant from
being able to effectively respond to the allegations
the applicant only limited and misleading information about the subject-matter
of the investigation in advance of her examination;
prohibiting
the applicant from speaking to Milingimbi School staff or others about the
allegations;
the applicant from Milingimbi School and with it her ability to access to
relevant records;
the allegations in general and conclusory terms in the IR and PS without
reference to specific incidents of facts, and
failing to identify the material
facts underlying the allegations;
restricting
the applicant’s access to evidence relied upon by the ICAC; and
the applicant’s time to respond;
(f) the simplistic engagement of the IR and PS with complex issues;
(g) the failure of the IR and PS to identify and meaningfully grapple with the
applicant’s response to the allegations given
during her examination and
in response to the draft proposed IR and PS;
(h) the failure of the IR and PS to offer any serious explanation for why
evidence of the applicant (including documentary evidence)
was rejected save
asserting in general and impenetrable terms that her explanations (not
identified in the IR or PS) were against
the “weight of the
evidence” (also not identified in the IR or PS) and could not be believed;
(i) the failure to obtain evidence from relevant staff at Milingimbi School
involved in the financial decision-making and other conduct
the subject of the
investigation.
At the outset it must be observed that any analysis of the importance of the
“critical circumstances” identified by the
applicant is greatly
hampered by the breadth of the description of some of those circumstances and
lack of particulars. For example,
the submission that “the nature and
extent of the false and misleading content in the report” is relevant to
an inference as to the ICAC’s state of mind is unhelpful without
identification of the particular content of the report that
is said to be false
and misleading, and an analysis of why that is said to be so. This observation
applies to “critical circumstances”
(a), (b), (c), (e)(i), (e)(iv),
(f), (g), and (i). In order to found an inference of bad faith, a failure on the
part of the ICAC
to interview persons or refer to documents must be shown to be
a relevant failure, that is, a failure to interview persons who could
relevant information or to refer to a document containing relevant information.
The failure of the applicant to provide particulars
of those allegations makes
it impossible to form a judgment about whether any such failure on the part of
the ICAC may found a reasonable
belief that the ICAC acted in bad faith.
[40] That is to
say, the primary judge did not ignore evidence that Mr Fleming made no real
attempt to investigate the serious allegations
against the appellant; made no
real attempt to comply with the law; and/or acted with an ulterior motive.
Rather, his Honour pointed
out that the lack of particularity in the
appellant’s pleading of these matters made it “impossible to form a
reasonable belief that the ICAC acted in bad faith”.
[41] It seems to
me that the primary judge was almost certainly correct in his observation
[t]his broad-brush approach to identification of the precise
content of the IR and PS to which the applicant refers, and her similar
to demonstrating that the material can found an inference that the ICAC acted in
bad faith, is probably a function of the
applicant’s error in identifying
the approach required for the Court to grant leave under s 155(5) of the
as being akin to that required in determining an application for
summary dismissal of proceedings ...
[42] Given this
fatal flaw in the case advanced by the appellant before the primary judge, the
primary judge made the following observations
with which I respectfully
In written submissions, the applicant stated that a number of
the “critical circumstances” would “only be explored
trial”, an approach which ignores the fact that the onus falls upon her in
the present application, in order for her
to be allowed to proceed to trial
against Mr Fleming, to demonstrate that there are substantial reasons to believe
that Mr Fleming
acted in bad faith. It is no answer to the onus imposed on the
applicant by the legislature to say “we will explore it at trial”,
just as it is no answer to say that the matter may be explored through discovery
and interrogatories.
appellant contends that the primary judge erred in adopting this approach
because “the exercise of statutory power
may be subjectively dishonest
whether or not the person believes they act in accordance with the governing
legislation, as in the
case where they hold an ulterior motive”, citing in
Three Rivers District Council v Bank of England (No
Nyoni v Shire of
Kellerberrin
[44] There was
no error in the approach adopted by the primary judge. The quoted passage is
simply part of the primary judge’s
application of the test which the
primary judge correctly articulated: are there real reasons (as opposed to
ephemeral or insubstantial
reasons) for believing that Mr Fleming did not
honestly believe that he was acting in accordance with the
the time he did those things of which the appellant
Ground 3: The primary judge applied the wrong test in
determining whether there were substantial grounds to believe the ICAC had
in bad faith
appellant contends that the primary judge erred in imposing too onerous a
standard of satisfaction when determining whether
there were substantial reasons
for believing the ICAC had acted in bad faith.
appellant contends that
Police Administration Act 1978
provides the only Territory
law comparable to s 155(5) of the
in that both provisions
require a prior grant of leave to plead and run a particular kind of allegation
to trial, and contends that
under s 148F, the party seeking leave need only
make out a prima facie case:
Secretary v Northern Territory of
[47] Section
148F(2) of the
is in the following terms:
(2) A person who makes a police tort claim against the Territory in any legal
proceeding may join the
who allegedly committed the tort as a party to the proceeding only if:
(a) the Territory denies it would be vicariously liable for the alleged tort if
it were established the
had committed the tort; or
grants leave for the claim to include a claim for damages in the nature of
punitive damages.
the Associate
Justice held, on an application for leave to amend a pleading to claim punitive
requirements to secure a grant of leave to claim punitive damages, such damages
are awarded in addition to general damages
where that is considered necessary
for the purposes of punishing inappropriate conduct, for reflecting the
Court’s disapproval
of that conduct and to deter recurrences. It is not a
cause of action or relief in its own right and is merely additional damages
payable in respect of the relief which the Plaintiffs would otherwise be
entitled to. Whether or not to grant leave is a matter
of discretion and the
discretion is at large. However, the party seeking leave has the onus to satisfy
the Court that there is sufficient
evidence to establish an entitlement to
punitive damages.
The Court is not concerned with the merits of a claim for
punitive damages or to assess the credibility of the evidence relied on.
only necessary for the claimant to make out a prima facie case and therefore the
available evidence is to be taken at its highest
in favour of the
Subject to a proper pleading to address the embarrassment evident in
paragraph 31(a)(i) as it currently stands, I think there is a
prima facie case
of entitlement to punitive damages. The evidence can support a finding that the
police indiscriminately pointed
their weapons at community members. Although I
acknowledge that this is based only on one side of the story, and the assault
be justified thereby negating any liability for damages, on the evidence
there is no justification for the indiscriminate pointing
of weapons at persons.
In those circumstances, given the generous and favourable view required to be
taken of the evidence for prima facie case purposes,
I am of the view that it
can be a basis for a finding that the conduct is in conscious and contumelious
disregard of the various
Plaintiffs’ right.
This is not limited to
infant Plaintiffs and does not depend merely on children witnessing police
activities. I am prepared to give
leave limited to that at least.
appellant’s reliance on
is misplaced. Section 148F of
does not impose a test that is equivalent to s 155(5) of the
s 148F does not require, as a prerequisite to
a grant of leave, that the Court form a state of satisfaction about the grounds
to establish the case for which leave is required: s 155(5) of
does. Section 148F(2)(b) of the
simply prohibits
certain proceedings unless “the court grants leave for the claim to
include a claim for damages in the nature
of punitive damages”. Under
s 155(5), the Supreme Court is prohibited from giving leave to a person to
issue proceedings alleging
that a person acted in bad faith when acting, or
purportedly acting, in an official capacity, unless the Court is satisfied there
are substantial reasons for believing the person acted in bad faith. The two
sections are not functionally equivalent – or
even similar.
[50] The primary
judge applied the correct test, that is to say that set out in s 155(5),
and did not impose too onerous a standard
of satisfaction when determining
whether there were substantial reasons for believing the ICAC had acted in bad
faith. The primary
judge set out the approach to be followed in making that
determination as
present respondents did adduce affidavit evidence, it was directed towards the
proposition that the conduct the applicant
complains of was conduct of Mr Wild
and not that of Mr Fleming. It is sufficient for present purposes to observe
that in a case where
no evidence addressing bad faith is adduced by a proposed
defendant and the applicant’s case is based on the drawing of inferences
from the evidence adduced,
the proper approach, in my view, is that such
inferences as may reasonably be drawn in favour of the applicant should be
To attempt to adjudicate between competing inferences, in those
circumstances, would be to place a burden of proving the ultimate
issue of bad
faith on an applicant in the leave proceeding.
appellant concedes that this is the proper approach to determining the threshold
question in s 155(5), but contends that
his Honour “fell into error
between that starting point and the Court’s ultimate determination that
the totality of the
evidence did not afford ‘
substantial reasons for
’ Mr Fleming acted in bad
However, the
appellant has not demonstrated any error in the primary judge’s reasoning
appellant does not take issue with the primary judge’s explanation of the
term “substantial” at
As all parties
accepted, the word “substantial” is a word that is susceptible to
more than one meaning depending on the
context in which it is found. In the
context of s 155(5) of the
, it means that the evidentiary basis
advanced by a plaintiff for leave to be granted to commence proceedings alleging
bad faith must
be such as to satisfy the Court that there are real reasons (as
distinct from ephemeral or insubstantial reasons) to believe that
defendant has acted in bad faith. This inevitably requires the Court to form a
judgment as to whether the evidence presented
in support of the application
satisfies this requirement.
[53] In the
Court below the appellant relied on cases dealing with summary judgment. The
primary judge correctly held that the principles
relating to summary judgment
were not applicable to an application under s 155(4)
opinion, little assistance in determining the proper approach to the operation
of s 155(5) can be derived from the summary dismissal
cases. As submitted by the
respondents, the presumption underlying the summary dismissal cases is that
ordinarily a litigant should
be permitted to litigate their case in the ordinary
manner. This may be contrasted with the presumption underlying s 155(5), which
is that a litigant should not be permitted to even commence proceedings alleging
bad faith unless they demonstrate that there are
substantial reasons for
believing that the proposed defendant has acted in bad faith.
I respectfully agree with his Honour’s reasoning.
[54] The primary
judge went on to consider the available evidence noting:
determination of whether substantial reasons exist for believing that a person
to whom s 155 applies has acted in bad faith must
be based upon evidence which
is placed before the Court. The mere fact that allegations are made in a SOC, as
in the present case,
or in some other form, cannot of itself establish that
there are substantial reasons for forming the required belief. If a mere
were sufficient, the clear legislative intention found in s 155 would
be rendered nugatory. The requirement that the Court achieve
the necessary level
of satisfaction based upon evidence obliges the Court, by necessary implication,
to assess the evidence to determine
whether it can support the level of
satisfaction required. This also means that in making a determination whether
the evidence adduced
does support the level of satisfaction required, the Court
will not take into account that further evidence may be uncovered as a
discovery or interrogatories.
It is not to the point that if leave is granted to the applicant, the onus of
proving that he is entitled to the benefit of the defence
in s 155 will fall
upon Mr Fleming. The fact that a legal onus may be held by one party or another
in the substantive proceedings
cannot logically affect the question whether the
evidence before the Court on an application for leave under s 155(4) satisfies
test found in s 155(5).
Again, I respectfully agree with the primary judge’s reasoning.
[55] His Honour
Considering
all the evidence together, I am not satisfied that there are substantial reasons
to believe that Mr Fleming acted in bad
faith in the conduct of the
investigation into the applicant or in the preparation or publication of the IR
or the PS. The application
for leave under s 155(4) of the
is refused.
appellant has demonstrated no error in this reasoning process: in particular,
the appellant has not shown that the primary
judge adopted too onerous a test
when determining whether there were substantial reasons to believe that the ICAC
had been guilty
of acting in bad faith.
appellant complains that, contrary to the indication in
Sherrington NTSC
at [40] that the proper approach to making the determination required by
s 155(5) is that such inferences as may reasonably be drawn
in favour of
the appellant should be drawn, the Court below preferred alternative
explanations unfavourable to the appellant and
unsupported by evidence. The
appellant contends that the primary judge adopted this approach at
Sherrington NTSC
at [120], [123] and
[58] Paragraph
Sherrington NTSC
is in the following terms:
respondents correctly observe, the verbatim statement attributed to Mr Fleming
did not commit to providing any reports. In
any event, and perhaps more
importantly, the applicant cannot demonstrate that the investigation into her
conduct was one of the
matters to which Mr Fleming referred. The statements
attributed to Mr Fleming in the news article cannot reasonably raise an
that Mr Fleming had pre-judged the outcome of the investigation into
the applicant’s conduct.
paragraph does not contain any inference drawn unfavourable to the appellant.
To say that the statements “cannot
reasonably raise an inference” in
favour of the appellant is not the same as drawing an inference unfavourable to
the appellant.
The primary judge drew no inference. Further, the words:
“the applicant cannot demonstrate that the investigation into her
was one of the matters to which Mr Fleming referred” is a reference
to the fact that the onus was on the appellant
to adduce sufficient evidence to
satisfy the test under s 155(5).
[60] Paragraphs
[123] and [124] are in the following terms:
The applicant submitted
that the fact the PS makes no reference to any investigation or enquiry
undertaken by the ICAC to verify or
disprove any of the matters set out by her
in her response to the draft IR, together with the failure of the respondents to
any evidence of such investigations in the present application, support
the inference that the investigation against her was prejudged
and that Mr
Fleming had adopted an inflexible timetable to conclude the investigation. As
noted above, there was no obligation cast
on the ICAC by the provisions of the
or otherwise to set out his reasoning for reaching his
conclusions in the PS (or in the IR). This submission also overlooks the fact
that the applicant has the obligation to satisfy me that there are substantial
reasons for believing that Mr Fleming acted in bad
The final matter raised by the applicant under this head of her application
is that the “publication of the public statement
was intended...to cause a
sensation”. The applicant submitted that Mr Fleming had resigned from
his office amid criticism of
his performance and that the publication of a
“sensationalist report making serious allegations against a named
individual”
could be seen as part of a strategy to divert the media away
from internal scandals within his office and from the personal criticisms
against him, and to demonstrate positive performance outcomes by him in his
office. In my opinion, this reasoning is based upon
speculation rather than a
logical process. It could not reasonably be inferred from the material put
before this Court that Mr Fleming
engaged in a deliberate process of attempting
to divert criticism of his performance in the office of the ICAC by designedly
reports falsely finding the applicant had engaged in misconduct for
the purpose of deflecting criticism of himself in his office.
[61] In [123]
the primary judge once again (correctly) refers to the onus being on the
appellant to satisfy the threshold test under
s 155(5): in that paragraph
the primary judge does not draw any inference unfavourable to the
[62] In [124]
the primary judge says that the inference sought to be drawn by the appellant
“cannot reasonably be inferred from
the material put before the
Court”. In so saying, his Honour is applying the standard set out in [40]
of the judgment conceded
by the appellant to be the appropriate standard. A
refusal to draw an inference in favour of the appellant because it cannot
be drawn on the available evidence is not the same as drawing an
inference unfavourable to the appellant: it does not involve drawing
inference at all.
appellant also complains that the Court below required the appellant establish
that the investigation was “
so inadequate as to effectively not amount
to an investigation at
or the evidence
all one way
before giving
consideration to complaints about the
investigation.
Those paragraphs
of the judgment read as follows:
The applicant’s complaint is
one regarding the sufficiency of the investigation undertaken by the ICAC. While
the ICAC is given
broad discretion in the way that he or she conducts an
investigation, that does not mean that a finding that there are substantial
reasons for believing that the ICAC has acted in bad faith with regard to the
sufficiency of an investigation could never be substantiated.
It is possible to
contemplate a case, hypothetically at least, where the supposed investigation
was so inadequate as to effectively
not amount to an investigation at all. The
existence of such an inadequate investigation would be evidence capable of
inference that the ICAC did not hold an honest belief that he or she
was acting in accordance with the terms of the
in conducting the
supposed investigation. This would not be inconsistent with the object of the
. It need hardly be said that the ICAC would not be acting
consistently with the object of the
by purporting to make
findings of wrongdoing without conducting any, or any real, investigation.
The applicant’s complaint is that the ICAC either knew that the
allegations were false or was recklessly indifferent to the
truth or falsity of
the allegations. I accept that if the applicant shows that there are substantial
reasons for believing that the
ICAC had one of those states of mind at the
relevant time, then leave under s 155(5) should be granted. I would, however,
caveat that proof that the ICAC could (or even, in my estimation,
should) have arrived at a different conclusion regarding the allegations
the applicant does not, of itself, demonstrate bad faith on the part of the
ICAC. The present application is not a form of
merits review of the ICAC’s
decision. It must be accepted, however, that if all the evidence was one way, in
favour of the
innocence of the applicant, and the ICAC nevertheless determined
that the applicant was guilty of misconduct, this may be relevant
to drawing an
inference that the ICAC had acted in bad faith.
paragraphs follow logically from the finding by the primary judge that, in order
to show bad faith in the investigation
and reporting functions of the ICAC, the
appellant would necessarily have to show dishonesty in the sense that the ICAC
did not hold
an honest belief that he or she was acting in accordance with the
terms of the
in conducting the supposed investigation. This
finding is the subject of the unsuccessful first ground of appeal. That ground
appeal being unsuccessful, the challenge to these two paragraphs of the
decision also fails.
Ground 2: failure to engage with the
appellant’s arguments
appellant’s final contention is that the primary judge did not engage with
the appellant’s arguments but, rather,
in the case of seven arguments
advanced by the appellant, misinterpreted the argument, summarily rejected the
argument without reference
to its substance or overlooked the argument all
together. This contention cannot be accepted.
appellant contends that “at the heart of the appellant’s case is a
complaint that Mr Fleming published a series
of extremely serious allegations
against the appellant which allegations are false or misleading”; and that
“Mr Fleming
did so knowingly or recklessly indifferent to their
truth”. The appellant contends that, after finding that the Court’s
consideration of a number of the grounds was hampered by lack of particularity
and broad-brush
allegations”
the Court did
not go on to consider each of the detailed examples given in support the
considerations.
response, the respondents submit that the sub-grounds advanced in relation to
this ground of appeal cannot succeed as the
matters which constitute the alleged
“detailed examples” given to the primary judge amounted to the
appellant seeking
merits review of findings of fact by the ICAC.
appellant contends that merits review is an evaluation of the merits of a
decision for its own ends whereas the appellant
was challenging
Mr Fleming’s conclusions in order to show that Mr Fleming was
recklessly indifferent to, or did not make a
real attempt to determine, the
truth of the allegations before publishing them.
[69] However,
the appellant’s reasoning for this ground relied on an asserted absence of
persuasive reasoning in the Investigation
Report and the public statement. As
the primary judge identified:
does not oblige the ICAC to provide reasons for the
findings of fact in a report or public statement,
(b) no such obligation arises at common law, and
(c) it is particularly inappropriate to import into the administrative context
obligations from the judicial context to expose a
decision-maker’s reasons
for preferring one tranche of evidence over
As the primary judge
It can hardly be argued that a failure of the ICAC to go further than the law
requires in providing information in the report is evidence
of bad faith on the
part of the ICAC, no matter how useful further information may be to a party
adversely mentioned in the report.
[70] Further,
the appellant bore the onus of satisfying the primary judge of the condition
precedent in s 155(5). Attempting to rely
on a purported absence of
reasoning in the Investigation Report was effectively reversing that onus.
[71] There is no
error in the reasoning of the primary judge or the conclusions reached. This
ground of appeal must fail. I add,
for completeness in relation to this ground
that I agree with the detailed analysis and conclusions of Reeves J on this
[123] to [136] below.
[72] I agree
that this appeal should be dismissed for the reasons given by Reeves J. I
note in any event that both his Honour and
Kelly J are ad idem insofar as Kelly
J agrees with the analysis of the tort of misfeasance in public office contained
in the judgment
of Reeves J and with his Honour’s reasoning and conclusion
that the appellant has not satisfied the onus of establishing the
pre-condition
Independent Commissioner Against Corruption Act
Introduction
December 2021 Ms Jennifer Sherrington filed a writ with an annexed statement of
claim together with a summons that sought
the following order:
plaintiff has leave pursuant to
section 155(4)
Independent
Commissioner against Corruption Act 2017
to allege bad faith against the
First and Second Defendants in the manner pleaded and particularised in the
Statement of Claim filed
in this matter.
Section 155
Independent Commissioner Against Corruption Act
Protection from liability – acting in official
(1) A person is not civilly or criminally liable for an act done or omitted
to be done by the person in good faith when acting, or
purportedly acting, in an
official capacity.
(2) Subsection (1) does not affect any liability the Territory would, apart
from that subsection, have for the act or omission.
(3) This section does not derogate from Part VIIA of the
Administration Act 1978
(4) If a person is alleged to have acted in bad faith when acting, or
purportedly acting, in an official capacity, a civil or criminal
proceeding for
the act may only be brought by leave of the Supreme Court.
(5) The Supreme Court is not to grant leave unless satisfied there are
substantial reasons for believing the person acted in bad
faith. (emphasis
defendants to whom this proposed order referred were the Independent
Commissioner against Corruption (the ICAC), the first
defendant, and
Mr Kenneth Fleming, the second defendant, the previous occupant of that
[76] Since the
office of the ICAC is not established under the
person capable of being sued, that office could not be sued in that capacity. It
follows that the first defendant was
not properly joined as a party in this
proceeding. Accordingly an amendment should be made to reflect that fact.
However, this deficit
is not fatal to this appeal because Mr Fleming, as an
individual, is capable of being sued whether personally, or as the holder of
that office.
Sherrington’s application was heard by the primary Judge and
. Because that was an
interlocutory judgment, Ms Sherrington required leave to appeal the
decision. That leave was subsequently
Sherrington’s appeal now comes before this Court. For the reasons that
follow, I consider it should be dismissed.
[79] The factual
background to this appeal is conveniently summarised in the
judgment of Kelly J
The grounds of appeal
Sherrington’s notice of appeal contains three grounds of appeal. They may
be summarised as follows:
(a) Ground 1: that the primary Judge adopted a narrow construction of “bad
faith” by limiting it to Mr Fleming’s
subjective state of mind and
by not finding that it may be established objectively from his alleged failure
to make any “real
attempt (including through honest ineptitude)” to
determine whether or not the Serious Allegations were true before publishing
them in PS.
(b) Ground 2: that the primary Judge failed to properly consider her case in
several respects including her claims that inferences
of “bad faith”
could be drawn from various alleged failings in the conduct of the joint
investigation, including: the
failure to properly investigate her exculpatory
evidence; the alleged irrationality in the reasons provided in the PS; and the
circumstances
in which the PS was published including the indications within it
of personal animus towards her and Mr Fleming’s predetermination
alleged adverse findings.
(c) Ground 3: that the primary Judge adopted too onerous a standard with respect
to the expression “substantial reasons for
believing” in s 155(5) of
and thereby required her to “prove the state of mind
of Mr Fleming by way of preliminary trial before commencing proceedings”.
grounds 1 and 3 ([80](a) and (c) above) both raise issues about the construction
of s 155(5) of the
they will be considered together first,
followed by ground 2 ([80](b) above).
The bad faith pleaded in
the Statement of Claim
[82] However,
because the main focus of these three grounds of appeal is the bad faith pleaded
in the Statement of Claim (SoC), it
is convenient to outline the allegations
bearing on that topic before addressing them. The primary relief sought by Ms
Sherrington
in her SoC is damages including aggravated damages and exemplary
damages. She also sought declarations to the effect that the publication
promotion of the PS and the preparation of the IR were unlawful.
[83] Her claim
for damages is founded on Mr Fleming having, in his capacity as the Independent
Commissioner against Corruption, allegedly
committed the tort of misfeasance in
public office. That claim is put on the basis that, in publishing and promoting
the PS, Mr Fleming
allegedly did so intending to cause injury or harm to Ms
Sherrington (at [84] of the SoC). Alternatively it is put on the basis that
knew publishing and promoting the PS would cause injury or harm to her and in
doing so he knew, or was recklessly indifferent
to the fact that he acted beyond
power (at [85] and [86] of the SoC).
[84] The injury
or harm concerned is particularised in the SoC (at [83]) in the following
Particulars of harm
(1) Following publication of the PS there was considerable media reporting of
the Serious Allegations.
(2) Ms Sherrington was named in connection with those reports and the
Plaintiff’s image has been published in connection with
the Serious
Allegations.
(3) Media reporting of the Serious Allegations is ongoing, with an ABC
article referring to the Serious Allegations published on 9
November 2021.
(4) An internet search of Ms Sherrington’s name returns a large number
of hits associated with the Serious Allegations.
(5) Prior to publication, Ms Sherrington had a good reputation in the
Australian community, in the Milingimbi community, and in the
(6) Publication of the PS containing the Serious Allegations has adversely
affect Ms Sherrington’s reputation in the Australian
community, in the
Milingimbi community, and in the education industry.
(7) Publication of the PS containing the Serious Allegations has caused Ms
Sherrington significant embarrassment and shame.
(8) Publication of the PS containing the Serious Allegations has adversely
affected Ms Sherrington’s capacity to obtain future
employment.
addition, the following particulars were provided of the Intention and Knowledge
referred to in the two alternative forms
of misfeasance mentioned
publishing and promoting the PS, Mr Fleming intended to cause harm to Ms
Sherrington.
Particulars of intention
(1) Mr Fleming anonymised all persons mentioned in
the Notice of Tentative Findings except Ms Sherrington and her immediate family
members before publishing the PS.
(2) Mr Fleming made gratuitous allegations as to the suitability and
performance in employment of Ms Sherrington’s named family
(3) Notwithstanding that Allegation 5 was concerned with the conduct of the
Chair of the School Council, who was responsible for calling
and presiding at
Council meetings, and the Secretary, who was responsible for keeping minutes;
the PS did not identify these persons
or attribute improper conduct to those
(4) Notwithstanding that Mr Fleming accepted that the conduct comprising some
or all of the Serious Allegations may be systemic, Mr
Fleming elected not to
investigate others and to target Ms Sherrington alone.
(5) In the premise of particulars (1)-(4) Mr Fleming chose to make an example
of, and to personally and professionally shame and embarrass,
Ms Sherrington and
her immediate family, and to damage Ms Sherrington’s reputation and
capacity to obtain future employment.
(6) The PS contains florid and sensationalist language intended to attract
media attention and ensure wide dissemination to the general
public of the
Serious Allegations.
(7) In promoting the PS, Mr Fleming intended to ensure wide dissemination to
the general public of the Serious Allegations.
(8) Wide dissemination to the general public of the Serious Allegations
served only to shame and embarrass Ms Sherrington, and to
Sherrington’s reputation and employment prospects.
(9) Further and better particulars may be provided after discovery and/or
interrogatories.
publishing and promoting the PS, Mr Fleming knew or was recklessly indifferent
to the fact that he acted beyond power in that:
Fleming knew that the Serious Allegations were false or misleading as pleaded
and particularised above, or was recklessly indifferent
to that fact;
Fleming knew that Ms Sherrington was denied procedural fairness as pleaded and
particularised above, or was recklessly indifferent
Fleming knew that the PS was
ultra vires
or not issued for a purpose
within 55(2) of the
as pleaded and particularised above, or was
recklessly indifferent to that fact;
Fleming knew that the PS was an unreasonable exercise of power under s 55(2) of
as pleaded and particularised above, or was recklessly
indifferent to that fact;
Fleming knew that he had failed to consider relevant considerations before
publishing the PS as pleaded and particularised above,
or was recklessly
indifferent to that fact;
[86] The six
Serious Allegations mentioned in these particulars were set out earlier in the
SoC (at [50]) in the following terms:
The PS contains allegations
of a serious nature against Ms Sherrington which are false or misleading
(collectively, the
Serious Allegations
Particulars: School Attendance
(1) The PS alleges: (i) that Ms Sherrington falsified student attendance
records; (ii) that in 2019 Ms Sherrington effected 2997 dishonest
changes from
‘absent’ to ‘present’ and a further 1380 records were
altered in the same manner in an attempt
to secure $1.4 million in additional
funding (collectively,
Allegation 1
(2) The PS alleges: (i) that Ms Sherrington dishonestly manipulated effective
enrolment at Milingimbi School by targeting attendance
‘census’ weeks; and (ii) that Ms Sherrington did not do so to
improve educational outcomes for students (collectively,
Particulars: Principal’s Initiative
(3) The PS alleges that Ms Sherrington diverted and
misapplied school funds away from educational resources and towards personal
including extended travel to and accommodation in Darwin, motor vehicle
hire for personal shopping, quality dining and fast-food
purchases for herself,
family members and friends (
Allegation 3
Particulars: Travel
(4) The PS alleges that Ms
Sherrington: (i) undertook unjustified or improper travel at Milingimbi School
expense; and (ii) made excessive
and unjustified use of charter flights in lieu
of commercially available flights (collectively,
Allegation 4
Particulars: School Governance
(5) The PS alleges that Ms
Sherrington failed to provide leadership and exhibited controlling behaviour in
that the Milingimbi School
council failed to have the required meetings for the
2018 and 2019 school years, and failed to maintain proper and accurate minutes
Allegation 5
Particulars: Conflict of Interest
(6) The PS alleges that Ms
Sherrington employed four immediate family members under conditions or in
circumstances which were unfavourable
to the Department of Education or the
Milingimbi School Council (
Allegation 6
statement: “as pleaded and particularised above...” which appears
throughout the particulars of the Knowledge
above refers back to a series of
allegations contained in the paragraphs which immediately succeeded [50] of the
[88] First, as
to [86](a) of those particulars (see at [84] above), under the heading
“[Mr Fleming’s] knowledge/indifference
to truth” Ms
Sherrington pleaded (at [52] of the SoC): “on the premises pleaded at
paragraphs 53 to 64 herein, Mr Fleming
knew the Serious Allegations were false
or misleading, or alternatively was recklessly indifferent to their truth or
[89] In summary,
the nominated paragraphs of the SoC ([53] to [64]) made a series of allegations
that challenged the integrity of
the joint investigation (described at [11]
above) which led in turn to the production of the PS and the IR. They included
the following:
(a) At [56] that Mr Fleming deliberately imposed “information
restrictions” on Ms Sherrington to hamper her ability to
respond to the
Serious Allegations. Those restrictions were described earlier in the SoC (at
[34]) in the following terms:
During the Joint Investigation, Ms Sherrington had limited access to
documents or records sent, received or used by her as Principal
of Milingimbi
School staff (Information Restrictions).
Particulars
(1) Ms Sherrington was unable to attend Milingimbi School to review physical
records kept there by reason of the CE’s Direction
and subsequently by
reason of her cessation of employment;
(2) Ms Sherrington was unable to contact any staff member of Milingimbi
School to request records or information by reason of CE’s
Direction and
subsequently by reason of her cessation of employment;
(3) Ms Sherrington did not have access to the Milingimbi School servers where
records were stored electronically by Ms Sherrington
and Milingimbi School
(4) Ms Sherrington did not have access to the computer she used as Principal
of Milingimbi School and to which she saved various records;
(5) Ms Sherrington did not have access to her personal drive she used as
Principal of Milingimbi School and to which she saved various
(6) Before 6 October 2020, Ms Sherrington did not have access to the emails
she sent and received on her government email account
(work emails) for the
periods relevant to the investigation;
(7) On 6 October Ms Sherrington was given a USB by ICAC staff containing her
work emails for 2018 and from 2019;
(8) On 23 October 2020 Ms Sherrington requested access to her emails for
January 2019 to August 2019;
(9) Ms Sherrington was not given access to her emails from January 2019 to
August 2019.
(b) At [58] that Mr Fleming deliberately limited the information provided to Ms
Sherrington prior to the examination hearings (described
at [14] above) in order
to create an “information asymmetry” which hindered her opportunity
to conduct her own investigations
or enquiries to inform her answers during
those hearings.
(c) At [61] that Mr Fleming did not, in numerous respects, investigate, or
adequately investigate, the “exculpatory factual
matters” raised by
her in response to the six Serious Allegations. Four pages of particulars were
(d) At [62] and [63] that Mr Fleming deliberately did not provide her with
“full and adequate particulars” of the Serious
Allegations
sufficient for her to understand and respond to them. Three and a half pages of
particulars were provided.
(e) At [64] that Mr Fleming did not “articulate any basis” for
reaching the conclusions that he did in the PS and IR
with respect to the
Serious Allegations.
[90] Secondly, as to [86](b) of those particulars (see at [84] above), under
the heading “procedural unfairness” Ms Sherrington
pleaded (at [65]
to [74] of the SoC) that Mr Fleming had failed to provide procedural fairness to
(a) in deciding to publish the PS to the public at large without giving her
advance notice thereof;
(b) in not giving her any adequate opportunity to respond to the adverse
materials in the “notice of tentative findings”
(described at [17]
above); and
(c) in not including in the PS a “fair summary within the meaning of s 50
” of her response to that notice.
[91] Thirdly as to [86](c), (d) and (e) of those particulars (see at [84]
above), under the heading “public statement is unlawful”
Sherrington pleaded (at [75] to [79] of the SoC) that the publication of the PS
was unlawful because:
(a) she was not afforded procedural fairness as detailed above (see at [90]);
(b) it was “not issued for any purpose within the terms of s 55(2) of the
(c) s 55 of the
did not authorise a public statement to contain
adverse findings about a person or body; and/or
(d) its publication was “an unreasonable exercise of power” under s
55(2) of the
(e) in publishing it, Mr Fleming failed to consider relevant considerations,
namely her response to the serious allegations.
[92] In the succeeding section of the SoC under the heading “bad
faith” Ms Sherrington set out a series of allegations
that were said
to comprise the allegations of bad faith for which leave was sought under s
155(4) of the
. Curiously, none of those allegations alleged
“bad faith”, per se, on Mr Fleming’s part but rather they
that he “did not act in good faith” in the following
(a) At [89] under the heading “No real attempt to determine the truth of
the allegations”. This allegation relied on
the first group of matters
summarised above (at [88] and [89]) namely Mr Fleming’s indifference to
the truth of the Serious
Allegations allegedly arising from his defective
conduct of the joint investigation.
(b) At [90] under the heading “No real attempt to comply with the
law”. This allegation relied on the second and third
group of matters
summarised above (at [89] and [90]) namely Mr Fleming’s alleged failures
to afford her procedural fairness
and his alleged breaches of various provisions
. In the alternative it also relied on the following
objective factors (at [91] to [94] of the SoC):
(i) Mr Fleming is a legal practitioner of considerable experience;
(ii) Mr Fleming knew the requirements of ss 50 and 55 of the
(iii) Mr Fleming knew the requirements of procedural fairness;
(iv) Mr Fleming knew that public power must be exercised reasonably, for a
proper purpose, and giving consideration to matters required
by the Act under
which the power is exercised;
(c) At [95] to [105] under the heading “Ulterior Motive”. This
allegation relied on a series of claims to the effect
that her response to the
notice of tentative findings was not properly considered, evaluated or
investigated by Mr Fleming because:
he demonstrated bias against her; he was
motivated by “extraneous reasons of convenience and efficiency”
and/or by “extraneous
reasons of his own satisfaction and personal
reputation”.
The construction of ss 155(5) of the
Grounds 1 and 3
The primary judgment
[93] The primary
Judge began by considering the meaning of the expression “substantial
reasons for believing” in s 155(5)
. His Honour’s
conclusions on that matter included the following:
(a) In the context of that section the word “substantial” means that
the reasons advanced “are real reasons (as
distinct from ephemeral or
insubstantial reasons) to believe that a proposed defendant has acted in bad
(b) Whether such substantial reasons exist must be based upon evidence which is
placed before the court
(c) Allegations made in a statement of claim or similar document cannot, of
themselves, establish such substantial reasons, nor can
claims that supporting
evidence may emerge at some future stage of a proceeding, e.g. during discovery,
be taken into account
(d) An applicant for leave does not have to establish bad faith to the standard
required at a substantive hearing of the
(e) The drawing of inferences will be dependent on whether the plaintiff and/or
proposed defendant adduce evidence on the application
which is directed to the
issue of bad faith
(f) Belief is different from suspicion, it “...is an inclination of the
mind towards assenting to, rather than rejecting, a
proposition and the grounds
which can reasonably induce that inclination of the mind may, depending on the
circumstances, leave something
to surmise or
conjecture”
[94] His Honour
then turned to consider the meaning of the expression “bad faith” in
. He began by reviewing
in some detail the judgments of: White J in
Campbell v Northern
, which dealt with
the phrase “an act done or omitted to be done by the person in good
faith” in the
Youth Justice Act NT
; the Full Court of the Federal
Mid Density Developments Pty Ltd v Rockdale Municipal Council (Mid
, which dealt with
the phrase “anything done or omitted to be done in good faith” in s
582A of the
Local Government Act NSW
; and two High Court judgments which
dealt with similar legislative provisions:
Cannane v J Cannane Pty
Bankstown City
Council v Alamdo Holdings Pty
[95] From his
review of those decisions his Honour concluded that “the meaning to be
given to the words “bad faith”
(and their counterpart “good
faith”) in a statutory immunity provision such s 155 of the
will depend on the nature of the act or omission alleged and the
“elucidation of the purpose of the statute”, particularly
pertains to the alleged acts or
. That led him
to undertake a review of the provisions of the
extent that they may assist in elucidating the intended meaning of the phrases
“good faith” and “bad
faith” in s 155 of the
undertaking that review, his Honour came to a number of conclusions including
the following
(a) Noting: that the
has a single purpose to address wrongdoing
in, or connected with, public administration; that the Commissioner is given a
broad discretion
as to how he or she achieves that purpose; that he or she is
not subject to any ministerial or other direction; and that the Act
still seek to strike a balance between the interests of persons the subject of
investigation and the public interest but
rather “falls heavily on the
side of the public interest”, it would be inconsistent with that statutory
framework to
give a broad meaning to the terms “good faith” and
“bad faith” such as to make the Commissioner subject to
“judicially determined” or objective standard in the performance of
his or her functions
(b) It would be equally inconsistent with that statutory framework to adopt that
broad meaning and thereby apply such a standard
to the Commissioner’s
investigative and/or reporting functions under the
, functions
which are closely connected, because that “would permit a court to
retrospectively determine what evidence was or
was not significant and what
conclusions should have been reached” in the exercise of those
(c) Instead the terms “good faith” and “bad faith”, as
they apply to the Commissioner’s investigative
and reporting functions,
should be construed to refer “to a purely subjective state of mind”
on his or her part
(d) the Commissioner will therefore be acting in good faith where he or she
honestly believes that he or she is acting in accordance
with the terms of the
and will be acting in bad faith where he or she does not hold
such an honest belief
[97] Having
reached these conclusions his Honour decided that, in determining Ms
Sherrington’s application for leave under s
155, he was required to answer
the following question: “are there real reasons (as opposed to ephemeral
or insubstantial reasons)
for believing that Mr Fleming did not honestly believe
that he was acting in accordance with the
at the time he did
those things of which the applicant
complains?”
Ms Sherrington’s contentions
Sherrington did not challenge any of the conclusions his Honour reached with
respect to the expression “substantial
reasons for believing”. To
the contrary she relied on some of them, namely those at [36] and [40] of the
primary judgment.
Her complaint under her third ground of appeal was that the
primary Judge fell into error by applying “too onerous a standard
satisfaction of substantial reasons for believing”. Instead, relying on
the judgment in
Secretary v Northern Territory of
, she contended
that his Honour should have imposed a low “threshold for
satisfaction” taking a “generous and favourable”
“in which a broad view of the pleadings is adopted... and the available
evidence is taken at its highest in the applicant’s
favour”. She
contended that this approach was consistent with the terms of s 155 of the
for two reasons. First because that section applies “as a
threshold to commence proceedings”; and secondly because, in
“it is concerned with the [proposed] defendant’s own state of
mind”. She also contended that the words
“real grounds to
believe” (sic) resembled the phrase “reasonable cause to
believe” which had been held to
pose a low threshold test whereby it was
not even necessary to demonstrate a prima facie
. As well, she contended
that, in this context, “little turns... on the precise verbal formula used
by the statute”
[99] As for the
construction of the expression “bad faith” raised by her first
ground of appeal, Ms Sherrington contended
that the construction that the
primary Judge had adopted, namely to give a narrow meaning to that expression to
advance the purposes
and to avoid any “dampening
effect” on the effectiveness of its operation, placed a gloss on the words
of the statute
and failed to have regard to the fact that it was an expression
the meaning of which may vary from case to case. She claimed that
Honour’s construction also disregarded the objective standard that had
been established in
Mid Density
and required her to meet an
“impossibly onerous threshold” of having to show that Mr Fleming
lacked an honest belief
that he was conducting an investigation under the
. She contended that was particularly so: where ss 155(4) and (5)
already provided adequate protection against any such dampening
effect; where
other similar public officeholders are held to objective account consistent with
the maintenance of the rule of law;
and where the construction applied to
s 155(1) was inconsistent with the Commissioner’s oath of office
“which plainly
requires more than mere honesty”. She also contended
that an objective standard was consistent with the objectives of the
in that it would discourage “the objectively inept exercise of power
in bad faith...”.
[100] As well,
Ms Sherrington contended that the primary Judge should have taken account of the
fact that this area of the law is
“under development” and that
process of development should not be dampened or stultified. Finally she
contended that
the primary Judge’s interpretation collapsed the three ways
in which “bad faith” was pleaded in her SoC into a
single inquiry
asking “whether or not Mr Fleming honestly believed that he was acting in
accordance with the
?” She identified those three ways as:
that Mr Fleming made no real attempt to determine the truth of the Serious
Allegations,
that he made no real attempt to comply with the law and that he had
an ulterior motive.
Consideration
[101] It is
appropriate to begin by noting the trite proposition that the meaning of a
statutory provision such as s 155(5) falls
to be determined according to its
text, context and purpose
Turning first to purpose, consistent with its heading: “protection from
liability – acting in official capacity”,
the evident purpose of s
is to provide certain protections from liability to
those persons who act, or purportedly act, in an “official capacity”
. That expression is defined in s 4 to mean
“performing functions under, or otherwise related to the administration
[102] As for
context, the first of those protections is contained in s 155(1). That
sub-section provides protection to such persons
from civil or criminal liability
for “an act done or omitted to be done in good faith”. This
protection is subject to
the qualification expressed in s 155(2) that the
liability of the Territory is not affected. That means the protection applies to
the direct personal liability of the person concerned, but not to the
Territory’s vicarious liability for that act or omission.
This marks an
important distinction between a public officer demonstrating a lack of good
faith under s 155(1) and acting in bad
faith under s 155(5) because, at least
with the tort of misfeasance in public office, liability with respect to the
latter usually
only involves the public officer
[103] There is
also a significant difference between the protection provided to a public
official by s 155(1) and that provided by
s 155(4). The latter does not provide
protection from liability, as such, but rather places a restriction on the
pursuit of an allegation
in a civil or criminal proceeding that a person, when
acting in an official capacity, has “acted in bad faith”. Its
protective purpose therefore is to protect such persons from
un-meritorious allegations of bad faith when they are acting in an official
capacity under the Act. The pursuit of spurious allegations to frustrate
investigations under the
, or as a means of revenge by a
disgruntled person the subject of findings of corruption made under that Act,
might be considered
two situations that warrant such
[104] The means
by which the peculiar form of protection is provided under ss 155(4) and
(5) is contained in the text of those provisions.
Dealing first with the text of
s 155(4), it operates if a person “is alleged to have acted in bad
faith”. In that event,
it provides that a proceeding for “the
act”, namely the act done in bad faith, “may only be
by leave”. It is not, therefore, specifically expressed to apply to the
commencement of proceedings, or to a claim made, or
to be made, in a proceeding.
Furthermore, as with s 155(1), it is expressed to apply to both civil and
criminal proceedings. This
feature of the section means that different rules of
procedure will apply depending on what form of proceeding is
[105] With this
combination of factors reflected in its text, the timing of an application for
leave under s 155(4) to bring a proceeding
for an act in bad faith may differ
depending on what particular set of litigious circumstances are pertinent to the
application and
when that combination of circumstances aligns. For example, it
is not difficult to envisage a situation whereby evidence of bad faith
emerge during the discovery process in a civil proceeding, or during either the
committal, or trial, stage of a criminal proceeding.
In either of these
instances the application for leave to bring the proceeding for the allegation
of bad faith would arise at a later
stage of an already existing proceeding. On
the other hand, where, as here, the allegation concerns an act of bad faith
critical to a claim for damages for the tort of misfeasance in public
office, the position will be different. That set of circumstances
ordinarily dictate that the application for leave to bring the proceeding with
respect to the allegation will be made at the
outset of the civil proceeding
concerned. It follows, in my view, that the word “brought” in s
155(4) must be construed
sufficiently broadly to accommodate this range of
circumstances. Accordingly, Ms Sherrington’s contentions that s
155(4) invariably
applies at the threshold or commencement of a proceeding must
be rejected.
[106] While the
text of s 155(4) affects the timing of an application for leave, it is the text
of s 155(5) that prescribes the means
by which the protection concerned is
offered to a person acting in an official capacity under the
First, that sub-section begins with a direction to the Court not to grant leave
unless it is satisfied that a specific state of
affairs exists. That is that
there are “substantial reasons for believing” that the person
concerned committed the act
of bad faith. Those words therefore set the standard
or test to be applied by the Court in deciding whether or not to grant
primary Judge identified correctly, with respect, the critical components of
that test. As appears earlier
his Honour found that the
that are pivotal to the test must be
substantial, that is real, as distinct from ephemeral or insubstantial, and they
must incline
the Judge hearing an application for leave towards “assenting
to rather than rejecting” the proposition that the prospective
acted in bad faith, while accepting that some aspects of that proposition may be
left open to surmise or conjecture.
[108] Since this
is the test that emerges from the text of s 155(5), there is no merit in Ms
Sherrington’s contention that some
other “generous and
favourable” test should be adopted when considering a leave application
under ss 155(4) and (5).
That includes a test or standard drawn from supposedly
analogous applications in civil proceedings, or from the judicial treatment
allegedly similar statutory provisions or, even less so, by reference to the
circumstances of the particular application in question.
[109] The former
situations include the entirely different circumstances and statutory
terminology under consideration in an application
for the summary determination
of civil proceedings such as
preliminary discovery application prior to the commencement of civil proceedings
. They also
include the provisions of the
Police Administration Act
considered in
which do not bear any relevant similarity in
context or text to the present statutory formulation. That judgment concerned an
application
for leave to claim punitive damages in a “police tort
claim” under s 148F(2) of the
Police Administration Act (NT)
provision did not prescribe any test for granting leave. The error inherent in
the last proposition is so obvious that it barely
needs stating. If adopted, it
would mean that the construction of s 155(5) would vary depending on the
circumstances of the particular
party making the application for leave.
[110] It follows
that no error is revealed by Ms Sherrington’s third ground of
next to the expression “bad faith” in s 155(5). In the particular
circumstances of this matter, Ms Sherrington
accepts that the only way she can
obtain the damages relief she has sought in her SoC is to establish that Mr
Fleming committed the
tort of misfeasance in public office. This concession was
well made. It reflects the established legal position that a person cannot
obtain damages for a breach of statutory duty (unless it is confirmed by
legislation)
, nor for negligent
licensing, supervision, or failure to withdraw a licence or for negligent
maladministration. Instead, the remedy
lies with judicial
Three Rivers District Council v Governor and Company of the Bank of England
(Three Rivers DC
) Lord Steyn identified the rationale for the tort of
misfeasance in public office in the following terms: “... In a legal
based on the rule of law executive or administrative power “may be
exercised only for the public good” and not for the
ulterior and improper
purposes...”
Northern Territory v
the plurality held
that the tort of misfeasance in public office was “... a deliberate tort
in the sense that there is no liability
unless either there is an intention to
cause harm or the officer concerned knowingly acts in excess of his or her
tort’s content, their Honours said it was not “constituted simply by
an act of a public officer which he or
she knows is beyond power and which
results in damage”. Instead, “policy and principle both suggest that
liability should
be more closely confined. So far as policy is concerned, it is
to be born in mind that, although the tort is the tort of a public
officer, he
or she is liable personally and, unless there is de facto authority, there will
ordinarily only be personal liability.
And principle suggests misfeasance in
public office is a counterpart to, and should be confined in the same way as,
those torts which
impose liability on private individuals for the intentional
infliction of harm”. Their Honours added that “there is much
said for the view that... misfeasance in public office is not confined to actual
knowledge but extends to the situation in
which a public officer recklessly
disregards the means of ascertaining the extent of his or her
[114] Importantly,
for present purposes, their Honours also held that constructive knowledge of the
lack of power is not sufficient
to establish the tort. Noting that public
officials are liable in negligence in the same way as ordinary individuals, they
“...In that context, the argument that misfeasance in public office
should be reformulated to cover the case of a public officer
who ought to know
of his or her lack of power can be disposed of shortly. So far as unintended
harm is concerned, the proposed reformulation
suffers the same defect as in
relation to the law of negligence as does the principal in
namely, it serves no useful purpose if there is a duty of care to avoid the
risk in question and is anomalous if there is not. And
it serves no purpose if
the public officer is actuated by intention to harm the plaintiff for that
constitutes misfeasance in public
office whether or not the officer knows that
he or she lacks
[115] In his
judgment in
Brennan J said that a particular state of mind was
necessary to render liable under the tort an invalid exercise of administrative
power, for example, arising from a failure to afford procedural
. After reviewing a
number of English authorities his Honour concluded that: “Malice,
knowledge and reckless indifference are
states of mind that stamp on a purported
but invalid exercise of power the character of abuse of or misfeasance in public
If the impugned conduct then causes injury, the cause of action is
complete”. His Honour said that these states of mind involved
officer acting “otherwise than in an honest attempt to perform the
functions of his or her office whereby loss is
caused to a
[116] Finally,
in his judgment in
, Deane J said that the critical element of the
tort in that case was malice. His Honour identified three circumstances where
malice will arise: “[It] will exist if the act was done with an
actual intention to cause such injury. The requirement of malice
will also be
satisfied if the act was done with knowledge of invalidity or lack of power and
with knowledge that it would cause or
be likely to cause such injury. Finally,
malice will exist if the act is done with reckless indifference or deliberate
to that invalidity or lack of power and that likely injury”. He
added: “Absent such an intention, such knowledge and
such reckless
indifference or deliberate blindness, the requirement of malice will not be
[117] The High
Court confirmed these principles in
majority, whilst acknowledging that the precise limits of the tort were still
undefined, described it as “an intentional
. It returned to the
Commissioner of Taxation v Futuris Corporation
course of dealing with the validity of an assessment made under the
Tax Assessment Act
(Cwth), in particular whether it involved a
exercise of the power to assess, the majority
...That phrase
is used in several senses in public law. With cognate expressions, it also
appears in formulations of the tort of misfeasance
in public office. This Court
has accepted that in that context it is sufficient that the public officer
concerned acted knowingly
in excess of his or her power. The House of Lords has
since indicated that in English law recklessness may be a sufficient state
mind to found the tort. The affinity between tort law and public law has been
remarked upon in this Court; that affinity reflects
the precept that in a legal
system such as that maintained by the
Constitution
executive or administrative
power is not to be exercised for ulterior or improper purposes.
pertinent for present purposes are the following observations that their Honours
made later in their
Allegations
that statutory powers have been exercised corruptly or with deliberate disregard
to the scope of those powers are not
lightly to be made or upheld. Remarks by
Hill, Dowsett and Hely JJ in
Kordan Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of
are in point. Their Honours said:
“The allegation that the Commissioner, or those exercising his powers
by delegation, acted other than in good faith in assessing
a taxpayer to income
tax is a serious allegation and not one lightly to be made. It is, thus, not
particularly surprising that applications
directed at setting aside assessments
on the basis of absence of good faith have generally been unsuccessful. Indeed
one would hope
that this was and would continue to be the case. As Hill J said
in San Remo Macaroni Company Pty Ltd v FCT[ ] it would be a rare
case where a
taxpayer will succeed in showing that an assessment has in the relevant sense
been made in bad faith and should for
that reason be set aside.”
The outcome on the present appeal bears out the quoted observation by Hill
Three Rivers DC
Lord Steyn described two of the forms of the tort as “targeted
malice”; and a public officer acting “knowing that
he has no power
to do the act complained of and that the act will probably injure the
. While these
comprised two different forms of liability, his Lordship said that they
“revealed the unifying element of conduct
amounting to abuse of power
accompanied by subjective
” (emphasis added) and that
there was “the need to establish deliberate and dishonest abuse of power
in every case”
[120] Finally,
while they were directed to an action in deceit rather than one for misfeasance
in public office, the following observations
of the plurality in
are pertinent in respect
of the recklessness form of the tort: “When “reckless” is used
in applying the principles
of the tort of negligence, the yardstick is objective
rather than subjective. On the other hand, to sustain an action in deceit,
is proved when it is shown “that a false representation has been made (1)
knowingly, or (2) without belief in its truth,
or (3) recklessly, careless
whether it be true or
[121] From these
authorities a number of things are clearly established with respect to the tort
of misfeasance in public office as
they bear on this appeal. First, it is an
intentional tort which is concerned with the dishonest use of public power.
Secondly, it
relies for its existence on establishing the subjective state of
mind of the public officer concerned whether that be malicious intent,
with knowledge of an absence of power or recklessly disregarding the means of
ascertaining the extent of his or her power
knowing that to so act is likely to
cause damage to the plaintiff. Thirdly, each of these states of mind is
characterised as “bad
faith”. Fourthly, and consequently, the
requisite state of mind cannot be established objectively, nor can the tort be
through a public officer’s honest ineptitude.
[122] As appears
, the primary Judge came
to essentially the same conclusions as the second and fourth propositions above,
albeit by a different process
of reasoning. It follows that no error is revealed
by Ms Sherrington’s first ground of appeal.
consideration of Ms Sherrington’s case – Ground 2
[123] Under this
ground of appeal Ms Sherrington claims that the primary Judge failed to properly
consider her case. While the conclusion
reached in relation to ground 3 above
with respect to the correct test applicable to her application, largely disposes
of this ground,
it is convenient to briefly identify several other reasons why
it also lacks merit.
[124] The first
relates to the type of bad faith with which Ms Sherrington’s case must
necessarily be concerned, namely the
bad faith which underpins the tort of
misfeasance in public office
The authorities reviewed above show that that type of bad faith can be
manifested in one of three forms: malicious intent or targeted
malice; acting
with knowledge that one lacks power; or recklessly disregarding the means of
ascertaining the extent of one’s
power, these latter two forms combined
with knowledge that so acting will probably injure or harm the plaintiff.
Unsurprisingly,
therefore, Ms Sherrington has pleaded each of those forms of bad
faith in her SoC
[125] However,
despite this, she did not engage with that type of bad faith before the primary
Judge. Instead she attempted to persuade
his Honour that Mr Fleming had
demonstrated a
lack of good faith
as pleaded elsewhere in her SoC under
the headings: No real attempt to determine the truth of the allegations; No real
comply with the law; and Ulterior
. The primary Judge
considered and rejected each of these sets of allegations in the primary
approach was erroneous in several respects. The first and most fundamental has
been mentioned already. It is that Ms Sherrington
has not engaged with the
relevant form of bad faith necessary to support her claim for damages based, as
it is, on the tort of misfeasance
in public office.
[127] The second
is that the form of bad faith upon which she has instead focused is primarily
directed to alleged deficiencies in
the conduct of the joint investigation. The
primary Judge identified this feature of her case in the primary judgment where
“the applicant’s complaint is one regarding the sufficiency
of the investigation undertaken
. A fundamental
problem with this approach is that the pleaded cause of her damages was
Mr Fleming’s promotion and publication
of the PS, not the conduct of
the joint investigation
[128] Another is
that the joint investigation was, as its title suggests, jointly conducted by Mr
Fleming and the Department of
. Furthermore, the
hearings which comprised a critical part of the investigation were conducted by
the Deputy Commissioner, Mr Wild
QC, not Mr Fleming. Despite this mixing of
roles, no attempt has been made by Ms Sherrington in her SoC, or otherwise in
her case, to distinguish the involvement of these other actors.
Indeed she contended before the primary Judge that she did not have
. Given that she is attempting
to pursue an allegation of bad faith against Mr Fleming personally, I consider
this reflects a significant
deficiency in her application for leave.
[129] Still
another is that, even assuming one were to ignore the thinly veiled attempt at
merits review of the joint investigation
that this approach entails, the PS
contains a number of statements that show that Ms Sherrington’s complaints
are spurious. Two examples will suffice. First, at the
commencement of the PS under the heading “Assessment of Evidence”
the following statements
followed carefully all of the evidence in this investigation, and any response
from each and every person and body against
whom adverse findings have been made
in this report, including unsworn responses.
In assessing the weight of any evidence, I have taken into account:
. my observation of the various witnesses examined in the course of the
. any inculpatory evidence
. any exculpate evidence
. contemporary records such as emails and phone messages
. documentary evidence.
Where I have doubted the veracity of evidence I have sought assistance from
contemporary records to resolve doubts. (emphasis added)
[130] Secondly,
and more strikingly, in response to Ms Sherrington’s claim that she
“had a cogent and exculpatory explanation
for each and every
allegation” made against her, the PS
Sherrington gave evidence on five days, the two components of which were
separated by two months. She was given the opportunity
to present additional
material and written submissions during that interval, and on a day to day basis
during her examination. She
availed herself of those opportunities and
consideration was, and has, been given to that material, and the further
material contained
in her response to the draft report.
At all times great care was taken to consider each of the matters raised by
Ms Sherrington, just as great care has been given to consider
the entirety of
the response provided by her and/or on her behalf.
The difficulty for Ms Sherrington is that in carefully weighing her
explanations against the weight of the evidence, her denials simply
. (emphasis added)
And further
It is important to make clear to Ms Sherrington, and any person who may read
this report or appear before the ICAC, that each and
every piece of evidence
before the ICAC in this investigation has been carefully considered
Sherrington’s contention that her explanations were “cogent and
exculpatory” is fanciful. Much of her evidence
provided no such
explanation and in fact was not believable and therefore not accepted.
(emphasis added)
[131] Finally,
in the interests of completeness, it is appropriate to briefly explain why, even
had Ms Sherrington engaged with the
relevant type of bad faith pleaded in her
, she would have failed in
her application for leave. First it is convenient to reiterate the test that Ms
Sherrington would have
had to meet to obtain that leave. That is to persuade the
Court that there are substantial reasons to assent to, rather than reject,
proposition that Mr Fleming held the subjective state of mind that
constituted one or more of the forms of bad faith which underpins
the tort of
misfeasance in public office.
[132] Next it is
appropriate to recall the context in which the PS came to be published. It
followed an investigation conducted under
the auspices of the
the purpose and focus of which were identified
and it was published
in exercise of Mr Fleming’s discretionary power as the Commissioner
contained and in s 55(2) of that Act.
[133] In that
context, and applying the test set out above, none of the matters particularised
at [84] of Ms Sherrington’s
provides the requisite
reason. Anonymising names – a common practice when Courts, Tribunals and
other public bodies publish
decisions or similar documents (particular 1),
making gratuitous allegations (even assuming they were gratuitous) about Ms
Sherrington’s
family members – not Ms Sherrington (particular 2), or
failing to name or investigate others (particulars 3 and 4), do not
substantial reasons to believe that Mr Fleming was maliciously targeting Ms
Sherrington when he published the PS.
[134] Nor does
using the following so-called “florid” language (particular 6):
“Ms Sherrington was not in the business
of education; she was in the
business of manipulating data and herding children to be at school on
“census days” to maintain
funding from both the NT and Australian
governments.” That is so because that single sentence appears in a report
51 pages and containing 169 paragraphs, 16 separate recommendations
and one appendix. And, more importantly, there is no evidence
that Mr Fleming
drew attention to it in the course of publishing and disseminating the PS with a
view to damaging Ms Sherrington,
or at all. It follows that particulars 6 to 8
inclusive do not provide substantial reasons to believe that Mr Fleming
maliciously
targeted Ms Sherrington when he published and disseminated the
[135] The same
applies to the matters particularised at [86] of her SoC. They are ostensibly
provided in support of the allegations
at [85] and [86] of the
that Mr Fleming published
the PS when he knew he had no power to do so and he knew that would likely cause
injury or harm to Ms Sherrington,
or alternatively, that he was recklessly
indifferent to whether or not he had that power. That is so because [85](a) of
Ms Sherrington’s
SoC concerns the substance of the serious allegations to
which the joint investigation related; (b) and (e) concern due process matters
connected with the conduct of the joint investigation; and (c) and (d) concern
the proper construction of s 55(2) of the
In other words,
ignoring the fact that most of them are directed to the conduct of the joint
investigation and not to the publication
of the PS, and even assuming that one
or more of them constitutes a valid complaint, they all amount to no more than
of a public officer which he or she knows is beyond power and
which results in
. It follows
that they do not provide substantial reasons to believe that Mr Fleming had the
requisite state of mind which underpins
those two forms of the tort of
misfeasance in public office, when he published and disseminated the PS.
[136] For these
reasons, Ms Sherrington’s application for leave to pursue an allegation,
or allegations, of bad faith against
Mr Fleming must fail. The primary Judge
came to the same conclusion albeit by a different
. Accordingly, no
error is revealed by Ms Sherrington’s second ground of
[137] For all
these reasons, none of Ms Sherrington’s grounds of appeal discloses an
appellable error in the primary judgment.
It follows that her appeal must be
ORDERS OF THE COURT
this proceeding be amended to remove the first defendant as a party.
the notice of appeal dated 20 February 2023 be dismissed.
hear the appellant on whether she should not be ordered to pay the costs of this
appeal and the costs of her application
for leave to appeal.
---------------------------
The appellant had already
commenced proceedings and filed a statement of claim.
This summary is taken from the
appellant’s submissions.
Sherrington v Independent
Commissioner Against Corruption (NT) & Ors
[2022] NTSC 67
Sherrington NTSC
”) at [4] to [15]
In the Supreme Court, the first
respondent argued that it was inappropriate to bring proceedings against
Mr Fleming personally, as
the bulk of the conduct complained of had been
carried out by Mr Wild. This is still a live issue between the parties but
relevant for the purposes of the present appeal.
Sherrington NTSC
This is said to have been the
Sherrington NTSC
at [70] – [72]
This is said to be the effect of
Sherrington
at [74] - [75]
Sherrington NTSC
[1993] FCA 408
(1993) 44 FCR 290
followed in
Campbell v NTA
[2021] FCA 1089
; cited with approval by the High Court in
Bankstown City Council v Alamdo Holdings
[2005] HCA 46
(2005) 223 CLR
Sherrington NTSC
Sherrington NTSC
Sherrington NTSC
- [69]; The appellant has identified no error in this careful analysis.
See summary of
appellant’s claims at [24] above.
Sherrington NTSC
Sherrington NTSC
Sherrington NTSC
[2001] All ER 513 at [44]
[2017] FCAFC 59
(2017) 248 FCR 311
[2019] NTSC 73
at [38] and
See generally,
v Northern Territory of Australia
[2018] NTSC 73
Gaykamangu v Northern
[2016] NTSC 26.
Sherrington NTSC
Appellant’s written
submissions [79]
Sherrington NTSC
Sherrington NTSC
Sherrington NTSC
Appellant’s submissions
Reasons at [78] AB 331
Reasons at [79] AB 332
Appellant’s submissions
Sherrington NTSC
Sherrington
at [84] – [91]
Sherrington
Sherrington
Sherrington v Fleming & Ors
[2023] NTCA 1.
See at [9] to [23] above. See
also the primary judgment
Sherrington
at [5] to [15].
Sherrington NTSC
Sherrington NTSC
Ibid at [37].
Ibid at [37].
Ibid at [39].
Ibid at [39] to [40].
Sherrington NTSC
to [43] quoting the Court in
George v Rocket
[1990] HCA 26
(1990) 170 CLR 104
Ibid at [44] to [75].
[2021] FCA 1089.
[1993] FCA 408
(1993) 44 FCR 290.
Cannane v J Cannane Pty
(1998) 193 CLR 557.
Bankstown City Council v
Alamdo Holdings Pty Ltd
[2005] HCA 46
(2005) 223 CLR 660.
Sherrington NTSC
Sherrington NTSC
Ibid at [70] to [71].
Sherrington NTSC
Ibid at [74].
Ibid at [67] and [74].
Ibid at [75].
Secretary v Northern
Territory of Australia
[2019] NTSC 73.
Referring to
Commissioner of Police
[2006] FCA 12
(2006) 150 FCR 165
per Finn J.
Relying on the judgment of
French CJ and Gummow J in
Spencer v Commonwealth
[2010] HCA 28
241 CLR 118.
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty
Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
(2009) 239 CLR 27
See the observations of the
plurality in
Mengel v Northern Territory
set out at [113] below.
These differences explain why
demonstrating a lack of good faith under s 155(1) and acting in bad faith under
s 155(4), at least
in the context of misfeasance in public office claims,
involve quite different concepts and principles. It is not therefore valid,
my view, to treat one as the converse of the other.
See the observations of Nettle
Construction, Forestry, Mining & Energy Union v Boral Resources
(Vic) Pty Ltd
[2015] HCA 21
(2015) 256 CLR 375
See at [93] above.
Involving an application under
s 31A of the
Federal Court of Australia Act
directed to showing that a
party had “no reasonable prospect of prosecuting the proceeding”:
Involving an application under
O 15A of the former
Federal Court Rules
directed to showing that there is
“reasonable cause to believe” that an applicant “has or may
have a right to obtain
relief” and/or that a person is likely to possess
any document relating to that question: see
Crimmins v Stevedoring
Industry Finance Committee
[1999] HCA 59
(1999) 200 CLR 1
at 58 at [157] per Gummow J.
Three Rivers DC v Bank of England
[2003] 2 AC 1 at 190 per Lord
Ibid at 190.
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Futuris Corporation Limited
(2008) 237 CLR 147
at 153 at [11] per Gummow, Hayne, Heydon and Crennan JJ set
out at [117] below.
(1995) 185 CLR 307.
(1995) 185 CLR 307
Mason CJ, Dawson, Toohey, Gaudron and McHugh JJ.
Ibid at 347.
(1995) 185 CLR 307
Ibid at 356.
Ibid at 357.
(1995) 185 CLR 307
(1998) 196 CLR 329.
Ibid at 346 [42] per Gleeson
CJ, Gaudron, Kirby and Hayne JJ. With respect to the elements and forms of the
tort see also discussion
in the subsequent Full Court decision in
[2003] FCAFC 150
(2003) 130 FCR 149
at 171 to 178, [87] to [108] per Black CJ and
French and Von Doussa JJs, and more recently in
Nyoni v Shire of
Kellerberrin
[2017] FCAFC 59
(2017) 248 FCR 311
at 327 to 329, [76] to [84] per North and
Rares JJ, and also the single judge decisions in
Brett Cattle Co v Minister
for Agriculture
[2020] FCA 732
(2020) 274 FCR 337
at 403 to 407, [269] to [284] per Rares
Plaintiff M83A v Morrison (No 2)
[2020] FCA 1198
[66] per Mortimer J (cited in the primary judgment at [23]).
(2008) 237 CLR 147.
Ibid at 153 to 154 [11] per
Gummow, Hayne, Heydon and Crennan JJ.
(2008) 237 CLR 147
166 [60] to [61].
See also the observations of
the Full Court of the Federal Court in
Commonwealth v Fernando
[2012] FCAFC 18
at 28 to 29 [128] to [130] per Gray, Rares and Tracey JJ.
[2003] 2 AC 1.
Ibid at 191.
Ibid at 191 and 192. See also
Lord Hobhouse’s description of the three types of malice involved as
“targeted malice”,
“[intentional] untargeted malice”,
and “reckless untargeted malice” at 230 to 231
Banditt v R
[2005] HCA 80
Ibid at 265 [2] per Gummow,
Hayne and Heydon JJ.
See at [96] above.
See the concession mentioned at
[110] to [111] above.
At [83] to [86] of the SoC, see
at [83] to [85] above.
At [88] to [105] of her SoC,
see at [92] above.
Sherrington NTSC
to [104]; [103] to [115]; and [116] to [124] respectively.
Ibid at [78].
See at [83] of her SoC at [84]
See at [11] above.
Sherrington NTSC
[17] to [21].
Public statement at [24] to
Public statement at [127] to
Public statement at
See at [124] above.
See the apposite part of the
primary judgment set out at [96](a) above.
See at [85] above.
See at [83] and [85]
See the plurality in
at [113] above.
See at [125] above.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (638 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter