URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTSCFC/2021/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:23:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lorenzetti v Brennan [2021] NTSCFC 3 (21 May 2021)
Lorenzetti v Brennan
[2021] NTSCFC 3
PARTIES: LORENZETTI, Christopher John
BRENNAN, Alexander
TITLE OF COURT: FULL COURT OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: LCA 14 of 2020 (22013327); LCA 15 of 2020 (22014875); LCA 16 of 2020
DELIVERED: 21 May 2021
HEARING DATE: 3 December 2020
JUDGMENT OF: Southwood, Kelly JJ and Riley AJ
CATCHWORDS:
Referral of questions of law to the Full Court of the Supreme Court pursuant
to s 21(1) of the
Supreme Court Act
Section 121(7) of the
Domestic and Family Violence Act
provides that
the court must not direct a term of imprisonment imposed for a breach of a
domestic violence order to be served concurrently
with another sentence of
imprisonment for any other offence – when sentencing an offender under
s 121(7) for breach of a domestic
violence order and another offence is the
court obliged to give effect to the totality principle by lowering the
individual sentences
below what would otherwise be appropriate – held
s 121(7) does not entirely abrogate the totality principle – the
principle may be given effect by making sentences for other offences
partially concurrent or by reducing sentences to the lower end
appropriate range for the particular offences – held further to lower the
sentences below what would be appropriate
for the objective seriousness of the
particular offending would be to adopt impermissible artificial measures for the
subverting the intention of the legislature expressed in
Section 121(5) of the
Domestic and Family Violence Act
that in sentencing an offender for a second or subsequent offence of
contravening an domestic violence offence the court must not
make an order which
would result in the offender being released from the requirement to actually
serve the term of imprisonment imposed
– appellant sentenced to
imprisonment for 28 months suspended after 10 months for a number of offences
including second or
subsequent breaches domestic violence orders –
amount of time required to actually serve under s 121(5) and other mandatory
sentencing provision was nine months – held the plain meaning of s 121(5)
is to prohibit the court from suspending any part
of a sentence for a second or
subsequent offence of breaching a domestic violence order – the sentence
imposed does not contravene
that subsection provided the sentence for the
subsequent breach of a domestic violence order was ordered to be served before
period of suspension
Section 163 of the
Local Court (Criminal Procedure) Act
right of appeal to the Supreme Court from a conviction, order, or adjudication
of the Local Court on certain grounds –
conflicting Supreme Court
authorities on whether a separate notice of appeal is required in relation to
each order appealed from
or each file or complaint – held that a separate
notice of appeal is required in relation to each sentence or other order
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
Justices Act 1921-1943
Justices Act
s 163 [now the
Local Court (Criminal Procedure)
Justices Act Amendment Act of
Justices Act
Justices Ordinance 1928
Justices Ordinance
1961 (NT) s 7
Local Court (Criminal Procedure) Act
Sentencing Act
Supreme Court Act 1979
Commissioner of Taxation v Arnhem Air Engineering Pty Ltd
Lawrie v Stokes
(Supreme Court of the Northern Territory of
Australia, unreported, Kriewaldt AJ, 17 December 1951), affirmed
Lee v New South Wales Crime Commission
[2013] HCA 39
(2013) 251 CLR
Mill v The Queen
[1988] HCA 70
(1988) 166 CLR 59
Postiglione v The Queen
[1997] HCA 26
(1997) 189 CLR 295
Potter v Minahan
[1908] HCA 63
(1908) 7 CLR 277
Elliot v Harris (No2)
(1976) 13 SASR 516
Osmasich v Evans
(1980) 25 SASR 481
Samuels v Leech
[1970] SASR 60
, not followed
Court v Armstrong
[2019] NTSC 38
Reilly v Baker
[1989] NTSC 46
(1989) 99 FLR
v The Queen
[2018] NTCCA 14
Warford v Firth
, considered
Brown v Guerin
[2016] NTSC 53
Idai v Malagorski
[2011] NTSC
Watson v Chambers
[2013] NTSC 7
, referred to
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: S Robson SC
Respondent: M Nathan SC with C Ingles
Solicitors:
Appellant: Northern Territory Legal Aid Commission
Respondent: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Judgment category classification: A
Number of pages: 33
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
AT ALICE SPRINGS
Lorenzetti v Brennan
[2021] NTSCFC 3
No. LCA 14 of 2020 (22013327); LCA 15 of 2020 (22014875); LCA
16 of 2020 (22016657)
CHRISTOPHER JOHN LORENZETTI
ALEXANDER BRENNAN
CORAM: SOUTHWOOD, KELLY JJ and RILEY AJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 21 May 2021)
Introduction
[1] A judge of
the Supreme Court seized of an appeal against a sentence of the Local Court has
referred three questions of law to
the Full Court of the Supreme Court pursuant
Supreme Court Act 1979
[2] On 31 July
2020, the appellant pleaded guilty to one count of aggravated assault, five
counts of contravening a Domestic Violence
Order (“DVO”), and one
count of attempting to contravene a DVO. He was sentenced to a total effective
sentence of imprisonment
for 28 months, suspended after 10 months with an
operational period of two years. In addition, two suspended sentences, also for
breaching DVOs, were restored and ordered to be served concurrently with the
fresh sentences.
[3] No complaint
is made about the individual sentences for the aggravated assault, for which the
appellant was sentenced to imprisonment
for eight months or the breach of one
domestic violence order, for which the appellant was sentenced to imprisonment
for six months.
However, the appellant contends, on Ground 1, that the
individual sentences for the other breaches of DVOs are manifestly excessive.
(Ground 1 is based largely on factual contentions and is not the subject of this
reference.)
appellant contends, on Ground 2, that the sentencing judge erred by failing to
apply, or failing to apply properly, the principle
of totality.
[5] It was not
open to the sentencing judge to make any part of any of the sentences
concurrent.
Section 121(7)
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
(NT) provides:
Sentencing Act 1995
, the court must not direct the term of imprisonment to be served
concurrently with the other term of imprisonment mentioned in subsection
or (b) (ie a sentence of imprisonment for any other offence).
[6] However, the
appellant contended in written submissions:
Subsection 121(7)
the DVFA cannot be taken to completely abrogate such a fundamental sentencing
provision as totality. The provision effectively
prohibits totality from being
applied by making sentences partially or fully concurrent but does not otherwise
preclude the achievement
of totality by lowering the individual sentences below
what would otherwise be
appropriate.
appellant relied on
to the effect that
the preferred method of giving effect to the totality principle is to make the
sentences partly concurrent but,
where that is not practicable, it may be given
by lowering the individual sentences below what would
otherwise be appropriate in order to reflect the fact that a number of sentences
are being imposed.”
respondent said, in written submissions:
The respondent accepts that
the principle of totality is not displaced by the requirement to accumulate the
sentences, and that totality
can be achieved by reduction of the individual
sentences in the situation that accumulation is legislatively
[9] It appears
that the sentencing judge acted on that principle. In sentencing the appellant
his Honour said:
Due to the nature of the legislation and other
authority, I am bound to order some accumulation of these sentences and in
fixing that
and the period of suspension, I do take into account the overall
sentence that I will be imposing upon you today. We do not want
to impose a
sentence that is crushing in all of the circumstances, but gives you some light
at the end of the tunnel.
[10] The view
held by both appellant and respondent (and applied by the sentencing judge) is
potentially in conflict with the decision
of the Court of Criminal Appeal in
v The Queen
which the court made the following remarks:
The appellant abandoned
Ground 1 in written submissions provided before the hearing of the appeal.
Counsel’s major focus was
the fact that, taking into account the
Queensland sentence, the sentence imposed by the sentencing judge results in an
overall effective
non-parole period of 89% of the overall effective head
sentence. Whilst the total sentence of 16 years five months and 22 days
imprisonment
was not said to be excessive, the appellant contended that the
sentencing judge should have structured the sentence for the Territory
in such a way as to avoid such a consequence.
Counsel contended that this could have been done by not fixing a non-parole
period at all, but by suspending part of his sentence
Sentencing Act 1995
Section 40(1)
only permits a court to suspend
all or part of a sentence of imprisonment if the term imposed is a sentence of
not more than five
years, but the appellant contended that the sentencing judge
could have reduced the six year sentence to five years but ordered it
commence at some date later than 12 August 2014.
It should be noted at the outset that the fact that the non-parole period
ended up being approximately 89% of the head sentence is
a mathematical artefact
attributable in part to the fact that the head sentence for the Territory
offences was made partly concurrent
with the Queensland sentence. Further,
do not agree that the principle in
Mill v The Queen
requires a court to
adopt convoluted measures designed to “get around” the requirements
of the legislation and the restrictions
on the court’s discretion imposed
by the legislature in the manner suggested by the appellant. Once the appellant
as he did, the contention that the overall sentence was manifestly
excessive, it necessarily followed that the provisions in the
legislation
concerning a sentence of that length (namely that the sentence could not be
partly suspended) needed to be given proper
First Question:
[11] Therefore,
the following question was reserved for the opinion of the Full
QUESTION 1: When the Court is applying
Domestic and Family Violence Act
in sentencing an offender for a breach
of a DVO and another offence or offences, is the court obliged to give effect to
the totality
principle by lowering the individual sentences below what would
otherwise be appropriate?
appellant and respondent have submitted that
Domestic and
Family Violence Act
does not entirely abrogate the principle of totality.
[13] The Supreme
Court has already considered whether
and (7) which require
consecutive sentences to be imposed for each breach of
the totality principle and has held that they do
These cases were correctly
common law principle of totality requires a sentencing court to ensure that,
when sentencing an offender for more than one
offence, the total sentence
imposed is a just and appropriate measure of the total criminality involved, and
is not crushing such
that all hope for a productive life post-sentence is
It is a fundamental
sentencing principle, rooted in the requirement for sentences to be fair, just
and proportionate which is mirrored
in the purposes set out in
Sentencing Act
, specifically proportionality and rehabilitation. The
importance of the principle is reflected in the discussion in
pages 62 and 63 and in the conclusion reached at pages 65 and 66, in particular
that passage set out at pages 66 and 67.
[15] It is to be
presumed that the legislature does not intend to “overthrow fundamental
principles, infringe rights, or depart
from the general system of law, without
expressing its intention with irresistible
clearness”.
New South Wales Crime
the High Court
endorsed the contemporary application of this principle of construction in the
following terms:
More recent statements of the principle in this
Court do not detract from the rationale identified
rather reinforce that rationale. That rationale not only has deep historical
roots; it serves important contemporary ends. It
respects the distinct
contemporary functions, enhances the distinct contemporary processes, and
fulfils the shared contemporary expectations
of the legislative and the judicial
branches of government.
does not set out a clear intention to entirely abrogate the principle of
Section 121(7)
prevent the principle of totality from
being applied by means of making the sentences for breaches of DVOs concurrent
or partially
concurrent with other sentences. However, in cases where there
are, for example, more than one assault charge, there is nothing
to stop the
principle from being applied by means of concurrency of the sentences for the
[18] The other
method of applying the principle of totality, albeit not the generally preferred
method, is by adjusting the length
of the sentences – both the head
sentence and time to serve.
appellant contends that where necessary to give effect to the totality
principle, the court can, and should, reduce the sentences
imposed for breaches
of DVOs (and/or related offences) below what would otherwise be appropriate to
the extent that, if necessary,
individual sentences should be imposed that may
be inadequate to reflect the seriousness of the individual offences.
[19] However,
the respondent contends that an application of the principle in the way
contended for by the appellant would be an illegitimate
attempt to subvert the
intention of the legislature in enacting
to prohibit sentencing
courts from making sentences for breach of DVOs concurrent. The second reading
speech for the Bill which
“The aim of
section 121
is to ensure that any sentence
for a contravention of a DVO is served in addition to other terms of
imprisonment. ..... The bill
section 121
in order to ensure that
persons who are found guilty of contravening a DVO, and who are sentenced to a
term of imprisonment, will
serve that term of imprisonment. The amendment
ensures that if a person is already serving a term of imprisonment, any sentence
they receive for contravening a DVO will need to be served and cannot be served
concurrently –
they will be locked up longer as a result of the
contravention.”
respondent contends that in light of the evident legislative intention, the only
scope for the application of the totality
principle when sentencing for breaches
of DVOs is for the court to lower the sentences to the lower end of the
appropriate range
of sentences for the particular offences. It would not be
permissible to lower the sentences below what would be appropriate sentences
the objective seriousness of the particular offending. To do so would be to
adopt artificial measures for the purpose of subverting
the intention of the
legislature expressed in the subsection and expounded in the second reading
speech. We agree with the respondent’s
contention, noting that the High
Lee v New South Wales Crime Commission
placed a rider on the
application of the general principle set out at
Application of the principle of construction is
not confined to the protection of rights, freedoms or immunities that are
hard-edged,
of long standing or recognised and enforceable or otherwise
protected at common law. The principle extends to the protection of fundamental
principles and systemic values. The principle ought not, however, to be extended
beyond its rationale:
it exists to protect from inadvertent and collateral
rights, freedoms, immunities, principles and values that are
important within our system of representative and responsible government
the rule of law;
it does not exist to shield those rights, freedoms,
immunities, principles and values from being specifically affected in the
of clearly identified legislative objects by means within the
constitutional competence of the enacting legislature.
[21] The Court
made it clear that where it is necessary in order to achieve the
objectives of the totality principle, the Court should impose head
which might otherwise be considered inadequate,
that the lower head sentence will fail to reflect adequately the seriousness of
the crime in respect of which it is imposed.
That is unfortunate. However, it is
to be preferred to the injustice involved in the imposition of a longer head
sentence because
of the inadequacy of the law to cope satisfactorily with the
intervention of State boundaries.
[22] However,
was concerned with a situation in which there was a lack of
statutory authority to back date sentences to take into account sentences
related offending imposed in another jurisdiction. It was not concerned, as we
are here, with a positive statutory prohibition.
There is scope for the
application of the totality principle by ordering concurrency of other sentences
imposed at the same time
(eg sentences for assault) and by reducing the
sentences imposed for breaches of DVOs and other sentences imposed at the same
to the lower end of the range of appropriate sentences available given the
objective seriousness of the breaches. However, to impose
inadequate individual
sentences to give effect to the totality principle in the face of the
legislative prohibition on concurrency
aimed at ensuring offenders serve the
sentences imposed and are “locked up for longer” because of their
contraventions
would, in our view, constitute an illegitimate attempt to subvert
the legislative intention of the sub-section.
Domestic and Family Violence Act
court must not make an order for a person who has previously been found guilty
of a DVO contravention offence if the order would
result in the release of the
person from the requirement to actually serve the term of imprisonment
[24] When the
appellant appeared before the Local Court on 31 July 2020, to be sentenced
for the matters the subject of this appeal,
he had previously been found guilty
of a DVO contravention offence. On 14 April 2020, he was found guilty of a DVO
contravention
offence committed on 11 April 2020. The matter is
complicated by the fact that three of the five counts which are the subject of
this appeal pre-date that finding of guilt. (They occurred on 7 February,
7-8 March and 26 March 2020.) However, two of the matters
for which the
appellant was sentenced on 31 July 2020, and which are the subject of this
appeal, post-date the finding of guilt on
14 April (“the subsequent
offences”). (The subsequent offences were committed on 19 April and
6 May 2020.)
sentencing judge ordered the appellant’s sentence to be suspended after he
had served 10 months. The respondent to
the appeal has cross-appealed
contending that the effect of
was to prohibit the sentencing judge from
making an order suspending any part of the sentence imposed in relation to the
result, the following question was referred to the Full Court for determination.
QUESTION 2: Did
Domestic and Family Violence
prohibit the sentencing judge from making an order suspending any part
of the sentence in respect of the subsequent offences?
[27] The plain
is to prohibit the court from suspending any part of a
sentence imposed for a second or subsequent offence of breaching a DVO.
in this case, when the sentence is analysed, it does not appear as
though the sentencing judge has done so, provided the sentence
structured such that the sentences for the subsequent offences are served in
full before the period of suspension begins.
sentence imposed on the appellant was imprisonment for 28 months suspended after
10 months. The sentence was made up as
(a) eight months for the aggravated assault;
(b) six months for one of the breaches of the DVO;
(c) two sentences of two months each and two sentences of four months each for
the other breaches of the DVO; and
(d) two months for the attempted breach of the DVO.
[29] Sub-section
121(7) requires the sentences for each of the five counts of contravening a DVO
to be served cumulatively upon each
other and upon the sentence for the
aggravated assault and the sentencing judge, accordingly, made all of the
sentences cumulative.
aggravated assault required a mandatory minimum sentence of three months actual
imprisonment. The two subsequent offences
attracted sentences of two months and
four months, which, under
could not be suspended in whole or in
part. Therefore, the total amount of time that the legislation required the
appellant to actually
serve – ie that part of the sentence which could not
be suspended – amounted to nine months in total. The sentencing
suspended the sentence imposed after 10 months.
[31] This court
does not have any information about how the sentence was structured. Provided
it was structured such that the sentences
for the subsequent offences were
imposed first, so that they were served in full before the suspended part of the
sentence took effect,
there will have been no contravention of
[32] On the
hearing of the reference, the parties also addressed submissions to the question
also precluded a sentencing court from fixing a non-parole
period. The appellant contended that it did not and the respondent contended
that it did.
question is not the subject of a reference to the Full Court. Moreover, should
the appeal be successful, there is no prospect
of the question arising on a
resentence. The total existing sentence for the two subsequent offences is six
months. There is no
possibility of any resentence exceeding that total for
those two offences, and the minimum non-parole period which is able to be
is eight months.
The question
would therefore be purely hypothetical and we decline to amend the reference and
to consider the question.
Question 3:
respondent contends that the appeal is incompetent because the appeal was
instituted by filing a single notice of appeal
against the sentences for five
offences across three different files: count 3 on file 22016657, count 1 on
file 22014875, and counts
1, 2 and 8 on file 22013327.
[35] There have
been conflicting statements of principle in decisions of this Court on the
question of whether separate notices of
appeal are required when an appellant
wishes to appeal against a sentence imposed in relation to a number of matters
which were heard
together. As a consequence, the following question has been
referred to the full court:
QUESTION 3: Is the appeal incompetent
in relation to some or all of the offences the subject of the appeal as a
consequence of only
one notice of appeal having been filed?
Summary of Northern Territory authorities:
[36] The first
Territory case on the issue,
placed emphasis on
the need for separate notices of appeal for matters on different
, but that case was decided at a time when the Northern
Territory legislation only permitted one matter to be charged on a complaint.
That case was followed by
Commissioner of Taxation v Arnhem Air Engineering
accepted the argument that the Act gives a right of appeal from
"a" conviction, order or adjudication and so contemplates separate
against every sentence or order from which it is desired to
. Hence it is defective to file one notice of appeal which relates to
more than one appeal. The clear implication of this line of
reasoning is that a
separate notice of appeal is required in relation to each sentence or conviction
even where the offences in question
were charged on the same complaint. In the
later cases of
Warford v Firth
held in each case, on the facts before it, that separate notices of appeal were
required. In each of those cases, the
appellant was purporting to appeal
against orders made in relation to matters charged on more than one complaint.
In each case,
the court left open the question of whether more than one notice
of appeal was required when the appeal related to offences which
charged on the same complaint.
Lawrie v Stokes
Lawrie v Stokes
separate complaints were laid against the appellant for dangerous driving,
offensive behaviour, resisting arrest and assault.
The charges arose out of the
same incident and were heard together by consent. He was convicted of all four
charges, fined in relation
to two, and sentenced to imprisonment in relation to
two. He purported to appeal against the two sentences of imprisonment. He
filed only one notice of appeal, and that notice did not contain the required
recognizance. (It was established that there was only
one notice of appeal by
examining the files and noting that there was no notice of appeal on one of
[38] Kriewaldt
AJ held that two notices of appeal were required. His Honour
that in none of the cases
to which he referred in his review of the authorities was there any legislation
analogous to s 51 of the
Justices Act 1921-1943
which specifically
permits the joinder of a number of offences in one complaint if the charges
arise out of the same set of circumstances.
At the time
Lawrie v Stokes
was decided, the
Justices Ordinance
(NT) did not permit the
joinder of more than one charge on a complaint. Section 51 of that Ordinance
Every complaint shall be for one matter of complaint
only and not for two or more
considering the question of whether two notices of appeal were required
Kriewaldt AJ said:
The appellant, I shall assume, consented to the
four charges being heard together. His counsel seems to have treated the four
as amounting together to one “case” and on that
assumption gave only one Notice of Appeal. It is implicit from what
I have said
that although the charges were heard together there were nevertheless four
distinct matters before the Court. There
were four complaints, four
convictions, and four separate penalties were imposed.
The fact that the
four complaints were heard together did not convert them into one charge of four
offences. It follows that if the
appellant desired to appeal against all four
convictions he was bound to give four separate Notices of Appeal,
similarly if he desired to appeal against two convictions, he was bound to give
two separate Notices of Appeal.
underlined portion of this extract from the judgment appears to place the
emphasis on the fact that there were four separate
, keeping in
mind that, at that time, only one offence could be charged on a complaint.
Would a complaint charging four offences
one charge of four
subsequent Northern Territory cases on this issue were all decided after the
Northern Territory legislation was amended to
provide that more than one charge
could be laid on the same complaint if the charges arose out of the same
circumstances.
Commissioner of Taxation v Arnhem Air
Engineering Pty Ltd
Commissioner
of Taxation v Arnhem Air Engineering Pty
was a Crown appeal (or
purported appeal) against inadequacy of sentence on a number of convictions.
The respondents were two separate
companies. By agreement in the Court of
Summary Jurisdiction in Darwin all charges were heard together; and argument
relating to
the validity of the appeals was likewise heard together.
respondents to the appeal argued that the appeals were incompetent by reason of
a number of defects one of which was that
only one notice of appeal was filed
and served for each respondent. In upholding that challenge to the appeal,
Asche J (as he then
There is one notice of appeal in each
case, i.e. where Arnhem Aircraft Engineering Pty Ltd is the respondent and where
Charter Pty Ltd is the respondent.
In fact in each case the appeal
relates to three separate charges and, presumably therefore the notices of
appeal are meant to encompass
appeals against six separate convictions and
It is submitted by Mr Mildren QC for the respondents that the Act
contemplates separate notices of appeal against every sentence or
order which it
is desired to appeal from
. This, it is said, can be the only reasonable
inference which can be drawn from the expression in
s 163 which gives a right
of appeal from "a" conviction, order or adjudication and the requirement for the
appeal to be on a ground
which involves sentence or error or mistake "in every
I accept the arguments for the respondent that it is defective to file one
notice of appeal which relates to more than one appeal.
[44] The focus
in this judgment is not on how many
there were, but on how
, as Asche J accepted the submission by Mr Mildren QC
then was) that on its true construction, the Act required a
separate notice of appeal in relation to “every sentence or order
is desired to appeal from”. It is not even made clear whether there was
more than one complaint (as distinct from
more than one charge) for each
respondent. As the case was decided after the 1961 amendment to s 51, it
is possible that all three
charges against each company were charged on the same
Reilly v Baker
Reilly v Baker
appellant appealed against a sentence imposed in the Court of Summary
charged on one
complaint and three offences charged on a separate complaint of the same date.
By consent the two complaints containing
the total of 10 charges were heard
together. The magistrate imposed a single fine of $20,000 in respect of all 10
offences and ordered
the appellant to pay costs in the sum of $6,416. The
appellant contended that the fine was manifestly excessive and that the award
costs involved an error of law.
[46] Counsel for
the respondent submitted that separate notices of appeal should have been
lodged, one in respect of the fine and
one in respect of the costs. Kearney J
I do not think that is necessary. In
Lawrie v Stokes
(1951) NTJ 66
Kriewaldt J held that there should be a separate notice of appeal
in respect of each conviction sought to be appealed, but that is
a different
point which I will deal with later.
[47] When he
came to deal with the issue raised in
Lawrie v Stokes
, Kearney J
submitted that in fact only one appeal had been instituted, purportedly in
relation to the sentence on the 10 charges contained
in the two complaints; he
submitted that this was not permissible since there had to be a separate notice
of appeal for each conviction
appealed. He relied on what was said by Kriewaldt
Lawrie v Stokes
(at 80), followed by Asche J (as he then was) in
Commissioner of Taxation (Cth) v Arnhem Aircraft Engineering Pty Ltd
[1987] NTSC 26
(1987) 90 FLR 140
at 144. It is unnecessary for me to rule upon this submission
since I consider that in fact two notices of appeal were
In my view, where
appeals are lodged against convictions or sentences imposed in respect of
several counts in a complaint
which are heard together, there should only
be one notice of appeal:
Samuels v Leech
[1970] SASR 60
the question is discussed by Hogarth J (at 61-62).
Kearney J went on to refer to South Australian authorities in which it had
been held that only one Notice of Appeal was necessary
even when charges on
complaints were heard
[48] Kearney J
determined that two notices of appeal had been filed because two identical
notices had been filed – and presumably
one copy placed on each file (ie
there were two copies of one notice of appeal – one for each file).
Warford v Firth
Warford v Firth
two charges of aggravated assault (on information) and two charges of breach
of a DVO (on complaint) were all heard together. The
appellant filed a single
notice of appeal – out of time.
[50] Southwood J
held that the Act required there to have been separate notices at least in
respect of the convictions for the charges
on information and the convictions
for the charges on complaint. His Honour said at [4]:
The original
Notice of Appeal was filed out of time. It was filed three days late. In
addition to being out of time, the Notice of
Appeal was defective.
solicitors for the appellant had impermissibly joined in the same Notice of
Appeal - the appeal from the convictions for the two
aggravated assaults, and
appeals from convictions for two charges of breaching a domestic violence
contrary to s 120 of the
Domestic and Family Violence Act
All four charges were summarily tried together in the Local Court.
footnote, Southwood J cited
Commissioner of Taxation v Arnhem Air Engineering
[1987] NTSC 26
(1987) 90 FLR 140
Lawrie v Stokes
(1951) NTJ 66
as authority for the proposition that the appeals had been impermissibly joined
in the one notice of appeal; noted the contrary views
Reilly v Baker
[1989] NTSC 46
(1989) 99 FLR 52
Elliott v Harris (No 2)
(1976) 13 SASR 516
It is preferable, and the Act requires, there to have been
separate notices
at least in respect of the convictions for the charges on
information and the convictions for the charges on complaint
[52] This left
open the question of whether separate notices of appeal were necessary when the
offences in question were charged on
the same complaint.
Court v Armstrong
v Armstrong
appellant was charged with a number of offences laid on information on one file
and charged with other offences, some laid on
information and some on complaint,
on a separate file, all heard together. He was found guilty and purported to
appeal against all
of the sentences in a single notice of appeal. Mildren J
focused on the fact that the one notice of appeal referred to two
The appellant purported to appeal against all of the
sentences in a single notice of appeal
which referred to both file
Objection was taken by Mr. Dane, counsel for the respondent, that the notice
of appeal was bad because only one notice of appeal was
filed, whereas
should have been separate notices of appeal filed for each file
Furthermore, the 4 charges on file number 21812446 were laid on separate
information, and the charges in relation to file number
21848910 were contained
in an information and a
After hearing submissions,
I ruled that there was only one notice of
appeal filed and that there should have been two.
I called upon the
appellant to elect as to
which of the two files
he intended to appeal.
The appellant elected to appeal file number 21848910 and sought leave to amend
the notice of appeal. Leave
[54] It should
be noted that although the notice of appeal, as amended to refer to only one
file, related to a number of offences,
it was an appeal against a single
sentence imposed in relation to those offences – and hence was an appeal
against a single
J left open the question whether a separate notice of appeal was required when
there was more than one order relating to
offences charged on the same complaint
– for example when the appellant sought to appeal against convictions for
one offence charged on the same complaint. In giving reasons for the
decision His Honour said:
where there are quite distinct
matters, the subject of two separate Local Court files
and those matters
are not connected as arising out of the same circumstances
or form or are
part of a series of offences of the same or a similar character the position is
different, and if it is desired to
appeal each of the sentences,
at least two
notices of appeal are necessary.”
appears to be a reference to s 51 of the
Local Court (Criminal Procedure)
which provides that charges for any number of offences may be joined in
the same complaint, if the charges arise out of the same
set of circumstances.
The underlined portion of Mildren J’s judgment seems to leave open the
possibility that if the matters
in question arose out of the same circumstances
and so were charged on the same complaint, only one notice of appeal would be
even if the appeal was against more than one order – eg an
appeal against multiple convictions on the same complaint.
Australian Cases
Samuels v Leech
in the South Australian Supreme Court held that where appeals are brought
against orders of a court of summary jurisdiction
separate counts on the
same complaint
, it is permissible, and desirable, that appeals against all
the orders made on that complaint be instituted in the same notice of
Elliott v Harris (No 2)
(which involved an appeal against a number of convictions on
complaints) Bray CJ held that, in that case, only one Notice of Appeal was
necessary. Part of the rationale for that decision was
as follows.
[1970] S.A.S.R. 60
J. held that there was no objection to appeals against several convictions on
several counts in one complaint being instituted
by one notice of appeal, and,
indeed, that it was preferable that this should be done. With respect I agree,
in the circumstances
of that case. It is true that his reasoning does not in
terms apply to an appeal against several convictions of the same defendant
arising out of different complaints heard concurrently, but I think the logic of
the decision does apply. Section 163 gives the right
of appeal to this Court
"from every conviction, order, and adjudication of a court of summary
a complaint of a simple offence". The
appeal is against the conviction, not against the complaint. If
can cover several convictions arising out of one complaint
, so, it seems to
me, by parity of reasoning it can cover several convictions arising out of
different complaints. ....
Parties contentions
appellant in this case has submitted that only one notice of appeal was
necessary and that the approach in the South Australian
cases referred to by
Kearney J in
is to be preferred,
noting that the provisions of the
Justices Act
under consideration in those cases are essentially identical to the appeal
provisions in the
Local Court (Criminal Procedure) Act
. Counsel relied,
in particular, on the following remarks of Bray CJ in
Elliott v Harris (No
Section 163
gives the right of appeal to this Court “from every conviction, order, and
adjudication of a court of summary jurisdiction
... or an order dismissing a
complaint of a simple offence.” The appeal is against the conviction, not
against the complaint.
If one notice can cover several convictions arising out
of one complaint, so, it seems to me, by parity of reasoning it can cover
several convictions arising out of different complaints ....
Accordingly I think the notice is good, but, of course, there is nothing to
stop an appellant from giving a separate notice of appeal
from each conviction.
In the circumstances of
Samuels v Leech
Hogarth J thought that the
preferable course was for there to be only one notice of appeal, and, as I have
said, I respectfully agree
with that. In other circumstances it might be
preferable that there should be separate notices. Indeed, in some cases, as if
were absolutely no nexus at all between the various convictions, it might
be an abuse of process of the Court if there were not several
[59] Mr Robson
SC for the appellant pointed out that the present appeal was against the total
effective sentence applied across charges
on three separate complaints; that the
notice of appeal identifies each of the three complaints by their file numbers;
although error is contended for in relation to sentences for discrete
offences, it is the final order giving rise to the total effective
which is ultimately being appealed against. He submitted that the manner in
which the notice has been drafted would seem
perfectly apposite to the nature
and circumstances of the appeal.
[60] Counsel for
the respondent contended that, notwithstanding the obiter remarks of Mildren AJ
Court v Armstrong
, the result in that case was that the Court held
that separate notices were required, following long standing precedent in
Lawrie v Stokes
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Arnhem Aircraft
Engineering
. Counsel pointed out that the practice of amending the notice
of appeal to restrict the appeal to one file had been followed in
a recent Crown
appeal before Southwood J in
[61] On the
hearing of the reference, junior counsel for the respondent, Ms Ingles,
pointed out that there was a difference in wording
between the South Australian
legislation under consideration in
Samuels v Leech
Harris (No 2)
and the Northern Territory legislation. The South Australian
legislation provides for an appeal “from
conviction,
order, and adjudication of a court of summary jurisdiction” whereas the
Northern Territory equivalent gives a right
of appeal “from
conviction, order, and adjudication of a court of summary
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Arnhem Aircraft Engineering
[62] Ms Ingles
pointed out that there are practical difficulties with both positions. In the
Local Court (and the Youth Justice Court)
it commonly occurs that multiple
complaints are heard supposedly seriatim but in reality simultaneously, followed
by the imposition
of a single total sentence. Quite often the appeal is focused
on whether the total effective sentence is manifestly excessive (or
inadequate)
and may involve issues such as whether the sentence should have been partly
suspended or a non-parole period fixed.
In those circumstances, it may seem
absurd, or at least wasteful of effort, for the appellant to be required to file
multiple notices
of appeal all essentially saying the same thing. Further,
courts are generally reluctant to deny a party an opportunity to be heard
what is essentially a technicality.
[63] On the
other hand, Ms Ingles pointed out that the approach set out in the passage from
Bray CJ’s judgment in
Elliott v Harris (No 2)
would involve the
appeal court exercising a discretion whether to allow a single notice of appeal
or require separate notices and
that is likely to lead to uncertainty and to
arguments on almost every appeal where there are multiple convictions, or
on multiple files on one notice of appeal, about the exercise of the
discretion and the nexus. Ms Ingles submitted that when dealing
inferior court with a high volume of matters, commonly matters where there are
multiple complaints and multiple offences
charged on each complaint, it is far
more efficient, sensible and certain to have a known and certain requirement for
separate notices
of appeal. The South Australian approach whereby there is a
discretion to allow single notices of appeal in some circumstances,
would simply
add to the workload of all parties involved, including the
[64] We agree
that no sufficient reason exists to justify this Court overturning long standing
precedent in the Northern Territory,
Lawrie v Stokes
Commissioner of Taxation v Arnhem Aircraft Engineering
, which have been
followed in subsequent cases, in order to follow the approach adopted in the
South Australian cases.
rationale for requiring separate notices of appeal, clearly articulated in
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Arnhem Aircraft Engineering,
s 163 of the
Justices Act
Local Court (Criminal
Procedure) Act
] gives a right of appeal from
conviction, order or
adjudication. This requires there to be a separate notice of appeal for every
sentence or other order sought
to be appealed. This is consistent with
Lawrie v Stokes
in which Kriewaldt JA said:
It follows that
if the appellant desired to appeal against all four convictions he was bound to
give four separate Notices of Appeal,
and similarly if he desired to appeal
against two convictions, he was bound to give two separate Notices of
Although elsewhere in the judgment Kriewaldt JA seemed to focus on the need
for separate notices in relation to separate complaints,
this was at a time when
only one charge could be laid in a complaint.
alternative approach would be to require a separate notice of appeal in relation
to matters charged on separate complaints.
This was the approach adopted by
Kearney J in
Reilly v Baker
though without explicitly specifying the
basis in principle for doing so; and left open as a possibility in
Court v Armstrong
[67] This Court
invited further written submissions from the parties on the following question:
Assuming that one notice of appeal was insufficient, was there a
requirement for 3 notices or 5 notices, given that the appeal related
charges over 3 files: that is to say, is a separate notice required for each
complaint or for each individual order appealed
[68] Both the
appellant and the respondent filed written submissions contending that only
three notices were required. The reasons
given were similar and can be summed
up in the following passage from the submissions of Mr Robson SC for the
[T]here is no good reason to require an individual
notice of appeal to be filed in relation to each and every order which is
against. Such an approach would only serve to increase the complexity
and costs of Local Court Appeals when, in other jurisdictions,
the approach has
been more focused on allowing the appeal to be dealt with on the merits where
there is no significant legal or practicable
impediment to doing
[69] Although we
agree with the parties that the most practical and efficient result would be to
require a separate notice of appeal
, we cannot see a
principled basis for such a finding. It seems to us that the rationale for
requiring separate notices of appeal
articulated by Asche J – on the basis
of the submission in that case by Mr Mildren QC – is compelling. There is
of appeal other than as provided by statute. The
Local Court
(Criminal Procedure) Act
gives a right of appeal from
conviction,
order or adjudication. This requires there to be a separate notice of appeal
for every conviction, sentence or other
order sought to be appealed.
[70] Separate
notices of appeal were required for each of the sentences appealed against. It
is not clear from the material before
this Court whether the Local Court imposed
separate sentences for each of the five charges, in which case five notices of
would have been required, or whether that Court imposed one aggregate
sentence for the charges on each file, in which case three
notices of appeal
were required.
[71] We agree
that the most rational position would be to require a notice of appeal for each
complaint and each information only
including where there are multiple charges
on a complainant or information. It is not uncommon for up to 10 charges to be
on a single
complaint and the Act as presently worded requires numerous notices
of appeal where appeals are pursued in relation to multiple convictions
sentences. We recommend that Parliament give consideration to amending the Act
to permit one notice of appeal per complaint and
one notice of appeal per
information to overcome the requirement for multiple notices of appeal which
serve no practical purpose.
examination of the files in the present case reveals that a single notice of
appeal appears on each file. As was the case
this means that,
although the notices of appeal are identical, and each one contains reference to
all three files, effectively the
appellant has filed a separate notice of appeal
for each file.
[73] We note
that Mildren J reached a different factual conclusion in
Court v Armstrong
in which the Supreme Court received separate notices for both matters and
two copies of the notice of appeal, one for each matter,
one being a photocopy
of the other. Mildren AJ held that “in those circumstances I am satisfied
that only one notice of appeal
was filed in the Local Court, and not two.”
However, this finding was in the context of that case in which some of the
were on complaint and some on information and the appellant purported to
include them all on the one notice. This factual finding
may also have been
affected by the need for separate recognizances and filing fees. In
the appellant filed two identical notices of appeal and entered into
separate recognizances to prosecute each of the two appeals,
and Kearney J held
that two notices of appeal had been filed. In the present case, the appeals
being filed by NT Legal Aid, there
was a waiver of the filing fees and no
recognizances were required.
[74] The answer
to the third question referred, therefore, is that separate notices of appeal
were required for each sentence being
appealed against. If the appeals relate
to three sentences only, the appeals are not incompetent because that
requirement has been
met. If the appeals purport to relate to five individual
sentences, then one or more of the notices of appeal will require to be
by deleting the references to the surplus
[75] QUESTION 1:
When the Court is applying
Domestic and Family Violence
in sentencing an offender for a breach of a DVO and another offence or
offences, is the court obliged to give effect to the totality
principle by
lowering the individual sentences below what would otherwise be appropriate?
Section 121(7)
Domestic and Family Violence Act
entirely abrogate the principle of totality.
Section 121(7)
prevent the principle of totality from being
applied by means of making the sentences for breaches of DVOs concurrent or
concurrent with other sentences.
(c) However, in cases where there are other charges not subject to the
restriction in
, for example, more than one assault charge, the
sentencing court should, where it is appropriate, give effect to the totality
by ordering concurrency or partial concurrency of those other
(d) A sentencing court should also give effect to the principle of totality,
where it is appropriate, by reducing the sentences to
the lower end of the
appropriate range of sentences for the particular offences.
(e) It is not permissible for a sentencing court to lower the sentences below
what would be appropriate sentences for the objective
seriousness of the
particular offending. To do so would be to adopt artificial measures for the
purpose of subverting the intention
of the legislature expressed in
[76] QUESTION 2:
Domestic and Family Violence Act
prohibit the
sentencing judge from making an order suspending any part of the sentence in
respect of the subsequent offences?
The plain meaning of
is to prohibit the court from suspending any
part of a sentence imposed for a second or subsequent offence of breaching a
DVO. However,
in this case, it does not appear as though the sentencing judge
has done so, provided the sentence for the second or subsequent offence
directed to be served first. (If this is not the case, the error can be
corrected by simply changing the order in which the
sentences are to be
[77] QUESTION 3:
Is the appeal incompetent in relation to some or all of the offences the subject
of the appeal as a consequence of
only one notice of appeal having been
(a) Separate notices of appeal were required in relation to the appeal against
each of the sentences imposed.
(b) The appellant has filed three notices of appeal by filing three identical
notices, one copy of which was placed on each of the
three files. Whether this
is sufficient will depend upon whether the appellant is purporting to appeal
against three separate sentences
or five separate
----------------------------
Appellant’s submissions at
[1988] HCA 70
(1988) 166 CLR 59.
Respondent’s submissions at
Transcript of 31 July 2020 at p
[2018] NTCCA 14
Brown v Guerin & Ors
[2016] NTSC 53
Watson v Chambers
[2013] NTSC 7
Idai v Malagorski
[2011] NTSC 102.
Postiglione v The Queen
[1997] HCA 26
(1997) 189 CLR 295
per McHugh J;
Mill v The Queen
[1988] HCA 70
(1988) 166 CLR 59
Potter v Minahan
(1908) 7 CLR 277
(8 October 1908) per O’Connor J at p 304.
[2013] HCA 39
(2013) 251 CLR 196
per Gageler and Keane JJ.
Mill v The Queen
Northern Territory,
Parliamentary Debates, Legislative Assembly
, 20 October 2010, 6431, (Lawrie,
Justice and Attorney-General).
at [313] per Gageler and Keane
Sentencing Act
(Supreme Court of the Northern
Territory of Australia, unreported, Kriewaldt AJ, 17 December 1951).
[1987] NTSC 26
(1987) 90 FLR 140
[2019] NTSC 38
[2017] NTSC 75
(Supreme Court of the Northern
Territory of Australia, unreported, Kriewaldt AJ, 17 December 1951).
as enacted by section 6 of the
Justices Act Amendment Act
of 1943. That section read:
Section 51 (1): A person may be charged with any number of summary offences
in the same complaint (either cumulatively or in the
alternative) if the charges
arise from the same set of circumstances or from a series of circumstances of
the same or similar character.
The section was amended by s 7
Justices Ordinance
Section 51 (1): Charges for any number of offences may be joined in the same
complaint, if the charges arise from the same set of
circumstances.
This is now s 51(1) of the
Local Court (Criminal Procedure) Act.
[1987] NTSC 26
(1987) 90 FLR 140
[1989] NTSC 46
(1989) 99 FLR 52
At pp 54-55.
Kearney J noted:
“On 19 June the appellant filed two notices of appeal; although they
are, understandably, in identical terms, I consider that
it is clear that one
relates to the complaint of 22 May relating to seven offences, while the other
relates to the complaint of the
same date relating to three offences. I note
that the appellant entered into separate Recognisances to prosecute each of
Elliot v Harris (No2)
(1976) 13 SASR 516
; Samuels v Leech
[1970] SASR 60
per Hogarth J; and
Osmasich v Evans
(1980) 25 SASR 481.
[2017] NTSC 75
[2019] NTSC 38
There was an issue relating to
the file that was struck from the amended notice of appeal, namely that an
aggregate sentence was
imposed when that was not permitted under the
. That did not affect the amended notice of appeal.
[1970] SASR 60.
(1976) 13 SASR 516
at 519; See
Okmasich v Evans
(1980) 25 SASR 481.
[1989] NTSC 46
(1989) 99 FLR 52
(1976) 13 SASR 516
Beams v Tilmouth
of 2020 (21912441); LCA 4 of 2020 (22001316); LCA 5 of 2020 (22002323); LCA 6 of
2020 (22006410).
The appellant cited to South
Australian cases referred to above.
[1989] NTSC 46
(1989) 99 FLR 52
This was the remedy applied in
Court v Armstrong.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (278 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter