URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCCA/2025/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:18:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sullivan v The King [2025] NTCCA 4 (12 May 2025)
Sullivan v The King
[2025] NTCCA 4
PARTIES: SULLIVAN, Roy
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: CA 15 of 2024 (22323470)
DELIVERED: 12 May 2025
HEARING DATE: 17 April 2025
JUDGMENT OF: Southwood and Brownhill JJ and Riley AJ
CATCHWORDS:
CRIMINAL LAW – APPEAL – Appeal against sentence for arson –
whether sentence manifestly excessive – offending
pre-meditated –
arson of a vehicle of substantial value – loss to victim beyond loss of
the vehicle – relevance
of insurance coverage – motive of revenge as
an aggravating factor – sentence not manifestly excessive – Appeal
Criminal Code 1983
(NT), s 243(1), s
Sentencing Act 1995
AB v The King
[2023] NTCCA 8
Ajax v The Queen
[2006] NTCCA 12
Aung v The State of Western Australia
(2022) WASCA 175
[2003] NTCCA 2
Cheung v The Queen
[2001] HCA 67
[2001] 209 CLR 1
[2024] NTCCA 13
; The Queen v Kilic (2016)259 CLR 256;
Markarian v The Queen
(2005) 228 CLR 357;
The King v Mamarika
[2024] NTCCA 5
The Queen v Rindjarra
[2008] NTCCA 9
Truong v The
[2015] NTCCA 5
(2015) 35 NTLR 186
R v Winters
[2022] ACTSC 371
[2015] ACTSC 114
, referred to
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: A Abayasekara
Respondent: L Auld
Solicitors:
Appellant: Northern Territory Legal Aid Commission
Respondent: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 16
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Sullivan v The King
[2025] NTCCA 4
No. CA 15 of 2024 (22323470)
ROY SULLIVAN
CORAM: SOUTHWOOD and BROWNHILL JJ and RILEY AJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 12 May 2025)
November 2023 the appellant pleaded guilty to a single count of causing damage
to a conveyance by using fire contrary to
s 243(1) of the
Criminal Code 1983
Criminal Code’
). On 24 January 2024, he was
sentenced to imprisonment for four years with a non-parole period of two years
and six months. The appellant
seeks leave to appeal out of time and leave to
appeal against sentence
on the sole
ground that the sentence was manifestly excessive.
[2] It is not
disputed that, following the sentence, the appellant promptly applied to the
Legal Aid Commission for representation
in relation to an appeal. On 29 January
2024 the solicitor for the appellant wrote to the Director of Public
Prosecutions advising
that the appellant intended to file an appeal against
There is no suggestion
that the delays which followed were in any way contributed to by the appellant
but rather arose in the offices
of the Legal Aid Commission.
[3] In all the
circumstances it is appropriate to grant an extension of time. It is not
suggested that the proposed ground of appeal
is not arguable and leave to appeal
should be granted.
The circumstances of the offending
sentencing Judge described the circumstances of the offending as both bizarre
and quite disturbing. Just after midnight on
24 July 2023 the appellant was
aboard the prawn trawler “Brampton” which was moored in Frances Bay,
in an area commonly
known as the duck pond. There then occurred an incident with
the victim the nature of which remains unclear. After that incident
appellant called the police and claimed that the victim had come on board the
vessel and threatened to shoot him with a 44 calibre
rifle. The appellant
told police he had armed himself with two large knives, that there had been an
exchange of words and the victim
told the appellant he had a 44 calibre gun in
his car. The appellant then claimed he walked the victim off the vessel and
police. CCTV footage showed the appellant and the victim talking with
each other on the wharf at the rear of the vessel. The victim
did not have any
firearm or weapon. He was holding a drink can. The appellant could be seen
holding the two knives. As his Honour
observed there was no evidence that the
victim was at any time armed in the presence of the appellant. Shortly
thereafter police
attended and the victim was arrested. At that time the
appellant, who appeared to be under the influence of alcohol, said to a police
officer that “rocking up like that, that looks like a hunter’s car
to me, that’s what I said, I’ll burn the
cunt”. The police
officer responded that the appellant should not do so and if he did “you
will be the prime suspect”.
appellant had been consuming alcohol prior to the arrival of police and he
continued to do so following their departure becoming
more intoxicated. At 1:53
am he sent a text message to DP, an employee of Austfish, in which he said:
“Just had a 44 pulled
on me at the Brampton!! Goanna firebomb the cunts
car un tonight”. Approximately two hours later, at 3:56 am, the appellant
obtained the keys to a forklift and drove it to where the victim’s Toyota
land cruiser was parked. He used the tines of the
forklift to roll the vehicle
onto its side causing damage. He then returned the forklift to its original
parking place. He walked
images of it on his mobile phone and sent some of those to DP. The appellant
then set fire to the interior of the vehicle and the fire engulfed the vehicle
causing a total loss. The appellant went back to the
Brampton where he watched
the vehicle burn and took a number of video recordings of the vehicle burning.
He sent the video images
to others. On one of the videos the appellant can be
heard saying “Oi, cunt wanted to put a 44 to my head, I just burned his
fucking car brus, fucking dog”.
[6] According to
the agreed facts, the vehicle was valued at approximately $57,000 and contained
other property valued at approximately
$15,000. In his victim impact statement
the victim advised that the vehicle had been significantly modified and was used
as his mobile
the value of the vehicle and the items lost was greater than stated
agreed facts. Further, it was apparent the victim suffered consequential losses
over and above the destruction of the vehicle.
The personal
circumstances of the appellant
[7] At the time
of the offending the appellant was aged 32 years. He was born in South Australia
but moved to Western Australia after
his parents died in separate motor vehicle
accidents when he was under the age of two years. He had a “stable and
good upbringing”
provided by his mother’s brother and his wife. He
left school in year 12 to undertake an apprenticeship which he did not complete.
He had a range of jobs and, at the time of this offending, was employed as a
professional fisherman and was residing on the prawn
“Brampton”.
appellant has a seven-page criminal history from Western Australia which
commenced in 2010. His convictions include seven
offences of property damage,
three of burglary, two of assault, one of assaulting a public officer, one of
aggravated common assault,
five minor drug-related offences, and six convictions
for breaching family violence restraining orders and police restraining orders.
Although he had not previously been sentenced to actual imprisonment he had been
sentenced to a suspended term of imprisonment and
also placed on an intensive
supervision order. He had been required to participate in programs and undertake
community work.
[9] The mental
condition of the appellant at the time of the offending was considered. His
Honour noted that the appellant had a diagnosis
of attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder from 2002 and in his teens he had been regularly seen by
a psychiatrist who specialised
in treating adolescents. As an adult he was
reviewed by a psychiatrist every six months up until 2022. He had also been
treated for
a major depressive disorder. When he moved to Darwin in October 2022
he was placed on a waitlist to see a psychiatrist. In light
of those matters his
Honour ordered a report from a psychiatrist which was received into
psychiatrist, Associate Professor Danny Sullivan, provided a detailed report in
which he concluded the appellant met the
diagnosis for severe substance misuse
disorder involving nicotine, alcohol and cannabis. However, he went on to state
that the appellant
did not suffer from any psychotic illness nor any cognitive
impairment and that he did not consider that “mental disorder was
associated with defending (sic) as described. He is impulsive, but this was
predominantly associated with intoxication with
alcohol”. There was and is
no challenge to those conclusions.
sentencing Judge concluded that the offending occurred because the appellant was
disinhibited and that alcohol was the primary
cause of the disinhibition. His
Honour observed that the prospects for rehabilitation of the appellant would
depend upon a number
of things including, particularly, dealing with his alcohol
problem. The appellant would be at risk of reoffending while under the
of alcohol.
The seriousness of the offending
[12] Offences of
this kind are serious and the maximum penalty of imprisonment for life for the
offence reflects that seriousness.
It was correctly acknowledged on behalf of
the appellant that the offending conduct in the present matter was a serious
such offending because the value of the damage was high for arson of
a motor vehicle and the conduct involved a degree of patience
and persistence
especially in light of a police warning not to engage in the threatened
sentencing Judge noted that the offending followed a plan devised by the
appellant. It took place over an extended period
of time and involved him
walking from the trawler to another area of the duck pond to obtain the forklift
and then driving it to
where the victim’s vehicle was parked. He used the
forklift to turn the vehicle over before returning the forklift to its original
location. He then walked back to the victim’s vehicle and set it alight.
He made a photographic or video record of the process.
He exercised patience in
implementing his plan and his Honour noted it was not “classically
impulsive behaviour”. It
was methodical. The plan was carried out in spite
of a police warning to the contrary. He filmed the consequences of his actions
and provided commentary in so doing. At the time of sentencing he showed neither
remorse nor concern for the circumstances of the
victim. There was no suggestion
that he would pay compensation.
[14] As the
appellant submits, in considering the seriousness of the offending it should be
borne in mind that the vehicle was, to
the knowledge of the appellant, not
occupied at the time the fire was set and the level of risk to other persons or
property was,
in the circumstances, limited. There was also reduced risk for
first responders given the circumstances. This is by way of contrast
offending involving premises which are occupied or where there are neighbouring
properties which may be put at
In this case there were no
injuries caused to others and no other property damaged.
[15] In imposing
sentence his Honour noted that there was no evidence to connect the offending
with any mental health condition and
that it is clear that the appellant was
both under the influence of alcohol and angry. His disinhibited state was
primarily caused
by the excessive consumption of alcohol. It was accepted that
the offending was unsophisticated but his Honour noted that the appellant
in accordance with the plan he had devised. There was no suggestion of remorse.
Reference was made to the relevant considerations
referred to in
[16] His Honour
adopted a starting point of imprisonment for five years which was reduced to
imprisonment for four years to reflect
the plea of guilty. Consideration was
then given to whether the sentence should be suspended and his Honour determined
“too much uncertainty in relation to the present extent of (his)
rehabilitation”. A non-parole period of two years and
six months backdated
to 24 July 2023 was imposed.
Manifest Excess
principles governing an appeal against sentence based on this ground are well
known and have been expressed in similar terms
in numerous cases. They were
recently restated first in
and later in
on v The King
in the following terms:
[56] Those principles are:
(a) The sentence is not to be disturbed on appeal unless error is shown.
(b) The presumption is that there is no error.
(c) Appellate intervention is not justified simply because the sentence is
markedly different from sentences imposed in other cases.
(d) Intervention is warranted only where the difference is such that in all the
circumstances the appellate court concludes there
must have been some
misapplication of principle, even though where and how is not apparent from the
(e) Manifest excess does not depend upon attribution of specific error. The
relevant test is whether the sentence was unreasonable
or plainly unjust.
(f) It must be shown that the sentence was clearly, not just arguably,
(g) There is no one single correct sentence. There can be compliance with
appropriate sentencing principles notwithstanding there
may be differences of
judicial opinion concerning the result.
[57] The relevant considerations in such an appeal are the maximum penalty
for the offence, the place which the criminal conduct occupies
in the scale of
seriousness of offences of the type committed by the appellant; the standards of
sentencing customarily imposed for
the offence and the personal circumstances of
the offender.
[18] The Courts
have observed that sentencing Judges must be accorded a wide measure of latitude
which will be respected by appellate
courts and that “judges at first
instance are to be allowed as much flexibility in sentencing as is consonant
with consistency
of approach and as accords with the statutory regime that
The sentence will
not be disturbed simply because it is stern or very stern or severe. It must be
“so egregiously erroneous
that the sentencing Judge must have made a
sentencing error although that error cannot be
identified”.
“sentence must be so far outside the range of a reasonable discretionary
judgement as to itself bespeak
[19] Further, in
assessing whether a sentence is manifestly excessive, comparison of the
appellant’s sentence with other sentences
for similar offending will not
be determinative of the appeal. There will, of course, be variation in the
circumstances of the offending
and of the offender in addition to the
discretionary nature of the sentencing exercise. However, a collation of
appropriate sentences
may provide a standard for a particular crime, although
not a fixed range departure from which will amount to demonstrable
referred to the High Court decision in
The Queen v
and went on to
Regard to current practice is an essential part of the
appellate function of minimising disparities in sentencing standards, and the
process of comparison has long been recognised as a legitimate forensic tool for
that purpose. The High Court in
held that similar cases may provide
a yardstick which assists in achieving consistency in sentencing, but that the
... does not mean that the range of sentences imposed in the past fixes the
boundaries within which future sentences must be passed;
rather the range of
sentences imposed in the past may inform a “broad understanding of the
range of sentences that would ensure
consistency in sentencing and a uniform
application of principle”.
The submissions
appellant did not seek to identify any specific error but, rather, submitted the
sentence was unreasonable and plainly unjust.
In support of this submission the
appellant directed attention to a number of matters arising out of the
sentencing remarks.
appellant acknowledged that the quantum of damage caused to the vehicle placed
the offending at the higher end for offences
of arson of a vehicle but suggested
it was in the mid-range for all arson offences. It was submitted that the
starting point of five
years imprisonment adopted by the sentencing Judge for an
offence involving $70,000 damage, where there was no actual harm nor any
life and other property, was at the higher end and indicates some misapplication
of principle.
appellant submitted that reliance by his Honour upon the “considerable
loss to the victim” as an aggravating
factor contributed unacceptably to
the severity of the sentence. In his written submissions the appellant
acknowledged that the “damage
caused was particularly high” in
comparison with other charges of arson of a vehicle. In this case it is apparent
loss to the victim went beyond the value of the vehicle and the
personal property within the vehicle and extended to losses arising
ability of the victim to use the vehicle in the pursuit of his employment. It
can be accepted that the amount of damage
is not necessarily a measure of the
culpability of the offender but, nevertheless, the extent of the damage is
relevant in the sentencing
process. In this case the damage was a relevant
consideration in determining an appropriate sentence.
appellant submitted that the fact the vehicle was insured was a relevant
consideration in lessening the seriousness of the
offending. In our opinion, in
the circumstances of this matter, this is not so. While the amount of damage
caused is a primary factor,
albeit not the only relevant factor, the fact that
the damage may be covered by insurance so as to lessen the burden on the
victim is not necessarily a matter of moderation. The causing of the
damage is the gravamen of the offending. The damage may have
a flow on effect
beyond the direct victim to others including an insurer and those who pay
premiums for such
appellant also took issue with the assertion of the respondent that an
aggravating feature of the offending was the motive
of the appellant. That
motive was revenge. The appellant submitted that the assessment of the
seriousness of an offence of arson
could not be significantly impacted by
considering whether the offender had a motive to commit that offence. We do not
accept that
submission. The motive with which the offence was committed is
plainly a consideration in determining the seriousness of an arson
[26] In support
of the proposition that the sentence was manifestly excessive the appellant
provided two schedules of comparative
sentencing in the Supreme Court covering
the period 1 January 2015 to 25 October 2024. The first related to arson of a
conveyance and the second to arson of a building or dwelling.
[27] As the
appellant submitted, reference to the first schedule reveals a usual range of
sentence, after application of a discount
for a guilty plea, of one to three
years. There were six sentences involving a disposition of less than 12
months’ imprisonment,
15 sentences involving a disposition of 12
months’ to less than two years’ imprisonment, 15 sentences involving
a disposition
of two years’ to less than three years’ imprisonment,
three with a head sentence of imprisonment for three years and
three where the
term of imprisonment was slightly greater than three
There was one sentence of
imprisonment for four years, which was the highest sentence imposed for arson of
[28] In that
the offender had
made two “Molotov cocktails”, drove to the victim’s house and
threw the Molotov cocktails at the
victim’s car. The car caught alight but
was put out with only minor paint damage. The head sentence for the count of
was imprisonment for four years and a further 18 months was imposed in
relation to the making of the Molotov cocktails.
considering those sentences it is necessary to also bear in mind the
observations of this Court over a number of years indicating
that sentences
imposed for arson in the Northern Territory are too low and need to be
increased. This view was expressed in
and, more recently, by
this Court in
respectfully agrees with those observations and, contrary to the submissions of
the appellant, we note that they apply
to all offences of arson. The maximum
penalty for the offence is imprisonment for life, reflecting the seriousness
with which the
offence of arson is to be regarded.
appellant drew attention to the non-parole period of two years and six months
and submitted this was also manifestly excessive.
The head sentence was
imprisonment for four years. Having determined that a partially suspended
sentence was not appropriate in the
circumstances of the offender, and having
provided reasons for so doing, his Honour then set the non-parole period.
Pursuant to the
relevant provisions of the
Sentencing Act 1995
minimum non-parole period available was two years. No reason was provided by his
Honour for determining that two years and
six months was appropriate in the
circumstances. Nevertheless, this was a discretionary matter and,
notwithstanding that it may have
been slightly more than expected, in all the
circumstances, it was within the bounds of that discretion.
respondent submitted this was a particular example of arson that was very
serious. It was planned, deliberate, motivated
by vengeance, committed in a
public place, and caused significant damage. The appellant filmed the burning
vehicle and he could be
heard bragging about his conduct. He demonstrated no
remorse and had a lengthy and relevant criminal history with uncertain prospects
for rehabilitation.
Conclusions
[32] Whilst it
is to be acknowledged that arson is an offence which can be committed in a wide
variety of circumstances, in our opinion
this was a particularly serious example
of this type of offending. As the respondent has submitted the offending was
premeditated,
deliberate, motivated by vengeance, committed in a public place
and caused significant loss to the victim. The appellant proceeded
conduct notwithstanding the warning from the police officer. He did so in
circumstances where over a period of hours he
developed a plan and implemented
that plan and bragged to others about what he was going to do and then, after
the event, what he
had done. He took no action to extinguish the fire or call
the fire brigade.
circumstances of the appellant were that he had an extensive criminal history
including some 55 entries for a wide range
of offences including damaging
property, wilfully and unlawfully destroying or damaging property and criminal
damage or destruction
of property. He had previously been sentenced to suspended
sentences of imprisonment and community-based orders. On this occasion
offending was serious and the moral culpability of the appellant was high. He
demonstrated no remorse. His prospects for rehabilitation
[34] In our
opinion and in all the circumstances the sentence imposed, whilst stern, was
within his Honour’s sentencing discretion.
[35] Leave to
appeal is allowed but the appeal is
Section 410(c) of the
In accordance with the
guidance provided in
[2003] NTCCA
See generally the observations
of Mildren J in
Ajax v The Queen
[2006] NTCCA 12
[2006] NTCCA 12
[2023] NTCCA 8
[2024] NTCCA 13
Markarian v The Queen
(2005) 228 CLR 357 at 371 [27].
Truong v The Queen
[2015] NTCCA 5
35 NTLR 186
Hanks v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 7
Truong v The Queen
[2015] NTCCA 5
35 NTLR 186
AB v The King
Ibid at [101].
The Queen v Kilic
[2016] HCA 48
259 CLR 256
R v Winters
[2022] ACTSC
Aung v The State of Western
(2022) WASCA 175
The Queen v Rindjarra
read with [80],
R v Wrigley
[2015] ACTSC 114
Cheung v The Queen
[2001] HCA 67
[2001] 209 CLR 1
This excludes the seven
sentences for arson of both a vehicle and a building, or where an aggregate
sentence was imposed for arson
NTSC 22219819, 26 May
2023 Burns J.
[2006] NTCCA 12
(2006) 161 A Crim R 293
298-299 and 299.
[2024] NTCCA 5
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (171 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter