URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTADComm/2004/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:16:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kennedy & Ors v Top End Womens Legal Service & Ors [2004] NTADComm 2 (4 June 2004)
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION COMMISSION
DECISION AFTER REMITTAL FROM THE LOCAL COURT IN DARWIN
FOLLOWING SUCCESSFUL APPEAL BY COMPLAINANTS.
LOCATION: DARWIN
TRIBUNAL: TONY FITZGERALD - COMMISSIONER
DATE OF DECISION: 4 JUNE 2004
ADC FILE NO: 20021157
LOCAL COURT CLAIM NO: 20212873
BETWEEN: ROBERT E KENNEDY
ANTHONY INGHAM
SHEILA M BATH
HOWARD BAILEY-GREEN
Complainants/Appellants
AND: NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
(OFFICE OF ETHNIC AFFAIRS)
First Respondent
TOP END WOMEN’S LEGAL SERVICE
Second Respondent
The Complainants allege that
their exclusion on
19 December 2001 by the Second Respondent from a family law workshop
targeted at migrant and refugee women, organized and presented
by the Second
Respondent and funded by the First Respondent, unlawfully discriminated against
them on the grounds of their (male)
sex, contrary to sections 19 and 20 of the
Anti-Discrimination Act
The Complainant Sheila M. Bath
alleges unlawful discrimination arising out of the same circumstances on the
basis of her association
with the above-named male Complainants contrary to
section 19(1)(r)
of the Act.
On or about 16
January 2002 the First Respondent, or more precisely the Delegate of the
Commissioner of the
First Respondent (“the Delegate”), accepted the complaints and
notified the First and Second Respondents to that effect.
Under the Act,
“acceptance” of complaints does not mean that complaints have been
found proved. “Acceptance”
or “rejection” under the Act
describes an initial screening process undertaken by the Delegate pursuant to
of the Act. Acceptance simply means a complaint appears to fall
within the scope of the Act.
The complaints involve
sections 15
of the Act. These sections are set out below.
“15. Delegation
(1) The Commissioner may, in writing, delegate to a person, including the
person from time to time holding, acting in or performing
the duties of, an
office, designation or position, any of the powers and functions of the
Commissioner under this or any other Act,
Division 4 or this
power of delegation.
(2) A power or function delegated under this section, when exercised or
performed by the delegate, shall, for the purposes of this
Act, be deemed to
have been exercised or performed by the Commissioner.
(3) A delegation under this section does not prevent the exercise of a power
or performance of a function by the Commissioner.
19. Prohibition of Discrimination
(1) Subject to subsection (2), a person shall not discriminate against
another person on the ground of any of the following attributes:
(c) sexuality;
(e) marital status;
(f) pregnancy;
(g) parenthood;
(h) breastfeeding;
(j) impairment;
(k) trade union or employer association activity;
(m) religious belief or activity;
(n) political opinion, affiliation or activity;
(p) irrelevant medical record;
(q) irrelevant criminal record;
(r) association with a person who has, or is believed to have, an attribute
referred to in this section.
not unlawful for a person to discriminate against another person on any of the
attributes referred to in subsection (1)
if an exemption under
20. Discrimination
(1) For the purposes of this Act, discrimination includes -
(a) any distinction, restriction, exclusion or preference made on the basis of
an attribute that has the effect of nullifying or
impairing equality of
opportunity; and
(b) harassment on the basis of an attribute,
in an area of activity referred to in
(2) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), discrimination takes
place if a person treats or proposes to treat another
person who has or had, or
is believed to have or had –
(a) an attribute;
(b) a characteristic imputed to appertain to an attribute; or
(c) a characteristic imputed to appertain generally to persons with an
less favourably than a
person who has not, or is believed not to have, such an attribute.
(3) For discrimination to take place, it is not necessary that -
(a) the attribute is the sole or dominant ground for the less favourable
treatment; or
(b) the person who discriminates regards the treatment as less
favourable.
(4) The motive of a person
alleged to have discriminated against another person is, for the purposes of
this Act, irrelevant.
27. Prohibition of aiding contravention of Act
(1) A person shall not cause, instruct, induce, incite, assist or promote
another person to contravene this Act.
(2) A person who causes, instructs, induces, incites, assists or promotes
another person to contravene this Act is jointly and severally
liable with the
other person for the contravention of this Act.
28. Areas of activities
This Act applies to prohibited conduct in the areas of -
(a) education;
(c) accommodation;
(d) goods, services and facilities;
(e) clubs; and
(f) insurance and superannuation.
41. Discrimination in goods, services and facilities area
(1) A person who supplies goods, services or facilities (whether or not for
reward or profit) shall not discriminate against another
(a) by failing or refusing to supply the goods, services or facilities;
(b) in the terms and conditions on which the goods, services or facilities are
(c) in the way in which the goods, services or facilities are supplied; or
(d) by treating the other person less favourably in any way in connection with
the supply of the goods, services or
facilities.
(2) Subsection (1) does
not apply to a person who supplies goods, services or facilities for or on
behalf of an association that
(a) is established for social, literary, cultural, political, sporting,
athletic, recreational or community service purposes or other
similar lawful
purposes; and
(b) does not carry out its purposes for the purpose of making a
42. Exemptions –
services for members of one sex
Nothing in this Division applies to or in relation to the provision of a
service the nature of which is such that it can only be provided
to members of
57. Special measures
(1) A person may discriminate against a person in a program, plan or
arrangement designed to promote equality of opportunity for a
group of people
who are disadvantaged or have a special need because of an attribute.
(2) Subsection (1) applies only until equality of opportunity has been
74. Investigation of complaint
(1) The Commissioner shall carry out an investigation under this Division of
alleged prohibited conduct if -
(a) requested to do so by the Minister; or
(b) the Commissioner accepts a complaint under section
(2) The Commissioner may carry out
an investigation under this Division if, during the course of carrying out the
Commissioner's functions,
it appears that prohibited conduct has occurred.
(3) An investigation carried out under subsection (1)(a) or (2) shall, for
the purposes of this Act, be deemed to be an investigation
of a complaint and
this Act shall apply to and in relation to –
(a) the investigation;
(b) any other proceedings under this Act in relation to the prohibited conduct;
(c) the Commissioner,
as if a complaint
had been made.
75. Conduct of investigation
(1) An investigation under this Division shall be conducted in such manner as
the Commissioner thinks fit.
(2) An investigation under this Division shall be carried out with as little
formality and technicality, and with as much expedition
as the requirements of
this Act and a proper consideration of the matters before the Commissioner
(3) In carrying out an investigation under this Division, the Commissioner
(a) shall make a thorough examination of all matters relevant to the
investigation; and
(b) where the Commissioner considers it appropriate, ensure that each party to
the investigation is given a reasonable opportunity
to present his or her
76. Completion of
investigation
(1) The Commissioner shall, on completing an investigation under this
Division in respect of a complaint, determine that the complaint
(a) dismissed; or
(b) if satisfied that there is
prima facie
evidence to substantiate the
allegation of prohibited conduct in the complaint
(i) to proceed to conciliation; or
(ii) if the Commissioner believes it cannot be resolved by conciliation, to
proceed to a hearing.
(2) The Commissioner shall give notice of a
determination under subsection (1) to the complainant and the respondent.
(3) The Commissioner shall, on completing proceedings under this Act in
respect of a matter investigated under section 74(1)(a) or
(2), report to the
Minister on the matter together with such recommendations, if any, as the
Commissioner thinks fit.
90. Conduct of proceedings
(1) In the conduct of proceedings under this Act, the Commissioner
(a) is not bound by the rules of evidence and the Commissioner may obtain
information on any matter as the Commissioner considers
appropriate;
91. Burden and standard
(1) Subject to this section, it is for the complainant to prove, on the
balance of probabilities, that the prohibited conduct alleged
in the complaint
is substantiated.
(2) Where a respondent wishes to rely on an exemption, it is for the
respondent to raise and prove, on the balance of probabilities,
exemption applies.
102. Discontinuance of complaint
(1) The Commissioner may, at any stage of proceedings under this Act in
respect of a complaint, discontinue the proceedings if the
Commissioner
reasonably believes that the complaint is –
(a) frivolous or vexatious;
(b) trivial;
(c) misconceived or lacking in substance; or
(d) fails to disclose any prohibited conduct.
(2) Where a complaint is discontinued under subsection (1)(a), the
Commissioner may order the complainant to pay to the respondent
an amount, being
an amount not more than that prescribed, that the Commissioner considers
appropriate as compensation for loss or
damage caused to the respondent by the
complainant making the complaint.”
3.1 The Second Respondent is a Commonwealth funded
community legal
service. A condition of funding is that the
Second Respondent provide
services in accordance with an “approved plan”. The approved plan
for 2000/2001 had the following
objectives [Appeal Book (AB) p.42]:
Provide legal assistance
and advice to women in the
Top End with particular regard to women who cannot obtain legal services
from any other source
Provide community
legal education relevant to the needs of TEWLS
Identify major legal issues
facing TEWLS clients and promote the protections of their legal
Improve women’s access to
legal services and the justice system.
constitution of the Second Respondent has similar objects, namely:
“3. Objects
(1) The objects of the Association are
(a) to provide legal services to women, with special concern for women who face
additional discrimination for reasons such as, but
not limited to; race,
culture, language, poverty, age, disability and sexuality;
(b) to educate women and the community in general so that women can participate
fully and confidently in legal matters which affect
(c) to research and evaluate the impact of existing laws and legal processes on
women’s access to justice and work toward law
reform in areas of
particular relevance to women; and
(d) to work toward the empowerment of all women within the legal system and
consequently within society.
(2) The Association supports and upholds the principles of the UN Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and the UN Draft Declaration on the
Elimination of Violence Against
As such, the Second Respondent is not
funded to provide legal services, or any other services, to men.
3.2 In 2000/2001 the First Respondent sought applications
from interested
groups for funding pursuant to its 2000/2001 Ethnic Affairs Sponsorship Program
(AB25). Broadly the objective of
the program was to allow ethnic groups to
develop and facilitate participation in the general NT community.
3.3 By application dated 25/4/01 (AB19) the Second Respondent successfully
sought funding (AB35) for a “Legal Access and Equity
Project for Migrant
and Refugee Women” (“the project”). The objectives of the
project were (AB22):
to provide migrant and
refugee women with greater awareness of their legal rights and the range of
legal, government and non government
services which are
to develop best practice in
working with migrant and refugee women on legal issues and to act as a resource
for other agencies providing
legal services to migrant and refugee
to provide a point of first
to provide high quality ongoing
community legal education for migrant and refugee women and other agencies
working with such women.
The project sought to
“build on previous work done by the
Top End Women’s Legal
Service (Second Respondent) in this area” (AB21).
The application cited two other recent projects for women from a
non-English speaking background (“NESB”) completed by the
Second Respondent:
a legal information
project containing multi-lingual radio promotions;
a legal resource
3.4 One of the project initiatives was a
workshop designed to
raise awareness about family law issues among migrant
and refugee women. The workshop was held on Saturday,
10 November 2001
and it was promoted by way of an article
in the local newspaper (NT News
8/11/01 extract AB36)
(“the article”) and a flyer circulated
amongst interest groups (AB37).
3.5 The Complainants read the article, and with the exception
Complainant Ingham, attended at the location of the workshop at the advertised
time and date. Three men, two complainants (Messrs
Kennedy and Bailey-Green)
and another man, who does not wish to make a complaint) were refused entry to
the workshop by the Second
Respondent because it was a “women only”
event. Complainant Bath refused to attend because her male associates were
allowed to accompany her, and; Complainant Ingham did not attend the event after
the Second Respondent informed him by telephone
beforehand that he would not be
admitted because of his male gender.
3.6 Once accepted (supra para 1.3) the Complaints were investigated by the
Commissioner’s Delegate. [Pursuant to section 15
of the Act the
Commissioner may delegate the powers in respect of the “Investigation
of a Complaint” found in ss74-76 inclusive of the
Act, and powers in
respect of “Discontinuance of a Complaint” contained in section 102
of the Act.]
3.7 The Delegate conducted a “... thorough examination of all matters
relevant to the investigation ...” as contemplated
by section 75(3)(a) of
the Act. The examination included interviewing the parties, requesting and
receiving submissions from the
parties, consideration of those submissions, and
consideration of relevant authorities and the provisions of the Act.
The Delegate’s decision was conveyed in writing to the parties on 2
August 2002 (AB3) - and that decision was to discontinue
the complaints on the
basis that they “... failed to disclose any prohibited conduct ...”
pursuant to section 102(1)(d)
of the Act.
3.8 The decision described in paragraph 2.7 was appealed
Complainants to the Local Court at Darwin on
18 November 2002.
3.9 After hearing submissions and considering the manner in
Delegate investigated the complaints, the
Learned Magistrate formed the
views that the Delegate may have been biased “by virtue of her identity
and her upbringing as
a female” (p.7 Transcript of Proceedings No.
and that the Delegate’s investigation was inadequate
(p.8 Transcript of Proceedings).
On 26 March 2003 the Presiding Magistrate made the following orders (my
(1) The Appeal is allowed.
(2) The Decision of the Delegate of the
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner
to discontinue the complaints is quashed.
(3) The matter is remitted to the Commissioner for further investigation.
(4) I recommend that the Commissioner allocate the investigation to a
Delegate other than (the original Delegate) for further investigation.
(p.10 Transcript of Proceedings)
3.10 I gave the parties until 21 July 2003 to make
further submissions on
the matter. The First and
Second Respondents took advantage of this
opportunity and the Complainants elected to rely on their existing submissions.
4.1 In further investigating the complaints pursuant to the Order of the
Learned Magistrate I may conduct a “thorough investigation”
to section 75 of the Act or consider whether it is appropriate to discontinue
the complaints pursuant to
section 102 (supra para 2.7).
4.2 After fully considering the history of the complaints, the conduct of
their investigation by the Delegate, the submissions of
the parties and the
provisions of the Act I am persuaded, and I so order, that the complaints should
be discontinued pursuant to
section 102(1)(d) of the Act in that they
“fail to disclose any prohibited conduct”.
4.3 In arriving at my Decision I find that the Complainants have been
discriminated against on the basis of their (male) sex (and
in the case of
Complainant Bath, on the basis of her association with the former) in the
provision of a service by the First and
Second Respondents. If the First
Respondent - even though it knew about, approved and funded the project - did
not actually commit
the prohibited conduct, then I find it is properly joined as
a Respondent because it “assisted or promoted” the prohibited
conduct contrary to section 27 of the Act.
However, section 19(2) of the Act states that discrimination is not unlawful
“if an exemption under Part 4 or 5 applies”.
4.4 Section 41 occurs under Part 4 of the Act and provides exemption for
conduct which would otherwise be discriminatory under the
4.5 Section 41 (supra para 2) provides
unlawful to discriminate in the provision of services to a person, but exempts
the supply of services by an “association”
(a) is established for social, literary, cultural, political, sporting,
athletic, recreational or community service purposes or other
similar lawful
purposes; and
(b) does not carry out its purposes for the purpose of making a profit.
“Association” is not defined under the Act, but I take it to
mean an association as defined under section 4 of the
Associations
(NT) which is reproduced below:
“4. Definitions
In this Act, unless the contrary intention appears –
"association" means –
(a) an association, society, institution or body formed or carried on for
(i) a religious, educational, benevolent or charitable purpose;
(ii) the purpose of providing medical treatment or attention;
(iii) the purpose of promoting or encouraging literature, science, art or a
cultural activity;
(iv) the purpose of recreation or amusement; or
(v) the purpose of beautifying or improving a community centre,
being an association, society, institution or body the activities of which are
carried on in whole or in part in the Territory;
(b) another association, society, institution or body certified in writing by
the Minister to be an association for this Act; or
(c) a trading
association;
According to the Second Respondent’s Constitution (AB48 and the Objects
of which are reproduced at para 3.1), the Second Respondent
is established for
“community service purposes” and I so find.
Also I am satisfied that the Second Respondent does not operate “for
the purpose of making a profit” on the basis that
it is funded by the
Commonwealth Government Community Legal Centres Program (see p.3 submission of
Second Respondent dated
29 July 2003), and on the basis that Australian Tax
Office documentation dated 19/6/00 supplied by the Second Respondent indicates
that the latter is an “income tax exempt charitable entity”.
It follows that the Second Respondent is an association as
defined under
section 4(a)(i) of the
Association Act
an association that
falls within the exemption contained in section 41 of the Act. Thus the
discrimination in which the
Second Respondent has engaged (supra para 4.3),
and the First Respondent has promoted, is lawful and I so find.
4.6 Accordingly, as the conduct of both Respondents “fails to disclose
any prohibited conduct”, the complaints are hereby
discontinued.
I note that under section 91(2) of the Act where the Respondent wishes to
rely on an exemption, the Respondent must show on the balance
of probabilities
that the exemption applies. For the record, my finding in para 4.5 means that
the First and
Second Respondents have passed that test.
4.7 The foregoing would ordinarily be sufficient to dispose of this matter,
but in view of the uncertainty of the Learned Magistrate
a “disadvantaged group” for the purposes of section 57 (special
measures) of the Act, I believe
it is necessary to discuss whether section 57 is
applicable to the facts of this case.
4.8 Under section 57 (supra para 2) the Act permits discrimination in the
adoption of “special measures” designed to promote
equality of
opportunity for disadvantaged groups. That is section 57 protects “a
program plan or arrangement” devised
for the purpose of securing
4.9 It is settled law that before a special measure on racial grounds obtains
protection under section 57 (or its interstate equivalents)
it must satisfy four
requirements, namely (my brackets):
(i) the measure must confer a benefit on some or all members of a class;
(ii) the membership (of the class) is based on race, colour, descent, or
national or ethnic origin;
(iii) for the sole purpose of securing adequate advancement of the
beneficiaries in order that they may enjoy and exercise equally
with others
human rights and fundamental freedoms; and
in circumstances where the
protection given to the beneficiaries by the special measure is necessary in
order that they may enjoy
and exercise equally with others human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
[Per Brennan,J. in
Gerhardy v Brown
(1985) 57ALR472, 520.]
Gerhardy v Brown
the High Court considered the extent to which the
Racial Discrimination Act
) gives operative effect to
Article 1(4) of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination
(CERD). Article 1(4) permits special measures to advance
the interests of racially/ethnically disadvantaged persons or groups.
Gerhardy v Brown
involved discrimination on the basis of race.
However it is also settled law that what Brennan,J. said in that case about
preferential
treatment on the ground of race is equally applicable to members of
other disadvantaged groups who possess attributes covered by
the various
anti-discrimination statutes throughout the nation, eg.
(i) for a case of sex discrimination see
Re Municipal Officers Association
of Australia and Others
38 IR 13, 18. In that case union rules,
which reserved positions on an executive for women, were found by the Australian
Relations Commission (AIRC) to be consistent with the special
measures exception to the
Sex Discrimination Act (C’wealth)
(ie. acts done to advance equal opportunity for women are lawful).
In an analysis of
Gerhardy v Brown
(ibid) and the significance of
Article 1(4) of CERD Moore,DP said (p.18):
“The effect of Article 1(4) of that Convention appears to be the same as,
or at least similar to, ... the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against
sex discrimination example is the unreported February 2004 AIRC Case of
Appeal by William Jacomb
(PR 943240) involving
a similar analysis of branch rules purporting
to reserve branch positions for women.
Senior Deputy President Lacy, during an analysis of Brennan,J.’s
Gerhardy v Brown,
said (para 73) (my
“The question that must be
determined, on the approach taken by Brennan,J. (in
whether rules that reserve positions specifically for women achieve substantive
equality, that is do they advance effective
and genuine equality.”
for a case of age
discrimination see
Re AIS American Institute for Foreign Study
(2000) EOC 93-071
the Applicant wished to advertise the availability of a residence/work/study
program in the USA for under 26 year olds. In
granting an exemption for the
program from the provisions of the Anti-Discrimination Act (Tas)
(“the Act”) the Commission found that as the relevant exception
to the Tasmanian Act related to programs designed to promote
equal opportunity,
and that as youth were a disadvantaged group and a group in special need, then
it was appropriate to exempt the
Applicant from the provisions of the Act.
4.11 As the First and Second Respondents seek to
rely on the section 57 exemption, under section 91(2) of the Act they must show
the balance of probabilities that their “program plan or
arrangement” (that is the provision of legal services and legal
to women in general, and the provision of a family law workshop to migrant and
refugee women in particular) is in fact
a program plan or arrangement
contemplated by section 57.
4.12 As I understand it the Learned Magistrate accepts that women were at
some unspecified time in the past disadvantaged compared
to males, but he
wonders whether substantial equality for the former might now have been
achieved. Also, he stated that the Delegate
ought to have investigated more
thoroughly the issue of whether women are a “disadvantaged group”.
(Transcript, ibid,
4.13 When faced with an issue such as that raised in para 4.11 (ie. are women
a disadvantaged group?) other Tribunals (
Municipal Officers Case
American Institute for Foreign Study Case
have adopted a two-step process, namely:
(i) determination of the circumstances affecting the disadvantaged group so
as to ascertain the extent if any to which the group is
denied opportunities
enjoyed by others;
(ii) assessment of whether the (special) measure aimed at the disadvantaged
group is designed to advance that group towards equal
opportunity.
Circumstances affecting the disadvantaged group
4.14 As observed by Brennan,J. in
Gerhardy v Brown
(ibid 523.15)
“the objective circumstances affecting the disadvantaged group are matters
of fact, capable of ascertainment
albeit with difficulty”.
The Second Respondent provides legal services and legal education to women,
and in particular women who are disadvantaged because
of race, culture,
language, poverty, disability among other factors. [See Object of Association
1(a) (AB 48)].
It submits that women, and particularly women who are marginalized because
of factors such as those described above, are denied equal
opportunity to men in
accessing legal services and legal education.
In support of this contention it relies on the comprehensive two-part Report
of the Australian Law Reform Commission entitled “Equality
Before the Law:
Justice for Women” (ALRC 69 1994). That Report concluded that women still
suffer widespread inequality, that
problems of inequality include
“representation in legal
institutions,” and “that
(women’s) unequal social status prevents or inhibits them from gaining
access to the legal
system on an equal basis with men”. (All quotations
from Part 1 p.11 of the Report).
The Report also concluded that “
women of non-English
speaking background experience serious difficulties with the legal
system”, (p.14) and “
are even more disadvantaged than men
of a similar background since they face the dual barriers of race and gender
” [p.105 ch.4 Access to Justice: Legal Aid].
The Report identified various factors causing problems for women in
accessing legal services including women have less access to
financial resources
than men (p.15) and; women are more likely to be impeded by their greater
responsibility as carers, (pp.11-12)
because women suffer more inequality and
sexual harassment in the workplace (p.18), and because women experience and fear
to a greater extent than men (p.26). [The NT Government Domestic
Violence Strategy Data Collection Project for year 2000 (occasional
printed November 2001) shows that 92% of victims of violence were female.]
The Report proposed various legislative and non-legislative measures to
advance the equality of women before the law.
Non-legislative measures
included the provision of women’s legal centres, women’s court
support schemes, women’s
telephone advice services, and women’s
community legal education and training (p.91 ch.4 Access to Justice: Legal
The Second Respondent directed me to a statistical snapshot of women’s
social and economic circumstances in the NT
(NTG 2001-02 Budget Papers
“Women in the Budget” pp.21-27) which reports that men comprise
63.1% of all higher education
enrolments, and that NT women earn an average
80.7% of the average weekly earnings of NT men.
I am satisfied that the more recent data provided above demonstrates that the
findings and recommendations contained in the ALRC Report
(supra) and propounded
10 years ago are still sound and current. Indeed it is the ALRC recommendations
which provide the justification
for the continued existence of the Second
Respondent.
As I am entitled pursuant to section 90(1)(a) of the Act to inform myself as
I consider appropriate, I take notice that the following
additional factors
support the contentions of the First and Second Respondents that women in
general and migrant and refugee women
in particular are a disadvantaged
Since 1996 the Second
Respondent has been, and continues to be, funded by the Commonwealth because of
a perceived need to provide
separate legal services and legal education to women
to overcome difficulties women have experienced in the past in accessing
legal services.
Respondent has been externally funded in the recent past to produce legal
information - in the form of radio advertisements
and a self-help kit –
specifically for NESB women, and the project (ie. the subject of this action)
falls into the same category.
(Second Respondent submission 29/7/03 p.9). As
such external funding providers (Legal Aid Commission and government) accept the
disadvantaged status of NESB women. As we know, many migrant and refugee women
come from a non-English speaking
background.
The fact that the First
Respondent (namely the Office of Ethnic Affairs) exists as a government agency,
and, as an expert in the field
of “ethnic affairs”, saw fit to fund
the project is further evidence of an acceptance by government of the
disadvantaged
status of migrant and refugee women. The project objectives were
clearly stated in the application for funding (AB22), and the project,
restricted to women, clearly met the objectives of the Ethnic Affairs
Sponsorship Program (AB27).
In view of the foregoing
I am satisfied that the First and
Second Respondents have demonstrated on
the balance of probabilities that women continue to be a disadvantaged group
because of circumstances
which affect them to a greater extent than men. It is
noteworthy that the AIRC in
(ibid 13) was of a similar view as
recently as February 2004 when it found that the Respondent trade union was
entitled to continue
to apply special measures (reservation of certain branch
positions for women) to achieve substantive equality between men and women.
“The material before me does not suggest that the steps that have been
taken by (the union) to redress systematic discrimination
against women in the
organization since its inception generally, has resulted in substantive
I am also satisfied that migrant and refugee women fall within a
“disadvantaged sub-group” of women in general. The disadvantage
discomfort experienced by women generally in accessing legal services is
potentially heightened for migrant and refugee women
because they may need to
contend with such issues as:
linguistic and cultural
barriers in accessing legal
difficulties in gaining
recognition of overseas
qualifications;
stereotyping;
lack of family/ethnic
community support if they wish to
poor understanding of the
Australian legal system - especially in areas of no fault divorce and
entitlements on separation;
speaking out in the presence of men.
special measure designed to advance the group?
The project was a family law workshop for migrant and refugee women. It was
advertised as such. The advertising flyer (described
in para 3.4) was
circulated amongst interest groups and announced that all the usual family law
topics would be covered. Experts
in the field from the Family Court, the staff
of the Second Respondent (from para 4.15 the Second Respondent is able to
demonstrate
expertise and experience in the area of community legal education to
NESB women), and the legal profession addressed the workshop
(see Second
Respondent submission p.8). Community legal education was recommended in the
ALRC Report as necessary to advance the
equality of women before the law.
Taking all of the above and the submissions before me into account, I am
equally satisfied that the project is a special measure designed
women, and especially migrant and refugee women, towards equal opportunity.
That is, I am satisfied on the balance of
probabilities that the First and
Second Respondents have fulfilled the second part of the
process” described in para 4.13 (supra).
4.15 In summary I have found in para 4.14 that the project
delivered by
the Second Respondent and “promoted” by the First Respondent is a
“program, plan or arrangement designed
to promote equality of
opportunity” for a disadvantaged group, namely women. This means that, by
virtue of the operation of
section 57 of the Act, the conduct of the First and
Second Respondent is not unlawful discrimination.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
5.1 As the Learned Magistrate indicated it may be that some women have
managed to achieve equality of opportunity with men. However,
Anti-Discrimination
is beneficial legislation and it is therefore not
appropriate to disentitle all women to special measures benefits because some
have achieved equality when it is clear that many women have not advanced to
that point.
Moreover, allowing distinctions between “achievers of equality”
and “non-achievers of equality” within a disadvantaged
group was not contemplated by Brennan,J. in his formulation of a test for a
special measure in
Gerhardy v Brown
(ibid), nor in any of the cases
Gerhardy v Brown
(supra), nor by the wording of
It is clear that the “special measures” contemplated by
Brennan,J., and by the Act, and by the Respondents, are those
special measures
designed to benefit a disadvantaged group
. This means
that justification for the continued application of special measures does not
cease until the disadvantaged group
has achieved equality of
opportunity.
If the law permitted the application of special measure exemptions to only
part of a disadvantaged group, or the disentitlement of
part of the
disadvantaged group to special measures benefits, then the Respondents in this
case and providers of “programs,
plans or arrangements for disadvantaged
groups” in general would be required to subjectively decide which members
of the disadvantaged
group had/had not achieved equality of opportunity. The
very heterogeneity of most groups would render this task impossible.
5.2 The situation may need review from time to time to determine whether
women have managed to achieve equality. However, I’m
satisfied that for
the present women continue to constitute a disadvantaged group.
5.3 Finally, I believe that no unfairness to the Complainants results from
denying them the remedy they seek. At all times the Complainants
were aware of
the family law-related topics to be discussed at the workshop because they were
clearly advertised by the Second Respondent.
For the same reason the
Complainants were also aware that the workshop was targeted at migrant and
refugee women.
At all times the Complainants have known that they could avail themselves of
the same family law information provided at the workshop
from other reputable
sources (eg. community based organizations, legal aid, the community legal
service) without the need to attend
a skills workshop targeted at migrant and
refugee women.
The refusal to permit the Complainants to attend the family law workshop
could not be said to have disadvantaged them, or taken place
at their expense.
The workshop was designed by the First and Second Respondents to advance the
equality of opportunity of women,
not to operate to the Complainants’
TONY FITZGERALD
NT ANTI-DISCRIMINATION COMMISSIONER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (159 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter