URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTADComm/2001/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:16:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Renouf, Ray v Australian Broadcasting Commission & Gary Gibson [2001] NTADComm 4 (3 December 2001)
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION COMMISSION
AT DARWIN IN THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
IN THE MATTER OF
Complainant
AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING CORPORATION
1st Respondent
GARY GIBSON
DECISION ON COSTS
(Delivered 3 December 2001)
Mr David LOADMAN, HEARING COMMISSIONER
In relation to this matter it
is incumbent upon the Commission to make a ruling in relation to the issue of
costs sought against the
complainant in this
It is necessary to briefly highlight
some aspects of the decision handed down on 14 September 2001.
All references are to the paragraph numbers
as they appear in the decision.
At paragraph
8 of the decision it is highlighted that the complainant “was unaware of
the fact that he was being discriminated
against until he was advised by a Mr
Michael Alsop in late 1997 that conduct amounting to discrimination had been
taking place “for
a considerable period of time”.
At paragraph 9 of the decision IS SET OUT
the hyperbolic assertion that Alsop made during the hearing of this matter to
that he “had never seen anybody persecuted as much as Ray
Renouf was in my entire working life”. Cursory investigation
complainant should have revealed that to be a nonsense as was found to be the
case in the decision.
Although of course Mr
Alsop’s credibility is not discretely an issue upon which a costs order
ought be predicated, transparent
unreliability of what he was saying which could
have been discovered by cursory investigation is relevant.
The complainant insisted that he had made
“many” complaints, described in paragraph 16 of the decision.
In paragraph 17 of the decision, Claire
Witham to whom the alleged many complaints were made denied the assertions and
consequently
the complainant was not believed in relation to those unfounded
assertions at all.
On 25 March 1998 a
meeting described in paragraph 18 of the decision was according to the evidence
of Ms Witham the first occasion
that the complainant asserted he had
“experienced harassment on the basis of his sexuality”. However, as
set out, no
amount of trying was able to evoke from the complainant sufficient
particularization to enable her to investigate it. It was either
baseless or
predicated on what should have been easily discovered as nonsense emanating from
As set out in paragraph 21 of the
decision, the complainant did not invoke at all the grievance procedure put in
place for the purposes
of protecting both a person such as the complainant if
his allegations were true, or the people against whom the allegations were
In paragraph 22 of the decision, the
complainant was alleged by Ms Edwards to have asserted an approach by
“senior people for
sexual favours”. As was found, such an incident
if it had ever taken place would not, given the conclusions of the Commissioner,
have been left out of the litany of complaints made by the complainant in this
As found in paragraph 24 of the
decision, “I reject entirely the allegation by the Complainant that there
was a homophobic
work environment at the First Respondent’s work
place”. Furthermore, the Commission also highlights the finding in
relation to the rejection of the complainant’s description of the second
respondent as a liar.
In summary, there
was never any objective basis upon which there could be any foundation for the
complaints made against the first
respondents.
Given that background the
Commission then turns to the written submissions filed in relation to this
Respondents’ submissions
Written submissions were
filed on behalf of the first and second respondents regarding their application
for costs (“respondents’
costs submissions”).
It is trite that section 96 is as set out
in paragraph 6 of the respondents’ costs submissions. The
Commissions finds that
the effect of section 96(1) is in fact intended to
and does displace the general principle that “costs follow the
That means that the Commissioner has a completely untrammeled and
unfettered discretion to find a basis upon which nevertheless
to order costs in
appropriate circumstances.
respondents’ costs submissions, commencing at paragraph 11, there are
submissions in relation to categorizing proceedings
as either vexatious or as
“initiated” without reasonable cause.
This Commission does not find it
appropriate to be constrained by the philosophy applicable to costs orders
Work Place Relations Act
The Tribunal does accept that Alsop made
mischievous comments to the complainant and that those utterings were the basis
the complainant subsequently brought the proceedings. It must
follow from the historical recounting of selected pieces of evidence
as outlined
above that the Commission believes it would have been prudent for complainant at
least to test the veracity of the allegations
made by Alsop by independent
means. He chose not to do so but to embrace the utterings as a basis for the
proceedings against both
respondents.
respondents allege there exists an analogy with the decision in
University of New South Wales
(1984) EOC para 92-018, the dictum of
Hutley J being set out at paragraph 26 of the respondent’s costs
submissions.
Complainant’s
submissions
Written submissions were
filed on behalf of the complainant in relation to the application for costs
(“complainant’s costs
submissions”).
The Commission accepts
that the philosophy cited in the authorities at pages 2 and 3 of the
complainant’s costs submissions
do not and ought not form the basis upon
which any costs order might be made against the complainant in this proceeding
and the issue
Industrial Relations Act
has already been addressed
in this decision.
The Commission accepts
there was a basis for the complainant to go beyond the “prima facie”
The complainant’s costs
submissions at page 5 and thereafter sets out various decisions relating to
comparable jurisdictions
elsewhere in the Commonwealth of Australia concerning
At page 6 of the
complainant’s costs submissions, there is cited a single instance of a
costs order being made “because
case was so lacking in any real foundation
that it should never have been brought”.
The Commission does accept principles in
the dictum cited at page 7 (
Murphy v Colorific Lithographics
ADT of Vic,
22 January 1997)”
In exercising its discretion the Tribunal must have regard to the nature of
the jurisdiction. If orders for costs are made too readily,
people might be
deterred from coming to the Tribunal and, to that extent, the policy of the
legislation would be
frustrated.”
must however have a corollary. If applications are specious and are based upon
hearsay communications, in respect of which no
investigation of any nature has
been carried out, and where at best there is a blindly held belief as to the
veracity of the hearsay
evidence, that should also not be encouraged for obvious
legal and logical reasons.
This Commission
does not embrace the philosophy that “a general belief in their own
victimization ... when that belief is held
to be unreasonable” is a basis
for refusing the orders sought by the
respondents.
The reason asserted at page 8
of complainant’s costs submissions as being sufficient to discount
categorisation of “unreasonable”
is not adopted nor does this
Commission embrace the submission that to found a successful costs order the
categorisation of the conduct
of the complainant must be that the complaint was
“lacking in substance”. Although the Commission has found that the
complainant was “the unfortunate victim of Alsop’s mischief”
it does not embrace the submission that should necessarily
provide a shield
against a costs order as asserted in page 9 of the complainant’s costs
submissions.
In respect of the
succeeding submission, the issue is not whether the complainant was obliged to
lodge a written complaint within
the complaints structure of the first
respondent prior to filing a complaint of discrimination with the Commission,
but rather whether
as a matter of fairness, particularly given the hearsay
nature of the allegations, he ought not to have allowed at the employer level
the appropriate investigation to be carried out in respect of the complainant.
That after all would have obviated the respondents
becoming embroiled in a
lengthy and expensive prejudicial and embarrassing
proceeding.
The Commission does not embrace
the submission that the “prima facie finding” would not have been
made unless there was
sufficient evidence to substantiate the complaint. That
evidence existed in the form of the evidence of Mr Alsop and no other
basis. Given Alsop’s managerial position, it is at least
arguable that the lack of care and caution by the complainant in
not checking
proceeding as he did could form the basis for a costs order against him.
Whilst the Commission does not accept
there existed an opportunity until the evidence was tested to make any
application under section
102, it does embrace the submission of Mr Tippett
recounted at page 12 of the complainant’s costs submissions.
In the circumstances the Commission will
make an order in the following
That there be no order for
the payment of the costs of first and or second respondent by the
complainant.
Dated: 3 December 2001
DAVID LOADMAN
Hearing Commissioner
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (27.8 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter