URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCCA/2024/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:18:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Joran v The King [2024] NTCCA 1 (24 January 2024)
Joran v The King
[2024] NTCCA 1
PARTIES: JORAN, Jason
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: CA 4 of 2023 (SCC 22111020 & 22138735)
DELIVERED: 24 January 2024
HEARING DATE: 28 June 2023
JUDGMENT OF: Kelly ACJ, Barr J & Hiley AJ
CATCHWORDS:
CRIME – Appeals – Appeal against sentence – Whether
sentencing judge erred in treatment of the harshness of pre-sentence
– Whether sentencing judge erred in applying the principle of totality
– Whether sentencing judge erred in treatment
of the applicant’s
childhood deprivation and complex PTSD – Held that applicant failed to
establish error in the sentencing
exercise – No less severe sentence to
that imposed by the sentencing judge was warranted – Leave to appeal
granted but
appeal dismissed
CRIME – Appeals – Appeal against sentence – Violent
offending against family members – Sentences for four
offences made fully
cumulative – Whether sentencing judge erred in applying the principle of
totality – Sentencing judge
confirmed full cumulation after considering
whether adjustment was necessary – Decision to accumulate discretionary
Applicant failed to establish that discretion miscarried – Leave
to appeal granted but appeal dismissed
CRIME – Appeals – Appeal against sentence – Whether
sentencing judge erred in treatment of the applicant’s
deprivation and complex PTSD – Held that
principles were
taken into account – Moral culpability was still high due to the nature of
the offending – No error in
the sentencing discretion
Criminal Code Act 1983
(NT), s 188, s 310, s 390, s 411
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
Barr v The Queen
[2003] NTCCA 2
Bugmy v The Queen
; 249 CLR 571,
Carroll v The Queen
[2011] NTCCA 6
29 NTLR 106
Clinch v The Queen
[1994] WASC 57
(1994) 72 A Crim R 301
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Vic) v Herrmann
[2021] VSCA 160
290 A Crim R 110
[2016] NSWCCA 266
McDonald v R
[1992] NTCCA 12
(1992) 85 NTR 1
[1988] HCA 70
[2007] NSWCCA 14
Postiglione v The Queen
[1997] HCA 26
189 CLR 295
; 167 A Crim R 159,
Rostron v The Queen
[1991] NTCCA 7
(1991) 1 NTLR 191
The Queen v Olbrich
[1999] HCA 54
199 CLR 270
Thomas v The Queen
[2017] NTCCA 4
, referred to.
Clayton Ruby,
(Butterworths, 3
Edition, 1987)
D A Thomas,
Principles of Sentencing
(Heinemann, 2
Edition, 1979)
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: J Murphy, J Bourke
Respondent: L Babb KC, L Auld
Solicitors:
Appellant: North Australian Aboriginal Justice Agency
Respondent: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 37
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Joran v The King
[2024] NTCCA 1
CA 4 of 2023 (22111020 & 22138735)
JASON JORAN
CORAM: KELLY ACJ, BARR J & HILEY AJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 24 January 2024)
[1] I have had
the benefit of reading the draft decision of Barr J and agree that the appeal
should be dismissed for the reasons given
in that decision.
applicant seeks leave to appeal against the sentence imposed by the Supreme
Court on 3 March 2023 in relation to three offences
of aggravated assault,
charged on indictment, and a further offence of contravention of a domestic
violence order, charged on complaint
and transmitted from the Local Court
pursuant to s 390
Criminal Code
applicant was born on 4 March 1978, and so was 43 years old at the time of
committing the offences.
[4] The offence
charged as count 1 in the indictment was committed on 28 March 2021. The
applicant was at home with GT, his partner
of 10 years, his seven year old
daughter and his four year old son. The children were playing and making noise.
The applicant became
frustrated and yelled and swore at the children, demanding
that they play elsewhere. They ignored his direction. The applicant then
lighter at his daughter as she was sitting on a mattress in the lounge room. He
then walked over to her and stomped on her
arm, causing her to scream in
immediate pain. She suffered fractures to the right distal 1/3 radius and ulnar
shaft. She was admitted
to hospital on 29 March 2021, where she underwent a
closed reduction procedure under anaesthesia after which a cast was applied.
was discharged on 2 April 2021.
[5] The admitted
circumstances of aggravation for count 1 were that it was a male-on-female
assault; that the victim was under the
age of 16 years; that the victim was
unable to defend herself due to age, physique and situation; that the victim
suffered harm,
and that she was threatened with an offensive weapon (a reference
to the lighter which the applicant had thrown at
[6] On 4 April
2021, the applicant was arrested. He participated in a police interview in which
he denied intentionally stomping on
his daughter’s arm. He claimed that he
had accidentally stepped on his daughter’s arm while it was extended
five centimetre gap between two separate mattresses. He was charged,
served with a domestic violence order (‘DVO’), and
granted bail. The
DVO was subsequently confirmed by the Local Court on 13 April 2021.
applicant’s partner, his seven year old daughter and his four year old son
were named as the ‘protected persons’
which restrained the applicant
from causing harm or attempting or threatening to cause harm to them; from
intimidating, harassing
or verbally abusing them, as well as exposing any child
or children of the parties to domestic violence. The DVO was to be in force
evening of 13 April 2021 (the same day the Local Court confirmed the DVO), the
applicant abused his daughter to the point
where she was upset and crying. He
also verbally abused his partner, calling her a “slut” and a
“big hole”.
That breach
of the DVO was not the subject of any charges heard by the Supreme Court.
applicant’s bail was then varied to prohibit him from approaching or
three victims.
November 2021, the police attended the home of the applicant’s partner and
children as a result of a domestic disturbance.
Police officers were informed
that there had been a disagreement earlier in the evening but that it had
resolved. However, the applicant
had breached the conditions of bail by
offences charged as counts 2 and 3 were committed on 13 December 2021, at
which time the DVO was still in force.
December 2021, the applicant attended the home of his partner and children. He
became angry with his son for getting into
trouble at school and struck him
three to four times to the back, causing bruising and pain. The little boy
immediately began crying
and ran to the neighbour’s house. The assault
against his son was aggravated by the fact that the boy was under the age of
years (he was four years old), unable to defend himself and that he suffered
harm. The assault was also a breach of the DVO.
[13] Shortly
after the assault on his son, the applicant became angry at his partner. He
picked up a plastic cricket bat and hit her
to the forearm with enough force to
cause immediate pain. The aggravating circumstances for this assault were that
it was male-on-female,
that the victim was unable to defend herself, that she
was threatened with an offensive weapon and that she suffered harm. The assault
was committed in the presence of both
and was a further breach
of the DVO.
[14] The day
after the commission of the offences charged as counts 2 and 3, the
applicant was once more at the home of his partner
and children. He started
yelling at his partner. He told her that she had “bastard children”.
This abuse occurred in
the presence of both children. They became scared and ran
from the house. The applicant’s partner followed, running in the
of the children’s school. The applicant chased her with a butter knife,
yelling out that he wanted to stab her. She
feared for her life and thought that
the applicant was going to hurt her.
[15] The conduct
of the applicant described in the previous paragraph was in contravention of the
DVO and was the factual basis for
the transmitted
Applicant’s criminal record
applicant’s criminal record included a conviction for aggravated assault
when he was 17 or 18 years old; a conviction
for unlawfully causing grievous
harm, for an offence committed in September 2000, when he was 22 years old; a
male-on-female aggravated
assault committed in April 2017, when he was 39 years
old, and a male-on-female aggravated assault committed in November 2019, when
was 41 years old. He also had convictions for high range drink driving, for
offences committed in March 2009 and February 2014.
applicant’s offending in September 2000 was particularly serious. The
applicant and his former wife were in Darwin
so that he could attend an alcohol
program run by the Council for Aboriginal Alcohol Program Services (CAAPS). In
the course of an
argument in relation to his excessive drinking, he punched his
wife to the face a number of times, causing her to fall to the floor
unconscious. He then kicked her once to the back. A caretaker entered the room
of the accommodation where the applicant and the victim
were staying and saw
that blood was coming from the nose of the victim. There was blood on the wall
and on a bedspread. Young children
were on the bed crying. The victim was taken
to hospital where she remained unconscious. She had suffered a severe closed
head injury,
bruising and facial fractures, as well as some impairment of her
cognitive function. She was transferred to intensive care and it
was not until
19 October 2000 (more than four weeks later) that she was transferred to the
rehabilitation ward. At that stage, she
was still suffering post-traumatic
amnesia and inability to do simple day to day tasks. She had slowed speech,
unsteady gait and
marked forgetfulness. She was finally discharged from hospital
on 21 November 2000. At the time of the assault, she was 21 weeks
applicant was not sentenced for the grievous harm offence until July 2006. The
sentencing remarks of Riley J indicate that
he was charged on 21 September 2000
and granted bail on 22 September 2000. He failed to attend court on 20 December
2000 and a warrant
was issued for his arrest. He was not apprehended until
August 2005, when he came to the attention of police in relation to an unrelated
matter. The applicant attended a committal hearing on 19 April 2006, when the
matter proceeded by way of a hand up committal. However,
he failed to appear in
the Supreme Court on 2 May 2006. A warrant was issued for his arrest and he
remained in custody from 24 May
2006 to the date of sentencing on 19 July
applicant was sentenced by the Supreme Court to a term of imprisonment of two
years and nine months, suspended after nine
months. The applicant was required
to be supervised for two years after his release from prison. The sentencing
judge observed that
the offending was a serious assault committed in the
presence of young children, with severe consequences for the victim. His Honour
noted that the applicant had been drinking alcohol since the age of 15 and
smoking cannabis from the age of 11. He warned the applicant
that he was a risk
for reoffending if he continued to abuse alcohol. A condition of the
applicant’s suspended sentence was
that he attend the FORWAARD 12-week
residential substance misuse
male-on-female aggravated assault committed by the applicant in November 2019
involved the applicant grabbing his partner
with both hands by the shirt,
shaking her and punching her in the chest area while still holding her by the
shirt. At the time, the
applicant was significantly affected by the consumption
of synthetic cannabis. The apparent motive for the assault was that the victim
had earlier refused the applicant’s request to provide him with more
synthetic cannabis. The assault took place in the presence
of the couple’s
two young children. The victim was yelling for the applicant to stop, and the
two small children were crying.
The assault was committed just four weeks after
the applicant had been served by police with a
For the assault, the applicant
was sentenced by the Local Court to a term of imprisonment of 3 months,
partially suspended. He was
also separately sentenced for the DVO
contravention.
Proceedings in the Supreme Court
November 2022, the applicant entered pleas of guilty to the four offences
referred to above. The agreed facts were read
in court and admitted by the
applicant’s counsel on his behalf. Relevant to this appeal, counsel for
the applicant submitted
that the applicant had suffered exposure to domestic
violence and a sexual assault during his childhood years, enlivening the
enunciated in
Bugmy v The
and that the applicant
had faced onerous conditions on remand as a result of Covid-19 restrictions,
lockdowns, overcrowding and the
death of his father.
[22] In relation
to conditions on remand, defence counsel referred to hardship in custody and
submitted that there was significant
overcrowding in the
Defence counsel informed
the presiding judge that the applicant had been “in several lockdowns for
periods of one to two weeks”,
during which time he was locked in a wing
and not allowed to go outside. The overcrowding was said to have reduced the
applicant’s
access to programs on a day-to-day basis as well as access to
work. Defence counsel said that the applicant was not engaged in any
at the prison as at November 2022, because he was focused on an educational
program undertaken at the Batchelor Institute.
In very comprehensive written
submissions, defence counsel informed the court that the applicant was attending
a program run by the
Batchelor Institute on Monday, Tuesday, Thursday and Friday
of each week, in which participants were required “to study various
subjects for the entire
Defence counsel
accepted as correct the comment of the presiding judge that such access to
education programs was “not bad,
in prison”, but reiterated that the
harshness was on account of lockdowns and overcrowding, specifically that the
was currently in a two-person cell occupied by four
[23] Following a
concession by the applicant’s counsel that there was no or little evidence
to support his submissions, the
presiding judge ordered a pre-sentence report.
His Honour also ordered an institutional report from the Darwin Correctional
to include the length of time and occasions that the applicant had been
in lockdown, the number of people in his cell from time to
time, and his
opportunities to engage in rehabilitation programs while in remand. Finally, his
Honour requested a psychiatric assessment,
to enquire into any substance use by
the applicant and the impact of his childhood experience of domestic violence
and sexual assault.
The matter was then adjourned.
February 2023, the sentencing proceeding resumed before another judge, the
original judge being unavailable. At that time,
a number of reports were
available: (1) a report of Dr Mary Frost, specialist psychiatrist, dated 19
December 2022; (2) a Darwin
Correctional Centre Institutional Report dated 23
January 2023, and (3) a pre-sentence report dated 25 January 2023. Counsel for
the applicant and the prosecutor made submissions, after which the matter was
adjourned for further submissions on 23 February 2023,
before being adjourned to
3 March 2023 for sentence.
Report of Dr Frost –
Psychiatrist
[25] The report
of Dr Mary Frost (exhibit P8) included a number of concerning matters about the
applicant’s early childhood
and teenage years. The applicant described to
Dr Frost how his father, a heavy drinker, would beat the applicant and his
He recalled on one occasion, as a child, requiring medical attention
after his father had beaten him with an electric cord. He witnessed
being beaten and badly injured by his father. The applicant felt alienated at
“big and fat”.
applicant’s counsel, in written
submissions,
described an
incident when the applicant’s father held him by the leg upside down over
a cliff and threatened to drop him.
The applicant’s grandfather intervened
and tackled the applicant’s father before he was able to drop his son off
cliff. There was no evidence in relation to this particular incident, and it
was not mentioned in the report of Dr Frost. However,
it appears to have been
accepted as true by the sentencing judge.
applicant told Dr Frost that, when he was 11 or 12 years old, he was sexually
assaulted by two older boys. It is unclear
exactly what happened to the
applicant. No details of the assault were mentioned in the report of
Dr Frost, save that Dr Frost described
it as a “brutal
[28] In relation
to the consequences of the sexual assault, the applicant told Dr Frost that, for
many years, he experienced nightmares
and flashbacks relating to the trauma
suffered in his early adolescence. He had kept the assault secret until about
two years previously,
when he began to speak about it with a doctor in the Tiwi
Islands and subsequently with a counsellor.
[29] Dr Frost
expressed the opinion that the sexual assault on the applicant as a young
adolescent had had a marked impact on his
identity and had contributed to early
substance use. Additionally, it had left him with problems regulating his
emotions and being
impulsive, aggravated by substance use.
reference to the applicant’s experience of childhood trauma, Dr Frost
acknowledged that this would not automatically
mean that he would be violent,
... in indigenous Australians in the Northern Territory,
its co-existence with excessive alcohol use escalates rates [of violence]
alarming levels (Ramamoorthi et al, 2014).
applicant was arrested on 14 December 2021. Dr Frost noted that, soon after he
was placed in custody, the applicant heard
of his father’s death, and
became acutely suicidal. He attempted to hang himself. The given reason was that
he was “sad
and angry at himself” for being unable to attend his
father’s funeral.
be accepted that, as the eldest son, the applicant had cultural obligations in
relation to his father’s funeral. There
was limited corroboration of the
applicant’s history of attempted suicide in the Institutional Report from
the Darwin Correctional
Centre, which indicated that the duration of his
suicidal state may have been a day or
[32] Dr Frost
diagnosed the applicant with (1) Complex Post-traumatic Stress Disorder
(C-PTSD), a possible feature of which is emotional
dysregulation, and (2)
Substance Use Disorder (involving alcohol and cannabis).
[33] Dr Frost
also expressed the view that the applicant’s Substance Use Disorder had
clearly impinged “upon his violence,
impulsivity and capacity to remain
emotionally stable”.
Darwin Correctional Centre
Institutional Report
following information in relation to the applicant’s conditions on remand
was provided in response to the request for
specific information by the first
presiding judge:
Whilst accommodated within the high and medium security sectors, Mr
Joran was subject to the following:
15 December 2021 to 18 December 2021 – full lockdown, COVID isolation
on reception in single cell.
18 December 2021 to 20 December 2021 – ‘At Risk’ in single
cell (locked down – medical housing).
20 December 2021 to 21 December 2021 – housed in single cell, not
locked down.
21 December 2021 to 5 January 2022 – housed in double up cell with
various other prisoners. Out of cell time limited (2-4 hours
out of cell) on 5
days, full unlock on another 10 days (medium accommodation).
5 January 2022 – transferred to the low security accommodation.
Whilst accommodated within the low security sectors, Mr [Joran] was subject
to the following:
November 2022 to current – subject to lockdown on nine (9) occasions.
June to November 2022 – subject to lockdown on twenty-nine (29)
January to May 2022 – subject to lockdown on seven (7) occasions.
During the above timeframes within the low security accommodation, the number
of people in the offender’s cell from time to
time would depend on size of
cell and prisoner numbers, however could range between there being two (2) and
four (4) up [sic] accommodation
[35] It can be
seen that, in 2022, the applicant was subject to lockdown on 36 occasions
between January and November. From November
2022, he was subject to lockdown on
a further nine occasions up to 23 January 2023. However, the evidence was
unclear as to how long
the lockdown periods lasted on each of the
“occasions”. In relation to overcrowding, the evidence was unclear
size of the cell in which the applicant was accommodated and how many
prisoners were in the cell with him, and as to the period of
time during which
the overcrowding situation continued. For example, it was not possible to make a
clear finding as to the length
of time the applicant had spent in a prison cell
intended for two prisoners which was actually occupied by four prisoners.
Institutional Report provided information in relation to the applicant’s
opportunities to engage in rehabilitation
programs on remand. In June 2022, he
completed the Alcohol and Other Drugs (AOD) program facilitated through the
Prison In-Reach
program (PIP) and delivered by Top End Health Services. He had
made a request to participate in the Safe Sober Strong (SSS) program
Alternative to Violence Program (AVP), and was waitlisted for both those
programs as at January 2023.
[37] Information
was also provided about the applicant’s employment while on remand. From
May to September 2022, he had worked
as a window cleaner in the low security
accommodation sectors at the prison. It appears that his employment was then
interrupted
during the period he engaged in programs and education, from
September to December 2022.
was also enrolled in a ‘foundation skills course’ and completed a
Cert 1 in ‘Access to Vocational Training’
over the period August to
November 2022.
On 19 January
2023 the applicant commenced employment as a general hand within food
applicant’s legal representatives did not seek to adduce further evidence
to cure any perceived deficiencies in the
Institutional Report, or otherwise to
support the submissions made by defence counsel. Moreover, the applicant did not
give evidence
was required to establish on the balance of probabilities in order
to have them
taken into account in his
Sentence imposed 3 March 2023
offence of aggravated assault carried a maximum penalty of imprisonment of five
The offence of
contravention a domestic violence order carried a maximum penalty of
imprisonment of two years.
sentencing judge applied a discount of 25 per cent to each individual sentence
to reflect the applicant’s guilty plea
and remorse. On count 1 (aggravated
assault of seven year old daughter) the applicant was sentenced to a term of
imprisonment of
two years and three months. On Count 2 (striking blows to four
year old son) he was sentenced to a term of imprisonment of nine months.
count 3 (assault on partner with plastic cricket bat), he was sentenced to
a term of imprisonment of 15 months. Finally, for the
DVO contravention, he was
sentenced to a term of imprisonment six months. The sentences were ordered to be
served wholly cumulatively,
which resulted in a total effective term of
imprisonment of four years and nine months. His Honour fixed a non-parole period
years and 6 months.
sentencing judge made the following remarks in relation to his decision to order
full accumulation:
The total of the sentences is four years and nine
months. I have had regard to the principal of totality and concurrency and
that that period is a just and appropriate sentence for your
In this respect, I have had regard to the fact that each of your offences
involved a separate assault on a separate victim, associated
with circumstances
of domestic violence.
objective seriousness his Honour found as follows:
Each of these
offences is a serious offence involving domestic violence. The victims were
vulnerable and were incapable of defending
themselves. You were in a position of
trust and under a moral responsibility to protect them and keep them free from
Further, despite being subject to a domestic violence order for their
protection, you still committed the offences. The first victim,
ET [daughter],
suffered significant harm. The first and second victims, your two children, were
both of a very young age. The assault
upon the first and third victims, namely
ET and GT [partner], involved the use of a weapon.
All of your victims live in fear of you. Because of her fear, GT delayed
taking your daughter, ET, to the clinic when she was suffering
from the broken
arm that you inflicted on her. They all suffered emotional trauma as a result of
your crimes. Your children are likely
to suffer ongoing emotional and
psychological harm as a result of your violent conduct. None of your victims is
to blame for the
violence that you inflicted on them.
[43] His Honour
took into account the applicant's criminal history which included convictions
for violent offences in 2006, 2017 and
2019, two convictions for breaching
domestic violence orders, and one previous conviction for breaching a suspended
sentence. His
Honour observed that the applicant’s criminal history was
relevant to structuring the applicant’s sentence and taking
into account
the need for specific deterrence, protection of the community and prospects of
rehabilitation.
[44] His Honour
detailed the applicant’s violent and dysfunctional family upbringing and
referred to the sexual assault perpetrated
against him by two older boys when he
was 11 years of age, acknowledging the resultant trauma and difficulties faced
by the applicant.
principles in
Honour found as follows:
Having regard to your history, you are entitled to the benefit of
the principles in
. That is to say your moral culpability is reduced
as a result of your violent and dysfunctional upbringing. However, your moral
culpability
is still, I consider, high. Furthermore, in cases of domestic
violence such as this, considerable weight must be given to specific
and general
deterrence and to protection of your family and the community.
Crimes of domestic violence are particularly serious crimes. They cause
enormous harm in our community and are a great burden on medical
and hospital
resources. You must be punished and others must be deterred from committing
further violence against their family members.
Women and children are entitled
to be safe in our community, and the community strongly disapproves of these
[45] His Honour
rejected the applicant’s submission that his time on remand was onerous
and required a reduction in his sentence:
I turn next to identify a
number of factors which affect the sentence to be imposed on you. First, I have
had regard to the fact that
you have now been in custody since 14 December 2021.
Accordingly, I propose to backdate your sentence to that date.
Your counsel suggests I should have regard to the circumstances of hardship
endured by you while you have been in custody; however,
I do not see that those
hardships have affected you more than the average remandee, and I therefore
reject that submission.
[46] Although
the evidence was vague in relation to the length of periods of lockdown and the
extent of overcrowding, his Honour accepted
that the applicant had experienced
some hardship on remand, notwithstanding that he had engaged in rehabilitation
programs, employment
and education in prison. However, it would appear that his
Honour was under the impression that counsel for the applicant had submitted
that the applicant had endured greater hardship than other prisoners, and, on
that understanding, his Honour rejected the submission
made, essentially on the
basis that the applicant was in the ‘same boat’ as all his fellow
prisoners. Given that the
first ground of appeal is that the sentencing judge
“erred in his treatment of the onerousness of the applicant’s
of custody”, it is appropriate at this point to identify the
actual submissions made.
November 2022, defence counsel referred to a number of matters, including
overcrowding because of COVID-19 and industrial
action, before making the
following submission to the presiding
further hardship I say in relation to why your Honour should find that his time
in custody has been more difficult than other
prisoners at other times that do
not have these circumstances, is that he has instructed he is currently in a
wing where they have
two up cells, being two persons to a cell. There are four
people in his cell. ... And he has been sleeping on a mattress on the floor
the past few months just because there’s no bed for him to sleep in at
this stage. That is not unique only to my client.
There are multiple people in
the prison that are subjected to these conditions right now. ... I submit that
his time in custody has
been more difficult and his sentence should be moderated
accordingly.
[48] In addendum
submissions dated 20 February
defence counsel referred
to the Institutional Report and made this submission:
submitted that Mr Joran has faced hardship whilst on remand, and his time in
custody has been more difficult than the average
remandee that is not subjected
to similar conditions.
February 2023, defence counsel made a similar submission to the sentencing judge
to that made by him on 3 November 2022,
namely that the applicant had been in
custody during the time COVID-19 had been rampant, with ongoing industrial
actions and significant
overcrowding. When his Honour suggested that being
locked down was common in prison, defence counsel submitted as
common these days but my point is, it is one we may rely on to say that his time
in custody now, these days, has been more
difficult than prisoners that have not
been subjected to similar conditions in the past or may not be subjected to
similar conditions
in the future.
[50] Defence
counsel’s submission to the sentencing judge was that, in common with all
other prisoners affected by lockdowns
as a result of COVID-19 restrictions and
industrial actions, the applicant’s time in custody had been more onerous:
had been more significant restriction on his liberties than if there
had not been such lockdowns. The submission was not one which
might be made in
circumstances where an offender has been a prisoner in protective custody, with
greater restrictions on his liberties
than other prisoners.
[51] I conclude
that the sentencing judge misapprehended the submission which defence counsel
had made in relation to the conditions
faced by the applicant as a remand
prisoner. Counsel for the applicant in this Court argues that the sentencing
remarks extracted
in [45] demonstrate error in at least two
more fully submitted
as follows:
applicant’s complex PTSD could not be described as common to ‘the
average remandee’, and thus it appears that
his Honour simply overlooked
the evidence and submissions relevant to the experience of custody. His Honour
must thus be found to
have mistook the facts or failed to take into account a
relevant consideration.
Honour’s consideration of the
generally applicable
nature of the
hardships imposed by the pandemic and overcrowding prevented the applicant from
calling them in aid, in terms of some
moderation of the length of the sentence.
[52] I would
reject the first dot-pointed submission in [51] because there was no evidence as
to how the applicant’s C-PTSD
affected his experience of custody. The
applicant did not give evidence. Dr Frost does not mention the effect which the
applicant’s
C-PTSD may have had on his experience of custody. To the
extent it may be relevant, I note that, when Dr Frost questioned the
incarcerated, he was experiencing anger, anxiety and sadness. However,
prison, being substance-free, he was of the view that both his anger and sadness
had gone, particularly as more recently he had
begun ‘praying to
Dr Frost noted
that the applicant’s sleep was still interrupted by nightmares, but that
he would use prayer as a way of inducing
sleep. He had re-established his
Catholic faith. In prison, his appetite had improved and his weight had
increased. It may be inferred
that the applicant’s mental health had
improved in prison.
[53] In the
addendum submissions on sentence, defence counsel referred to the diagnosis of
C-PTSD and submitted: “Mr Joran has
had to grapple with this illness
whilst on remand”,
footnoting page 13 of Dr Frost’s report. There the doctor explained the
diagnosis of C-PTSD. She also referred to Mr Joran’s
suicidal state at the
time he was unable to attend his father’s funeral. However, Dr Frost did
not link that particular episode
with the C-PTSD diagnosis. Nor did Dr Frost say
anything about the applicant having to ‘grapple with’ that
illness or experiencing any particular problem as a result of that
illness while in prison.
[54] However,
for reasons explained, I would accept the second dot-pointed submission in [51].
His Honour apparently misunderstood
defence counsel’s submission and did
not consider whether the sentence might be moderated, and if so to what extent,
as a result
of the matters actually submitted, clarified by me in [50]. It does
not follow that leave to appeal should be granted or any appeal
allowed for that
reason, given the factual matters discussed in [35] – [38] above. I
consider below whether this Court should
moderate the sentence on appeal,
bearing in mind that the Court is required to dismiss an appeal unless of the
opinion that another
sentence, in this case a less severe sentence, should have
been passed.
[55] His Honour
ultimately found that the applicant had “guarded” prospects of
rehabilitation and “at least a moderate
risk” of re-offending and in
particular a risk of perpetrating future violence against the applicant’s
partner and children.
Proposed grounds of appeal
proposed grounds of appeal are as follows:
sentencing judge erred in his treatment of the onerousness of the
applicant’s experience of custody.
sentencing judge erred in applying the principle of totality.
sentencing judge erred in his treatment of the applicant’s profound
childhood deprivation and associated complex post-traumatic
stress disorder
[57] In relation
to the second ground of appeal, counsel for the applicant referred to the
sentencing judge’s reasons in relation
to totality, extracted in [41]
above, apparently taking issue with his Honour’s observation that each of
the offences had involved
a separate assault on a separate
Although counsel for the
applicant accepts that the applicant offended against each of three victims, he
submits that domestic violence
being the common character of the offending
weighed against full
accumulation.
The argument was
developed as follows: the three victims were closely related, being part of the
same family unit; the harm caused
by each offence was harm to the family unit as
well as to its “constituent parts”; and there was a
“significant
degree of commonality in what made each offence objectively
serious and thus what was the applicant’s overall criminality”.
respect, I do not see how that argument exposes error on the part of the
sentencing judge. If anything, the argument draws
attention to the physical and
psychological or mental harm done to the victims. For example, it is possible to
look back at the events
through the eyes of the applicant’s seven year old
daughter, the traumatised victim of the offending charged as count 1. She
then exposed to the assault of her little brother and then the assault of her
mother on 13 December 2021, and subjected to the
deeply hurtful abuse and the
violence which occurred the following day.
separate but related argument, counsel for the applicant submits that the
offending charged as counts 2 and 3 was part of
transaction’. That may be accepted insofar as the assault on the
applicant’s partner was committed shortly
after the assault on his son.
However, it could equally be seen as two separate transactions, because there
were two victims. The
mere fact that offences form part of what might be
described as a single episode does not of itself warrant concurrency. The
question is whether the sentence imposed for one offence encompasses
in whole or in part the criminality of the other offence or
Thomas v The
, this Court approved the principle that temporal proximity is not
conclusive in relation to whether concurrency should be ordered
where offences
are part of a single episode of criminality with common factors. In that
context, the Court (Grant CJ, Southwood J
and Riley AJ) observed as
proximity is not conclusive, particularly in offences of violence (including
sexual violence) involving separate attacks
and/or separate victims. A failure
to identify and evaluate the nature and seriousness of each offence and to
cumulate the individual
sentences appropriately will, among other potential
errors, amount to a failure to accord appropriate weight to relevant factors
such as the physical, psychological and/or emotional harm done to each victim.
[60] Counsel for
the applicant makes the further submission that all of the offending was at
least partially the result of the same
underlying factors, namely the
applicant’s impulse to anger and violence in response to frustration
experienced in the family
context, “ultimately rooted in the same
traumatic childhood experiences”. That submission may be accepted, but
qualification ‘partially’ noted. Dr Frost’s
explanation for the applicant’s violent tendencies undoubtedly
proper basis, but in this case it can only be a partial explanation because to
elevate it beyond that would be to deny the
applicant’s
‘agency’ in his own abhorrent conduct. The unfortunate fact is that
the applicant has a particularly
nasty temper which he failed to curb on three
separate occasions, committing four violent offences: stomping on his little
arm; striking his young son three or four times to the back;
hitting his partner to the forearm with a plastic cricket bat; and finally
abusing his partner and children in deeply offensive language and chasing his
partner with a knife threatening to stab her. The offences
in December 2021 were
committed while the applicant was on bail and each of them constituted a breach
of the DVO confirmed by the
Local Court.
[61] Counsel for
the applicant contends that the individual offences are connected “as a
matter of fact and law”. Counsel
contends that “to treat each
offence as so isolated as to warrant a separately cumulative sentence was ...
artificial in the
That submission
cannot be accepted. There was no relevant connection as a matter of law. As to
any connection on the facts, I refer
to my observations in [58] and [59] above.
The applicant’s impulse to anger and violence in response to frustration
experienced
in the family context may be a common element (and hence constitute
a factual connection) but that does not mean that the sentencing
miscarried because separate sentences were ordered to be served wholly
cumulatively. I fail to see how the asserted connection
somehow renders it
“artificial in the extreme” to impose separate sentences to be
served fully cumulatively. In my opinion,
it is not artificial at all.
[62] The final
submission made by counsel for the applicant in relation to totality was that
“... it is accepted that the severity
of a sentence increases in an
exponential rather than linear way as it increases in length”. The
proposition may be accepted,
but it has little relevance in the present case.
The ‘compounding effect’ on the severity of the total sentence by
aggregating two or more lots of sentences was referred to by Malcolm CJ
Clinch v The Queen
cited with approval by the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal (Spigelman
CJ, Whealy and Howie JJ) in
However, the principle
(if it can be called that) appears to have been stated or relied on in relation
to very lengthy sentences.
For example, in
the caution expressed
by Malcolm CJ was about aggregating a sentence of seven years and a sentence of
eight years, with the resultant
sentence of 15 years described as out of
proportion to the degree of criminality involved. Similarly, in
the Court was dealing with a sexual offender who was serving a sentence of
16 years with a 12 year non-parole period who was then
sentenced to a further
sentence of nine years with a four year non-parole
so-called compounding effect on the severity of the total sentence by
aggregation has little significance in the present
case, given that the total
effective sentence for all offences was four years and nine months, with a
non-parole period of two years
and six months being only slightly in excess of
the mandatory minimum 50 per cent. The sentence was not a ‘crushing
nor was it out of proportion to the degree of criminality
v The Queen
the High Court
discussed the totality principle and the related principles of concurrency and
cumulation. The Court described the
totality principle as “a recognized
principle of sentencing formulated to assist a court when sentencing an offender
number of offences”.
The Court referred with approval to Thomas,
Principles of Sentencing
quoted the passage extracted
effect of the totality principle is to require a sentencer who has passed a
series of sentences, each properly calculated
in relation to the offence for
which it is imposed and each properly made consecutive in accordance with the
principles governing
consecutive sentences, to review the aggregate sentence and
consider whether the aggregate is ‘just and appropriate’.
principle has been stated many times in various forms: ‘when a number of
offences are being dealt with and specific punishments
in respect of them are
being totted up to make a total, it is always necessary for the court to take a
last look at the total just
to see whether it looks wrong[’]; ‘when
... cases of multiplicity of offences come before the court, the court must not
content itself by doing the arithmetic and passing the sentence which the
arithmetic produces. It must look at the totality of the
criminal behaviour and
ask itself what is the appropriate sentence for all the
offences’.”
After then referring to Ruby,
ed. (1987),
pp 38 - 41, the Court observed:-
Where the principle falls to be applied in relation to sentences of
imprisonment imposed by a single sentencing court, an appropriate
result may be
achieved either by making sentences wholly or partially concurrent or by
lowering the individual sentences below what
would otherwise be appropriate in
order to reflect the fact that a number of sentences are being imposed. Where
practicable, the
former is to be preferred.
Postiglione v The Queen
Kirby J cited with approval the passage from Thomas,
Principles of
, extracted above, and observed as follows:
sentencing judge must first reach a conclusion as to what seems to be the
appropriate sentence having regard to the maximum
fixed by Parliament for the
worst case and the norm that is appropriate to the objective criminality of the
case. The judge must
then adjust that sentence, where appropriate, for the
factors personal or special to the offender, discounted by any relevant
considerations
(for example co-operation with authorities or absence of
remissions). But it still remains for the judge to look back at the product
these calculations and discounts. It is then that the sentencing judge must
consider whether the resulting sentence needs further
adjustment. It may do so
because it is out of step with the parity principle requiring that normally like
cases should be treated
alike. Or it may offend the totality principle because,
looking at the prisoner’s criminality as a whole, the outcome is,
totality, not “just and appropriate”. The last-mentioned conclusion
will the more readily be reached where the
judge comes to the conclusion that
the outcome would be “crushing” and, as such, would not hold out a
proper measure
of hope for, and encouragement to, rehabilitation and reform.
[66] In this
case, the implication is clear from the structure of the sentence that the
sentencing judge decided that the sentences
should not be made concurrent or
partially concurrent on the basis of general principles relating to concurrency
and cumulation.
It may be inferred that his Honour did not consider that the
sentence for any one offence could adequately comprehend and reflect
criminality of another offence.
As is apparent from the sentencing remarks extracted in [41], his Honour was
mindful that the totality principle might operate in
the sentencing of the
applicant, and did what
required by considering whether the sentence
needed adjustment. In the exercise of his discretion, for reasons given, his
determined not to make any adjustment. Reasonable minds may differ as to
the need for cumulation and often there will be no clearly
correct answer. For
example, it was open to the sentencing judge to allow some limited concurrency
between the sentences on counts
2 and 3. However, that does not mean that his
Honour’s decision to accumulate was not a sound discretionary judgment. In
judgment, the applicant has not demonstrated that the sentencing discretion
miscarried.
[67] I turn to
consider the third proposed ground of appeal, namely that the sentencing judge
erred in his treatment of the applicant’s
profound childhood deprivation
and associated complex post-traumatic stress disorder.
[68] Based on
the sentencing remarks extracted at [44] above, counsel for the applicant
contends that the sentencing judge considered
only the ‘general’
application of
to reduce moral culpability, and that his Honour
completely failed to take into account the ‘specific’ way in which
applicant’s profound childhood deprivation could be causally or
realistically linked to his offending so as to explain that
offending. The
contention was based on an analysis of the High Court’s decision in
by the Victorian Court of Appeal (Maxwell P, Kay, Niall,
T Forrest and Emerton JJA) in
Director of Public Prosecutions (Vic) v
[69] Before
dealing with the contention, I should note that the sentencing judge’s
consideration of the applicant’s background
and upbringing, relevant to
principles and the appellant’s C-PTSD, was not confined to
the matters summarized and sentencing remarks extracted by me at
[44] above. His
Honour also referred to the applicant’s history of cannabis consumption,
starting at the age of 13, “to
forget about [his] previous
Before then
imposing sentence, his Honour considered the pre-sentence reports (the three
reports referred to in [24] above), and
specifically the report of Dr Mary
Frost. After referring to the doctor’s diagnosis of C-PTSD (and substance
use disorder),
the judge addressed possible conditions of release and read out
this quote from Dr Frost’s report:
Consistent access to
culturally appropriate trauma counselling in order to learn skills to better
regulate his emotions and to manage
his anger, coupled with the teaching of
skills to enhance his avoidance of substance use will be important facets of
reducing Mr
Joran’s chance of recidivism. ...
[70] It is clear
from all the matters dealt with by the judge in his sentencing remarks, referred
to in [44] and [69], including the
quoted extract from Dr Frost’s report,
that His Honour understood the causative nexus between the applicant’s
unfortunate
traumatic childhood experiences and his difficulty as an adult in
regulating his emotions and managing his anger. The applicant’s
contention, that his Honour’s reasons evince “no engagement”
with the evidence or submissions concerning that
should be rejected. In my
judgment, his Honour’s statements, extracted in [44], that the applicant
was entitled to the benefit
of the principles in
, and that his
moral culpability was reduced as a result of his violent and dysfunctional
upbringing, demonstrated an implicit acceptance
that the applicant’s
exposure to violence and sexual abuse were an explanation for his recourse to
violence when frustrated
such that his moral culpability for the inability to
control his impulse was reduced.
In this respect, I accept the submissions of counsel for the
respondent.
applicant’s case in relation to the asserted deficiencies in the
judge’s approach to the application of the
principles ends
with the submission that his Honour afforded the applicant “only the most
modest reduction in moral
culpability”.
Any response
to that submission must be qualified. It is correct that the judge found that
the applicant’s moral culpability
remained high, even taking into account
his violent and dysfunctional upbringing. However, the applicant’s moral
culpability
may otherwise have been considered to be
particularly the offence committed against his daughter.
moderation of sentence, the applicant’s focus on the
principles in relation to reduced moral culpability overlooks the second part of
the following statement in [44] of the
offender’s childhood exposure to extreme violence and alcohol abuse may
explain the offender’s recourse to violence
when frustrated such that the
offender’s moral culpability for the inability to control that impulse may
be substantially reduced.
However, the inability to control the violent response
to frustration may increase the importance of protecting the community from
[73] Protection
of the applicant’s family and the community were specific matters which
the judge considered should be given
considerable weight.
[74] There is a
further matter that I consider should be mentioned, notwithstanding that the
applicant has not sought to appeal on
the ground of manifest excess. In my
opinion, the sentence imposed in respect of count 1 was very lenient. The
applicant was a heavily
built man, 43 years old, who became frustrated with his
young children to the extent that he walked over to where his seven year
daughter was sitting on a mattress and stomped on her arm, causing wrist
fractures which had to be treated by a closed reduction
procedure under
anaesthesia and the application of a cast. The child was hospitalised for some
days. The offending was not only violent,
it was also cruel. For the stomping
component of count 1, there were four admitted circumstances of aggravation. The
offence carried
a maximum penalty of imprisonment of five years. The applicant
had a significant history of relationship violence. I consider that
appropriate starting point was a sentence of four to five years before any
discount was allowed for a guilty plea. Although the
applicant admitted in the
Supreme Court that he stomped on his daughter’s arm, he had told the
police that he had accidentally
stepped onto her arm. He told Dr Frost that he
trod on his daughter’s arm “by accident”. I mention these
because I am by no means convinced that the applicant was entitled to a
‘full’ 25 per cent discount.
[75] Nonetheless,
in sentencing the applicant on count 1, the sentencing judge took as his
starting point a sentence of three years,
from which he allowed a 25 per cent
discount, to arrive at a sentence of two years and three months.
[76] Although
his Honour might possibly have provided a detailed analysis of the
factors, the applicant has not established that the sentencing judge erred in
failing to apply the
principles. The sentence on count 1 was
sufficiently lenient as to reflect moderation on account of reduced moral
culpability, even
in the absence of an express statement to that
would grant leave to appeal on all three
notwithstanding the error on the part of his Honour identified in [54] above, I
am of the opinion that no other, less severe,
sentence to that imposed by his
Honour was warranted or should have been passed. The consequence is that, in
accordance with s 411(4)(b)
Criminal Code
, the appeal should be
[78] I too have
had the benefit of reading the draft decision of Barr J and agree that the
appeal should be dismissed for the reasons
given in that
-------------------
The single assault charged was
constituted by two assaults: the initial throwing of the lighter at the victim
and then the stomping
on the victim’s forearm. Under s 310 of the
Criminal Code
, the two assaults could be charged as one assault on the
basis that they were committed on the same person at or about the same time.
and Family Violence Act 2007
Application book, p
107: Agreed Facts, par 19.
The agreed facts also note at par
27 that the applicant's daughter witnessed both assaults: the assault on her
brother and the assault
on her mother.
Application Book p 172: Sentencing
remarks, 19 July 2006 (Riley J).
Ibid, p 175.
Application Book, p 169: Agreed
Facts in file 21944028.
Bugmy v The Queen
249 CLR 571.
Application book, pp 27-29:
Transcript of proceedings 3 November 2022.
Application book, p 193, par
Application book, p 29.
Application book, p 191, par
Exhibit D4: Notes of
conversation with Aboriginal Health Practitioner.
The report read, relevantly, as
follows: “... it is reported that on 18 December 2021, Mr Joran reported
to officers through
his cell intercom he had a shirt tied around his neck in an
attempt to self-harm. As per prison protocols, he was immediately taken
medical and placed at risk to undergo an at risk assessment. Upon being
monitored for 2 days, he was assessed on 20 December 2021
and deemed to be no
apparent risk of self-harm, and returned to mainstream accommodation”.
Exhibit P7 – Darwin
Correctional Centre Institutional Report, 21 January 2023.
This was probably a reference
to the Batchelor Institute program referred to in [21] above.
Application book, p 136. There
is some ambiguity in the information provided in the Institutional Report, in
relation to whether
separate programs undertaken by the applicant overlapped, or
whether there was one or more programs which followed one another.
The Queen v Olbrich
(1999) 199 CLR 270
, at [25], [27] per Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, Hayne and
Callinan JJ.
Criminal Code
Domestic and Family Violence
Application book: Sentencing
remarks, p 97.5.
Bugmy v The Queen
; 249 CLR 571.
Application book: Sentencing
remarks, p 99.1.
Application book, p 29:
Transcript 03/11/2022, p 19.
Application book, p 207:
‘Addendum to defence submissions on sentence’, par 7.
Application book, p 72:
Transcript 22/02/2023, p 30.
Application book, p 223:
Written submissions of counsel for the applicant, 31 March 2023.
Application book, p 144: Report
Dr Frost, p 6.
Application book, p 207.
Criminal Code
, s 411(4).
Written submissions, par
Written submissions, par
[2007] NSWCCA
Thomas v The Queen
[2017] NTCCA 4
, at [35], citations omitted.
Application book, p 226:
Applicant’s submissions, par 30.
Clinch v The Queen
[1994] WASC 57
(1994) 72 A Crim R 301
[2006] NSWCCA
; 167 A Crim R 159 at
Similarly, in
[2016] NSWCCA 266
, another case referred to by counsel for the
applicant, the appellant was serving a term of imprisonment of 6 years with a
period of 3 years when he was further sentenced to a total
sentence of 8 years with a non-parole period of 5 years.
Mill v The Queen
[1988] HCA 70
(1988) 166 CLR 59.
Ibid, p 62-63.
Principles of
ed (1979), pp 56 – 57.
Postiglione v The Queen
[1997] HCA 26
(1997) 189 CLR 295
Carroll v The Queen
[2011] NTCCA 6
29 NTLR 106
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Vic) v Herrmann
[2021] VSCA 160
290 A Crim R 110
Application book, p 98:
Sentencing remarks.
Application book, p 132, par
Bugmy v The Queen
249 CLR 571 at [44], per French CJ, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel, Bell and Keane
Written submissions on behalf
of the respondent, par 34.
Application book p 232, par
applications for leave to appeal, the test is whether the grounds of appeal are
McDonald v R
[1992] NTCCA 12
(1992) 85 NTR 1
ostron v The Queen
[1991] NTCCA 7
(1991) 1 NTLR 191
at 196; and
[2003] NTCCA 2
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (381 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter