URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCA/2025/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:16:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
FE Accommodation Pty Ltd & Anor v Gold Valley Iron Ore Pty Ltd [2025] NTCA 8 (14 August 2025)
FE Accommodation Pty Ltd & Anor v Gold Valley Iron Ore Pty
[2025] NTCA 8
PARTIES: FE ACCOMMODATION PTY LTD (ACN 160 943 082)
G&C PASTORAL CO PTY LTD
(ACN 008 039 405)
GOLD VALLEY IRON ORE PTY LTD
(ACN 618 094 634)
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: AP 7 of 2024 (22427907)
DELIVERED: 14 August 2025
HEARING DATE: 19 February 2025
JUDGMENT OF: Kelly and Blokland JJ and Lasry AJ
CATCHWORDS:
APPEAL– contract – appeal against assessment of damages –
whether trial Judge erred by awarding nominal damages
only to first plaintiff
– whether error in construction of s 84
Supreme Court Act
– held no error– s 84 permits an award of interest only on
“the sum for which
is given” - whether trial judge erred by not awarding interest on the
principles in
Hungerford v Walker
– held no error – claim for
interest as damages not pleaded and proved - whether trial judge erred in not
the respondent’s counterclaim on the basis of
estoppel – held no error – whether trial judge erred in awarding
interest under s 84
Supreme Court Act
on amount awarded on
respondent’s counterclaim – held no error
CROSS APPEAL - whether trial Judge erred in finding s 52(3) of the
Sale of Goods Act
did not apply to assessment of second appellant’s
damages – held no error - whether error in the assessment of damages
concerning values and starting points for assessment – held no error
Federal Court Act 1976
(Cth), s 51A(1)
Sale of Goods Act 1972
Supreme Court Act
Supreme Court Act
ABD (Metals and Waste) Ltd v Anglo-Chemical Ore Co Ltd
[1985] 2 Lloyds
Adrenaline Pty Ltd v Bathurst Regional Council
[2015] NSWCA 123
(2015) 97 NSWLR
Ajaimi v Giswick Pty Ltd (No 3)
(2022) 67 VR 529
Financial Services and Leasing Pty Ltd v Hills Industries Ltd
[2014] HCA 14
(2014) 253 CLR
Baltic Shipping Co v Dillon
[1993] HCA 4
(1993) 176 CLR 344
Barrow v Arnaud
[(1846) 8 QB 595 at 609-610
[1846] EngR 10
(115 ER 1000
Clark v Macourt
[2013] HCA 56
Commonwealth of Australia v Amann Aviation
[1991] HCA 54
Commonwealth v Chessell
(1991) 30 FCR 154
Commonwealth v
SCI Operations
(1998) 192 CLR 285
David Securities Pty Ltd v
Commonwealth Bank of Australia
[1992] HCA 48
(1992) 175 CLR 353
Ebinger Actien
Gesellschaft v Armstrong
(1874) 9 QB 473
Equuscorp Pty Ltd v Haxton
(2012) 246 CLR 498;
FE Accommodation Pty Ltd & Anor v Gold Valley Iron
Ore Pty Ltd
[2020] NTSC 61
FE Accommodation Pty Ltd & Anor v Gold
Valley Iron Ore Pty Ltd
[2024] NTSC 61
Ford v Perpetual Trustees
Victoria Ltd
(2009) 75 NSWLR;
Gold Valley Iron Ore Pty Ltd v FE
Accommodation Pty Ltd & Anor
[2021] NTCA 2
Haines v Bendall
[1991] HCA 15
(1991) 172 CLR 60
Hegarty v Keogh
(No 2) [2023] SASCA;
Hobartville
Stud Pty Ltd v Union Insurance Co Ltd
(1991) 25 NSWLR 358
Hungerfords v
[1989] HCA 8
(1988) 171 CLR 125
Ikosidekas v Glenis
[2023] VSCA 134
Joseph & Co Pty Ltd v Harvest Grain Co Pty Ltd
(1996) 39 NSWLR 722
Kwai Tek Chao v British Traders and Shoppers Ltd
[1954] 2 QB 459
v Paterson Constructions Pty Ltd
[2019] HCA 32
(2019) 267 CLR 560
Marshall & Co v
Nicoll & Son
[1919], SC 244
McDonald v Dennys Lascelles Ltd
[1933] HCA 25
(1933) 48 CLR 457
Northern Territory v Griffiths
[2019] HCA 7
(2019) 269 CLR 1
Pavey & Matthews Pty Ltd v Paul
[1987] HCA 5
(1987) 162 CLR 221
Pooraka Holdings Pty Ltd v Participation Nominees Pty Ltd
(1991) 58 SASR
State Bank of New South Wales v Yee
(1994) 33 NSWLR 618
(WL) Ltd v Robinson (Gunmakers) Ltd
[1955] Ch 177
Timbercorp Finance Pty
Ltd (in liq) v Collins
[2016] FCA 44
(2016) 259 CLR 212
Tomlinson v Ramsey Food
Processing Pty Ltd
[2015] HCA 28
(2015) 256 CLR 507
Walker v FAI Insurance Ltd
(1991) Tas R 258,
Water Board v Moustakas
(1988) 180 CLR 491
v Chicoutimi Pulp Co
[1910] UKPC 1
; [1911] AC 301; referred to.
JW Carter, W Courtney and GJ Tolhurst, ‘Issues of Principle in
Assessing Contract Damages’ (2014) 31
Journal of Contract Law
Carter’s Breach of Contract
LexisNexis Butterworths
Mason and Carter,
Restitution Law in Australia
Professor Michael Bridge,
Benjamin’s Sale of Goods
REPRESENTATION:
Appellants: A Harris KC with E Keynes
Respondent: A Wyvill SC with R Sanders
Solicitors:
Appellants: CCK Lawyers
Respondent: HWL Ebsworth Lawyers
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 80
IN THE COURT OF APPEAL
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
FE Accommodation Pty Ltd & Anor v Gold Valley Iron Ore
[2025] NTCA 8
No. AP 7 of 2024 (22427907)
FE ACCOMMODATION PTY LTD
(ACN 160 943 082)
First Appellant
G&C PASTORAL CO PTY LTD
(ACN 008 039 405)
Second Appellant
GOLD VALLEY IRON ORE PTY LTD
(ACN 618 094 634)
CORAM: THE COURT
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 14 August 2025)
[1] This appeal
arises out of proceedings in connection with the termination of a contract
between the appellants and the respondent
entered into on 17 August 2017
(“the Contract”).
[2] Under the
Contract, the first appellant (“FE”) sold the respondent
(“Gold Valley”) a mining camp known
as the Sawfish Camp (“the
Camp”) and the second appellant (“G&C”) sold Gold Valley
some plant and equipment
(“the Plant and Equipment”). (The Camp and
the Plant and Equipment are collectively referred to as “the
Chattels”.)
[3] The Chattels
were located at the Roper Bar Iron Ore Mine near Borroloola in the Northern
Territory which had been operated by
WDR Iron Ore Pty Ltd (“WDR”).
In 2013 FE purchased the Camp from WDR and agreed to lease it back to WDR for
its continued
use in the operation of the mine. However, a short time later,
WDR was placed into receivership and in April 2016 WDR went into
liquidation.
[4] In September
2016, G&C purchased the Plant and Equipment (which comprised essentially all
of the assets WRD had used in operating
the mine other than the Camp) from the
liquidator of WDR.
[5] Under the
Contract Gold Valley agreed to purchase the Chattels from FE and G&C for
$3.5 million to be paid in instalments.
Property in the Chattels was not to
pass until the contract price was paid in full. However, Gold Valley was
entitled to possession
of the Chattels under licence from the date of execution
of the Contract (17 August 2017) in exchange for a further payment of $3.5
million in licence fees to be paid in annual instalments. (Details of the
apportionment of the purchase prices and licence fees
are set out at [91]
[6] On 16 August
2017, following execution of the Contract, Gold Valley took possession of the
Chattels. Under the terms of the Contract,
Gold Valley was not to remove the
Chattels from the mineral leases on which the mine was operated without the
prior written consent
of the appellants until the full amount of $7 million plus
GST had been paid. Clause 15 of the Contract provided:
Both parties
agree at signing in consideration of the vendor not requiring guarantees of the
purchaser’s directors, the purchaser
agrees not to remove the Chattels
from the Mineral Lease prior to payment in full of all moneys payable under this
contract or otherwise
only with the vendor’s consent.
[7] On 25 August
2017, Gold Valley paid G&C $500,000, being the first instalment of the
purchase price of the Plant and Equipment.
September 2017, the parties entered into a variation of the Contract, allowing
Gold Valley to pay the $500,000 payable to
FE under the Contract in two
tranches. These were paid on 2 October and 16 October 2017.
liquidator of WDR sold the mineral leases comprising the Roper Bar Iron Ore mine
to Britmar (Aust) Pty Ltd (“Britmar”)
and Britmar became the
registered owner of the mine on 18 December 2017.
[10] Between May
and July 2018, Gold Valley removed some items of the Plant and Equipment from
the mineral leases without the consent
of the appellants and without their
knowledge. (These are referred to in the damages judgment (and this decision)
Removed Items”.)
[11] The second
instalment of $500,000 for the Plant and Equipment and the licence fee of
$750,000 for the Camp were due and payable
on 17 August
[12] On 17 July
2018, the appellants commenced proceedings against Gold Valley claiming payment
of the balance of the purchase price
of the Chattels, namely $6 million plus GST
pursuant to clause 15 of the Contract.
[13] On 9 August
2018, Gold Valley purported to terminate the Contract for breach. On 30 August
2018, the appellants treated the
purported termination as a repudiation of the
Contract which they accepted and terminated the Contract.
[14] The Supreme
Court ordered that the issue of liability only be tried as a preliminary issue
and on 11, 12 and 13 December 2018
there was a trial before Southwood J of
the issues in the proceeding on liability only.
[15] Judgment on
the liability trial was delivered
on 11 September
2020. Southwood J found that Gold Valley was liable to the appellants for
wrongful repudiation of the Contract; that
the appellants had validly terminated
the Contract on 30 August 2018; and that the appellants were entitled to have
their damages
[16] In the
liability decision, Southwood J also held that clause 15 of the
Contract (set out above at [6]) operated as an accelerated
payments clause for
the benefit of the appellants so that if Gold Valley removed the Chattels from
the mineral leases without the
consent of the appellants (which it had done) all
payments under the Contract for the Chattels were accelerated and payable in
Valley appealed unsuccessfully against the liability decision.
[18] In the
meantime, in March 2019, Britmar commenced proceedings against the appellants
and the controlling mind of the appellants,
Mr Vivian Oldfield, seeking
orders that the appellants remove the remaining Plant and Equipment from the
mineral leases. This litigation
was settled in accordance with a settlement
deed and asset sale deeds whereby:
(a) Britmar purchased a defined portion of the Camp from FE for
$5.5 million payable by instalments; and
(b) Britmar purchased the remaining Plant and Equipment which was still on the
mineral leases (with the exception of seven fuel pods)
for $500,000 payable by
instalments.
(That portion of the Camp not purchased by Britmar is referred to in the
damages decision (and this decision) as “the Excluded
[19] In about
July 2019, G&C arranged for the seven fuel pods to be transported by Roper
River Transport (“RRT”),
to RRT’s yard in Mataranka at a cost
of $33,556.60 inclusive of GST.
[20] In February
2021, G&C retrieved possession of about half of the Removed Items. It did
so by engaging RRT to transport those
items to G&C’s yard in Alice
Springs at a total cost of $107,628.51 payable as follows:
(a) $26,788.51 (inclusive of GST) payable in cash;
(b) $73,500 plus GST in kind consisting of part of the Plant and Equipment the
subject of the Contract which was being retrieved
by RRT and one of the seven
fuel pods previously transported to Mataranka by RRT.
[21] In August
2021, FE sold some of the Excluded Assets, namely 12 of the four room
accommodation buildings and one laundry building,
to Nathan River Resources
(‘NRR’), a related entity to Britmar, for $500,500 plus GST.
later transported some of the Excluded Assets (eight accommodation buildings and
one laundry building) to the Moura Caravan
Park in Queensland, owned by a
related company to FE, at a cost of $236,565.51 excluding GST which was paid by
the related company.
remaining Excluded Assets were not sold and remain on the mine site.
[24] By the date
of the trial on damages, the Removed Items that had not been transported by RRT
to Alice Springs on behalf of G&C
remained at the locations to which they
had been taken by Gold Valley.
[25] A further
trial was held before Brownhill J on 10, 11 and 12 April 2024, with further
written submissions filed on 16 and 26
April 2024, for the purpose of assessing
damages. At that trial, Gold Valley raised a counterclaim, seeking repayment by
restitution of the instalment of $500,000 paid to G&C for purchase of
the Plant and Equipment and the instalment of $500,000
paid to FE for purchase
of the Camp
August 2024, Brownhill J delivered judgment in the following
Subject to the
impacts of GST, I will make the following orders.
(1) The first plaintiff
is entitled to judgment against the
defendant for nominal damages only and the defendant
(Gold Valley)
pay the first plaintiff nominal damages of $1.
(2) The second plaintiff
is entitled to judgment against the
defendant for damages and the defendant is to pay the second plaintiff damages
of $382,555, plus
interest at the rate prescribed by Order 59.02(3) of the
Supreme Court Rules
for the period from 30 August 2018 to the date of
(3) The defendant is entitled to restitution against the first plaintiff on
the counterclaim and the first plaintiff is to pay the
defendant restitution of
$500,000, plus interest at the rate prescribed by Order 59.02(3) of the
Supreme Court Rules
for the period from 30 August 2018 to the date of
(4) The defendant’s counterclaim against the second plaintiff is
In these reasons, the decision of Southwood J on 11 September 2020 is
referred to as “the liability decision”; the decision
Valley’s unsuccessful appeal against the liability decision is referred to
as “the liability appeal decision”;
and the decision of Brownhill J
of 22 August 2024 assessing damages is referred to as “the damages
[27] FE and
G&C have appealed against the damages decision on the following
(a) Ground 1: The trial judge erred in her
determination that the judgment (in order 1) in favour of the first appellant
was only in the sum of $1, and should have found instead that the
first appellant is entitled to judgment against the respondent
(Gold Valley)
for a greater amount.
(b) Ground 2: The trial judge erred in her determination that the judgment (in
order 2) in favour of the second appellant
was only in the sum
of $558,358.92 (inclusive of interest), and should have found instead that the
second appellant is entitled to
judgment against the respondent
(Gold Valley)
for a greater amount.
(c) Ground 3: The trial judge erred at [133] and [155] which paragraphs in part
inform order 2, in assessing the second appellant’s
damages by taking into
account the amount of $73,500 in respect of the sale of items of plant and
equipment to Roper River Transport,
without also taking into account the
specific loss that was avoided by that sale, and the trial judge should have
increased the amount
of the assessment at [155] by $73,500.
(d) Ground 4: The trial judge erred in her determination (order 3) that the
respondent was entitled to any judgment in respect of
its counterclaim against
the first appellant for restitution and should have found that the counterclaim
is estopped or otherwise
precluded as it constitutes an abuse of process.
(e) Ground 5: In the alternative to Ground 4, the
trial judge erred in her determination (order 3 and [178]) that the respondent
is entitled to interest pursuant to
Supreme Court Act
period from 30 August 2018 to the date of judgment.
appellants also contend that the trial judge erred in deducting the sum of
$37,180 for the legal costs of the Federal Court
proceedings with Britmar rather than adding this amount to G&C’s
Gold Valley does not dispute this error in calculation, though
contending that it should have been dealt with under the slip rule
[29] Gold Valley
has cross-appealed against the assessment of damages in favour of G&C,
contending that the trial judge:
(a) erred in finding that
did not apply to the assessment of G&C’s damages;
(b) should in any case have required G&C to establish the values of each
subset of the Plant and Equipment at the times when
possession of those items
reverted to G&C;
(c) erred in finding that the market for the Plant and Equipment was curtailed
by reason of its being located on remote mineral leases
owned by a third party,
and/ or being difficult and expensive to transport;
(d) erred in ascribing values (including nil values) to items of Plant and
Equipment in respect of which “there was an absence
of raw material to
which good sense may be applied” and/ or ascribed values that were too
temporally disparate from the appropriate
time for assessing damages;
(e) erred in holding that the starting point for the assessment of damages was
the value of the unperformed promise to pay $1 million
to G&C under
clause 15 as the value of the Plant & Equipment retained by G&C should
have been used in defining the putative
starting point as distinct from merely
comprising the basis for an ex post facto adjustment; and
(f) erred in a number of specified ways in accepting certain evidence as to the
value of items of Plant and Equipment recovered by
[30] Gold Valley
also filed a Notice of Contention raising issues which overlap with its
counterclaim.
[31] In addition
to these issues, the appellants sought to raise what they referred to as
“an additional issue” which
was characterised by Gold Valley as an
unpleaded claim to set off a licence fee of $750,000 said by the appellants to
have fallen
due under the Contract before the Contract was terminated. However,
the appellants did not seek judgment for this amount as being
an amount payable
under the Contract. Rather, they contended that it was relevant to Gold
Valley’s counterclaim for repayment
of the amounts paid to FE under the
Contract in this way. The appellants say that Gold Valley’s claim for
restitution of the
$500,000 ought not to have been allowed because there had not
been a total failure of consideration. Under the Contract, Gold Valley
entitled to possession of the Camp. That was a benefit Gold Valley received
under the Contract and the best evidence of the
value of that benefit was the
agreed licence fee under the Contract which was $750,000. There being no total
failure of consideration,
Gold Valley was not entitled to return of the $500,000
paid under the Contract. Gold Valley objects to the appellants raising this
issue for the first time on appeal. These issues are considered
Grounds 1 and 2
[32] These two
grounds concern the treatment of pre-judgment interest by the trial judge.
Grounds 1 and 2 relate to:
(a) the proper construction of
Supreme Court Act
and the scope of the
discretionary power conferred by
(b) alternatively, the refusal by the trial judge to award interest as damages
in accordance with the principles enunciated in
Hungerfords v
Supreme Court Act
provides as
Interest up to judgment
in respect of a cause of action that arises after the commencement of this Act
may order that there shall be included in the sum for which
is given interest at such rate as it thinks fit on the whole or any part of that
sum for the whole or any part of the period between
the date when the cause of
action arose and the date of the
trial judge accurately described the appellants’ approach to the treatment
of interest in the assessment of damages
in the following
The plaintiffs
claimed damages assessed essentially as the amount of the unpaid monies due
under the Contract of Sale on the date
of the plaintiffs’ termination for
the defendant’s repudiation, argued to be $6 million due and payable
pursuant to cl
15, with interest calculated on a cash flow basis over time,
from the date of termination to the date by which judgment was anticipated,
deducting the amounts paid by Britmar under the asset sale deeds and the amount
paid by NRR for some of the FEA Excluded Assets and
adding the legal costs as
they were received or paid. ...
[35] Her Honour
rejected this approach
Interest on
The plaintiffs’ claim for interest was put on the basis of
Supreme Court Act 1979
(NT) (‘SCA’).
Section 84(1)
provides that the Court may order that there be included in the sum for which
judgment is given interest at such rate as it thinks
fit on the whole or any
part of that sum for the whole or any part of the period between the date when
the cause of action arose
and the date of the judgment.
The purpose of pre-judgment interest is to compensate a plaintiff for the
loss or detriment which they have suffered by being kept
out of their money
during the applicable period.
Counsel for the plaintiffs argued that the plaintiffs are entitled to
interest calculated in the way particularised because they were
kept out of
their money until payments were received from Britmar and NRR under sales
entered into in mitigation of their loss.
Section 84(1)
of the SCA permits the Court to award interest
damages. It expressly, and only, permits the Court to order interest ‘on
the whole or any part of’ ‘the sum for
which judgment is
If a plaintiff receives payments from a third party in mitigation of their
loss, their damages are reduced accordingly. As set out
in paragraph [45] above,
a fundamental rule governing mitigation of damage is that a plaintiff cannot
recover losses which are in
fact avoided, whether or not there was an obligation
to mitigate in that way. It must follow that any judgment sum for damages is
necessarily reduced by, and necessarily excludes, the amount of such payments.
It must also follow that there is no power to order
interest under
the SCA on an amount from which such payments are deducted in determining the
judgment sum. The purpose of a statutory power to
award interest like that
contained in
of the SCA is to compensate the plaintiff for being
deprived, between the time the cause of action arose and the time of judgment,
to which they were entitled. Damages do not
amounts received in mitigation; damages are
by such amounts.
(Footnotes omitted)
followed a review of relevant authorities and her Honour concluded, so far as
the claim for interest was made under
[T]here is no power
to order statutory pre-judgment interest under
of the SCA on an amount
from which payments received in mitigation of damages are deducted in
determining the judgment sum because
the purpose of a statutory power to award
interest like that contained in
of the SCA is to compensate the
plaintiff for being deprived, between the time the cause of action arose and the
time of judgment,
to which they were entitled and damages
do not include amounts received in mitigation.
Interest as damages
Given the operation and effect of
of the SCA as set out above, the
plaintiffs’ claim for interest is properly characterised as a claim for
damages, not interest
damages. ...
(Footnote omitted)
appellants contend that the trial judge was in error in her interpretation of
Supreme Court Act
appellants contend that the purpose of
is to compensate a plaintiff
for the detriment a party suffers by being kept out of its money during the
applicable period and that,
pre-judgment interest is awarded in cases where the
judgment sum is paid by the defaulting party late, such interest is also to be
awarded when the defaulting party has had the benefit of mitigatory steps taken
by the injured party which involves payment over
contention assumes as a starting position that
pre-judgment interest is awarded in cases
where the judgment sum is paid by the defaulting party late”. That
contention cannot
be accepted without qualification. One must begin with the
plain words of
which, as the trial judge correctly stated, permits
the Court to award interest
damages. It
expressly, and only, permits the Court to order
interest ‘on the whole or any part of’ ‘the sum for which
is given’. Therefore, if a defendant pays the outstanding sum
after the issue of proceedings and before judgment, it is not
correct to say
that “pre-judgment interest is awarded in cases where the judgment sum is
paid by the defaulting party late”.
Interest under
can only be
awarded on the sum for which judgment is given. The remedy for a plaintiff
where the amount claimed is paid before judgment
is to plead and prove interest
damages, in accordance with the principle in
Hungerfords.
appellants refer to “the cornerstone principle of contractual
damages” that “the party who has sustained
loss by reason of a
breach of contract is to be placed in the position it would have been in if the
contract had been performed”,
and submit that the purpose of statutory interest is to satisfy this principle,
quoting the following passage from
of interest up to the date of judgment is an award of interest in the nature of
Fire and All Risks Insurance Co. Ltd
., at p 431. This statement
acknowledges that the award of interest is an integral element in the attainment
of the object of damages,
namely, to compensate a plaintiff for injury
sustained. Hence the award of interest is compensatory in character. While
“(i)nterest
should not be awarded as compensation for the damage
done” (emphasis added) (
Jefford v. Gee
[1970] EWCA Civ 8
(1970) 2 QB 130
, at p 146),
the award of interest is nevertheless an essential element in the achievement of
true compensation for that damage. In
Thompson v. Faraonio
(1979) 54 ALJR
231, at p 233;
[1917] HCA 36
, at p 7, the Privy Council
stated that “(t)he reason for awarding interest is to compensate the
plaintiff for having been kept
out of money which theoretically was due to him
at the date of his accident” (emphasis added). See also
Batchelor v.
, per Gibbs C.J. at p 455;
M.B.P (S.A.) Pty. Ltd. v. Gogic
205; p 196 of ALR; cf.
Ruby v. Marsh
[1975] HCA 32
(1975) 132 CLR 642
, per Barwick C.J. at pp
652-653. The award of interest for the period of delay in payment between the
date of accrual of the cause
of action and judgment affords the fair legal
measure of compensation:
Pheeney v. Doolan
(1977) 1 NSWLR 601
Reynolds J.A. at p 613. Thus, it is the award of damages and, where appropriate,
interest awarded on damages for the period
up until the judgment takes effect
which allows the plaintiff to be placed in or restored to the situation, as far
as money can do,
in which he or she would have been but for the
defendant’s negligence.
[41] However,
the legislation providing for pre-judgment interest under consideration in
Haines v Bendall
is materially different from
The provision
which empowered the Court to award pre-judgment interest under consideration in
that case was s 94 of the New South
which conferred power on the Supreme Court to order that
there shall be included, in the sum for which judgment is given, interest
such rate as it thinks fit on the whole or any part of
the date when the cause of action arose and the date when the judgment takes
That effectively allows
the court to calculate interest on amounts owing from time to time if payments
are made or amounts received
in mitigation before judgment in a way that
s 84 does not.
[42] In any
Haines v Bendall
was not concerned
with whether a plaintiff can be awarded interest on an amount paid in reduction
of damages. As the trial judge
does not concern an amount received by the plaintiff
reduction of
. Rather, it concerns an amount received by the
plaintiff which serves the same purpose as the award of damages. The High Court
(at 72) that, as the plaintiff had enjoyed the benefit of that amount
before judgment, that enjoyment must be taken into account
in ascertaining the
amount on which interest should be awarded as compensation for being kept out of
the money to which he was entitled
by way of damages. It is clear that the
calculation made by the High Court (at 73) did not reduce the overall award by
$49,037, it only reduced the interest awarded. That is because the
workers’ compensation did not reduce the plaintiff’s
entitlement to
damages. The workers’ compensation legislation simply required the
plaintiff worker to repay to their employer
any workers’ compensation
which had been paid to them from any common law damages award they received.
appellants rely on a number of interstate authorities including
Commonwealth
v SCI Operations,
Ikosidekas v
these authorities do not assist the appellants for the same reason as
does not assist.
Commonwealth v SCI
, the High Court was considering s 51A(1) of the
Federal Court Act
which relevantly provided:
proceedings for the recovery of any money (including any debt or damages or the
value of any goods) ... the Court or a Judge
shall, upon application, unless
good cause is shown to the contrary, either:
(a) order that there be included in the sum for which judgment is given
interest at such rate as the Court or the Judge, as the
case may be, thinks fit
on the whole or any part of the money
for the whole or any part of the
period between the date when the cause of action arose and the date as of which
judgment is entered;
(b) without proceeding to calculate interest in accordance with paragraph (a),
order that there be included in the sum for which
judgment is given a lump sum
in lieu of any such interest.
Commonwealth argued that s 51A(1) did not authorise the payment of interest
where the moneys claimed in legal proceedings
were paid in full prior to
judgment. The High Court rejected that argument. While holding that s 51A(1)
“cannot be construed
as conferring a discretion to award interest
independently of the existence of a cause of action or for a period prior to the
on which the cause of action
stated that “the power conferred by s 51A(1), being a power conferred
on a court, is not to be construed as subject
to limitations which its terms do
not require”.
Sub-section
(1) of s 51A does not specify that interest may be included in a judgment for a
sum of money claimed in legal proceedings.
Rather, it provides that it may be
included “in the sum for which judgment is given”. Clearly, s 51A(1)
requires that
there be a “sum for which judgment is given” before
interest can be included. But that does not mean that interest cannot
if payment of the moneys claimed in the proceedings is made prior to judgment.
The mere payment of a debt or other money sum claimed in legal proceedings
does not deprive a court of power to enter judgment for
the costs of those
proceedings.
And judgment may be entered for costs in a fixed sum. In
that event, there is, in terms of s 51A(1), a “sum for which judgment
given” and, in my view, there may be included in that sum interest
pursuant to par (a), or, a lump sum in lieu of interest
pursuant to par
[46] This does
not assist the appellants in the present case. The trial judge in this case did
not impose any artificial limitation
on the power to award interest under s 84
which the terms of the section do not require. Her Honour applied the plain
words of the
section which, unlike s 51A(1) of the
Federal Court Act
expressly, and only, permits the Court to order interest ‘on the whole or
any part of’ ‘the sum for which judgment
Ikosidekas v Glenis,
relevantly for the present appeal, the Victorian
Court of Appeal was considering s 60(1) of the
Supreme Court
which provided:
Interest in proceedings for debt or
, on application in any
the recovery of debt or damages, must, unless good cause is shown to the
give damages in the nature of interest
at such rate not
exceeding the rate for the time being fixed under
Interest Rates Act 1983
as it thinks fit from the
commencement of the
the date of the
and above the debt or damages awarded.
[48] Ikosidekas
was defrauded of $160,000 by Glenis, an employee of MWL. Glenis fraudulently
represented to Ikosidekas that he had
arranged for him to lend $160,000 to a
director of MWL, at high interest rates and secured by a caveat over real estate
purportedly
owned by the director. Ikosidekas sued Glenis for $160,000 plus
interest, and costs and exemplary damages. Before judgment, Ikosidekas
payment of $160,000 from MWL’s professional indemnity insurer in
settlement of Ikosidekas’ claim against MWL.
[49] One of the
issues on the appeal was whether Ikosidekas would have been entitled to interest
Glenis contended
that there was no basis for awarding interest under s 60(1) of the Act unless a
judgment for debt or damages was
first ‘awarded’, because there is
otherwise no amount ‘over and above’ which damages in the nature of
may be ‘given’ under that section. The Victorian Court of
Appeal rejected that approach
In summary,
Glenis contends that there is no basis for awarding interest under s 60(1) of
the Act unless a judgment for debt or damages
is first ‘awarded’,
because there is otherwise no amount ‘over and above’ which damages
in the nature of
interest may be ‘given’ under that section. While
we accept that this may be so, that proposition says nothing about
time at which the Contribution ought to have been taken into account
the following reasons, we are of the view that the judge ought to have first
assessed all of the monetary relief to which Ikosidekas
was entitled at the date
he received the Contribution on 31 May 2020 — including his entitlement to
interest under s 58(1)
or s 60(1) of the Act — before subtracting the
amount of the Contribution. Our reasons follow.
a successful plaintiff’s entitlement to statutory interest
under either s 58 or s 60 is ‘an additional head of damages’
which the plaintiff is entitled to recover judgment.
Second, the judge’s approach gives a narrow meaning to s 60(1). This is
contrary to the beneficial purpose of the Court’s
power to award penalty
interest as compensation to a successful plaintiff for being kept out of money
which could otherwise have
been utilised, as summarised by Tate and Kyrou JJA
Carbone v Melton City Council
The statutory power to award interest has a twofold beneficial purpose.
First, to compensate a party who has been obliged to take
proceedings to recover
a money sum and who in the meantime has been kept out of moneys which could
otherwise have been used or upon
which interest could have been earned.
Secondly, to encourage the early resolution of litigation. In
Drilling Pty Ltd v McConnell Dowell Constructors (Aust) Pty Ltd,
stated that s 58 should not be given a narrow meaning and that its beneficial
purpose should be given a broad application.
Third, the position is analogous to the common sense approach in the offer of
compromise regime under O 26 of the
Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
provides that, where the Court is considering whether a plaintiff
obtains a judgment on the claim which is no less favourable to
the plaintiff
than the terms of an offer of compromise, the amount of the plaintiff’s
interest entitlement to the day of the
offer of compromise is to be taken into
reasoning turns on the wording of s 60, in particular that under that section
the court is directed to “give damages
in the nature of interest” a
different proposition from the wording of s 84 that “there shall be
in the sum for which
interest at such rate as [the court] thinks fit on the whole or any
of that sum
appellants urge upon this Court the reasoning of the Victorian Court of Appeal
that to give a narrow meaning to the pre-judgment
interest provision in the
legislation would be contrary to the beneficial purpose of the Court’s
power to award interest as
compensation to a successful plaintiff for being kept
out of money which could otherwise have been utilised. However, the
“beneficial
purpose” of the legislative provision empowering the
Court to award pre-judgment interest – in this case s 84 –
derived from the words of the section and the wording of s 84 is clear and
unambiguous: the Court is empowered to award
interest only on “a sum for
which judgment is given”. There was no error in the trial judge’s
construction of
appellants contend that the words in s 84 “interest on the whole or any
part of that sum
for the whole or any part of the period
between the date
when the cause of action arose and the date of the
should be construed to empower a Court to include interest on amounts owing by a
defendant to a plaintiff during
of the period between the date
when the cause of action arose and the date of the judgment in calculating the
amount of damages,
as was done by the appellant’s expert, Mr Morris. This
contention cannot be accepted. It would involve construing s 84 as
interest to be awarded on “money owing from time to time”, rather
than “a sum for which judgment is
given” contrary to the plain words
of the section.
appellants contend that, in the alternative to awarding interest under
s 84, the trial judge should have awarded the appellants
interest by way of
damages in accordance with the principles in
Hungerfords
. The trial
judge rejected the appellants claim for
Hungerfords
interest in the
Given the operation and effect of s 84 of the SCA as set out above, the
plaintiffs’ claim for interest is properly characterised
as a claim for
damages, not interest
The distinction between
the two was expressed by Brennan and Deane JJ in
Hungerfords v Walker
[1989] HCA 8
(1988) 171 CLR 125
152) as follows:
There is, in our view, a critical distinction between an order that
interest be paid upon an award of damages and an actual award
of damages which
represents compensation for a wrongfully caused loss of the use of money and
which is assessed wholly or partly
by reference to the interest which
would have been earned by safe investment of the money or which was in fact
paid upon borrowings which otherwise would have been unnecessary
or retired. On
the one hand, there is no common law power to make an order for the payment of
interest to compensate for the delay
in obtaining payment of what the court
assesses to be the appropriate measure of damages for a wrongful act. If such
interest is
to be awarded at common law, it must be pursuant to statutory
authority. On the other hand, there is no acceptable reason why the
principles governing the recovery of common law damages should not, in an
appropriate case, apply to entitle a plaintiff
to an actual award of damages as
compensation for a wrongfully and foreseeably caused loss of the use of money.
As this extract explains, where interest is awarded as damages, it is awarded
not under statutory provision but at common law, and
it is awarded for a proved
To sustain a claim for
interest as damages, the plaintiff’s loss and its quantum are to be found
as a fact and assessed on
the evidence, not assumed from the withholding of the
money and automatically assessed by the application of current market rates
Counsel for the plaintiffs initially expressly disavowed a claim for interest
as damages under the principles enunciated in
Hungerfords v
subsequently, counsel for the plaintiffs argued that a claim for interest as
damages (if that was what they had made) has
been pleaded and
The Further Amended Statement of Claim filed on 28 February 2024 pleaded as
(a) Under the heading ‘Loss and damage’ – that on 11
September 2020, judgment in favour of the plaintiffs was delivered,
with reasons
finding that the plaintiffs’ termination of the Contract of Sale was valid
and the plaintiffs are entitled to
have their damages for the defendant’s
repudiation assessed.
(b) Under the heading ‘Damages for repudiatory breach of
contract’ – that the plaintiffs are entitled to be paid
representing the loss suffered by the plaintiffs as a result of the
defendant’s breach, which is particularised as
The quantum of the plaintiffs’ loss, and the basis upon which such loss
is quantified, is set out in the expert report of Brian
Morris (‘Morris
Report’)...
(c) Under the heading ‘The Camp and the Conveyor’ – that
the plaintiffs entered into the asset sales deeds with
Britmar and the facts of
Britmar’s payments to the plaintiffs under those deeds are pleaded.
(d) Under the heading ‘Remedies’ – that the plaintiffs
claim against the defendant: damages as set out in the Morris
Report; interest;
Theoretically perhaps, the pleading that the plaintiffs claim damages as set
out in the Morris Report could be construed as a claim
for interest as damages
in the sense that the Morris Report calculates the plaintiffs’ claim with
interest. However, there
is no pleading of any actual loss to the plaintiffs as
a consequence of being kept out of the $6 million. There is no plea, for
of material facts to the effect that, as a consequence of being kept
out of the money, the plaintiffs had to source money through
borrowing at
specific rates of interest, or were unable to repay debt at a specific rate of
interest, or had to spend money they
would otherwise have invested, whether into
their businesses or elsewhere, at specific rates of interest.
The only thing that might be considered to be a plea or evidence of a loss of
the use of money such as to found a claim for interest
as damages is contained
in the evidence of Brian Morris.
Mr Morris is a chartered accountant in the business of providing accounting
and valuation services. He holds qualifications in accountancy,
law, arbitration
and mediation and has performed forensic accounting investigations and reports
for courts for decades.
Mr Morris was asked by the plaintiffs’ solicitors to calculate the
difference between the actual cash flows of each plaintiff
(comprising the
initial sum received under the Contract of Sale, plus the actual amounts paid by
Britmar and NRR under the asset
sales deeds, less the actual amounts of legal
costs paid by each plaintiff) and the hypothetical cash flows that would have
received if the defendant had performed its obligations under the Contract
of Sale, and he did so, yielding the sums set out in paragraph
Mr Morris was then asked by the plaintiffs’
solicitors how he would measure the plaintiffs’ losses based on the cash
he had calculated.
responded that the plaintiffs’ losses should be calculated as the
difference between the cash flows that would have been
received if the defendant
had performed its obligations under the Contract of Sale and the cash flows that
the plaintiffs have received
and will receive under the asset sales deeds
entered in order to mitigate the
He was then asked how he
would ‘calculate the plaintiffs’ losses based on a claim for loss of
use of money from 30 August
2018 to 10 October
He responded that,
at all relevant times, the amounts that the plaintiffs were entitled to receive
from the defendant exceeded the
amounts that the plaintiffs received in
mitigation, and consequently, the plaintiffs have been denied the opportunity to
of the money that they were entitled to receive from the defendant
pursuant to the Contract of
Mr Morris calculated the plaintiffs’ loss of use of money measured by
way of simple interest on the sums outstanding from time
to time, on the basis
of three potential interest rates which he was asked to adopt, namely 10% per
annum (which is a rate referred
to in the Contract of Sale for late payments of
instalments), the Supreme Court’s pre-judgment interest rates and the
Court’s post-judgment interest
Those calculations
yielded the sums referred to in paragraph
In cross-examination, Mr Morris agreed that he had not been given any
instructions or information or documents about the actual cost
of finance to
either plaintiff, and he agreed that none of the interest rates he had been
asked to apply would reflect that actual
loss to the plaintiffs of not having
the funds the defendant had contracted to
He said that the manner in
which the funds would be utilised is possibly relevant if the focus was what has
been lost by the plaintiffs
under the principle in
Hungerfords v
He said that the 10%
interest rate was a right under the Contract of Sale so ‘that’s
their loss of use’.
re-examination, Mr Morris said that the particular financial arrangements
or funding arrangements of the plaintiffs were not relevant
to the interest
calculations he made in his
Mr Morris’s
opinion was that a cash flow approach is the most appropriate way to measure the
plaintiffs’ loss because
it takes into account the timing of the monies
coming in and the monies going
Even if that is so from an accounting or commercial perspective, Mr
Morris’s evidence is insufficient evidence upon which to
establish a claim
for interest as damages under the principles in
Hungerfords v Walker
which Mr Morris himself expressly disavowed. Effectively, the
plaintiffs’ claim for interest is for a loss: (a)
withholding of the money, not
from evidence establishing the use
to which the plaintiffs would have put the money; and (b) quantified by the
application of various
rates of interest which bore no
established relation to the
cost to the plaintiffs of being held
out of the money.
[54] There is no
error in the trial judge’s careful and thorough analysis of the pleadings
and evidence in the appellants’
case and the application of the principles
Hungerfords
. Put simply, the appellants failed to properly plead and
prove a claim for interest as damages.
[55] Grounds 1
and 2 of the appeal must be dismissed.
Ground 3: the contended
error in the treatment of the $73,500 agreed to be paid by G&C to RRT by way
of “in kind”
appellants contend that the trial judge erred in the calculation of the damages
payable by Gold Valley to G&C in her
Honour’s treatment of $73,500
agreed to be paid by G&C to RRT by way of “in kind” payment at
paragraphs [133]
and [155] of the damages judgment.
The trial judge took
into account the amount of $73,500 in respect of items of Plant and Equipment
sold to RRT by deducting that amount
from the damages otherwise payable to
G&C. The appellants contend that her Honour should also have taken into
account on the
other side of the ledger that it cost the appellants $73,500 to
transport those goods into Alice Springs.
[57] At [133]
the trial judge said:
Just as the
amounts actually paid by Britmar to the second plaintiff should be deducted from
the second plaintiff’s damages,
so too should any other amounts actually
received by the second plaintiff on account of items of Plant and Equipment it
second plaintiff sold to RRT four categories of Plant and Equipment in
exchange for reduction in the cost of transportation of items
of Plant and
Equipment charged to the plaintiffs. The cost reductions were: $17,000 (exc GST)
for a truck, $30,000 (exc GST) for
three modular buildings, $25,000 (exc GST)
for a fuel pod, and $1,500 (exc GST) for a communications
Those amounts also
comprise losses actually avoided by the second plaintiff and the second
plaintiff’s damages must be reduced
accordingly by a total of $73,500 (exc
[58] Accordingly,
at [155], her Honour calculated G&C’s damages as
Second plaintiff’s damages award
For the above reasons, the second plaintiff is entitled to an award of
damages as follows:
Amount owing under cl 15 on 30 August 2018
Principal paid by Britmar under G&C asset sale deed
Interest paid by Britmar under G&C asset sale deed
Amount credited by RRT
Value of Plant and Equipment not sold
Legal costs in relation to Federal Court proceeding
[59] Gold Valley
contends that this approach by the trial judge was correct; that G&C made a
decision to incur a liability in
the amount of $73,500 (excluding GST) to
transport its own property to yards in Alice Springs and, rather than pay for it
own funds, G&C chose to discharge the liability by assigning the
four items mentioned in [133] to RTT. That cannot absolve G&C
obligation to account for the benefit it received from those four items and the
amount of $73,500 was rightly deducted from
G&C’s damages.
appellants contend that this analysis of the transaction ignores the fact that
the items that were being transported to Alice
Springs by RRT were not
“G&C’s own property” external to the dealings between
G&C and Gold Valley. The
items that were transported to Alice Springs at a
cost of $73,500 were items of Plant and Equipment that Gold Valley had wrongly
removed from the mineral leases without the knowledge or consent of G&C in
breach of the Contract. The transport costs of $73,500
were costs incurred by
G&C in retrieving wrongfully removed Plant and Equipment for which Gold
Valley is liable in damages.
G&C did not get a net benefit of $73,500 from
those four items; its net benefit was nil.
[61] The actual
cost to G&C of transporting the items wrongly removed by Gold Valley was
$107,628.51 of which G&C paid $26,788.51
to RRT in cash and $73,500 in kind
by way of transferring ownership of those four items referred to in paragraph
[133]. The trial
judge dealt with the payment of $26,788.51 by treating it as a
loss to be offset against the value of the items that were retrieved
which G&C retained ownership. Her Honour
... I accept
that Mr Oldfield’s evidence about the effects of weather and lack of
maintenance since 2014 also explains why the
eight vehicles, three items of
machinery (including the drilling rig), 11 shipping container buildings, six
fuel pods, a communications
tower and eight wheelie bins and four spill kits in
the Table 4 Items had very little value,
specifically less than the
$26,778.51 in transportation costs paid by the second plaintiff to retrieve
, by the date they were returned to the second plaintiff’s
physical possession in February 2021. I consider that to be the relevant
for the purpose of assessing whether a deduction should be made on their account
from the second plaintiff’s damages because
the defendant had removed them
from the mineral leases in breach of the Contract of Sale, had refused to tell
the second plaintiff
of their location and did not do so until after the
plaintiffs commenced proceedings in the Supreme Court, and had not taken any
steps thereafter to return the Removed Items to the second plaintiff’s
physical possession. I find, on the balance of probabilities,
that the Table 4
Items (including the six fuel pods) were, at that date, of no material value
after deducting the transportation costs
[62] The trial
judge treated 28 other items that had been removed by Gold Valley the same way
that no deduction to the second plaintiff’s damages is necessary or
appropriate to reflect the second plaintiff’s
retention of ownership and
right to possession of these 28 Removed Items because they were not, from late
May to early July 2018,
in the second plaintiff’s physical possession as a
consequence of the defendant’s conduct in breach of the Contract of
In any event, I infer, on the balance of probabilities, from the evidence
relating to the Table 4 Items that the same conclusions
would apply equally to
these 28 Removed Items such that they were, by February 2021, of no
material value
after deducting likely transportation costs to relocate them
to the second plaintiff’s physical possession.
[63] Logically,
the payment of $73,500 in kind should be treated the same way. The transport
costs were incurred for the purpose
of retrieving wrongly removed Plant and
Equipment. The appellants are correct and the $73,500 should not have been
deducted from
G&C’s damages; it should be brought to account on both
sides of the ledger: $73,500 worth of Plant and Equipment recovered
and deducted
from G&C’s damages and $73,500 transport costs incurred for retrieving
wrongly removed Plant and Equipment
added to those damages, cancelling each
[64] Ground
3 should be allowed and $73,500 added to G&C’s
Ground 4: asserted error in allowing Gold Valley’s
counterclaim against FE for restitution
appellants contend that the trial judge erred in allowing Gold Valley’s
claim against FE for repayment of the $500,000
paid under the Contract by way of
an instalment of the purchase price of the Camp. This ground of appeal stands
on two bases:
estoppel; and
(b) an argument advanced on appeal for the first time, that the precondition for
ordering restitution – namely failure of consideration
present. (This is the issue referred to by the appellants as “the
additional issue”. Gold Valley objects
to it being raised for the first
time on appeal.)
of Melbourne Authority v
the Port of
Melbourne Authority had hired a crane to Anshun. A worker was severely injured
while the crane was being operated by
Anshun. The worker sued the Authority and
Anshun for damages for personal injury. The Authority and Anshun claimed
contribution
from each other. The notice of contribution served by the
Authority claimed contribution only, not an indemnity, notwithstanding
existence of an indemnity given by Anshun in the hiring agreement for the crane.
In the worker’s action, judgment was entered
for the worker against both
defendants; Anshun recovered contribution from the Authority to the extent of 90
per cent of the worker’s
damages and the Authority recovered from Anshun
contribution to the extent of 10 per cent of the damages. The damages were paid
in those proportions. Subsequently, the Authority commenced an action against
Anshun claiming the amount of damages it had paid
the worker plus legal costs
and disbursements pursuant to the indemnity in the agreement for hire of the
crane. Anshun defended
the claim on the basis of estoppel, the substance of the
defence being that the Authority could have raised its claim against Anshun
the worker’s action. When the matter eventually reached the High Court,
the plurality (Gibbs CJ, Mason and Aickin JJ) upheld
Anshun’s defence
making the following observations:
In this situation we would prefer
to say that
there will be no estoppel unless it appears that the matter
relied upon as a defence in the second action was so relevant to the subject
matter of the first action that it would have been unreasonable not to rely on
. Generally speaking,
it would be unreasonable not to plead a defence
if, having regard to the nature of the plaintiff's claim, and its subject matter
would be expected that the defendant would raise the defence and thereby
enable the relevant issues to be determined in the one proceeding
respect, we need to recall that there are a variety of circumstances, some
referred to in the earlier cases, why a party
may justifiably refrain from
litigating an issue in one proceeding yet wish to litigate the issue in other
proceedings e.g. expense,
importance of the particular issue, motives extraneous
to the actual litigation, to mention but a few. ...
It has generally been accepted that a party will be estopped from bringing an
action which, if it succeeds, will result in a judgment
which conflicts with an
earlier judgment. ...
The likelihood that the omission to plead a defence will contribute to the
existence of conflicting judgments is obviously an important
factor to be taken
into account
in deciding whether the omission to plead can found an estoppel
against the assertion of the same matter as a foundation for a cause
in a second proceeding. By “conflicting” judgments we include
judgments which are contradictory, though they
may not be pronounced on the same
cause of action.
It is enough that they appear to declare rights which are
inconsistent in respect of the same transaction
It is for this reason that we regard the judgment that the Authority seeks to
obtain as one which would conflict with the existing
judgment, though the new
judgment would be based on a different cause of action, a contractual
Tomlinson v Ramsey Food Processing Pty
the High Court
confirmed the basis for
estoppel in the following
Three forms of estoppel have now been recognised by the
common law of Australia as having the potential to result from the rendering
a final judgment in an adversarial proceeding. The first is sometimes referred
to as “cause of action estoppel”. Estoppel
in that form operates to
preclude assertion in a subsequent proceeding of a claim to a right or
obligation which was asserted in
the proceeding and which was determined by the
judgment. It is largely redundant where the final judgment was rendered in the
of judicial power, and where
res judicata
in the strict sense
therefore applies to result in the merger of the right or obligation in the
judgment. The second form of estoppel
is almost always now referred to as
“issue estoppel”. Estoppel in that form operates to preclude the
raising in a subsequent
proceeding of an ultimate issue of fact or law which was
necessarily resolved as a step in reaching the determination made in the
judgment. The classic expression of the primary consequence of its operation is
that a “judicial determination directly involving
an issue of fact or of
law disposes once for all of the issue, so that it cannot afterwards be raised
between the same parties or
their privies”. The third form of estoppel is
now most often referred to as “
estoppel”, although it
is still sometimes referred to as the “extended principle” in
Henderson v Henderson
. That third form of estoppel is an extension of the
first and of the second.
Estoppel in that extended form operates to preclude
the assertion of a claim, or the raising of an issue of fact or law, if that
or issue was
so connected with the
subject matter of the first proceeding as to have made it unreasonable in the
context of that first proceeding
for the claim not to have been made or the
issue not to have been raised in that proceeding.
The extended form has been
treated in Australia as a “true estoppel” and not as a form of
res judicata
in the strict sense. Considerations similar to those which
underpin this form of estoppel may support a preclusive abuse of process
(citations omitted)
[68] Similar
observations were made by the plurality (French CJ, Keifel, Keane and Nettle JJ)
Timbercorp Finance Pty Ltd (in liq) v
mentioned at the outset of these reasons that the appellant does not contend
that an issue estoppel arises with respect to
the claims that the respondents
now seek to pursue. That is to say, it is not argued that they involve an issue
of fact or law which
was necessarily involved as a step in reaching the
determination of the group proceeding. Rather, it is contended that these claims
ought to have been raised and determined in that proceeding. An estoppel of this
estoppel”, will preclude the assertion of a
claim or of an issue of law or fact
if the claim or issue was so connected to
the subject matter of the first proceeding as to make it unreasonable, in the
the first proceeding, for the claim or issue not to have been made or
raised in it.
(citations omitted)
appellants argue that Southwood J in fact dismissed Gold Valley’s
counterclaim for repayment of the $1 million it had
paid toward the purchase
price of the Chattels saying:
The defendant counterclaims for the
return of the instalment payments totalling $1 million it paid towards the
purchase prices for
the chattels in 2017 and ancillary
As a result of the alleged wrongful repudiation of the Contract of Sale by
the plaintiffs, the defendant has counterclaimed for the
repayment of the $1
million it has paid to the plaintiffs in
instalments.
I find that the defendant’s termination of the Contract of Sale was
invalid and constituted a repudiation of the contract.
plaintiffs’ termination of the Contract of Sale was valid.
Consequently, the defendant’s Defence and Counterclaim must be
and the plaintiffs are entitled to have their damages for the
defendant’s repudiation of the Contract of Sale
[70] After the
liability decision was handed down, and before the appeal against that judgment
was heard, Gold Valley filed a further
amended defence and counterclaim which
included a new paragraph 29.4A seeking orders for restitution of the $1 million
the contract of sale less any amount which is set off.
liability appeal decision was handed down in August
The Court of Appeal held
at [113(a)]:
The appeal is dismissed save for grounds 19 and 20.
Consequently, the trial Judge’s conclusion at [195] of the Reasons should
stand and the purchaser is liable to the vendor for the wrongful repudiation of
the Contract, with damages to be assessed.
appellants filed a reply and defence to counterclaim on 13 September 2023
asserting that the claim for restitution in the
further amended defence and
counterclaim should be dismissed on the basis of estoppel,
res judicata
or abuse of process.
[73] The trial
judge in the damages decision held that no
estoppel had arisen and
allowed Gold Valley’s claim against FE for restitution of the $500,000
paid under the Contract. In
doing so her Honour
Counsel for
the plaintiffs argued that it was not open to the defendant to counterclaim for
the instalments of the purchase price
paid by the defendant because the
defendant’s counterclaim had been dismissed by Southwood J in the
liability hearing. It was
res judicata
, issue estoppel or
estoppel precluded this counterclaim being made and determined
because the counterclaim has been dismissed and finally determined.
I reject these submissions.
On 14 August 2018, the Supreme Court ordered that the issue of liability only
be tried as a preliminary issue.
In its Amended Defence and Counterclaim filed in Court on 11 December 2018,
the first day of the liability hearing, the defendant
alleged that the
plaintiffs had breached and repudiated the Contract of Sale, the defendant had
terminated the Contract of Sale and
the plaintiffs were liable to the defendant
for damages for breach of contract. The damages were particularised as the loss
from the Contract of Sale of the plaintiffs (had they performed their
obligations), plus the $1 million paid under the Contract of
Sale and the other
costs and expenses incurred in respect of the Contract of Sale or,
alternatively, return of the $1 million paid
under the Contract of Sale and
other costs and expenses. The counterclaim also alleged that the plaintiffs had
breached and repudiated
the Contract of Sale, that the defendant had terminated
the Contract of Sale, and that the plaintiffs were liable to the defendant
damages for breach of contract as claimed earlier in the defence.
The order made by Southwood J after the liability trial, on 15 September
2020, was that there be judgment for the plaintiffs on the
question of
liability, with damages to be assessed. No order was made dismissing the defence
and counterclaim.
The defendant’s claim and counterclaim to repayment of the instalment
payments, rested on the allegation that the plaintiffs
had breached the Contract
of Sale and the defendant had validly terminated it, entitling the defendant to
damages. That is the way
Southwood J understood the case. Ultimately, Southwood
J found that the defendant’s termination of the Contract of Sale was
invalid and constituted a repudiation, and that the plaintiffs’
termination of the Contract of Sale was valid, holding that
defendant’s Defence and Counterclaim must be dismissed and the plaintiffs
are entitled to have their damages for the defendant’s
repudiation of the
Contract of Sale assessed.
On 15 September 2020, Southwood J ordered the plaintiffs to file and serve an
amended statement of claim dealing with its claim for
damages and the defendant
to file and serve an amended defence dealing with the plaintiffs’ claim
for damages.
On 14 December 2020, the defendant filed a Further Amended Defence and
Counterclaim, which included: (a) a plea that the plaintiffs’
damages were
to be assessed pursuant to s 52(3) of the SGA, a plea that the plaintiffs’
damages could not exceed the loss (if
any) suffered on resale of the Camp and
the Plant and Equipment, and a plea that the plaintiffs’ damages are
subject to a set
off of the sum of $1 million paid by the defendant under the
Contract of Sale; and (b) an amended counterclaim seeking orders for
restitution
of the $1 million paid under the Contract of Sale.
res judicata
arose such that the right or cause of action claimed
or put in suit (a claim in restitution) has passed and merged into judgment.
The defence and counterclaim determined by Southwood J did not include a
claim for $1 million founded on restitution as the cause
of action. Rather, the
cause of action as determined by Southwood J was breach of contract.
Similarly, no issue estoppel arose because no state of fact or law is alleged
or denied in the present counterclaim the existence
of which was a matter
necessarily decided by Southwood J’s judgment.
estoppel arisen. The principle of
estoppel prevents a party from later relying on a claim or defence which it has
unreasonably refrained from raising in earlier proceedings,
being proceedings so
closely connected with the later subject matter that it might reasonably have
been expected that the claim or
defence would have been raised in those earlier
proceedings. Even if the liability hearing and the assessment of damages
could be considered as separate but closely connected proceedings to
which the principle could apply (a matter I am not deciding),
it is clear that
the issues to be determined in the liability hearing were: (a) which side
repudiated the Contract of Sale, and (b)
which side validly terminated the
Contract of Sale, so as to identify which side was liable to the other for
damages for breach of
contract. I do not accept that the defendant unreasonably
refrained from raising the issue of recovery of instalments of the purchase
price in the liability hearing because that claim is founded on the valid
termination of the Contract of Sale
by the plaintiffs
and so would not
reasonably have been expected to have been raised by the defendant in its case
seeking damages for breach of contract
by the plaintiffs. Furthermore, the
principle of law referred to above is well-settled and the facts of payment by
the defendant
of instalments of $500,000 to each of the plaintiffs are not in
Consequently, I find that the defendant is entitled to recover the sum of
$500,000 paid to the first plaintiff in part payment of
the purchase price for
the Camp under the Contract of Sale.
appellants do not contend that the trial judge was in error in holding that
there was no
res judicata
(in the sense that the cause of action claimed
has passed and merged into the judgment) and that no issue estoppel had arisen.
appellant’s contention is that the trial judge ought to have dismissed
Gold Valley’s counterclaim by reason of
appellants contend that the judge was in error in finding that it was not
unreasonable for Gold Valley to have refrained
from raising the issue of
recovery of instalments of the purchase price in the liability trial on the
ground decided by the trial
judge, namely that the restitutionary claim is
founded on the valid termination of the Contract of Sale by the plaintiffs and
would not reasonably have been expected to have been raised by the defendant
in its case seeking damages for breach of contract by
the plaintiffs.
appellants contend that the focus by the trial judge on the case being conducted
in the liability trial by Gold Valley ignores
the fact that on 30 August
2018, the appellants filed a reply and defence to counterclaim pleading, in
response to Gold Valley’s
further amended defence and counterclaim, that
the appellant’s termination of the Contract was valid. An issue to be
on the liability trial was whether Gold Valley was entitled to
repayment of the $1 million it had paid to the appellants under the
Although Gold Valley’s counterclaim asserted the right to repayment based
on what it claimed to be a valid termination
of the Contract by Gold Valley, the
defence to that Counterclaim squarely put in issue that contention by Gold
Valley. The appellants
contend that in those circumstances, if Gold Valley
wished to contend that, should the Court find that the termination by the
was valid (as pleaded in the defence to counterclaim) Gold Valley was
in any event entitled to be repaid the $1 million on restitutionary
grounds, it could and should have done so shortly after delivery of the reply
and defence to counterclaim on 30 August 2018.
appellants also rely on the fact that on 16 August 2018, Southwood J
ordered that all issues of liability be tried separately
from issues of quantum
at the December 2018 liability trial and contend that whether a restitutionary
cause of action arises is a
liability issue, not a quantum issue.
appellants also contend that the decision of the trial judge to allow Gold
Valley to pursue the restitutionary claim has
resulted in “conflicting
judgments” as that term was used by the plurality in
passage quoted at [66] above.
By “conflicting” judgments
we include judgments which are contradictory, though they may not be pronounced
on the same
cause of action. It is enough that they appear to declare rights
which are inconsistent in respect of the same transaction.
appellants contend that the judgment of the trial judge giving judgment for Gold
Valley on the counterclaim in the damages
decision is inconsistent with the
judgment of Southwood J in the liability decision at [181]:
find that the defendant’s termination of the Contract of Sale was invalid
and constituted a repudiation of the contract.
I find the plaintiffs’
termination of the Contract of Sale was valid.
Consequently, the
defendant’s Defence and Counterclaim must be dismissed
plaintiffs are entitled to have their damages for the defendant’s
repudiation of the Contract of Sale assessed.
appellants submit that, in these circumstances, given that Gold Valley was
counterclaiming in the liability trial for repayment
of the $1 million paid
under the Contract, and that the appellants had specifically pleaded in their
defence to counterclaim that
their termination of the Contract was valid (thus
traversing Gold Valley’s contract based claim for repayment) the
issues in the restitution counterclaim are so
connected with the subject matter of the liability trial as to have made it
unreasonable
for the restitution claim not to have been made or the issue not to
have been raised in that trial. The appellants contend that
if the issues of
liability and quantum had been determined at the same time, and Gold Valley had
sought to initiate fresh proceedings
to prosecute its restitutionary claim, the
Court would have inevitably found that it was unreasonable for Gold Valley not
made that claim in the present proceeding and to have dismissed the
second proceeding on the grounds of
[81] We agree
that if Gold Valley’s restitutionary claim had been raised in fresh
proceedings after final judgment in this proceeding
dismissing Gold
Valley’s counterclaim, the Court would likely have dismissed that claim on
the grounds of
estoppel. However, the present situation is
different. Although Southwood J stated that “the defendant’s
Defence and
Counterclaim must be dismissed”, he did not make an order
dismissing the counterclaim or give judgment for the appellants on
counterclaim. Further, he was referring to the counterclaim based on contract.
There are, therefore, no “conflicting
judgments”. All that happened
was that Gold Valley amended its pleadings in the present proceeding to claim
repayment of the
money paid under the Contract on a different basis before any
order of the Court determining the counterclaim.
respondent contends that it was not unreasonable for Gold Valley not to raise in
the liability trial a claim that only arose
if it lost the liability trial. It
was an issue, like damages, which followed from the determination of the contest
at the liability
trial as to which party repudiated the Contract and which, like
damages, would not have been determined at the liability trial even
been raised.
[83] We do not
accept that the issue of liability on the restitutionary counterclaim could not
have been determined at the liability
trial had it been raised there (subject to
issues of set-off). However, that does not determine the issue of whether the
in the restitution counterclaim are so connected with the subject matter
of the liability trial as to have made it unreasonable for
the restitution claim
not to have been made or the issue not to have been raised in that trial.
[84] In our view
it was not unreasonable for Gold Valley not to have raised the restitutionary
claim in the liability trial. Given
that it was a split trial in the same
proceeding and there was no order in the liability trial disposing of the
counterclaim, we
consider the trial judge in the damages trial was not in error
to allow Gold Valley to pursue its claim for restitution. The claim
restitution is intimately connected with the assessment of damages and was
logically and appropriately dealt with in the damages
trial. If FE’s
damages had turned out to be in excess of $500,000, for example because it was
unable to resell the Camp at
the price it obtained and/ or it had pleaded and
proved a claim for
Hungerfords
interest, the $500,000 paid by Gold Valley
would simply have been accounted for in the calculation of those damages as was
with the calculation of G&C’s
[85] The appeal
ground based on
estoppel must fail.
“additional matter”: no failure of consideration and hence no basis
to order restitution
appellants contend that Gold Valley was not entitled to repayment of the money
paid under the Contract because it had not
established the precondition for an
order for restitution, namely a failure of consideration.
[87] The trial
judge addressed Gold Valley’s claim for restitution against FE in the
following terms.
question then arises as to whether the defendant is entitled to recover the
$500,000 it paid to the first plaintiff.
It is clear that, in the absence of an express agreement giving the vendor of
land an absolute right to retain them, instalments of
the purchase price of
property already paid may be recovered by a defaulting purchaser when the vendor
elects to discharge the contract.
McDonald v Dennys Lascelles
[1933] HCA 25
(1933) 48 CLR 457
at 477-478 per Dixon J (Rich and McTiernan JJ
agreeing). See also at 470 per Starke J.] This principle applies equally to
of goods. [See
Moffet Farms v Pauls
Services & Sales Pty Ltd
(1991) 7 SR (WA) 351
at 355 per Hammond J,
Dies v British and International Mining
& Finance Corp Ltd
[1939] 1 KB 724
at 742, 744 per Stable J.]
There is nothing in the Contract of Sale to suggest, by the use of the word
‘deposit’ or otherwise, that the payments
made to each plaintiff
which were due on execution of the Contract of Sale.
appellants contend that the trial judge applied the wrong test and that the
correct legal analysis of Gold Valley’s
claim for restitution is as
(a) The claim was based upon a failure of consideration. That is, Gold Valley
paid $500,000, and claimed it got nothing in return
because the Contract was
terminated.
Baltic Shipping Co v Dillon
The action to recover money paid on a total failure of consideration is on a
common money count for money had and received to the
use of the plaintiff.
Pavey & Matthews Pty Ltd v Paul
, Deane J explained that unjust
enrichment is not an independent cause of action but a “unifying legal
concept” underpinning
actions for money had and
... the concept of unjust enrichment in the law of this country...
constitutes a unifying legal concept which explains why the law
recognises, in a
variety of distinct categories of case, an obligation on the part of a defendant
to make fair and just restitution
for a benefit derived at the expense of a
plaintiff and which assists in the determination, by the ordinary processes of
legal reasoning,
of the question whether the law should, in justice, recognise
such an obligation in a new or developing category of case...
Equuscorp Pty Ltd v Haxton
, French CJ, Crennan and Kiefel JJ
described the ‘distinct categories’ instead as ‘distinct
classes of qualifying
or vitiating factors’ as
David Securities Pty Ltd v Commonwealth Bank of Australia
Court explained the part played by unjust enrichment in a claim for money had
and received (in that case for recovery of a
payment made under mistake of law).
That explanation may be expressed, at a fairly high level of abstraction, as an
approach to determining
such claims. In summary:
recovery depends
upon the enrichment of the respondent by reason of one or more recognised
classes of “qualifying or vitiating”
the category of
case must involve a qualifying or vitiating factor such as mistake, duress,
or a failure of consideration
, by reason of which the
enrichment of the respondent is treated by the law as unjust;
when identified
in this way, unjust enrichment gives rise to a prima facie obligation in a
respondent to make restitution;
this prima facie
obligation can be displaced by circumstances which the law recognises would make
an order for restitution in favour
of the claimant unjust.
(e) Accordingly, the correct question for the trial judge to ask was whether
there was in this case a ‘qualifying or vitiating
factor’, namely
failure of consideration.
(f) It was Gold Valley’s onus to prove the existence of a
‘qualifying or vitiating factor’. The Court of Appeal
Australia observed in
Hegarty v Keogh
The claimant bears the onus of proving the existence of a recognised
qualifying or vitiating factor [
Alexiadis v Zirpiadis
[2013] SASCFC 64
(2013) 302 ALR 148
[30] (Kourakis CJ]. The respondent is not required to demonstrate the
“justice” of the receipt or retention of a benefit.
The claimant
bringing the claim must first show that the facts of the claim fall within an
established category of unjust enrichment
[K Mason, J W Carter and G J Tolhurst,
Restitution Law in Australia (LexisNexis Australia, 2nd ed, 2008), [2204]]:
It is wrong to treat the defendant as having a general onus to establish
the justice of the receipt or retention of the benefit. The
error lies in
inconsistency with the idea that there are recognised cases in which a prima
facie obligation to make the restitution
arises. The idea of a prima facie case
asserts that the injustice element of unjust enrichment is a matter which must
not assumed, by bringing the facts within one of the established
categories such as mistake.
(g) As those observations make clear, Gold Valley was not simply required to
prove that it had paid money under a contract which
had been discharged.
Rather, it was required to bring the facts of this case within the established
category of failure of consideration
so as to establish that it would be unjust
for Gold Valley not to have the funds returned.
(h) This is also consistent with the observations of Mason and Carter,
Restitution Law in Australia (2016, 3
Edition) at [1 103]:
Discharge is not in itself sufficient: the requirements of unjust enrichment
must be satisfied. As always in the ineffective contract
context, the
problematic elements are benefit and injustice.
(i) It is also consistent with the observations of Allsop P and Young JA (with
whom Sackville AJA agreed) in
Ford v Perpetual Trustees Victoria
[120] No separate defence of change of position or any other particular
restitutionary defence was pleaded.
[121] The relevant enquiry as to the availability of the order for payment or
repayment does not cease with the identification of
the relevant qualifying
consideration, such as mistake. The enquiry is as to the injustice of the
retention of any money or benefit.
This lies at the root of the claim and of any
defence such as change of position:
Lipkin Gorman v Karpnale Ltd
AC 548 at 560 (per Lord Templeman) and 578 (per Lord Goff) .
[123] The question of request, payment, receipt and benefit should be viewed
as matters of substance and not form or legal technicality:
Australia and New
Zealand Banking Group Ltd v Westpac Banking Corporation
(at 673-674).
[126] None of the above paradigms covers the facts here precisely, but all
reveal the necessity to look to the substance of the matter.
(1990) 5 BPR 11,761, McLelland J (as he then was) was concerned with a
case of undue influence. This was not a case of money had
and received, but
rather undue influence by a spiritual adviser. The judge found that Pastor Beggs
had used undue influence and the
question was whether he should make
restitution. The judge said (at 11,779): "There is an analogy with proceedings
to enforce restitution
of money payed by one person to another under a
fundamental mistake of fact." He then quoted the Australia and New Zealand
Group case noting that the courts paid regard to substance rather than
to form as to what had occurred. McLelland J thought that
it would not be
appropriate to order restitution looking at the substance of what had
(j) Those passages from
were cited with approval by Leeming J (with
whom Macfarlan and Ward JJA agreed) in
Adrenaline Pty Ltd v Bathurst Regional
(k) When the substance of what occurred in this case is identified it should be
clear that there was no failure of consideration.
Whilst Gold Valley paid
$500,000, it received $750,000 in value, being the licence for use and
possession of the Camp for one year.
That is the ‘substance’ of
what occurred.
(l) Gold Valley did not prove that there had been a failure of consideration by
reference to all the facts. The trial judge made
no mention of the licence fee
in her reasoning.
appellants contend that these authorities establish that Gold Valley carried the
onus to prove that the facts of the present
case fall within an established
category of unjust enrichment such as failure of consideration. It was not for
FE to demonstrate
the justice of the receipt of the money.
appellants contend that Gold Valley failed to prove that there had been a
failure of consideration with respect to the $500,000
paid to FE, or that there
was any ‘injustice’ in the retention of that money by FE, and,
further, that there was no failure
of consideration and no injustice because
Gold Valley had the use and possession of the Camp for one year, a right which
under the Contract at $750,000.
[91] Gold Valley
did not respond to these contentions in written submissions, being apparently
under the misunderstanding that the
appellants’ case on “the
additional matter” was that FE was entitled to set off the licence fee of
$750,000 which
fell due before the Contract was terminated against Gold
Valley’s restitution
[92] In oral
submissions Mr Wyvill SC for Gold Valley referred to the fact that this section
of the trial judge’s decision was
only two paragraphs there because it wasn’t contested on the merits by the
appellants below. The appellants didn’t
make any substantive submission
that there wasn’t a restitutionary right for a party who had paid more
than a deposit under
a contract of sale to recover that in restitution even
they’re the wrongdoer.
Dennys Lascelles
is authority for that in relation to real
property, and there are other authorities at 129 in relation to personal
property. Going
Dyes v British
which is a 1939. So
the two - there are authorities there going back to the 1930s, which, of course
is before the law of restitution
was even recognised as a separate area of legal
We didn’t run a case based on this being a total failure at
consideration. Our case was based on those authorities. This -
it may be that
on examination, academics might say that, “Well, the jurisdiction or the
juridical foundation for the remedy
is total failure of performance, total
failure of consideration or some other remedy.” But we just relied upon
the establishment
common law principles that said it was applicable, where even
if you’re the wrongdoer or you’ve paid more than the deposit.
that’s - as I said, that’s well‑established.
Now, that wasn’t contested down - which is why her Honour’s
judgment is so short in that respect. It was never said to
her Honour that,
“Look, the juridical foundation for this is total failure of
consideration.” And there hasn’t
been a total failure of
consideration for the reasons my learned friend has explained today.
contentions by the appellants on the additional matter cannot be accepted. An
examination of
McDonald v Dennys Lascelles
shows that the basis for
allowing a purchaser to recover instalments of the purchase price paid before
termination of a contract
is, in essence, failure of consideration.
Dixon J (with whom Rich and McTiernan JJ agreed)
When a party to a simple contract, upon a breach by the other
contracting party of a condition of the contract, elects to treat the
as no longer binding upon him, the contract is not rescinded as from the
beginning. Both parties are discharged from the
further performance of the
contract, but rights are not divested or discharged which have already been
unconditionally acquired.
Rights and obligations which arise from the partial
execution of the contract and causes of action which have accrued from its
alike continue unaffected. When a contract is rescinded because of
matters which affect its formation, as in the case of fraud, the
parties are to
be rehabilitated and restored, so far as may be, to the position they occupied
before the contract was made. But when
a contract, which is not void or voidable
at law, or liable to be set aside in equity, is dissolved at the election of one
because the other has not observed an essential condition or has committed
a breach going to its root, the contract is determined
so far as it is executory
only and the party in default is liable for damages for its breach. (See
Deep Sea Fishing and Ice Co. v. Ansell
Hirji Mulji v. Cheong Yue
Steamship Co.
Cornwall v. Henson
Salmond and Winfield
Law of Contracts
, (1927), pp. 284-289;
Principles of
Rescission of Contracts
(1916), pp. 179, 180.) It does not, however,
necessarily follow from these principles that when, under an executory contract
sale of property, the price or part of it is paid or payable in advance,
the seller may both retain what he has received, or recover
overdue instalments,
and at the same time treat himself as relieved from the obligation of
transferring the property to the buyer.
When a contract stipulates for
payment of part of the purchase money in advance, the purchaser relying only on
the vendor’s
promise to give him a conveyance, the vendor is entitled to
enforce payment before the time has arrived for conveying the land; yet
title to retain the money has been considered not to be absolute but conditional
upon the subsequent completion of the contract.
“The very idea of
payment falls to the ground when both have treated the bargain as at an end; and
from that moment the vendor
holds the money advanced to the use of the
purchaser” (
Palmer v. Temple
Laird v. Pim
“It is clear he cannot have the land and its
value too”;
the case, however, was one in which conveyance and payment
were contemporaneous conditions (see
Laird v. Pim
It is now beyond
question that instalments already paid may be recovered by a defaulting
purchaser when the vendor elects to discharge
the contract
[94] In the same
case, Starke J (agreeing in the result in a separate judgment)
But, apart from any special stipulations of the contract, I
apprehend that a purchaser who is not himself in default is discharged
further performance of the contract and is entitled to recover any money paid or
property transferred by him thereunder; he
is entitled to take proceedings in
equity to assert his right and secure restitution, or to sue at law (
Mayson v. Clouet
, 3rd ed. (1923), vol. 2, pp. 1012, 1013). On the other hand, a
vendor who is not himself in default is discharged from further performance
the contract, and is entitled to the return of his land the subject matter of
the contract, or his interest therein, but is bound
to restore any moneys paid
or property transferred to him thereunder: the vendor cannot have the land and
its value too (
Laird v. Pim
Vendor and Purchaser
, 3rd ed., vol. 2, p. 1013). A deposit paid as
security for the completion of the contract stands perhaps in an exceptional
because the intent of the parties is that, if the contract goes off by
default of the purchaser, the vendor shall retain it (
Howe v. Smith
(citations omitted)
authority refers to a contract for the sale of land. In such a case, where the
contract is terminated, “the vendor
have the land and its value too”. It is not disputed that the same rule
applies to contracts for the sale of chattels.
[96] In the case
Baltic Shipping
relied upon by the appellants to assert that the onus
was on Gold Valley to plead and prove total failure of consideration, Mason
In the context
of the recovery of money paid on the footing that there has been a total failure
of consideration, it is the performance
of the defendant’s promise, not
the promise itself, which is the relevant consideration ((13)
Fibrosa Spolka
Akcyjna v. Fairbairn Lawson Combe Barbour Ltd
(1943) AC 32
, at p 48). In that context, the receipt and retention
by the plaintiff of any part of the bargained-for benefit will preclude
unless the contract otherwise provides or the circumstances give rise
to a fresh contract. So, in
Whincup v. Hughes
[1871] UKLawRpCP 9
(1871) LR 6 CP 78)
the plaintiff apprenticed his son to a watchmaker for six years for a premium
which was paid. The watchmaker died after one year.
No part of the premium could
be recovered. That was because there was not a total failure of consideration
((15) See also
Hunt v. Silk
[1804] EngR 356
(1804) 5 East 449
(102 ER 1142)).
qualification to this general rule, more apparent than real, has been introduced
in the case of contracts where a seller is bound
to vest title to chattels or
goods in a buyer and the buyer seeks to recover the price paid when it turns out
that title has not
been passed. Even if the buyer has had the use and enjoyment
of chattels or goods purportedly supplied under the contract for a limited
the use and enjoyment of the chattels or goods has been held not to amount to
the receipt of part of the contractual consideration.
Where the buyer is
entitled under the contract to good title and lawful possession but receives
only unlawful possession, he or she
does not receive any part of what he or she
bargained for. And thus, it is held, there is a total failure of
consideration
Rowland v. Divall
(1923) 2 KB 500
Butterworth
v. Kingsway Motors Ltd.
(1954) 1 WLR 1286).
As this Court stated in
Securities Pty. Ltd v. Commonwealth Bank
[1992] HCA 48
(1992) 66 ALJR 768
, at p 779;
[1992] HCA 48
, at p 78):
the notion of total failure of consideration now looks to the benefit
bargained for by the plaintiff rather than any benefit which
might have been
received in fact.
[97] That is to
say, whether a purchaser is entitled to a return of instalments paid under a
contract which is later terminated, must
depend upon what it is that the
purchaser contracted to receive. If what the purchaser contracted to receive
was simply the ownership
of land or chattels, and termination of the contract
results in the purchaser not receiving such ownership, then the purchaser is
entitled to restitution: the vendor cannot have the land (or chattels) and its
the present case, what Gold Valley contracted to receive in return for the money
payable under the Contract was as
Contract provides
vendor shall sell and the purchaser shall purchase, free from encumbrances,
‘the Chattels’ at the price and
subject to the terms and conditions
hereinafter contained and/or implied. The term ‘encumbrance’ is
to mean a mortgage,
charge, bill of sale, lien, pledge, writ, warrant, caveat, registered agreement
or dealing ‘or any other
interest, right, claim or demand
whatsoever’. The term ‘Chattels’ is
to mean the Camp and the
Ex WDR Plant & Equipment.
The purchase price for the Camp is $2 million and for the Plant &
Equipment is $1.5 million.
price was to be paid in instalments, as
(a) on the Execution Date,
August 2017, $500,000 for the Camp and $500,000 for the Plant & Equipment;
(b) one year after the Execution Date, ie 16 August 2018, $500,000 for the Plant
& Equipment;
(c) on the Settlement Date for the sale and purchase of the Plant &
ie 16 August 2019,
$500,000 for the Plant & Equipment; and
(d) on the Settlement Date for the sale and purchase of the
ie 16 August 2021,
$1.5 million for the Camp.
The Contract provides
(a) property in the Camp shall pass to the purchaser on the Settlement Date for
the sale and purchase of the Camp (ie 16 August 2021);
(b) property in the Plant & Equipment shall pass to the purchaser on the
Settlement Date for the sale and purchase of the Plant
& Equipment (ie 16
August 2019); and
(c) risk in the Chattels shall pass to the purchaser on the Execution Date.
The Contract provides
the purchaser ‘shall be entitled to possession of the Chattels under
licence from the Execution Date’ and that,
from the Execution Date to the
Settlement Date, the purchaser shall:
(a) pay to the first respondent the licence fees for the Camp set out in the
Fifth Schedule, which comprise a total sum of $3.5 million,
with $750,000
payable one year and two years after the Execution Date and $1 million payable
three and four years after the Execution
(b) ‘use, operate and possess the Chattels at the purchaser’s
(c) comply with all applicable laws regarding the safe and lawful operation of
the Chattels;
(d) maintain and service and keep the Chattels in good repair including seeking
to minimise any fair wear and tear;
(e) if the Chattels are damaged or destroyed other than as a result of an act or
omission of the vendor, repair or reinstate or replace
the Chattels at the
purchaser’s cost;
(f) not remove the Chattels from the current location without the prior written
consent of the vendor;
(g) take out and maintain all insurances reasonably required by the vendor;
(h) permit the vendor, at all reasonable times, to enter the Mineral Lease and
inspect the state of repair of the Chattels.
[99] This is not
a case where the purchaser contracted to receive ownership and lawful possession
and received only unlawful possession:
it had a right to possession derived from
the Contract. However, there are two related agreements in the Contract between
Gold Valley; an agreement for the sale of the Camp for $2 million payable
by instalments in exchange for which Gold Valley was to
receive ownership of the
Camp on payment of the final instalment, and an agreement for Gold Valley to
have possession of the Camp
under licence from the Execution Date for a fee of
$750,000 per annum.
[100] There is
no dispute that the $500,000 paid by Gold Valley to FE was an instalment of the
purchase price of the Camp and that
on termination of the Contract, property in
the Camp remained with FE. Gold Valley did not receive possession of the Camp
licence in exchange for the $500,000: that was to be paid for separately.
FE was entitled to damages for Gold Valley’s breach
of the Contract, and
the unpaid licence fee of $750,000 was accounted for in the calculation of
FE’s damages. (The trial judge
in the damages trial assessed FE’s
damages as nominal only by starting with the $5 million owing under clause 15 of
the Contract
and deducting the amount of $6 million and five hundred paid by
Britmar and NRR under asset sale deed. The sum of $5 million included
$750,000 unpaid licence fee as well as future annual licence fees.) In relation
to the agreement under the Contract for the
of the Camp, on the
undisputed facts there has been a failure of consideration. FE cannot have the
Camp and its value. In any event,
the observations of Mason CJ in
underlined in the passage quoted above would appear to be
inconsistent with the appellant’s contention that it was necessary
plead and prove total failure of consideration in order to claim restitution of
the instalment of the purchase price of the Camp.
[101] It is not
necessary to determine whether FE should be permitted to run this additional
ground on the appeal in accordance with
the principles in
Water Board v
appellants’ argument on this additional ground is without merit.
[102] Ground
4 must be dismissed.
Ground 5: In the
alternative to Ground 4, the trial judge erred in her determination (order 3 and
[178]) that the respondent is entitled
to interest pursuant to s 84 of the
Supreme Court Act
for the period from 30 August 2018 to the
date of judgment
appellants argue that the trial judge was in error to award Gold Valley interest
on its judgment for $500,000 restitution
from 30 August 2018. Her Honour
awarded interest from that date because the cause of action in the restitution
claim arose on the
date the Contract was terminated by the
appellants.
appellants argue that this exercise of the discretion to award interest
miscarried because the trial judge failed to take
into account two material
considerations.
[105] First,
the purpose of an award of statutory interest is to compensate a successful
claimant for being kept out of the money
to which they were entitled, and in the
period from 30 August 2018 to 23 January 2024, any entitlement of Gold Valley,
FE, to restitution of the $500,000 paid under the Contract would have
been set off entirely by FE’s entitlement to damages
against Gold Valley
for breach of contract.
[106] In support
of this submission, the appellants contend
that the trial judge found at [67] that upon the appellants having validly
terminated the Contract, Gold Valley owed $5 million to
FE. That is not an
accurate statement of her Honour’s finding or of FE’s entitlement,
[67] reads:
Upon the plaintiffs’ termination of the Contract
of Sale on 30 August 2018 for the defendant’s repudiation: (a) the
was deprived of the $5 million owed to it
, and the second
plaintiff was deprived of the $1 million owed to it, by the defendant under
each plaintiff retained its respective ownership of the Camp
and the Plant and Equipment
; and (c) each plaintiff regained its respective
rights to possession which it had, by the Contract of Sale, conferred on the
appellants then refer to the fact that FE mitigated its losses by the sale of
parts of the Camp to Britmar under the Asset
Sale Deed and other parts of the
Camp to a related party.
out in written submissions the amounts received in a table which showed that it
was not until 24 January 2024 that FE had
mitigated the loss it suffered by
reason of Gold Valley failing to pay the $5 million it owed FE. At all times
prior to 23 January
2024, the discrepancy between the amounts received in
mitigation and the amount owed by Gold Valley was greater than the $500,000
value of Gold Valley’s restitutionary claim.
[108] That is
not the correct analysis of FE’s claim. The way in which the claim was
pleaded by FE, was not that Gold Valley
owed FE a debt of $5 million as at
30 August 2018 which gradually reduced over time as sums in mitigation were
received. FE pleaded
its claim as a claim for damages for breach of contract
and, as Southwood J determined in the liability trial, FE was entitled to
“damages to be assessed”. In the damages trial, FE’s damages
were assessed as nominal only because FE was in fact
$825,571 better off as a
result of Gold Valley’s unperformed promise. Hence there was nothing to
set off against Gold Valley’s
restitutionary claim. As counsel for Gold
Valley contended, as a result of Gold Valley’s breach of contract, FE was
of payment of $5,000,000 and retained ownership of chattels worth
$6,000,500. It suffered no loss and was therefore obliged to repay
the $500,000
received under the Contract to Gold Valley on the date of termination of the
Valley’s analysis is correct; the trial judge made no error in awarding
judgment to Gold Valley on its restitutionary
ground of appeal is dismissed.
Gold Valley’s cross
Grounds 1 to 4: failure to apply the prima facie measure of
[111] The prima
facie measure of damages, both at common law and under the
Sale of Goods Act
”), is the difference between the contract price and
the market price at the time of breach of the contract of sale.
Valley’s primary contention in relation to damages, both at first instance
and on this appeal, was that the prima
facie measure contained in
applied; the appellants had not proved the market price of the
Camp and the Plant and Equipment on the date of termination of the
Contract (30
August 2018); so they had not established loss, and the appellants had not
displaced the prima facie measure because
they had not proved that there was no
market for the Plant and Equipment on 30 August 2018.
Damages for non-acceptance
(1) Where the
neglects or refuses to accept and pay for the
maintain an
him for damages for non-acceptance.
(2) The measure of damages is the estimated loss directly and naturally
resulting in the ordinary course of events from the
breach of contract.
(3) Where there is an available market for the
in question, the measure of damages is prima facie to be ascertained by the
difference between the contract price and the market
or current price at the
time or times when the
ought to have been accepted, or if no time was fixed for acceptance, then at the
time of the refusal to accept.
[114] Counsel
for Gold Valley argued that, as Gold Valley had refused to
accept and pay
the Camp and the Plant and Equipment,
applied to the
appellants’ claim for damages for Gold Valley’s breach of the
Contract. Counsel for the appellants argued
that Gold Valley
accepted the goods but refused to pay for them, so
[115] The trial
judge rejected Gold Valley’s contention that the prima facie measure of
applied because her Honour found that Gold Valley
accepted the goods the subject of the Contract within the meaning of the
which provides:
is deemed to have accepted the
when he intimates to the
that he has accepted them, or when the
have been delivered to him and he does any act in relation to them which is
inconsistent with the ownership of the
or when after the lapse of a reasonable time he retains the
without intimating to the
that he has rejected them.
Honour’s reasons were as
basis of the following facts, I find that the defendant did accept the Camp and
the Plant and Equipment within the meaning
of the SGA, and did so
upon execution of the Contract of Sale.
On 27 March 2017, Mr Xie (the guiding and
directing mind of the defendant) went to the WDR Mine, stayed at the Camp and
the mineral leases.
6 April 2017, Mr Xie and Mr Oldfield reached an in-principle agreement as to the
price for the Camp and the Plant and
On 20 July 2017, Mr
Oldfield sent Mr Xie a draft contract of sale which included a schedule listing
the Plant and Equipment.
16 August 2017, they executed the Contact of Sale, at which time the
defendant took delivery and possession of the Camp and the
Plant and Equipment,
and all risk in relation thereto, passed to the defendant under the licence in
On that date, the
defendant took delivery of the goods (ie the Camp and the Plant and Equipment)
within the meaning of the SGA.
On 3 November 2017, some two and a half months after the Contract of Sale was
executed and the defendant took delivery, Britmar raised
with Mr Oldfield
Britmar’s wish for some of the Plant and Equipment to be removed from the
mineral leases and Mr Oldfield informed
On 27 November 2017,
Britmar became the owner of the mineral
although the transfer
was not registered until 18 December
On 30 November 2017, Mr
Xie asked if the removal could be delayed until after the ‘wet
season’ and committed to having
all the Plant and Equipment removed from
the mineral leases by the end of March
Britmar agreed to that
extension for the removal of the Plant and Equipment and said that there was no
urgency for the removal of
Despite his commitment, Mr
Xie did not take steps for the
On 16 February 2018,
Britmar’s solicitors wrote to Mr Oldfield and Mr Xie demanding the
removal of the Plant and Equipment
and the Camp by 28 February
By the execution of the Contract of Sale after the inspection by Mr Xie, the
defendant took delivery of the goods within
of the SGA by taking
possession of them. From that time, the risk of the goods was the
defendant’s. By accepting Britmar’s
requirements for the goods to be
removed and committing to removing them, the defendant intimated to the
plaintiffs that it had accepted
the goods within
of the SGA. By the
commitment to their removal, the defendant accepted responsibility for them, at
least up to 28 February 2018.
In that period between 16 August 2017
and 28 February 2018, the defendant retained possession of the goods and
did not intimate to
the plaintiffs that it had rejected them within
the SGA. That period of six months and 12 days was a reasonable time within
which to reject the goods. Even after Britmar’s
demand of 28 February
2018, the defendant continued to indicate that it would remove the goods from
the mineral leases, thereby continuing
to accept responsibility for
Further, between late May and early July 2018, the defendant removed the
Removed Items from the mineral leases without giving notice
to the plaintiffs
and refused to inform the plaintiffs of the items it removed or their new
Thus, after the goods were delivered to it, the defendant did acts in relation
to the goods which are inconsistent with the ownership
of the plaintiffs within
of the SGA.
Consequently, I find that the defendant had, prior to the termination of the
Contract of Sale, accepted the Plant and Equipment and
the Camp within the
of the SGA.
It must follow that the defendant did not
wrongfully neglect or refuse to
goods within
of the SGA, with the consequence that
the SGA is not applicable to the plaintiffs’ claim for damages.
Valley complains that the finding at [113] that it accepted the goods upon
execution of the Contract was not open, firstly
because that is inconsistent
which addresses conduct
the contract has been entered
into from which acceptance may or may not be deemed. That may be so, but in and
of itself does not
affect the trial judge’s finding at [118] that Gold
Valley had accepted the Plant and Equipment and the Camp within the meaning
“prior to the termination of the Contract” on the basis of
conduct by Gold Valley after the formation of the Contract.
Valley takes issue with the finding that there was such acceptance by Gold
(a) Gold Valley contends that the act of removing some of the Plant and
Equipment from the mine “was an act of self-help designed
possession of some of the Plant and Equipment and was not inconsistent with the
ownership of G&C” because it did
not affect G&C’s retention
of title to the Plant and Equipment under clause 2.6 of the Contract. That
argument is mis-conceived.
The fact that a vendor retains title to goods does
not mean that a purchaser cannot do an act “inconsistent with the
That phrase is not intended to refer to the acquisition of ownership in the
sense of legal title by the purchaser but to
their acceptance under the
contract. A thief who takes away a person’s property does an act
inconsistent with the rightful
owner’s ownership but does thereby acquire
title to the stolen goods. In this case the trial judge was not in error to
that the removal of some of the Plant and Equipment from the mineral leases
by Gold Valley without giving notice to the appellants
and its refusal to inform
the appellants of the items it removed or their new location were acts in
relation to the goods which were
inconsistent with the ownership of the
appellants within
(b) That makes it unnecessary to decide Gold Valley’s other objections to
this finding by the trial judge. For the sake of
completeness, it should be
said that none of these other objections can be accepted; there is no error in
the trial judge’s
reasoning. On any objective view Gold Valley must be
taken to have acted in a manner inconsistent with the appellant’s
rendering any further arguments superfluous.
Valley accepts that, notwithstanding what it contended was an error by the trial
judge in holding that
did not apply, the trial judge did ask the right
question, namely, has the prima facie measure of damages (ie the difference
the contract price and the market value of the subject goods at the date
of termination of the Contract) been
However, Gold Valley
contends that the trial judge should not have found that the prima facie measure
of damages had been displaced.
[120] The trial
judge said, at [102] – [103]:
Prima facie measures of damages
have been explained as bases of assessment for certain breaches of contract
developed over 150 years
of case law on damages, which represent the
conventional positions for courts to take in the application of the ruling
The best known
examples of prima facie measures are enshrined in the sale of goods legislation,
but they are repeated throughout
The prima facie
measures standardise the evidence required to establish damages entitlements in
terms which minimise and regularise
The prima facie measures
assume that certain steps have been taken by the promisee, such as going into
the market.
Because the position
assumed under a prima facie measure may be different from the actual position of
the promisee, the measure operates
for good or ill, and tensions arise whenever
a promisee’s actual loss is shown to be different from that addressed
prima facie measure.
Where a prima facie measure is applicable on the basis of an available
market, the onus is on the plaintiff to establish the relevant
If a prima facie measure
is applicable, but the promisee seeks to recover a different loss, the onus is
on the promisee to displace
the measure, and prove that the loss claimed arose
naturally, or was within the contemplation of both
Whether or not prima
facie measures embody conclusions about remoteness and mitigation, they do not
prevent the recovery of additional
Valley concedes that these paragraphs correctly explain the prima facie measure
where there is an available market for
the goods and the burden is on FE and
G&C in this respect but contends that the trial judge ought to have
acknowledged that the
onus was on FE and G&C to establish that there was no
available market. However, Gold Valley does not contend that the trial
misapplied this onus in her Honour’s reasons. In any case, in
it seems to have
been accepted that a defendant may bear at least an evidentiary onus in
establishing the correct measure of damages
to be applied. Hayne J said (at
Issue having been joined, and the forensic contest having
been fought as described, there was neither cross-examination of the appellant,
nor production of any evidence in chief on behalf of the respondent, directed to
the proposition that the acquisition costs of Xytex
sperm were not an
appropriate proxy for the value of the St George sperm, had it been compliant
with the vendor’s warranty.
There being no evidence on the point, the
respondent cannot sustain an argument that the measure of damages proven by the
was not the correct measure to be applied or that it should be
displaced by some other measure
. The submission, in the respondent’s
notice of contention, that “the cost of the acquisition of replacement
Xytex sperm
was not an appropriate proxy” for the value of the St George
sperm must be rejected. There was no error in the decision of
the primary
On the same issue, Keane J said (at [138]):
Fourthly, at trial St George and the respondent did not seek to advance an
evidentiary basis for a finding as to the true value of
the St George sperm had
St George kept its contractual obligations. In this respect, the elements of the
primary judge’s calculation
based on the cost of replacement sperm from
Xytex were not challenged. It may also be noted here that the respondent sought
to file out of time a notice of contention to the effect that, if the
appellant was entitled to recover damages assessed by reference
non-delivery of the contract sperm, then the cost of the acquisition of the
Xytex sperm was not an accurate proxy for that
But the respondent did
not adduce any evidence to establish a more reliable proxy.
The view formed
by the primary judge on this factual matter was not unreasonable. The submission
advanced pursuant to the notice
of contention should be rejected.
[122] The trial
judge concluded that the prima facie measure of damages had been displaced
reasons set out below, in the particular combination of the facts and
circumstances in this case, the prima facie measure
of damages (comprising the
difference between the contract price and the market price at the time of breach
of the Contract of Sale)
is displaced as the measure of damages which would
compensate the plaintiffs (specifically, the second plaintiff) in accordance
the ruling principle.
First, in assessing damages for breach, the prima facie measure looks to the
market value of the goods at the time provided for acceptance
of the goods.
However, under the Contract of Sale, the Plant and Equipment was accepted by the
defendant upon execution of the Contract
of Sale on 16 August 2017, some 12
months prior to the breach and termination of the Contract of Sale. The prima
facie measure is
directed to the situation (relevantly) where the seller of
goods does not receive the contract price and retains possession of the
and assumes coincidence between the two. That is not the case here where the
seller of the goods received part but not all
of the contract price and
conferred possession, but not ownership, of the goods on the buyer when the
contract was executed.
Second, the Plant and Equipment were accepted by the defendant where they
were located, which was on mineral leases belonging to a
third party in a remote
location. Possession and removal of the goods from the mineral leases were
therefore subject to the rights
and obligations of the owner of the mineral
leases (ultimately, Britmar) and the provisions of the
Mining Management
. The second plaintiff’s capacity to resume full possession of the
goods and put them into the market was necessarily curtailed.
Third, generally speaking, the Plant and Equipment comprised items which had
been in place for use in a mining operation since 2014.
Many of the items were
bulky, and were difficult and expensive to transport from their remote location
on the mineral leases to locations
where buyers might be found.
Fourth, in July 2018, the defendant removed the Removed Items from the
mineral leases and retained possession of them at a location
not disclosed to
the second plaintiff until 30 August 2018. Around half of those were recovered
by the second plaintiff in February
2021, but the remainder remain where the
defendant took them.
These matters (the second, third and fourth just referred to) effectively
denied the existence of an available market for the Plant
and Equipment because
buyers and sellers were not procurable at once and within a reasonable distance
in sufficient numbers to constitute
the relationship of supply and demand and
the consequent establishment of a
Fifth, the sale of almost all of the Plant and Equipment that remained on the
mineral leases to Britmar in situ and for use in a mining
operation was a
commercially rational way for the second plaintiff to mitigate its losses
arising from the defendant’s breach
of the Contract of Sale and the second
plaintiff received monies from that sale paid between July 2019 and January
2024. In accordance
with the principles set out above, the second plaintiff
cannot recover damages for its losses avoided by that sale. The monies received
from Britmar under the G&C Asset Sale Deed cannot be adopted as a proxy for
the market price of the Plant and Equipment in the
way done in
because Britmar purchased only around half of the Plant and
Equipment as that was all that was on the mineral leases after the defendant
removed the Removed Items.
Consequently, I find the prima facie measure to
be displaced, and I reject the defendant’s arguments that the second
plaintiff’s
claim for damages must fail because: (a) damages are to be
assessed on the basis of the market price of the Plant and Equipment as
30 August 2018, which has not been proved by the plaintiffs; or (b) the
plaintiffs have failed to prove that there was no available
market on that date.
Valley contends that this conclusion is erroneous for the following
(a) Gold Valley contends that FE and G&C did not adduce any evidence as to
the nature and extent of the market in respect of
the Camp and the Plant and
Equipment and as to whether it was “available” in the sense used by
the authorities. Gold
Valley contends that the sales to Britmar and the other
buyer show there was a market.
(b) Gold Valley contends that FE and G&C produced a report by
Mr Ossendryver which attested to the “Fair Market Value”
Camp and the Plant and Equipment as at 30 August 2018, the date the Contract was
terminated, although it was not produced
in time to be used at the trial. Gold
Valley contends that this is the evidence the prima facie measure of damages
requires and
that Mr Ossendryver “necessarily would have knowledge of
the relevant market” in order to produce that report.
[124] Neither of
these contentions can be accepted.
Joseph & Co Pty Ltd v Harvest Grain Co Pty
referred to
by the trial judge, contains the following discussion of the concept of
“available market”.
What is an “available
Benjamin’s Sale of Goods
, 4th ed (1992) at §16-053 examines
some possible meanings of the expression. The learned authors (at §16-056)
submit that
the courts are likely to eschew formal limitations on the meaning of
“available market”, and cite authorities in support
proposition.
Sales and Consumer Law
, 4th ed (1995) at 21.42 states:
Available market then would seem to mean that buyers and sellers are
procurable at once and within a reasonable distance of the aggrieved
sufficient numbers to constitute the relationship of supply and demand and the
consequent establishment of a price.
Thompson (W L) Ltd v Robinson (Gunmakers) Ltd
[1955] Ch 177
decision turned on whether or not there was an available market. Upjohn J (as he
then was), after reviewing the authorities,
held (at 187):
Had the matter been res integra I think that I should have found that an
‘available market’ merely means that the situation
in the particular
trade in the particular area was such that the particular goods could freely be
sold, and that there was a sufficient
demand to absorb readily all the goods
that were thrust on it, so that if a purchaser defaulted, the goods in question
could readily
be disposed of.
[126] Further
guidance as to the meaning of “available market” may be found in
Benjamin’s Sale of Goods
(Eighth Edition).
The availability
of buyers and sellers and their ready capacity to supply or absorb the relevant
goods is the basic concept of an
There must be
“sufficient traders potentially in touch with each other to evidence a
market in which the actual or notional
seller could if he wished sell the
“available” should be given both a temporal and a geographical
meaning: the buyers or sellers should be immediately
accessible and within a
reasonable distance of where the breach of contract occurs so that there is a
possibility of an immediate
[T]he temporal
test should be one of a reasonable time after the breach, given the nature of
the goods in
size of the alleged market will be relevant to the decision whether it is an
available market: thus, a few sales of small quantities
of the relevant goods
will not constitute an available
unlikely that there will be an available market where the goods have been (or
were to be) specially manufactured to suit
the peculiar requirements of the
buyer; the chance of resale of such goods within a reasonable time after the
breach is too limited
fortuitous.
[127] The trial
judge rightly applied the test for an “available market” at [127]
when her Honour held that the matters
set out in the paragraphs quoted above
“effectively denied the existence of an available market for the Plant and
buyers and sellers were not procurable at once and within a
reasonable distance in sufficient numbers to constitute the relationship
supply and demand and the consequent establishment of a
It should be
noted that FE did not obtain a buyer for the Camp (and then only for part of the
Camp) until March 2019, around seven
months after the breach and a buyer for
some of the rest of the Camp until August 2021, two years after the breach.
Some items were
never sold to a third party but transferred to a related party
essentially for the cost of transport.
[128] The fact
that Mr Ossendryver gave an opinion as to what he referred to as the “fair
market price” of the Camp, Plant
and Equipment as at the date of
termination of the Contract, says nothing about whether there was in fact an
“available market”
for the Chattels within the meaning of the
. It cannot be inferred from the fact that he (an accountant) used
the word “market” in giving his opinion as to the
value of the goods
at the date of termination of the Contract that he turned his mind to the
existence of an “available market”
in the relevant sense.
[129] As for
evidence of the non-existence of an available market, the trial judge was
entitled to take into account the evidence
set out in the judgment at [123] to
[126] in assessing whether there was an available market for the Camp and the
Plant and Equipment,
(quoted at [121] above). There is no error in her
Honour’s reasoning or conclusion that there was no available market for
the Chattels and that the prima facie measure of damages had been displaced.
None of Gold Valley’s reasons for rejecting the
trial judge’s
findings, based on that
is compelling when
measured against the concept of “available market”. It is simply
common sense, for example that the
location of the Camp and some of the Plant
and Equipment on a remote mine site (and the fact that they were, to an extent
made” for that particular mine) and were subject to the
rights of the owner of the mineral leases, would have a bearing on
whether the
situation in the particular trade in the particular area was such that the
particular goods could freely be sold, or
whether buyers and sellers were or
were not procurable at once and within a reasonable distance in sufficient
numbers to constitute
the relationship of supply and demand and the consequent
establishment of a market price. This is so notwithstanding that in modern
times marketing of such goods may take place
electronically.
the prices for which FE and G&C actually sold the Camp, Plant and Equipment,
do not establish that there was an ”available
market” in this
[130] In her
Honour’s analysis set out above, the trial judge was applying the primary
“ruling principle” applicable
to the assessment of damages for
breach of contract as explained in
[131] Each of
the judges in the High Court in
Clark v Macourt
emphasised that the
proper approach to the assessment of damages for breach of contract is to place
the injured party, so far as money
can achieve the result, in the same position
that party would have been in had the defaulting party complied with its
contractual
obligation (Hayne J at [7] & [10]; Crennan and Bell JJ
at [26]-[27]; Gageler J at [59] – [68]; Keane J at [106]
[110]), and also that the measure of damages does not turn on the
distinction between a sale of goods and sale of a business (Hayne
Crennan and Bell JJ at [30]; Gageler J at [68]). Crennan and
Bell JJ explain (at [28]) that the prima facie measure of
common law in respect of a sale of goods stated in
and codified
subsequently in sale of goods legislation is simply a reflection of this more
basic principle; and Keane J (with whom
Hayne, Crennan and Bell JJ
agreed) quotes
observations of Lord Atkinson on behalf of the Judicial Committee of the Privy
Wertheim v Chicoutimi Pulp
setting out this
“ruling principle” and saying (inter alia) that “[T]he rule
which prescribes as a measure of damages
the difference in market prices at the
respective times ... is merely designed to apply this principle”.
Gageler J (dissenting
– but not relevantly to this point) urged
caution in elevating subsidiary principles (such as the prima facie measure of
for breach of a contract for the sale of goods) to the level of the
basic “ruling principle” in the assessment of damages
for breach of
answering that question,
[ie which of the competing approaches to the
assessment of damages adopted by the primary judge and by the Court of Appeal
goes furthest
in placing Dr Clark, so far as money can achieve the result, in
the same position she would have been in had the company complied
contractual obligation]
statements of subsidiary principle framed in the
context of working out the ruling principle in standard categories of case must
approached with circumspection
There is, as has often been pointed
out, “a danger in elevating into general principles what are in truth mere
applications
to particular facts or situations of the overriding general
. The measure appropriate in a particular case “cannot
be divorced from the [claimant’s] personal position and obligations,
legal and moral, or from what the [claimant] ought reasonably to do by way of
mitigation”, and a rigid distinction cannot
always be drawn between
measure and mitigation.
[132] Grounds 1
to 4 of the cross-appeal must be dismissed.
Grounds 12 to 14 and
17 to 21 of the cross-appeal: alleged failure to find that G&C had not
proved its loss
Valley contends, in the alternative to Grounds 1 to 4 of the cross-appeal
considered above, that the trial judge should
have found that Gold Valley failed
to prove the value of the items of Plant and Equipment not sold to
The trial judge
dealt with the valuation of the items of Plant and Equipment not sold to Britmar
Plant and Equipment not purchased by Britmar or RRT consisted of:
(a) the six fuel pods transported to Mataranka and then to Alice Springs, being
one x 20 feet (or five metres long) and five x 40
feet (or 12 metres long);
(b) the 24 Removed Items recovered by the second plaintiff and transported to
yards in Alice Springs (‘Table 4 Items’);
(c) the 28 Removed Items remaining at the locations to which they were taken by
the defendant.
As regards the fuel pods and the Table 4 Items, Mr Oldfield deposed that the
second plaintiff purchased those items of Plant and Equipment
7 September 2016, then located on the mineral leases, for the amounts
attributed to them in the Pickles Invoice. Those amounts
totalled from
$106,863.62 to $108,499.98, the difference being attributable to items with the
same descriptor in the Pickles Invoice
having different amounts. After deducting
the cost of transporting those items from where the defendant had taken them to
in Alice Springs ($26,778.51), the Pickles Invoice prices totalled
from $80,085.11 to $81,721.47 (exc GST). Mr Oldfield deposed that
expectation that, during the almost two years between the second
plaintiff’s purchase and the date of breach of
the Contract of Sale, the
second plaintiff had not performed any works on the fuel pods and the Table 4
Items which could have increased
their value, and they would have deteriorated
in condition as they were left exposed to the weather and they were not
in any way, with the consequence that their value would have declined
below the prices in the Pickles Invoice.
As regards the fuel pods, counsel for the defendant argued that each fuel pod
had a value of $25,000 because that was the amount credited
to the RRT invoice
for one of the 40 foot fuel pods it took in exchange for transportation costs.
Consequently, it argued that the
six fuel pods had a total value of
As regards to the Table 4 Items, counsel for the defendant argued that each
of the Table 4 Items had a value that was 370% of the
amount set out in the
Pickles Invoice because that was the average difference between the amounts
charged in the Pickles Invoice
and the amounts credited to the RRT invoice for
the truck, the three modular buildings and the communications tower. Counsel for
the defendant argued therefore that the Table 4 Items had a value of around
In cross-examination, Mr Oldfield rejected the proposition that the amounts
attributed in the RRT invoice to the ‘modular buildings’
was effectively five times the amounts attributed to ‘shipping container
buildings’ in the Pickles Invoice
($1,818), saying that some of the
buildings were in better condition and had a higher value than others, and RRT
would have chosen
the buildings that were in the best condition. When shown that
the truck acquired by RRT for $17,000 was priced at $5,000 in the
Invoice, Mr Oldfield said that he took what he was offered by RRT for it, and
that price was for the item located in RRT’s
yard. As for the fuel pods,
which were all priced at $8,636.36 in the Pickles Invoice, one of which was
exchanged with RRT for $25,000,
Mr Oldfield said again that RRT would have
picked out the best of the seven tanks, only some of them had pumping units and
dirty fuel in them. Mr Oldfield agreed that the amount attributed to
the communications tower in RRT invoice was around $100 more
than the price in
the Pickles Invoice. Mr Oldfield agreed that the Table 4 Items (including the
six fuel pods) had been in Alice
Springs since February 2021, he had not done
anything with them, had not sold or rented them, and it was his intention to do
once the litigation concludes.
In re-examination, Mr Oldfield said that his expectations about selling or
renting the Table 4 Items was that some of them, such as
the vehicles, would be
‘just trashed’, some of the equipment would have reached the end of
its economic life and someone
may buy it if they have a use for it, but the mine
shut in 2014 and some of the equipment has not operated since then and has been
sitting idle until the present time. Mr Oldfield said that leaving machinery in
the elements all that time causes them to suffer
break downs in the seals and
contamination of the oils, hydraulics, filters and intakes, so that the chances
of someone wanting to
buy them can be remote unless they have a specific need
and they are really desperate and want to use them for parts. He said that
did not have any great expectations for them. He said that he had had Pickles,
Lloyds and Hassels auctioneers come and look at
them and tell him these items
have no commercial value. He said that there will be a range of where it sits,
but some of them are
basically a burden.
I accept Mr Oldfield’s evidence as set out above regarding the
condition of the Table 4 Items, their deterioration and their
diminution in value from the starting point of the prices set out in the Pickles
Invoice. I accept that Mr Oldfield’s
evidence explains why the amounts
credited to the RRT invoice cannot be taken to represent the value of the other
Table 4 Items,
given that the items varied in condition, RRT would have chosen
the items in the best condition, and the amounts were a credit against
transportation costs of items already at RRT’s yard in Mataranka rather
than amounts paid upon a sale in an open market. I
accept that
Mr Oldfield’s evidence about the effects of weather and lack of
maintenance since 2014 also explains why the eight
vehicles, three items of
machinery (including the drilling rig), 11 shipping container buildings, six
fuel pods, a communications
tower and eight wheelie bins and four spill kits in
the Table 4 Items had very little value, specifically less than the $26,778.51
in transportation costs paid by the second plaintiff to retrieve them, by the
date they were returned to the second plaintiff’s
physical possession in
February 2021. I consider that to be the relevant date for the purpose of
assessing whether a deduction should
be made on their account from the second
plaintiff’s damages because the defendant had removed them from the
mineral leases
in breach of the Contract of Sale, had refused to tell the second
plaintiff of their location and did not do so until after the plaintiffs
commenced proceedings in the Supreme Court, and had not taken any steps
thereafter to return the Removed Items to the second plaintiff’s
possession. I find, on the balance of probabilities, that the Table 4 Items
(including the six fuel pods) were, at that
date, of no material value after
deducting the transportation costs.
Consequently, no deduction to the second plaintiff’s damages is
necessary or appropriate to reflect the second plaintiff’s
retention of
ownership and possession of the Table 4 Items.
(Extensive footnoted references to the evidence omitted.)
Valley contends that the trial judge should not have accepted
Mr Oldfield’s evidence saying that G&C paid WDR
over $106,000 for
the Table 4 Items on 7 September 2016 out of a total price of $495,000 and that,
less than a year later, Gold Valley
agreed to pay a total of $1.5 million for
the same items which, Gold Valley argues, suggests that, applying the same
apportionment
to the purchase price paid by Gold Valley as the apportionment of
the purchase price paid by G&C, a reasonable apportionment
Valley’s contract price would see around $300,000 apportioned to the Table
4 items. Gold Valley goes one step further
and contends that an analysis of the
prices obtained for the other items sold after 30 August 2018 (ie the sales
to Britmar and the
other company) shows that those prices were about 370% more
than the price G&C paid to the liquidator of WDR. Gold Valley argues
these values should have been applied to the Table 4 items.
argument ignores the fact that the Table 4 Items were items wrongfully removed
by Gold Valley and later retrieved by G&C.
Gold Valley contends that the
only evidence led by G&C as to the condition of these items was from Mr
Oldfield who testified
that he expected their value would have declined. Gold
Valley points to the fact that there was no evidence led from a valuer and
G&C did not tender photographs or other evidence of their condition.
However, Mr Oldfield did give evidence of how it was
that the value of the items
had declined.
The question relates to the items that are in the yard
and the suggestion that you’ll try and either sell or rent them somehow
deal with them after the litigation is over. What’s your expectation of
your ability to be able to do that?---Well, some items,
Mr Harris, will be
– they’ll be just trashed. I mean I could hand her Honour –
I’ve got photos of the vehicles
which you won’t need an expert to
decide what they’re worth. And some of the other equipment is –
your Honour,
probably the best way to describe some of this stuff is all
equipment has an economic life and value. So when it’s new, it
it’s worth X and then the maintenance, you know, go down along this line
and you say maintenance. And as a lifetime
expands, the maintenance increases.
So the maintenance curve goes up, the value economic life goes down. And when
it hits a point,
it’s basically lost its value. It’s got no
economic value. And – or limited. Somebody may buy it if
got a use for it. But we use the old adjective at work a bit
of machinery, if you’ve got a use for it in a contract is worth
but as a doorstop is very expensive. And when you’ve got the likes of
some of this equipment that – remember
it was – the mine shut 2014.
Some of this hasn’t operated and been sitting idle for the period up until
now. Now, the
components of machinery are made from seals, hydraulics, oils,
whatever. And when they’re placed in the element and they’re
stored, there’s the possibilities of contamination, condensation, it gets
in the oils, rain gets in the filters or gets
in the intakes and unless you pull
them down for a big inspection, the chances of somebody wanting to come and buy
them off you can
be remote, unless they had a specific need and they’re
really desperate and want to use some for parts. But I haven’t
great expectations for them. But you can hope but I – I’ve had
Pickles and guys come around and auctioneers.
I’ve had Lloyds, I’ve
had Hassles(?). And someone there saying having no commercial value. So
there’ll be a
range of where it sits, but some of the items are just
basically burden.
Valley contends that this passage from the evidence of Mr Oldfield
demonstrates that G&C failed to prove its damages
“with a degree of
precision which reflects the proof that was reasonably available to
G&C” and refers to the evidence
of direct relevance to the value of
these items which G&C did not call: photos, “the Pickles guys”
etc. We disagree.
Assessment of the evidence was primarily a matter for the
trial judge and her Honour was entitled to accept the evidence of
Mr Oldfield
that the Table 4 items had essentially no commercial value
(ie were worth less than the $26,588 G&C paid to transport them) for
reasons given by him in evidence.
[137] Grounds
12 to 14 and 17 to 21 of the cross-appeal must also be
Gold Valley’s notice of contention
Valley contends that, if this Court accepts Gold Valley’s argument that
G&C is only entitled to nominal damages,
then G&C’s counterclaim
for repayment of the $500,000 paid to G&C on account of the purchase price
for the Plant Equipment
must succeed. As we have not accepted this argument by
Gold Valley, this issue does not arise.
[139] ORDERS:
(a) Grounds 1 and 2 of the appeal are dismissed.
(b) Ground 3 of the appeal is allowed and $73,500 is added to G&C’s
(c) Ground 4 of the appeal is dismissed.
(d) Ground 5 of the appeal is dismissed.
(e) The $37,180 for the legal costs of the Federal Court proceedings with
Britmar mistakenly deducted from G&C’s damages
should be reversed and
added to those damages (ie adding a further $74,360).
Cross-Appeal
(a) Grounds 1 to 4 of the cross-appeal are dismissed.
(b) Grounds 12 to 14 and 17 to 21 of the cross-appeal are dismissed.
FE Accommodation Pty Ltd &
Anor v Gold Valley Iron Ore Pty Ltd
[2020] NTSC 61
; (“the liability
decision”) at [154.14].
Accommodation Pty Ltd & Anor v Gold Valley Iron Ore Pty Ltd
[2024] NTSC
61(“the damages decision”)
[1989] HCA 8
171 CLR 125
Hungerfords”)
the damages decision at [39]
the damages decision at [73] to
the damages decision at [84] and
Commonwealth of Australia v Amann Aviation
[1991] HCA 54
(1991) 174 CLR 64
at 136, 148 and
Haines v Bendall
[1991] HCA 15
(1991) 172 CLR 60
Haines v Bendall
the damages decision at [9]
Haines v Bendall
the damages decision at
(1998) 192 CLR 285
at [26] per
Gaudron J (“
Commonwealth v SCI
[2023] VSCA 134
Ikosidekas v Glenis
Commonwealth v SCI
Gaudron J at [22]
Gaudron J at [26]
Ibid at [27]
The appeal was decided in
Ikosidekas’ favour on other grounds.
Ikosidekas v Glenis
A more apt authority is the
English case of
IM Properties Plc v Cape & Dalgleish
[1998] EWCA Civ 862
[1999] QB 297
cited by the trial judge at [82]-[84].
the damages decision
Ajaimi v Giswick Pty Ltd
(2022) 67 VR 529
at [28] per M Osborne J.
Northern Territory v
[2019] HCA 7
(2019) 269 CLR 1
per Edelman J, citing
Hungerfords v Walker
Commonwealth v
(1991) 30 FCR 154
at 161-162 per Sheppard J and 163 per Wilcox J,
Hungerfords v Walker
Hobartville Stud Pty Ltd v Union
Insurance Co Ltd
(1991) 25 NSWLR 358
at 364 per Giles J.
Hobartville Stud Pty Ltd v
Union Insurance Co Ltd
(1991) 25 NSWLR 358
at 364 per Giles J. See also
Commonwealth v Chessell
(1991) 30 FCR 154
at 161-162 per Sheppard J and
163 per Wilcox J. See also
Pooraka Holdings Pty Ltd v Participation Nominees
(1991) 58 SASR 184
Walker v FAI Insurance Ltd
(1991) Tas R
State Bank of New South Wales v Yee
(1994) 33 NSWLR 618
Commonwealth v Chessell
(1991) 30 FCR 154.
See Oral submissions at
Transcript, p 179; Plaintiffs’ Further Outline of Submissions dated
16 April 2024 at [23]-[25].
See Plaintiffs’ Further
Outline of Submissions dated 16 April 2024 at [33]-[35].
Transcript, pp 75-77;
Exhibit P3, Appendix 11
Exhibit P3, [2.1]-[2.14],
[5.7]-[5.8], [6.6]-[6.7]. The payment times under the Contract of Sale was
varied by the parties by a deed
of variation executed on 28 September 2017 (Ex
Exhibit P3, [2.15]
Exhibit P3, [2.16]-[2.17]
Exhibit P3, [2.18]
Exhibit P5, [2.19]-[2.21];
[2.25]-[2.26]
Exhibit P5, [2.22]-[2.23];
[2.27]-[2.28]
Transcript, p 106
Transcript, p 108
Transcript, p 111
Transcript, pp 113-114
Transcript, pp 58-59
These amounts do not take into
account GST.
the damages decision at
the damages decision at
[1981] HCA 45
(1981) 147 CLR 589
[2015] HCA 28
(2015) 256 CLR 507
[2016] FCA 44
(2016) 259 CLR 212
the liability decision at
the liability decision at
the liability decision at
Gold Valley Iron Ore Pty Ltd
v FE Accommodation Pty Ltd & Anor
[2021] NTCA 2
(“the liability
appeal decision”)
damages decision at
[163]-[174]
See the damages decision at
[156]-[158]
the damages decision
[160]–[162]
Appellants’ further reply
submissions dated 18 February 2025 at [22]
[1993] HCA 4
(1993) 176 CLR 344
Baltic Shipping
[1987] HCA 5
(1987) 162 CLR 221
[2012] 246 CLR 498; HCA 7 at
[30] (French CJ, Crennan and Kiefel JJ) citing
David Securities Pty Ltd v
Commonwealth Bank of Australia
[1992] HCA 48
(1992) 175 CLR 353
Financial Services and Leasing Pty Ltd v Hills Industries Ltd
[2014] HCA 14
(2014) 253 CLR
(French CJ), at [138] (Gageler J). See also
Mann v Paterson
Constructions Pty Ltd
[2019] HCA 32
(2019) 267 CLR 560
(Nettle, Gordon and
Edelmann JJ).
[2023] SASCA 30
(Livesey P, Doyle and Bleby JJA)
[2009] NSWCA 186
75 NSWLR 42
[119]-[126]
[2015] NSWCA 123
Gold Valley’s written
submissions dated 13 December 2024 at [55]-[57]
Appeal Transcript p72
This is plainly a reference to
Dies v British and International Mining & Finance Corp Ltd
referred to by the trial judge at [170] of her Honour’s reasons.
(1933) 48 CLR 457
[1993] HCA 4
(1993) 176 CLR 344
(1993) 111 ALR 289
(1993) 67 ALJR 228
per Mason CJ at [13]
liability appeal decision at
Cl 2.3, 2.4
Defined by cl 1.0(k) to mean
the date on which the parties executed the Contract.
Defined by cl 1.0(g) to
mean two years after the Execution Date.
Defined by cl 1.0(f) to
mean the date falling on the commencement of the fifth year after the Execution
(1988) 180 CLR 491. (See
judgment of Mason CJ, Wilson, Dawson and Brennan JJ at 497.)
Damages judgment at [161]
Appellant’s written submissions filed 15
November 2024 at [157]
Appellant’s written
submissions filed 15 November 2024 at [168]
the damages decision at
[113]-[119]
the liability decision at
the liability decision at
the liability decision at
the liability decision at
the liability decision at
the liability decision at
the liability decision at
the liability decision at
the liability decision at
the liability decision at
the liability decision at
the liability decision at [85],
[91] and [96]
the liability decision at
the damages decision at
[121]-[122]
JW Carter, W Courtney and GJ
Tolhurst, ‘Issues of Principle in Assessing Contract Damages’
Journal of Contract Law
Ibid at 186
Breach of Contract
ed, 2018, LexisNexis Butterworths,
[13-04], p 596.
Ibid, pp 596-697. See also
JW Carter, W Courtney and GJ Tolhurst, ‘Issues of Principle in Assessing
Contract Damages’
Journal of Contract Law
‘It goes without saying that prima facie measures may be displaced by the
facts’. It is expressly acknowledged
Clark v Macourt
prima facie measure can be displaced: see at [28], [30] per Crennan and Bell JJ,
at [107], [132] per Keane J. See also at
[68] per Gageler J.
JW Carter, W Courtney and GJ
Tolhurst, ‘Issues of Principle in Assessing Contract Damages’
Journal of Contract Law
[2013] HCA 56
(2013) 253 CLR 1
”); See the damages decision at [121].
damages decision
at [122] to [129]
See, for example,
& Co Pty Ltd v Harvest Grain Co Pty Ltd
(1996) 39 NSWLR 722
per Moore DCJ, citing
Thompson (WL) Ltd v Robinson (Gunmakers) Ltd
at 187 per Upjohn J.
(1996) 39 NSWLR 722
Benjamin’s Sale of
Goods 16-066 p1014;
Marshall & Co v Nicoll & Son
[1919], SC 244
at p 245 (affirmed 1919 SC (HL) at p 129;
Thompson (WL) Ltd v Robinson
(Gunmakers) Ltd
[1955] Ch 177
Benjamin’s Sale of
Goods 16-066 p 1015;
ABD (Metals and Waste) Ltd v Anglo-Chemical Ore Co
[1985] 2 Lloyds Rep 456
at p466 (followed in
Shearson Lehman Hutton
Inc v Maclaine Watson & Co Ltd (No 2)
[1990] 3 All ER 723
Benjamin’s Sale of
Goods 16-066 p 1015; The concept of a geographical extent of an “available
market” may nowadays
have to be modified by the existence of online
markets, but the cost of transport from a remote location will still be a
consideration.
Benjamin’s Sale of
Goods 16-066 p 1015; Examples given range from several days to about two
Michael Bridge, Benjamin’s Sale of Goods (8th Edition) 16-069 p1016; Kwai
Tek Chao v British Traders and Shoppers
[1954] 2 QB 459
Michael Bridge, Benjamin’s Sale of Goods (8th Edition) 16-0667;
Actien Gesellschaft v Armstrong
(1874) 9 QB 473
at pp 476-477; This may
apply by analogy to the Camp which was specially designed for the mine on which
it was located.
See, for example,
Joseph & Co Pty Ltd v Harvest Grain Co Pty
(1996) 39 NSWLR 722
at 726-727 per Moore DCJ, citing
Thompson (WL) Ltd v Robinson (Gunmakers) Ltd
[1955] Ch 177
at 187 per Upjohn J.
Gold Valley’s written
submissions dated 13 December 2024 at [70]
Gold Valley’s written
submissions at [70] and 72]
Gold Valley’s written
submissions at [70.3]
[2013] HCA 56
; See the damages decision at [121].
[1846] EngR 10
(1846) 8 QB 595
[1846] EngR 10
(115 ER 1000
Clark v Macourt
[1910] UKPC 1
; [1911] AC 301 at 307-308
Clark v Macourt
These were the only other
grounds of the cross appeal pressed.
the damages decision at
[136]-[143]
Transcript Brownhill J 10
April 2024 at p 71-72
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (678 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter