URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTADComm/2001/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:16:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Barton-Johnson, Susan v Darwin Turf Club [2001] NTADComm 5 (7 December 2001)
COMPLAINANT: Susan Barton-Johnson
RESPONDENT: Darwin Turf Club
TRIBUNAL: Mr Tom Stodulka
Hearing Commissioner
ISSUE: Challenge to Jurisdiction due to alleged deficiencies in complaint
and s. 76 decision
DATE OF APPLICATION: 5 December 2001
DATE OF DECISION: 7 December 2001
Introduction
In 1999 the Complainant,
Susan Barton Johnson, was living in a de facto married relationship with Stephen
Paynter. Stephen Paynter
was a licensed trainer of race horses. Licenses and
permits to train race horses in Darwin are issued by the Respondent, Darwin
The Complainant had for a
time acted as Stephen Paynter’s foreman and had looked after his horses
while he was absent from Darwin.
In August 1999, the
Respondent suspended Stephen Paynter’s licence to train for three months.
The suspension finished on 18
November 1999.
On 26 September 1999, the
Complainant applied to the Respondent for a restricted permit to train race
horses. The Respondent adjourned
consideration of her application until 17
November 1999 and then refused to grant her a
The Complainant lodged a
complaint with the Anti-Discrimination Commission. She alleged that she was
refused a restricted permit
to train because of the policy of Darwin Turf Club
to prevent 2 people in the same household holding a trainer’s licence and
also because the committee would not accept that she was applying for a licence
to train in her own right and that this constituted
discrimination on the basis
of her marital status.
A delegate of the
Commissioner accepted the complaint and, as required by s 70 of the Act, she
notified the Respondent of the substance
of the complaint by letter dated 13
December 1999.
The Commissioner’s
delegate proceeded to investigate the complaint. The Respondent responded to
the complainant’s allegations
in a number of letters. The Respondent
denied that they had the policy alleged by the Complainant and denied that they
had refused
her a permit for the reasons she alleged.
On 25 January, while the
complaint was still being investigated, the Respondent wrote to the Complainant
as follows:
“Subsequent to the discussions held between yourself and the Club, I wish
to advise (so that there are no misunderstandings)
that you are free to make a
fresh application for a restricted permit to train if you so desire.”
Complainant made a fresh application for a permit and on 16.02.00 the committee
of the Respondent decided to grant her a permit
subject to three conditions.
The Complainant refused to
accept the third condition stating that she believed it placed restrictions on
her that were unfair and
were over and above the requirements of a particular
local rule which applied to all trainers.
The Respondent refused to
withdraw the condition.
The Complainant then lodged
a complaint of victimisation with the Anti-Discrimination Commission. She
alleged that the third condition
was imposed because she had made the first
complaint to the Commission.
The victimisation complaint
was likewise accepted by a delegate of the Commissioner and
investigated.
At the conclusion of the
investigation, the Commissioner’s delegate, Ms Jacqui Bourke, determined
that there was
prima facie
evidence to substantiate both of the
complaints made by the Complainant. On 26.05.00 she made a written report
headed “FINDING
ON COMPLETION OF
INVESTIGATION”.
“I, Jacqui Bourke, Delegate of the Commissioner, in the matter wherein
Susan Barton Johnson is the Complainant and Darwin Turf
Club is the Respondent,
have considered the material disclosed or created in the investigation into this
matter and find:
That I am satisfied that there is
prima facie
evidence to substantiate
the allegation of discrimination on the basis of marital status and prohibited
conduct on the basis of victimisation
in the complaint.
Bourke then sets out the material she considered and the grounds upon which she
reached that conclusion.
The report was sent to both
the Complainant and the Respondent on 29 May
The matter was unable to be
resolved by conciliation.
On 13 July 2000 the
Complainant wrote to the Commission and requested that her “complaints
against the Darwin Turf Club go directly
to hearing”. On 8 August 2000 Ms
Bourke, the delegate of the Commissioner advised the Complainant the matter
would be referred
to hearing and that the Registrar would contact her in due
course. On the same day Ms Bourke advised the Respondent that the Complainant
had requested the matter be referred to hearing, that the matter had been
referred to hearing and that the Registrar would be in
Notice of a
Registrar’s Conference set down for 26 October 2000 were sent to the
parties along with copies of a “Report
under s.77 of the Anti
Discrimination Act” on 6 October 2000.
The s. 77 report itself is
very brief although it attaches the material referred to as material considered
in the delegate’s
s.76 prima facie decision. The s. 77 report itself
merely notes the identity of the parties that the basis of the complaint is
19 – Discrimination on the grounds of marital status in the
area of work and s. 23 Prohibition of Victimisation. It notes the
complaint was lodged, the date it was accepted and the date of the
decision. It also notes that the matter was referred to the
Commissioner for hearing under s. 84 on 8 August
At the Registrar’s
Conference, held on 26 October 2000 directions were made by consent for the
filing and service of Points
of Claim by the Complainant and a Response by the
Respondent.
The Complainant filed Points
of Claim on 30 November 2000. The Points of Claim contained (inter alia) the
following allegation:
“2. The Respondent is responsible for inter alia, the licensing of horse
trainers in the Darwin region, and as such is a supplier
of goods, services or
facilities for the purposes of sections 20 and 41 of the
Anti-Discrimination
The Respondent filed its
Response on 15 December 2000. That Response contained (inter alia) the
“2. Admitted.”
Directions Hearings and
Registrar’s Conferences were held on 17 November 2000, 22 January 2001, 2
February 2001 and 15 February
By letter dated 7 February
2001, the Respondent advised as follows:
“I confirm that I wish to make an application that the complaint be
discontinued under section 102 of the Act on the basis
misconceived.
In particular, the Respondent denies that it is the supplier of goods, services
or facilities pursuant to Section 41 of the Act as
alleged in paragraph 2 of the
points of claim.”
15 March 2001 directions were made for the exchange of written submissions and
the Respondent’s application under s 102 was
set down for hearing on 9
April 2001.
On 2 March 2001, the
Complainant filed amended Particulars of Claim. Paragraph 2 was amended as
“2. The Respondent is responsible for inter alia, the licensing of horse
trainers in the Darwin region, and as such
has the power to grant, renew or
extend a qualification or authorisation that is needed for, or facilitates the
carrying out of a
trade or business or alternatively
is a supplier of goods,
services or facilities for the purposes of sections 20 and 41 of the
Anti-Discrimination Act (NT).
letter dated 21 March 2001 the Respondent referred to the Amended Points of
Claim and advised:
“In light of the amendments made, I confirm that the Club has resolved not
to proceed with the application pursuant to
section 102
Anti-Discrimination Act
At a directions hearing held
on 28 March 2001, the hearing date for the application on 9 April 2001 was
vacated and directions given
for the exchange of draft agreed facts and
documents and lists of
further Registrar’s conference was held on 23 August 2001. The Respondent
was directed to file a Response and the matter
was tentatively listed for
hearing for three days commencing on 22 October
On 24 August 2001 the
Respondent filed its Response to the Amended Points of Claim. The Response
contained (inter alia) the following:
“2. The Respondent admits that it is a qualifying body and that it is
responsible for, inter alia, the licensing of horse trainers
in the Darwin
region but otherwise denies the contents of paragraph 2 of the Points of
Further directions hearings
were held on 13 September 2001 and 26 November 2001. The hearing dates in
October were vacated and the
matter re-listed for 3 days commencing on 5
December 2001 at 10.00 am.
In the mean time both
parties filed and served affidavits, exchanged documents and agreed on a lengthy
statement of agreed facts.
On 4 December 2001, the
Respondent requested that the hearing begin at 9.00 am the following day to
accommodate one of its witnesses
who was travelling interstate at lunch-time on
5 December. I acceded to that request
Less than half an hour
before the requested starting time of 9.00 am, counsel for the Respondent gave
notice to the solicitor for
the complainant and to counsel assisting the
Commissioner, that he would be submitting that the Commissioner lacked
to conduct the hearing. During argument before me I noted, and I
repeat here, my displeasure that in a matter that had been on foot
year with a party represented by a legal practitioner, an issue as fundamental
as the jurisdictional point raised by counsel
for the Respondent should be
brought up at such a late hour.
I heard submissions from
counsel for the Respondent, counsel for the Complainant and counsel assisting.
On 5 December, I held that
I did have jurisdiction and said that I would publish
my reasons. Those reasons are as
The Respondent’s Submissions
The Respondent has submitted
that I lack jurisdiction to embark on a hearing of this matter. The submission
is made on two alternative
Firstly, it is submitted
that the complaint did not disclose prohibited conduct and the Commissioner was
therefore bound to reject
Anti-Discrimination
(“the Act”) and, conversely, could not accept it under
of the Act.
Hence, it is submitted, the
Commissioner had no power to conduct an investigation under
(1) (b) of the
Act; the delegate of the Commissioner could not have made the requisite finding
(1) (b) of the Act; there was no power to conduct a conciliation
and no power to conduct a hearing under
The Respondent says that the
complaint alleged discrimination on the basis of marital status, but did not
allege what was referred
to in submissions as the third crucial element, namely
that the discrimination occurred in one of the areas of activity specified
of the Act.
The alternative submission
made by counsel for the Respondent was that, even if the complaint did disclose
prohibited conduct, the
finding of a
prima facie
case by the
Commissioner’s delegate is defective because it does not address the
crucial third element of prohibited conduct
under the Act.
The Respondent submits that
a proper finding of a
prima facie
case is a pre-requisite to the power to
conduct either a conciliation or a
The Effect of
I should note here that in
the instant case there can be no basis to this second submission. As noted above
at paragraph 19 the hearing
in this matter was called on pursuant to
(1) provides:
84. REQUEST FOR HEARING AFTER 6
Commissioner has not finished dealing with a complaint at the expiration of 6
months after accepting the complaint under
, either the complainant or
the respondent may, in writing, request the Commissioner to conduct a hearing of
the complaint.
In addition
(7) provides:
(7) Subject to subsection (2) [which is not relevant to the current
discussion], if a request under subsection (1) is made by the
complainant, the
Commissioner shall conduct a hearing of the complaint.
The inter-relation of these
provisions in
was considered by Bailey J in
Darwin Port
Authority and Adey and Grieg v Anti-Discrimination Commissioner
[1999] NTSC 8
(at paragraphs 39-60). His Honour concludes (at paragraph
“I consider that
(7) cannot be interpreted as
being subject to
of the Act. Accordingly, I consider there is no basis to
order the defendant to determine whether there is prima facie evidence to
substantiate the allegation of prohibited conduct in the complaint, prior to
proceeding to a hearing of the complaint.”
As the issue of alleged
deficiencies in the
prima facie
decision of the Delegate Ms Bourke
was argued by counsel before me I will consider this matter later in this
decision. However, in
light of the decision of Justice Bailey, I determine that
if the complaint in this matter was in proper form and properly accepted,
am bound to find that I have jurisdiction to hear the complaint by virtue of
(7), irrespective of any such alleged deficiencies in the
It is appropriate therefore
to turn to the issue of the validity of the complaint and its acceptance under
The Complaint and
Counsel for the Respondent
has not submitted that the activities of the Respondent in issuing permits to
people to train horses does
not in fact come within one of the areas of activity
covered by the Act. Rather, the submission is that there is a defect in the
form of the complaint.
I do not agree that there is
such a defect. As is required by
of the Act, the substance of the
complaint was set out in the letter from the delegate of the Commissioner to the
Respondent dated
13.12.99. That letter
“In summary the Complainant, Ms Barton Johnson is alleging that she was
refused a restricted permit to train because of the
policy of Darwin Turf Club
to prevent 2 people in the same household holding a trainer’s licence and
also because the Committee
would not accept that she was applying for a licence
to train in her own right and that this constituted discrimination on the basis
of her marital status.”
Several pages of detailed allegations follow
concerning what is alleged to have been said and done by various committee
members and
officers of the Respondent in connection with the
Complainant’s application for a “Permit to Train”.
provides (to the extent relevant):
“33 (1) A person who has power to grant..... authorisation that ..... is
needed for, or facilitates, the.... carrying on of
a trade or business shall not
discriminate –
(a) in granting .... authorisation or failing to do so; or
the terms on which .... authorisation is
granted...”
(2) A person who has power to grant..... authorisation that ..... is needed
for, or facilitates, the.... carrying on of a trade
or business shall not
discriminate against another person –
treating the other person less favourably in any way in connection with the
grant .... of ...
authorisation.”
provides so far as is relevant:
“20 (1) For the purposes of this Act, discrimination includes –
(a) any distinction, restriction, exclusion or
preference made on the basis of an attribute that has the effect of nullifying
impairing equality of opportunity;
in any area of activity referred to in
(2) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), discrimination takes
place if a person treats or proposes to treat another
person who has or had ,
or is believed to have or had (sic) -
(a) an attribute;
(b) a characteristic imputed to appertain to an attribute; or
characteristic imputed to appertain generally to persons with an
less favourably than a person who has not, or is believed not to have, such an
attributes on the basis of which the Act prohibits discrimination are set out in
of the Act. They include “marital
does not set out
a separate prohibition outside of the main scheme of the Act prohibiting
discrimination on the basis of an attribute
in a relevant area of activity. It
of the Act, referred to in
The scheme of that Part is
(Section 28)
sets out 6 broad areas of activities to
which the Act applies. There follow 6 separate divisions (
Divisions 2 to
) which further elaborate on what constitutes discrimination in each of
those 6 areas. Division 3, in which
appears, deals with
discrimination in the area of work. A contravention of
discrimination on the basis of an attribute in the area of
The complaint made by the
Complainant is that the Respondent refused to grant her a restricted permit to
train because of the policy
of Darwin Turf Club to prevent 2 people in the same
household holding a trainer’s licence and also because the committee would
not accept that she was applying for a licence to train in her own right and
that this constituted discrimination on the basis of
her marital status. This
contains all of the necessary elements to amount to an allegation of prohibited
conduct. It alleges
discrimination - ie exclusion or less favourable
treatment - on the basis of an attribute – namely marital status - in
with the grant/ refusal of an authorisation necessary for the conduct
of (or which facilitates the conduct of) the business of a
horse trainer –
namely a “restricted permit to train”. If that allegation is
made out on the facts, it would
amount to prohibited conduct within the meaning
section 33.
Further, I consider that it
is possible that the conduct alleged, if proven. may amount to a breach of
of the Act which prohibits discrimination on the basis of an attribute in the
provision of (inter alia) services and facilities.
The Respondent at first
admitted that it was a supplier of “goods, service or facilities”
within the meaning of
and later denied it. It elected not to proceed with
section 102
application based on the assertion that it was not such a
provider. In those circumstances, I consider the question of whether
the Respondent is a provider of goods services or facilities to be a matter for
evidence at the hearing.
It cannot be said,
therefore, that there is no complaint on foot within the meaning of the Act, or
that the Commissioner was obliged
of the Act not to accept the
complaint. In
Fiorido v Anti-Discrimination Commissioner & Northern
Territory of Australia
(Unreported, NT Local Court, 15 May 2001, Trigg SM),
Mr Trigg SM held (at p. 5) that the threshold test for acceptance of a complaint
is “a very basic screening
In his written outline of
submissions, counsel for the Respondent submitted: “Unless the complaint
an area of ‘work’ activity, as described in the
Act, the complaint did not properly allege ‘prohibited conduct’
under the Act.” [emphasis added]
I do not accept that
this is the correct test to apply.
sets out the requirements for the
form of a complaint. So far as is relevant, it provides that the complaint must
be in writing,
and must set out in detail the alleged prohibited
That is to say, the Complainant must say what the Respondent has
– ie must set out the material facts which, if proven, would amount to
prohibited conduct. There is no requirement for the
Complainant to set out the
provisions of the Act which the Complainant believes the Respondent has
contravened. Nor is there any
requirement for the Complainant to analyse the
Respondent’s conduct in terms of “prohibited conduct”,
“attribute”
or “relevant area of activity”. Indeed,
many of the people whom the Act is arguably most designed to protect may be
quite unable to do so and may nevertheless state in the complaint what they say
the Respondent has done wrong in terms which satisfy
the requirements of
I believe this
interpretation accords with that of Martin CJ in
Dew v Anti-Discrimination
Commissioner
[1996] NTSC 6
(1996) 130 FLR 1
where his Honour states:
“ It may be expected that many of the persons who seek the remedies
available under the Act will come from disadvantaged backgrounds,
and partly for
that reason are prone to be discriminated against...”
Honour goes on to note:
“If the Complaint is in accordance with the requirements of the
Act and the substance of it conveyed to the respondent, which
is all that is
required, the occasion for seeking further detailed particulars should rarely
.” (at pp 28-29 unreported version).
If a complaint in fact
discloses allegations of conduct which, if proven, would amount to prohibited
conduct within the meaning of
the Act, it is appropriate for the complaint to be
accepted. The present complaint does so and I therefore conclude that it was
properly accepted pursuant to
of the Act.
The alternative submission
made by the Respondent is that a proper finding of a
prima facie
a pre-requisite to the power to conduct either a conciliation or a hearing and
that the finding of a
prima facie
case by the Commissioner’s
delegate is defective because it does not address the crucial third element of
prohibited conduct
under the Act. I have already noted that as this is a matter
referred to hearing pursuant to
of the Act that I do not believe there can
be any foundation to this submission in the present case. However, as the matter
before me and clarification of the issue may assist in determining
the requirements of procedure under the Act I will now turn to
consider these
submissions.
Counsel for the Respondent
said in written submissions: “the third element of prohibited conduct is
not included as part of
[the delegate’s] analysis. There is a single
passing suggestion in [the delegate’s] report that the complaint might
have involved the area of activity of ‘work’: see page 8. This
single passing reference is not expressly elaborated
upon elsewhere in the
I do not accept that the
finding of the delegate is defective in the manner
of the Act sets
out what the Commissioner (or his delegate) is required to do on completing an
investigation. He must determine
that the complaint is dismissed [76 (1) (a)]
or, “if satisfied that there is
prima facie
evidence to
substantiate the allegation of prohibited conduct in the complaint”
– proceed to conciliation or a hearing
provides that the
Commissioner
[not must] prepare a report relating to the
investigation of a complaint.
There is no requirement to
produce a report at all; no requirement to prepare a report which analyses all
of the elements of the prohibited
conduct and no requirement to “expressly
elaborate upon” the area of activity which the complaint relates
. The only prerequisite for
proceeding to a conciliation or hearing is that the Commissioner [or delegate]
be “satisfied
that there is
prima facie
evidence to substantiate
the allegation of prohibited conduct in the complaint”.
If there were any
inadequacies in the format of the report produced by the delegate, these could
not impinge upon the Commissioner’s
The Respondent’s
submission must therefore amount to this. The delegate cannot have been
satisfied that there was
prima facie
evidence to substantiate the
allegation of prohibited conduct in the complaint because she did not turn her
mind to the question of
whether the alleged discrimination occurred in one of
the relevant areas of activity set out in the
However, such a submission
is not borne out by an examination of the delegate’s report. In the
report which was prepared by
the Commissioner’s delegate, Ms Bourke, in
this matter, she addresses the complaint actually made throughout.
The Complainant has alleged
that the Respondent discriminated against her on the basis of an attribute
– namely marital status
- in connection with the grant/ refusal of an
authorisation necessary to conduct the business of trainer – namely a
to train race horses. If that allegation is made out on the facts, it
would amount to prohibited conduct within the meaning of
The Commissioner’s
delegate determined that there was prima facie evidence to substantiate
complaint. The substance of the complaint is set out on page 4
under the heading “
“The Complainant, alleges that she was discriminated (sic) on the basis of
marital status and that she was victimised by the
respondents. She says that
she was refused a restricted permit to train because of the policy of Darwin
Turf Club (hereafter DTC)
to prevent 2 people in the same household holding a
trainer’s licence and also because the committee would not accept that
was applying for a license to train in her own right and that this constituted
discrimination on the basis of her marital status.”
report then deals with the history of the complaints and the investigation (and
an early attempt at conciliation). It then goes
on to set out the test to be
applied in order to find that there is
prima facie
evidence of prohibited
conduct (p 7) and the definition of discrimination (p8).
Ms Bourke sets out the
definition of discrimination in
in full, including the requirement that the
discrimination occur in an area of activity referred to in
adds the words
(which includes work)
in italics after that requirement
with a note at the bottom of the page “The italicised words are
mine”. In light of
this it is difficult to see how it could be said that
the delegate did not address the question of whether the alleged discrimination
occurred in one of the relevant areas of activity set out in the Act, and that
therefore the delegate cannot have been satisfied
that there was
prima facie
evidence to substantiate the allegation of prohibited conduct in the
There follow, throughout the
report, references that make it clear that the delegate is considering whether
prima facie
evidence of discrimination by the DTC in the
granting of an authorisation needed for (or which facilitates) the carrying on
business of a trainer – ie a permit to train.
On page 9 Ms Bourke refers
to direct and indirect discrimination and says, “The allegations
associated with direct discrimination
concern a policy that the DTC
issue licenses to train horses
to 2 members of the same household.”
On the same page she says: “The complainant says that she told the
sub-committee that she would feel discriminated against if her domestic
arrangements were considered in conjunction with
her licence
application
On page 10 Ms Bourke says:
“It would appear to me that people
seeking a licence to train horses
would be more likely to be adults and as such live in a household
which would more likely than not contain individuals who would
be living in
relationships that would be defined as marital status for the purposes of the
On page 11 the delegate
concludes: “It would appear to me that on the balance of probabilities
the Licensing sub-committee,
at least in part, used this policy/ practice when
making its decision and that as a result it indirectly discriminated against Ms
Barton Johnson on the basis of her marital status and that the complainant has
suffered less favourable treatment
by being refused a permit to
On the same page Ms Bourke
goes on to define the question in relation to direct discrimination in the
following way: “The next
question involves direct discrimination. Did
the DTC make its
decision not to grant a permit to train
discriminatory grounds?” She goes on to consider this and to decide, on
p 16, that there is
prima facie
evidence of this. Throughout her
discussion of the issues it is clear that the discrimination alleged and being
considered is discrimination
on the basis of an attribute (marital status) in
connection with the grant of a permit to train.
In summary, I consider that
the complaint does allege conduct which amounts to prohibited conduct under the
Act and that, at the conclusion
of the investigation, the delegate was
satisfied that there was
prima facie
evidence to substantiate the
prohibited conduct which was alleged in that complaint.
The delegate was not obliged
to set out in a report every step in the chain of reasoning that led her to that
conclusion – or
indeed prepare a report at all. It cannot be concluded
from the report that Ms Bourke did prepare that she addressed only the question
of whether there had been discrimination on the basis of an attribute and
ignored the third crucial element, namely that the discrimination
occurred in
one of the areas of activity specified in
of the Act. Quite the contrary,
the report makes it clear throughout that she was considering whether there was
evidence of the
complaint that had actually been made, and that complaint
contained allegations of conduct which, if proven, would have been in breach
of the Act and which, accordingly, would amount to discrimination in the
area of work. [See also the comments at 55 above in relation
For these reasons I hold
that I do have jurisdiction to proceed to a hearing of the
Because of the conclusions I
have reached, it is not necessary for me to deal with the question of whether
the Respondent was correct
in submitting, as it did, that if the complaint did
not disclose prohibited conduct the Commissioner had no power to conduct an
investigation;
the delegate of the Commissioner could not have made the
requisite finding under
(1) (b) of the Act; there was no power to conduct a
conciliation under
and no power to conduct a hearing under
However, I note that
(2) allows the Commissioner to carry out an investigation if it appears to the
Commissioner in the course of carrying out his functions
that prohibited conduct
has occurred and that, by sub-section 74 (3), such an investigation shall, for
the purposes of the Act, be
deemed to be an investigation of a complaint. I
also note that
(c) allows the Commissioner to hold a hearing where he
believes that the nature of the complaint is such that it should be dealt
by a hearing.
would mean that the Commissioner had jurisdiction to proceed to a hearing where
an investigation revealed prohibited conduct
even if there had been a defect in
the original complaint.
Arguably, also,
would allow the Commissioner to proceed to a hearing where there had been a
valid complaint, even if the Commissioner’s
delegate had not formed the
requisite opinion under
Tom Stodulka
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner
7 December 2001
His Worship goes on to draw an
analogy with
Native Title Act 1993
(Cth.) as considered by
French J in
re Waanyi Peoples Native Title Application
(1994) 129 ALR 100
at 111-113.
In relation to
a decision under
, I should note that the delegate may be required to
provide reasons for their decision to dismiss a complaint pursuant to
by virtue of the provisions 106 (2) (b) if there is an appeal against the
decision to dismiss the complaint. However, Mr Trigg
Malaysian Airline
Systems v Anti-Discrimination Commissioner & Jude Lee
(Unreported, NT
Local Court, 20 April 1999) determined that there is no appeal under
against a decision that there is
prima facie
evidence to support the
allegations of prohibited conduct in the complaint per
(b) and thus there
can be no requirement to provide reasons for such a decision under
92 of (the transcript of) that decision his Worship states:
“So a determination under
is not according to Bailey J, a necessary
step in the chain before one gets to a hearing. That being so I do not see that
therefore under
is of such crucial importance that it could be,
or would be, intended to be itself the subject of a full appeal de novo under
Mr Trigg’s reference to Bailey J in that
passage is reference to the decision of Bailey J in
Darwin Port Authority
& Adey & Greig v Anti-Discrimination Commission
[1999] NTSC 8
referred to
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (174 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter