URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCAT/2025/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:17:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Environment Centre Northern Territory (ECNT) v Minister for Environment, Climate Change and Water Security; Tamboran B2 Pty Ltd [2025] NTCAT 8 (15 July 2025)
Environment Centre Northern Territory (ECNT) v Minister for Environment,
Climate Change and Water Security; Tamboran B2 Pty Ltd
DECISION NUMBER:
[2025] NTCAT 8
ENVIRONMENT CENTRE NORTHERN TERRITORY (ECNT)
MINISTER FOR ENVIRONMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE AND WATER SECURITY
1ST RESPONDENT
TAMBORAN B2 PTY LTD
2ND RESPONDENT
MATTER TYPE:
Review Jurisdiction -
Petroleum Act 1984
2024-02309-CT
HEARING DATE:
04 JULY 2025
DECISION OF:
LESLIE MCCRIMMON and MARK O'REILLY
DATE OF ORDERS:
15 JULY 2025
APPEARANCES and REPRESENTATION (if any):
HON. ADAM SEARLE and DAVID ROWE instructed by Johnson Legal Pty Ltd
FIRST RESPONDENT:
SECOND RESPONDENT:
MONICA MALONEY
HAMISH BADDELEY SC instructed by Squire Patton Boggs
REASONS FOR DECISION:
4 July 2024, the Environmental Centre Northern Territory (the
‘Applicant’)
filed an Initiating Application in the Northern
Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal (the ‘Tribunal’) for a
review of a decision of the Minister for Environment, Climate Change and
Water Security (the ‘Minister’) to approve an
Environmental
Management Plan (‘EMP’) for the Shenandoah Exploration and Appraisal
Program EP98 and EP117 (the ‘Project’).
Tamboran B2 Pty Ltd
(‘Tamboran’) is the proponent of the Project and submitted the EMP
to the Minister for approval.
Initiating Application was subsequently amended on 20 September 2024,
25 September 2024 and 13 December 2024. The 13 December
2024 document,
being the Second Further Amended Initiating Application, is discussed in greater
detail below.
25 February 2025, the Applicant filed two Form 4 Applications for Evidence
Summons. In particular, the Applicant seeks from the
Minister, and from the
Minister for Mining and Energy, a copy of the Well Operations Management Plan
(‘WOMP’) for the
Project. On 30 June 2025, the latter was reissued
to the Proper Officer of the Department of Mining and Energy.
31 March 2025, the Applicant filed a Form 3 Ordinary Application to admit
further evidence in the review proceedings. In particular,
the Applicant sought
leave pursuant to
section 46(2)(b)
Northern Territory Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2014
(‘NTCAT Act’) to admit an
Unattested Declaration dated 31 March 2025 of Professor Matthew Currell and an
Unattested Declaration
dated 31 March 2025 of Professor Grant
Background facts
1 December 2023, Tamboran submitted an EMP for the exploration phase of the
Project to the Minister. Pursuant to
regulation 8A(2)
(Environment) Regulations 2016
, the Minister must publish the EMP “in
any manner the Minister considers appropriate” within 14 days of receiving
plan. The Minister, in accordance with
regulation 8A(2)
, published the EMP
for public comment on 12 December 2023.
Petroleum (Environment) Regulations 2016
stipulates:
“Interested persons may submit written comments on a plan published under
regulation 8A
to the Minister no later than 28 days after the date of its
publication”. Consequently, the closing date for public comment
stipulated to be 9 January 2024.
Applicant made a 32-page written submission on 9 January 2024. In addition, the
Applicant also submitted a joint expert report
prepared by Professor Currell and
Dr Ndehedehe consisting of 98 pages.
section 29B
Northern Territory Environment Protection Authority Act
, the Minister sought the advice of the Northern Territory Environment
Protection Authority (‘NT EPA’) on the EMP. By
letter to the
Minister dated 10 May 2024, the NT EPA, after reviewing the relevant
documentation including the
public comments and submissions,
considers that, subject to the consideration of the recommended EMP approval
conditions, the EMP:
is appropriate
for the nature and scale of the regulated activity; and
demonstrates
that the regulated activity can be carried out in a manner that potential
environmental risks of the activity will be
reduced to a level that is ALARP [as
low as reasonably practicable] and acceptable.
In providing this
advice the NT EPA has considered the principles of ecologically sustainable
development.
coming to this conclusion, the NT EPA considered, inter alia, the
Environment
Protection Act 2019
(EP Act). It
The NT EPA has
had regard to sections 10 and 11 of the EP Act and its published guidance,
Referring a Proposal to the NT EPA, and
has determined that:
a) The industry type or activity proposed is not inherently hazardous, nor is it
likely to give rise to multiple or unacceptable
risks or impacts on the
environment, with the proposed controls implemented.
b) The location of the regulated activity has avoided impacts to sensitive
environmental values and receptors to the greatest extent
possible and where
unable to be avoided, any potential impacts have been mitigated so they would
not be significant.
c) At no stage of its lifecycle, including post closure, would the activity, on
its own or cumulatively with other activities, have
significant impact on the
environment.
23 May 2024, the Minister approved the EMP under
regulation 11(3)(a)(ii)
Petroleum (Environment) Regulations 2016
, subject to the 18 conditions
noted in the approval. In making the decision to approve the EMP, the Minister
The following
material has been taken into account in making this decision:
Basin Shenandoah South E & E Program, dated 26 April 2024.
principles of ecologically sustainable development referenced in reg 5A and the
approval criteria set out in reg 9(1).
NT EPA advice provided at my request under s 29B of the NT EPA
Authority Certificate issued under the
Northern Territory Aboriginal Sacred
Sites Act 1989
Code of Practice: Onshore Petroleum Activities in the Northern Territory (Code)
as set out in reg 4A.
Department of Industry, Tourism and Trade advice that the Well Operations
Management Plan approved for the regulated activity
meets the requirements of
the Code of Practice: Onshore Activities in the Northern Territory.
Greenhouse Gas Abatement Plan prepared by Tamboran B2 Pty Ld, version 3.0 dated
16 November 2023.
public comments submitted under reg 8B.
Law Relating to
Tribunal’s review of the Minister’s decision to approve the EMP
falls within the Tribunal’s review
Such review is not a
hearing de novo
Applicant required to identify errors made by the Minister in approving the
The Tribunal reviews the
decision of the Minister on its
with the objective of
producing the “correct or preferable
Shi v Migration Agents Registration Authority
[2008] HCA 31
(2008) 235 CLR 286
J (as her Honour then was) at [140] discussed the meaning of the term
‘correct or preferable decision’ in the
context of the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
(Cth) (‘AAT Act’),
which applies equally to the use of that term in 46(1) of the NTCAT
“Preferable” is apt to refer to a decision which
involves discretionary considerations. A “correct” decision,
context of review, might be taken to be one rightly made. It is, inevitably, a
decision by the original decision-maker with
which the Tribunal agrees.
nature of administrative merits review was considered by the High Court of
Australia in the context of the AAT Act in
Frugtniet v Australian Securities
and Investments Commission
[2019] HCA 16
(2019) 266 CLR 250.
, Kiefel CJ, Keane and
Nettle JJ noted:
The enactment of the AAT Act established a new and
substantially unprecedented regime of administrative merits review,
distinguished
principally by the AAT’s jurisdiction to re-exercise the
functions of the original administrative decision-makers. The question
determination by the AAT on the review of an administrative decision under s 25
of the AAT Act is thus whether the decision is
the correct or preferrable
decision. That question is required to be determined on the material before the
AAT, not on the material
as it was before the original decision-maker. As Bowen
CJ and Deane J held in
Drake v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic
, however, and has since been affirmed by this Court in
Migration Agents Registration Authority
, the AAT is not at large. It is
subject to the same general constraints as the original decision-maker and
should ordinarily approach
its task as though it were performing the relevant
function of the original decision-maker in accordance with the law as it applied
to the decision-maker at the time of the original decision.
the NTCAT Act, in coming to the “correct or preferrable decision”
the Tribunal is to examine “the evidence
or the material before the
original decision maker”,
“any further evidence or material that the Tribunal decides, in the
circumstances of the particular case, to admit for
rehearing”.
“in the circumstances of the particular case” in section 46(2)(b) of
the NTCAT Act indicate that the Tribunal’s
discretion to admit further
evidence or material in the review proceeding is not ‘at large’.
Relevant to the exercise
of the Tribunal’s discretion will be the same
general constraints under which the Minister operated, which includes the time
constraints imposed upon the Minister and others by the relevant
legislation.
follows that previous decisions of the Tribunal which indicate that the
admission of further evidence or material “will be
the exception rather
than the rule”,
taken no higher than that the Tribunal’s discretion in section 46(2)(b) of
the NTCAT Act is not ‘at large’.
It is qualified by the requirement
in the subsection that the Tribunal considers “the circumstances of the
particular case”
when considering whether to admit such further evidence
or material.
in exercising its discretion to admit further evidence or material under section
46(2)(b) of the NTCAT Act, the following
observations of the High Court in
are instructive. At [15], Kiefel CJ, Keane and Nettle JJ
Depending on the nature of the decision the subject of
review, the AAT may sometimes take into account evidence that was not before
original decision-maker, including evidence of events subsequent to the original
decision. But subject to any clearly expressed
contrary statutory indication,
the AAT may do so only if and to the extent that the evidence is relevant to the
question which the
original decision-maker was bound to decide; really, as if
the original decision-maker were deciding the matter at the time that
before the AAT. The AAT cannot take into account matters which were not before
the original
decision-maker where to do so would change the nature of the
decision or,
put another way, the question before the original
decision-maker. As Kiefel J observed in
, identifying the question
raised by the statute for consideration will usually determine the facts that
may be taken into account
in connection with the decision. The issue is one of
relevance, to be determined by reference to the elements of the question
to be addressed in reaching a decision.
identifying the question before the original decision-maker, whether the
decision contained a temporal element is relevant to
whether “the
circumstances of the case”
may allow a consideration of further evidence or material. In
J noted at [143]:
Where the decision to be made contains no temporal
element, evidence of matters occurring after the original decision may be taken
into account by the Tribunal in the process of informing itself. Cases that
state that the Tribunal is not limited to the evidence
before the original
decision-maker, or available to that person, are to be understood in this light.
It is otherwise where the review
to be conducted by the Tribunal is limited to
deciding the question by reference to a particular point in time.
Applicant’s submissions re consideration on review of further
evidence or material
Second Further Amended Initiating Application filed on 13 December 2024 sets out
the orders the Applicant is seeking in the substantive
proceedings. In
particular:
(1) An order that the Original Decision is set aside and substituted with a
decision that the Tribunal is not satisfied that the
information provided in the
EMP is sufficiently compliant with the
Petroleum Act 1984
(NT) and the
Petroleum (Environment) Regulations 2016
(NT), in relation to:
of wastewater spills; and
in relation to inter-aquifer connectivity.
(2) An order that varies the Original Decision and inserts conditions or varied
conditions in the EMP in relation to the risks of
wastewater spills and risks in
relation to inter-aquifer connectivity and how they should be managed in
accordance with the
Petroleum Act 1984
(Environment) Regulations 2016
Alternatively, ECNT seeks:
(3) An order that the EMP should be sent back to the Minister administering
Petroleum Act 1984
(NT) for reconsideration in light of the risks of
wastewater spills and risks in relation to inter-aquifer connectivity and how
should be managed in accordance with the
Petroleum Act 1984
Petroleum (Environment) Regulations 2016
(NT), with a recommendation that
the EMP be referred to the NT EPA for an independent assessment in relation
to the risks of wastewater spills and risks in relation to inter-aquifer
connectivity.
the Applicant acknowledges that it had an opportunity to make public comment on
the EMP during the statutorily mandated public
comment process noted above, it
submits that:
Draft EMP was open for public submissions under reg 8B only between
12 December 2023 and 9 January (i.e., 14 working days, excluding
between Christmas and New Year). As noted above, the issues before the Minister
were numerous and broad-ranging. That
the Applicant now advances a more detailed
and more confined objection to the EMP in the context of the review proceeding
precisely what one would expect, following more considered review of
the EMP and the Minister’s Statement of Reasons. It is
also, to some
extent, a consequence of the First Respondent’s choice of a very brief
consultation on the Draft EMP, scheduled
over the summer holidays.
Applicant submits that it is relevant to the exercise of the Tribunal’s
discretion to admit further evidence or material
under section 46(2)(b) of the
NTCAT Act that, at the time the public comment process was held, the
Minister’s reasons for approving
the EMP were not, and could not have
been, known at the time the Applicant’s submissions on the Draft EMP were
The Applicant could not have known whether the
Minister’s Notice of Approval and Statement of Reasons would contain
errors until after the decision was made and an expert or experts could
review it. The Applicant’s expert evidence assists
in the resolution of
the material issues in the EMP, such as whether planned activities pose a risk
to the surrounding environment
and communities, whether drilling fluids are
persistent and bioaccumulative, whether hydraulic fracturing can interact with
groundwater,
whether environmental risks from chemical mixtures were
appropriately assessed, whether the spill scenarios were appropriately assessed,
and whether groundwater monitoring was undertaken appropriately. The
Applicant’s expert evidence assists the Tribunal in determining
the Minister could have been reasonably satisfied that the EMP met the statutory
requirements (as referred to in the Applicant’s
Outline of Grounds) and
determining what
is the correct or preferable
Applicant acknowledges that the Minister sought, and was provided with, advice
from the EPA NT before deciding to approve the
EMP. The Applicant submits,
however, that the EPA NT advice “does not on its face engage at all with
Prof Currell’s criticism
of the EMP’s approach to inter-aquifer
connectivity – a fundamental
addition to section 46(2)(b) of the NTCAT Act, the Applicant submits that the
general provisions dealing with the conduct of Tribunal
proceedings must also be
considered by the Tribunal in its review jurisdiction. In particular, the
for conducting proceedings in section 53 must be considered, as
must the requirement that the Tribunal inform itself for a proceeding
in section 55.
the specific circumstances of this case, the Applicant also submits that
Environment Protection Act 2019
must be considered when
deciding whether to admit further evidence or material. That section provides
that “[d]ecisions should
be based on the best available evidence in the
circumstances that is relevant and reliable”.
the Applicant submits that consideration of the further expert evidence
proffered by the Applicant promotes the best principles
of public administration
(section 10(a) of the NTCAT Act) “given that the impugned decision maker
is a Minister of the
and that the
Applicant’s standing as the peak non-profit community organisation
pursuing public interest litigation promotes
access to justice by the public as
required by section 10(b) of the NTCAT Act.
submissions re consideration on review of further evidence or material
submits that the expert evidence sought to be admitted by the Applicant is not
relevant new evidence, and its receipt by
the Tribunal would change the nature
of the decision or question that was before the Minister. It acknowledges that
the Tribunal’s
review of the Minister’s decision to approve the EMP
will require the Tribunal to consider, inter alia, the public comments
submissions made about the EMP in the public consultation period established by
Petroleum (Environment) Regulations 2016
. It submits,
however, that review proceedings are not “intended to involve the parties
preparing and filing further rounds
of extensive expert evidence regarding the
potential risks of fracking
Tamboran submits
that such matters have been extensively investigated in
The Scientific
Inquiry Into Hydraulic Fracking in the Northern Territory, Final Report
April 2018, generally referred to as the ‘Pepper Inquiry’. Further,
in this proceeding, the matters raised in the Applicant’s
Second Further
Amended Initiating Application have already been specifically considered and
advised upon by the NT EPA.
submits that, for the Tribunal to admit extensive further expert evidence a year
after the review proceedings were commenced
would be contrary to the objective
of the Tribunal stipulated in section 10(d) of the NTCAT Act to:
ensure that proceedings are processed and resolved as quickly as
possible while achieving a just outcome, including by resolving disputes
high-quality processes and the use of mediation and alternative dispute
resolution procedures where appropriate.
maintains that the admission of the further expert evidence proffered by the
Applicant, which would require Tamboran to file
extensive expert evidence in
rebuttal, is inconsistent with relevant underlying statutory framework in
regulations 8B
Petroleum (Environment) Regulations
, and the overriding object of the
Petroleum Act 1984
of actively
encouraging petroleum exploration and fracking.
Consideration re
admission of further evidence or material
High Court decision in
establishes clearly that the Tribunal,
in conducting the review of the Minister’s decision to approve the EMP, is
the same general constraints as the Minister. In conducting the
review, the Tribunal must “ordinarily approach its task as
though it were
performing the relevant function of the original decision-maker
in accordance
with the law as it applied to the decision-maker at the time of the original
law as it applied to the Minister included the requirement to publish the EMP
within 14 days of its receipt.
Further, the
Petroleum (Environment) Regulations 2016
regulation 8B(1)
established a time limit of “no later than 28 days after the date of its
publication” for interested persons to submit
written comments on the EMP.
Finally, pursuant to
regulation 11(1)
, the “Minister must make a decision
under subregulation (2) as soon as practicable, but no later than 90 days, after
an interest
holder submits an environment management plan for
the Minister had the statutory power under
regulation 10(1)
(Environment) Regulations 2016
, to require further information from Tamboran
had no power to extend the 28 day public consultation period, or to
allow members of the public to submit written comments on the
EMP outside of the
statutorily mandated consultation period.
considering whether to approve the EMP, the Minister was required to adhere to
rigid statutory timeframes. To use the language
quoted above,
the Minister’s decision contained a temporal
To allow the admission
of additional expert evidence outside of the statutory framework governing the
receipt of public comment and
the making of the Minister’s decision would
require the Tribunal to ignore the circumstances of the particular case.
Specifically,
it would require the Tribunal to ignore the law as it applied to
the Minister at the time the decision to approve the EMP was
expert reports sought to be adduced into evidence by the Applicant are not
relevant to the question before the Tribunal in the
review proceeding. The
Tribunal is required to determine the correct or preferrable decision in
accordance with the law as it applied
to the Minister at the time the EMP was
approved. Contrary to the Applicant’s submissions, the expert evidence
does not assist
the Tribunal in determining whether the Minister could have been
reasonably satisfied that the EMP met the statutory requirements.
is also clear from what has been stated above that the Minister did not
‘choose’ a brief public consultation period over the summer
holidays. Once Tamboran submitted the EMP for approval, both
the time available
to the Minister
to publish the plan and the time available to interested
persons to submit written comments on the EMP were stipulated in the
Petroleum (Environment) Regulations 2016
. The Applicant’s
submission that the Minister had any say in the timing or length of the public
consultation period ignores
the statutory scheme governing the EMP approval
Applications for Evidence Summons
Applicant seeks the production from both the Minister and the Minister for
Mining and Energy, of a copy of the WOMP for the Project.
The evidence before
the Tribunal established that:
34.1. the WOMP
was not a document that the Minister received, considered or approved as part of
the EMP approval process. The only
document the Minister was required to
receive, consider and review is the WOMP Certification, “which confirmed
that the WOMP
was assessed against the relevant parts of the Code of Practice:
Onshore Petroleum Activities in the Northern Territory and met the
requirements”;
Minister did receive, consider and review the WOMP Certification, which is
included in the evidence filed in the review
proceedings;
34.3. the WOMP
is not a document to which the public, including the Applicant, has access under
the EMP approval process.
warrant the exercise of the Tribunal’s power to require a person to
produce evidentiary material under section 89(2) of the
NTCAT Act, “the
documents sought must have at least some apparent potential relevance to the
matters in issue”
Tribunal proceedings. The review proceedings concern the Minister’s
decision to approve the EMP, not the decision of
another minister to approve the
WOMP under a different statutory approval process.
Any issues arising from the WOMP Certification, or the Minister’s receipt
and review of such document, are properly before
the Tribunal in the review
proceedings. The WOMP itself has no apparent potential relevance to the matters
in issue in the review
proceedings and need not be
It follows from what has been stated above that the two Evidence Summons filed
by the Applicant should be dismissed. In addition,
the Applicant’s
Ordinary Application to admit further evidence in the review proceedings should
also be dismissed.
Tribunal makes no order as to costs. These are interlocutory matters and
question of costs, if any, is a matter for determination at the conclusion of
the substantive proceedings.
Accordingly, the Tribunal orders
Form 4 Application for Evidence Summons directed to the Minister for Climate
Change, Environment and Water Security for the production
of the Well Operations
Management Plan for the Shenandoah Exploration and Appraisal Program EP98 and
EP117 is dismissed.
Form 4 Application for Evidence Summons directed to the Proper Officer of the
Department of Mining and Energy Security for the
production of the Well
Operations Management Plan for the Shenandoah Exploration and Appraisal Program
EP98 and EP117 is dismissed.
Form 3 Ordinary Application to admit an Unattested Declaration of Professor
Matthew Currell dated 31 March 2025, and an Unattested
Declaration of Professor
Grant Hose dated 31 March 2025, is dismissed.
no later than 4:00pm on 25 July 2025, the parties are to provide the NTCAT
registry with and electronic copy of agreed timetabling
orders for the filing of
written submissions in the substantive
proceeding.
15 July 2025
LESLIE MCCRIMMON
MARK O'REILLY
TRIBUNAL MEMBERS
Advice of the Northern
Territory Environment Protection Authority to the Minister for Environment,
Climate Change and Water Security
dated 10 May 2024, p
Advice of the Northern
Territory Environment Protection Authority to the Minister for Environment,
Climate Change and Water Security
dated 10 May 2024, p 15.
Minister for Environment,
Climate Change and Water Security, Approval notice and statement of reasons
dated 23 May 2024, 8.
Generally, see
Northern Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
Nulite Pty Ltd v Northern Territory Liquor Commission, Director of Liquor
[2023] NTCAT 20
Kasper v Psychology
Board of Australia [No 2]
[2015] NTCAT 179
Shi v Migration Agents
Registration Authority
[2008] HCA 31
(2008) 235 CLR 286
[140]-[142].
Shi v Migration
Agents Registration Authority
[2008] HCA 31
(2008) 235 CLR 286
, [140]-[142].
Northern Territory Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2014
Northern Territory
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2014
Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2014
s 46(2)(b).
TEHG Property Pty Ltd v
Northern Territory Liquor Commission
[2024] NTCAT 3
Nulite Pty Ltd
v Northern Territory Liquor Commission, Director of Liquor Licensing
Northern Territory Civil
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2014
Applicant’s
Submissions: Further Evidence and Summonses filed on 4 June 2025,
Applicant’s
Submissions: Further Evidence and Summonses filed on 4 June 2025, [33].
(Emphasis in original)
Applicant’s Submissions: Further Evidence and Summonses filed on 4 June
2025, [37].
Applicant’s Submissions: Further Evidence and Summonses filed on 4 June
2025, [40(d)].
Respondent’s Submissions Regarding Applicant’s Evidence Application
and Two Summons Applications filed on 18 June
Frugtniet v
Australian Securities and Investments Commission
[2019] HCA 16
(2019) 266 CLR 250
[Emphasis ours]
(Environment) Regulations 2016
Shi v Migration
Agents Registration Authority
[2008] HCA 31
(2008) 235 CLR 286
Frugtniet v
Australian Securities and Investments Commission
[2019] HCA 16
(2019) 266 CLR 250
Respondent’s Submissions on an Application to Adduce Further Evidence and
Two Summons Applications filed on 25 June 2025,
Australian Gas Light Co v
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2003] FCA 1101
[2003] ATPR 41-956
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (12.8 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter