URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTWHC/2022/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:23:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lajevardi v Performance Services Pty Ltd [2022] NTWHC 9 (19 October 2022)
CITATION: Lajevardi v Performance Services Pty Ltd
[2022] NTWHC 009
PARTIES: LAJEVARDI
PERFORMANCE SERVICES PTY LTD
(ACN: 162 049
TITLE OF COURT: WORK HEALTH COURT
FILE NO(s): 2021-00206-LC
DELIVERED ON: 19 October
DELIVERED AT: DARWIN
HEARING DATE(s): 12 May 2022, 9
& 10 June 2022
JUDGMENT OF: GORDON JR
CATCHWORDS:
Taxation of Costs; reasonable offer of compromise; costs of taxation;
professional charges
Supreme Court Rules 1987
Supreme Court
(General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
Supreme Court Rules 2000
Danielle Rankin v Toll Personnel Pty Ltd
[2019] NTLC
REPRESENTATION:
Worker: Alannah
Employer: Matilda Franklin &
Solicitors:
Worker: Piper Ellis
Employer: Sparke Helmore Lawyers
category classification: B
Judgment ID number: [2022] NTWHC
Number of paragraphs: 65
IN THE WORK HEALTH COURT
DARWIN IN THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
2021-00206-LC
PERFORMANCE SERVICES PTY LTD
(ACN: 162 049 443)
REASONS FOR DECISION
(Delivered 19 October
Judicial Registrar Gordon
15 November 2021 the Work Health Court at Darwin made an order for costs in
favour of the Worker following a contested Hearing
in which the Worker was
successful. The order for costs was as follows:
The Employer pay the Worker’s costs of an incidental to the
proceeding after
6 May 2021 when the proceeding was allocated the hearing dated 21
22 October 2021, to be taxed in default of agreement at 100% of the
Court scale and certified fit for counsel at all Directions Hearings,
except where
otherwise ordered.
would appear that from the time of the cost Order to the date of taxation the
background mechanics of the matter were somewhat
turbulent, particularly in
circumstances where the Employer’s legal representation changed, such that
the legal representatives
who conducted the taxation, were not the legal firm
who conducted the Hearing. Thus, neither the taxing master nor the Employer had
the advantage of having been an active participant in the Hearing and its
preparation, and were now tasked to review and assess such
costs. While common
place for the taxing Master, the Employers lack of involvement in the litigation
during the period for which
costs are claimed, was in my view, an impediment to
the taxation.
Nonetheless,
the taxation commenced on 12 May 2022, focussing initially on the content of
Counsel’s Invoice issued 17 November
2021. Of note, following an objection
of the Employer that the hourly rate charged by counsel was excessive, after
consideration
of the Northern Territory scale rates for counsel, the complexity
of the matter and the skill, reputation and notwithstanding the
significant
expertise of the Worker’s counsel, it was conceded and agreed that a 25%
discount ought be applied to Counsels
hourly rate across the invoice.
the conclusion of the taxation of counsel’s invoice, it was apparent that
costs of approximately 18% had been taxed off counsel’s
bill. Parties then
considered Order 63.34 of the
Supreme Court Rules
, in particular o63.34
(5)(a) which provides (
my emphasis
“On the taxation of a bill of costs the Taxing Master may refuse to
allow to the
solicitor who filed the bill the amount, or any part of the amount,
claimed in the bill
in respect of the taxation if:
(a) the amount of
professional charges
contained in the bill is
20% more on the taxation.”
were in disagreement as to whether a disbursement, being counsels fees, is
included in the calculation of professional charges
as provided for in
o63.34(5)(a). The Taxation was adjourned for parties to file written submissions
in support of their preferred
interpretation of the definition of professional
note however, that parties did not press for a determination on that issue prior
to pressing on with the taxation, which concluded
on 10 June 2022.
the conclusion of the taxation, both parties acknowledged that the total amount
taxed off the Workers Bill of Costs did not exceed
outcome of the taxation (of the Bill of Costs filed 15 March 2022 and excluding
the costs of taxation which are dealt with separately
below) was that the sum of
$13,439.60 was taxed off the Bill.
taxation professional fees were sought in an amount of $32,807.00 together with
disbursements in an amount of $33,146.15, totalling
$65,953.15. After taxation,
the amount allowed was $52,513.55 (excluding the costs of
submissions and evidence where subsequently filed by the parties dealing with a
number of applications and arguing that the
taxing master should exercise the
discretions provided for in o.63.34 in various ways.
note that following the filing of the Workers final submissions on 27 June 2022,
no further request to be heard, or provide further
submissions on any
outstanding issue or assertion made by the other party, has been raised by
either party
I take it that the written submissions filed by each
fully represents their
position on all outstanding issues and any final taxation determinations should
be finalised on the papers,
with my written reasons for same contained
matters remaining for determination in order to finalise the taxations are as
the Worker:
the Worker should have their costs of taxation in an amount of $2,844.00 as set
out in the Bill of Costs filed 15 March 2022;
the Worker should have their costs of taxation in an amount of $3,771.50 as set
out in the Supplementary Bill of Costs filed
12 May 2022;
the Worker should have their further costs from 12 May to the finalisation of
taxation in an amount of $10,656.80 as set out
in the Further Supplementary Bill
of Costs filed 24 June 2022;
order 63.73A should be enlivened by the failure of the Employer to accept a
reasonable offer to compromise; and
interest on costs should be paid pursuant to order 63.74.
the Employer:
pursuant to order 63.34(5)(b) the Worker should be refused any or all costs for
failing to accept a reasonable compromise
an equitable adjustment should be made pursuant to order 63.34(5); and
pursuant to order 63.34(6) the solicitor who filed the Bill of Costs should
personally pay the costs of the Employers attendance
propose to answer each of those questions, some of which have overlapping
considerations, by considering the following matters:
offers of compromise made by each party and the impact of same on the exercise
of my direction regarding the costs of taxation,
the operation of o63.73A,
Interest under o63.74, the refusal of any costs and any equitable
adjustment.
the Employer’s costs of taxation should be paid by the Worker’s
addition, although by virtue of the 20% threshold not being met, the issue of
the inclusion of Counsel’s fees in the calculation
of ‘professional
costs’ is no longer a live issue in the proceedings, I will also examine
this question.
Negotiations prior to Taxation
Worker, through the Affidavit of Alanna Mariah Florence Grimster filed 24 June
sets out and annexes various negotiations exchanged
by the parties. In
December 2021 - Following a successful outcome to his application to the Work
Health Court the Worker provided his calculations
for the payment of arrears and
interest to the Employers then legal representative;
February 2022 - Payment of arrears and interest is confirmed by the Employers
new legal representatives and details of costs incurred
are sought;
February 2022 – the Worker rejects an offer to resolve costs in an amount
of $49,000 and counter offers $65,000. This offer
subsequently lapses without
March 2022 - Summons to attend Taxation of Costs is served on the Employers
legal representatives;
April 2022 – the Worker requests details of any updated instructions from
the Employer regarding costs;
April 2022 – original date set for Taxation is adjourned at the request of
the Employer;
2022 – Employer restates offer of $49,500
May 2022 10.11 am - Employer offers $54,450 in full and final settlement of
May 2022 1.06 pm – Worker rejects Employers offer and counters with
May 2022 1.59 pm – Employer offers $58,770 and leaves offer open for
acceptance until the commencement of the Taxation;
May 2022 2.00 pm – Taxation commences.
costs of taxation
Worker seeks costs of taxation in an amount totalling $17,272.30 being costs of
initial taxation
($2,844.00),
further costs of taxation
($3,771.50) and further costs of
($10,656.80). These costs
have not been subjected to an itemised taxation and are rather opposed by the
Employer in their entirety
on the basis that the Worker failed to accept a
reasonable offer of compromise (o.63.34(5)(b)) and on the basis that it would be
equitable for the Court to refuse these costs (o.63.34(5)(c)).
Employer relies upon the offer of $58,770 as a reasonable offer which was not
accepted, noting that ultimately, the amount awarded
in the taxation (save for
the costs of taxation) is as set out at paragraph 9, in a lesser amount of
$57,764.91.
note that, prior to this offer being conveyed, one minute prior to the
commencement of the adjourned taxation, each previous offer
had been below the
amount allowed. The Worker had very limited opportunity to consider this offer
in a reasonable fashion, save for
seeking to adjourn the taxation, which had
already been set back one month due to the lack of readiness of the Employer in
the Worker’s attempts to engage in negotiations in February and April and
the Employers efforts to resolve the question
of costs primarily occurring in
the days prior to the taxation, I accept the Worker’s
that by the time the
offer of $58,770 was put “
the Worker had incurred post judgment costs
in chasing up arrears, attempting to negotiate a costs compromise, drawing its
costs in taxable form and considering the 12 pages of
objections.”
the Employer’s offer was subsequently re-put prior to the recommencement
of the taxation on 9 June 2022, by this date
two additional matters had
occurred. Firstly, the Worker had calculated and formed a belief based on the
part heard taxation, of
the likely outcome of taxation, and the additional costs
of attendance at the taxation on 12 May
had been incurred.
factors, together with the Employers insistence that they would be pressing the
question of the inclusion of counsel’s
fees in professional
, must be considered in an
assessment of the reasonableness of the Worker’s refusal to accept the
Employers offer. It was becoming
abundantly clear that minimal concessions would
be forthcoming by either party with respect to the issue of costs.
my view, if put in a reasonable fashion prior to the taxation and the incurring
of costs associated with preparation and attendance,
the Employer’s offer
of $58,770 may be considered reasonable and effect the Worker’s
entitlement to the costs of taxation.
However, in all of the circumstances of
the taxation I do not consider that this offer sufficient to invoke my
discretion under o63.34
(5) (b) and refuse the Worker his costs of
the Employer’s objection to the costs of taxation is in the nature of
‘all of nothing’ and the Employer
has not filed any further
Objection to Bill of Costs in response to the Worker’s further
, I do not intend to disturb
the Workers costs of taxation as sought.
Worker will be awarded his costs of and incidental to the taxation in an amount
of $17,272.30 (ex GST).
Equitable adjustment
Employers claim for an equitable reduction in the Workers costs of taxation is
made on two grounds:
duplicated attendances of solicitor and counsel were allowed despite the
decision in
Rankin v Toll Holdings Limited
the Employers reasonable offer of compromise exceeded the amount claimed by the
Worker in both the Bill of Costs
and Supplementary Bill of
relation to the first submission it is acknowledged that items of duplication
between counsel and the Workers solicitors have been
allowed. The rationale and
basis for this was discussed at the
. Objections were dealt
with as they arose and discretion applied to each item following the submissions
of the legal representatives.
I note the author of the Employers written
submissions, which refer to the misapplication of
attendance at the taxation of 12 May 2022 when counsel’s bill was
findings in
were not absolute and allow for discretion when
dealing with duplications. In my view, being unsatisfied with the outcome of
resolved in the other parties favour is not grounds for an equitable
adjustment.
regard to the second argument, I respectfully concur with the submissions of the
that the calculations and
argument therein is difficult to discern.
have dealt with the reasonableness of the Employers offer of compromise and its
impact on the Workers costs of taxation above. I
do not intend to make any
further equitable adjustment on the basis of the offer of
Rule 63.73A Increase in costs if offer of compromise
is not accepted
Worker relies on his offers of settlement of $65,000 and $63,000, in support of
the submission that o.63.73A should be invoked
and the Workers costs increased
in an amount of 20%
Worker acknowledged that o.63.73A is a discretionary provision and relies on
all of the circumstances of the matter as set out
considering the workers written submissions with respect to the
reasonableness of the parties’ actions in taking steps towards
finalisation of all matters including costs I acknowledge the application is not
without some merit. I am likewise satisfied that
the Worker meets the test to be
eligible for an adjustment as provided for in o.63.73A.
Nonetheless,
noting in particular, the Workers costs of taxation have been allowed in full, I
am not minded to exercise my discretion
in order to increase the Worker’s
costs. I am satisfied that the final certificate of taxation to be issued is
reasonable in
all of the circumstances.
Rule 63.74 Interest
am satisfied, having considered the evidence filed by the parties in relation to
the matters to be considered in taxation, that
there has been delay occasioned
on behalf of the Employer. A post judgment change in instructing solicitors
resulted in concerns
of dual representation, impeded the progress of
negotiations, caused uncertainty regarding instructions to accept service and
gave rise to the adjournment of the first listed date for taxation.
it may be argued these matters don’t necessarily constitute non-compliance
with Rules of the court as contemplated
by o.63.74 I am satisfied the exercise
of discretion under o.63.74 is not solely constrained to such matters. I accept
the Worker’s
submission that an order for interest, on a portion of the
bill should be made. Interest in an amount of 6.10% will be applied for
– 394 of the Bill of Costs (items allowed not taxed off only), including
allowed disbursements, from the date of the
Order for costs to the date of these
Employer’s costs of taxation
Employer seeks that the solicitor who filed the Bill of Costs to personally pay
the Employers costs of attending the taxation.
for same is made by o.63.34(6) which provides (my emphasis):
“...if on the taxation of a bill of costs the amount of professional
charges contained in
the bill is reduced by 20% or more
, the Taxing
Master may direct the solicitor who filed the bill to personally pay the costs
of attending the taxation incurred by
a party who:
(a) appeared on the taxation; and
(b) in the opinion of the Taxing Master, had a right to appear.
the most favourable interpretation for the Employer, the Worker could be said to
have had his initial Bill of Costs reduced by
20.4% if the taxed off amount of
$13,439.60 was considered against the professional costs and disbursements which
totalled $65,953.15.
However this fails to account for the allowances for the
costs of preparation and attendance at taxation.
my view the Employer is not entitled to invoke o.63.34 (6). However, for the
avoidance of doubt, even if the argument stems from
the narrow construal of
professional charges set out above, there being such a negligible encroachment
beyond 20% it would not, in
my view, give rise for the need for a personal costs
order against the filing solicitor. Furthermore, I accept the submissions of
Worker who contends that the taxation was not brought
unreasonably
Employer, relying on o.63.75 (1), contends that GST is not payable on the
professional charges on the Bill of Costs.
Supreme Court Rules 1987
“In taxing a bill, the Taxing master may allow a reasonable amount for
GST paid or payable on
other taxed costs
in the bill”
do not accept the Employers interpretation with regard to the entitlement to
GST. ‘Other taxed costs’ is not expressly
defined however, the rule
does not specify that GST is payable on disbursements only or expressly preclude
GST on professional costs.
my view the rule operates in a permissive manner, explicitly allowing for GST to
be allowed, I cannot be satisfied that it was
drafted with a view to being
prohibitive of GST on professional costs or to conclude that ‘other taxed
costs’ ought be
interpreted to exclude professional costs.
Counsel’s fees as ‘professional
taxation commenced with a taxation of the fees of counsel which were sought as
part of the disbursements incurred by the Worker.
Following the initial taxation
a question arose as to whether the fees of counsel, which are in the nature of
legal professional
services but paid in the manner of a disbursement might be
considered ‘professional charges’ for the purposes of
o.63.34(5)&(6)
were directed to file submissions in support of their respective positions and,
although the finalisation of the taxation
has rendered the question mute, there
is some merit in considering the question in any event, should the issue arise
in the future.
significance of the meaning and scope of ‘professional charges’ is
borne out when determining whether a bill of costs
has been reduced by 20%
following taxation. If the threshold is met the paying party may be denied their
costs of taxation and be
the solicitor who filed the bill may be personally
liable for the costs of the paying party. The importance of accurately assessing
the 20% threshold is clear.
Worker submits that the rule, and its previous incarnation, have only ever
referred to ‘professional charges’ with
nil mention of
disbursements. Further o.63.72 which specifically deals with counsel’s
fees, adopts the terms ‘counsel’s
fees’, ‘fees’
‘costs’. Notably, the terminology ‘professional charges’
is not adopted or
used in relation to counsel’s fees in the
Worker also submits that the fact that o.63.64 is silent on the reduction of
disbursements should be interpreted that the omission
is deliberate and
disbursements where not intended to be captured in the 20% calculation.
support of this argument the Worker notes Rule 63.85 of the Victorian
Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
provides (emphasis added):
“If the amount of the
professional charges and disbursements
in any bill of costs ... is reduced by 15 per cent or more unless the Costs
Court otherwise ordered, no costs shall be allowed to
the solicitor filing the
bill for taxation for preparing the bill and for attending
contrast the Tasmanian
Supreme Court Rules 2000
Regulation 865
provides (emphasis added):
“If, on the taxation of a bill of costs, the amount of
professional charges
contained in the bill is reduced by a
sixth or more –
(a) costs are not allowed to the practitioner for preparing of the bill,
attending the taxation or any matter relating to the taxation,
unless the taxing
officer otherwise determines
regulation 847
, the form of the bill of costs is noted to contain the
following (emphasis added):
“A bill of costs for taxation –
(a) is to have 5 separate columns, as follows:
(i) the first or left-hand column for dates;
(ii) the second for consecutive numbers of the items;
(iii) the third for the particulars of the services charged for;
the fourth for disbursements
ruled in dollars and
the fifth for the professional charges
dollars and cents; and
(b) is to specify the date of each item in the bill; and...
(c) [not relevant]; and
(d) [not relevant].”
in various jurisdictions the legislature has taken steps to very clearly include
or exclude disbursements in the overall calculations
as to what has been taxed
off following taxation. While the
Work Health Court Rules
Supreme Court Rules
do not provide a clear delineation of the
interpretation of counsel’s fees strictly as a disbursement.
Employer argues that a plain English interpretation of ‘professional
charge’ should result in a finding that the fees
acting in his capacity as a legal professional (barrister) and
therefore, constitutes a professional change in its ordinary
Employer adopts the Australian Oxford Dictionary definition of professional
a paid occupation, especially one that involved prolonged
training and a formal
qualification”
take no issue with the definition and its suitability. However, it cannot be
ignored that qualified professionals extend well beyond
those people who provide
legal representation.
Employer argues that counsel’s fees are distinguishable from other
disbursements, where one might find commonly find other
professional or expert
reports obtained during the course of litigation. They argue that the work done
by counsel is simply an extension
of legal advices and expertise being provided
by their instructing solicitor, counsel’s fees are itemised in generally
same manner as a solicitor’s, and counsel’s fees are subjected
to taxation under the
my view, were the Court to broaden the scope of ‘professional charges
there is a very real risk that there will be circumstances
where charges,
unrelated to legal advice per se, may be professional charges under the
Employers interpretation.
legal services are not the only professional charges which are capable of or
routinely subjected to itemisation or an hourly
rate breakdown. For instance, a
forensic accountant’s bill could foreseeably have many similarities to
that of a solicitor,
rendering it open to an interpretation as being a bill for
a paid occupation, especially one that involved prolonged training and
qualification’
although the non-legal disbursements may not be subject to detailed scrutiny or
guidance under the
they are nonetheless, subject to being taxed. A
disbursement which is found to be irrelevant or unnecessary is unlikely to
a taxation. Indeed, in this matter, the daily fees of a medical expert
where reduced to a cancellation fee during the taxation.
my view, the distinctions elucidated by the Employer are not sufficient to
create a circumstance where
counsel’s fees can or could be
defined as professional charges for the purpose of a taxation.
particularly the noting manner in which counsel’s fees are dealt with
separately from those of a solicitor in the
the interstate
examples which provide examples of the delineation between the two and the
absence of any indicia in the
to suggest counsels fees were
intended to be considered professional charges for the purposes of taxation, I
will not adopt such
an interpretation.
Orders that I will make are as follows:
Certificate of Taxation to issue for an amount of $62,213.76 being $75,653.36
claimed less $13,439.60 taxed off for the Bill of
Costs filed 15 March
the Supplementary Bill of Costs filed 12 May 2022 be allowed in full.
the Further Supplementary Bill of Costs filed 24 June 2022 be allowed in
on costs pursuant to o.63.74 on items 1 to 394 of the Bill of Costs filed 15
March 2022 and the disbursements in the Bill
of Costs filed 15 March 2022 from
15 November 2021 to the date of these Orders at a rate of 6.1%.
Despite the Worker inviting the
Employer to file a further Notice of Objection to outline any objections to
items 359 – 394
of their Bill of Costs filed 15 March 2022 in their
Submissions of the Worker on O 63.34(5)&(6)
Supreme Court
filed by the Worker on 27 June 2022 at para
Submissions of the
Worker on O 63.34(5)&(6)
Supreme Court Rules
filed by the Worker on 20
Employers Submissions of the operation of Order 63.34(5) & (6)
Supreme Court Rules 1987
(NT) in relation to counsels fees
the Employer on 20 May 2022;
Employers Submissions of the operation of Order
63.34(5) & (6) of the
Supreme Court Rules 1987
filed by the
Employer on 17 June 2022; and
Submissions of the Worker on O
63.34(5)&(6)
Supreme Court Rules
filed by the Worker on 27 June
Bill of Costs filed 15
Supplementary Bill
of Costs filed 12 May 2022
Further Supplementary Bill of Costs filed 24 June
Submissions of the Worker on O 63.34(5)&(6)
Supreme Court Rules
by the Worker on 27 June 2022 at para
$1,020 per item 440 Further
Supplementary Bill of Costs filed 24 June
Annexure AG-7 of the
Affidavit of Alanna Mariah Florence Grimster filed 20 May
Work Health Court of the
Northern Territory, JR Gordon, 7 May
Submissions of the operation of Order 63.34(5) & (6) of the
Supreme Court
(NT) in relation to counsels fees
filed by the Employer on 20 May
2022 at paras 43 - 46
15 March 2022
Filed 12 May
Submissions of the operation of Order 63.34(5) & (6) of the
Supreme Court
filed by the Employer on 17 June 2022 at paras 17 -
Noting taxation matters
are not conducted in open Court, no transcript or recording is
Submissions of the Worker on O 63.34(5)&(6)
Supreme Court Rules
by the Worker on 27 June 2022 at para
Submissions of the Worker on O 63.34(5)&(6)
Supreme Court Rules
by the Worker on 27 June 2022 at para
Submissions of the
Worker on O 63.34(5)&(6)
Supreme Court Rules
filed by the Worker on 20
May 2022 at para 24
Submissions of the operation of Order 63.34(5) & (6) of the
Supreme Court
(NT) in relation to counsels fees
filed by the Employer on 20 May
2022 at para 22
Submissions of the operation of Order 63.34(5) & (6) of the
Supreme Court
(NT) in relation to counsels fees
filed by the Employer on 20 May
2022 at para 19.1
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (213 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter