URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTSCFC/2024/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:23:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Northern Territory of Australia v Yao [2024] NTSCFC 1 (22 March 2024)
Northern Territory of Australia v Yao
[2024] NTSCFC 1
IN THE MATTER of an appeal under the
PARTIES: NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
TITLE OF COURT: FULL COURT OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: 2022-01845-SC
DELIVERED: 22 March 2024
HEARING DATE: 14 April 2023
JUDGMENT OF: Grant CJ, Kelly and Brownhill JJ
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION – Reasonable management action – Onus of
Referral of questions of law to the Full Court pursuant to s 21(1) of
Supreme Court Act
– Whether employer or worker bears legal and
evidential onus of proof that mental injury is excluded by reason of
– Operation of provision is
to lay down general rule of liability for injury and introduce by way of
exclusion mental injury
caused by special element in form of reasonable
management action – Employer pleaded reasonable management action as
to worker’s claim – Legal onus on employer to prove defence
– Both parties carried an evidential onus.
Australian Telecommunications Commission v Barker
[1990] FCA 700;
Beezley v Repatriation Commission
[2015] FCAFC 165
(2015) 150 ALD 11
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
[2004] FCAFC 16
(2004) 135 FCR 105
v Repatriation Commission
[1992] HCA 47
(1992) 175 CLR 408
Catholic Education Office
of WA v Granitto
[2012] WASCA 266
Comcare v Martin
[2016] HCA 43
(2016) 258 CLR
Comcare v O'Dea
[1997] FCA 1409
(1997) 150 ALR 318
Corbett v Northern Territory
of Australia
[2015] NTSC 45
Currie v Dempsey
(1967) 69 SR (NSW) 116
Darling Island Stevedoring & Lighterage Co Ltd v Jacobsen
[1945] HCA 22
Director of Public Prosecutions v United Telecasters Sydney Ltd
[1990] HCA 5
(1990) 168 CLR 594
Hart v Comcare
[2005] FCAFC 16
(2005) 145 FCR 29
Horne v Sedco
Forex Australia
[1992] NTSC 4
(1992) 106 FLR 373
Metropolitan Coal Co Ltd v Pye
[1936] UKPCHCA 1
(1936) 55 CLR 138
Millar v ABC Marketing and Sales Pty Ltd
[2012] NTSC
O’Brien v Sacred Heart Primary School
[2000] VCC 44
& Anor v Q-Comp
[2008] QSC 175
Purkess v Crittenden
[1965] HCA 34
Robertson v Territory Insurance Office
[2005] NTSC 74
SA Mental Health Services Inc v
[1995] SASC 5246
Swanson v Northern Territory of Australia
[2006] NTSC 88
(2006) 204 FLR 392
Djordjevitch
[1955] HCA 19
(1955) 91 CLR 512
, referred to.
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: D McConnel SC with J Nottle
Respondent: K Sibley
Solicitors:
Appellant: Hunt & Hunt Lawyers
Respondent: Halfpennys Lawyers
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 35
IN THE FULL COURT OF THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Northern Territory of Australia v Yao
[2024] NTSCFC
No. 2022-01845-SC
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
CORAM: GRANT CJ, KELLY & BROWNHILL JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 22 March 2024)
respondent to the present proceedings brought a claim in the Work Health Court
seeking compensation for mental injury arising
out of or in the course of his
employment with the appellant. The respondent was successful in prosecuting his
claim in the Work
Health Court and the appellant has appealed that decision to
the Supreme Court.
[2] The grounds
of appeal include an assertion that the trial judge erred in law in deciding
that the appellant bears the legal and
evidentiary onus of proof that the
respondent’s mental injury was caused by reasonable management
[3] The judge
hearing the appeal has referred the following questions of law for determination
by the Full Court.
(1) Did the trial judge err in law in deciding that the appellant (employer)
bears both the legal and evidential onus of proof that
any mental injury
suffered by the respondent (worker) is excluded by reason of
(2) Did the trial judge err in law in deciding that the onus on the appellant
requires the appellant to prove each of the following:
(a) the conduct of actions complained of by the respondent constitute
‘management action’ as defined in
(b) the management action was taken on reasonable grounds; and
(c) the management action was taken in a reasonable manner; and
(d) the reasonable management action wholly or primarily caused the mental
The relevant statutory provisions
[4] The question
of which party bears the onus of proof in the determination of whether a mental
injury is caused by reasonable management
action is a matter of substantive
statutory construction involving the relevant provisions of the
Work Act 1986
(NT) (‘the Act’). The term ‘injury’
is defined in
of the Act in the following
(1) An injury, in relation to a worker, is a physical or mental injury
arising out of or in the course of the worker’s employment
(a) a disease; and
(b) the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation, recurrence or deterioration of
a pre-existing injury or disease.
(2) Despite any other provision of this Act, a mental injury is not
considered to be an injury for this Act if it is caused wholly
or primarily by
one or more of the following:
(a) management action taken on reasonable grounds and in a reasonable manner by
or on behalf of the worker's employer;
(b) a decision of the worker’s employer, on reasonable grounds, to take,
or not to take, any management action;
(c) any expectation by the worker that any management action would, or would
not, be taken or any decision made to take, or not to
take, any management
[5] The term
‘management action’ is defined broadly in
of the Act in
the following terms.
management action
, in relation to
a worker, means any action taken by the employer in the management of the
worker’s employment or behaviour
at the workplace, including one or more
of the following:
(a) appraisal of the worker’s performance;
(b) counselling of the worker;
(c) stand down of the worker, or suspension of the worker’s employment;
(d) disciplinary action taken in respect of the worker’s employment;
(e) transfer of the worker’s employment;
(f) demotion, redeployment or retrenchment of the worker;
(g) dismissal of the worker;
(h) promotion of the worker;
(i) reclassification of the worker’s employment position;
(j) provision to the worker of a leave of absence;
(k) provision to the worker of a benefit connected with the worker’s
employment;
(l) training a worker in respect of the worker’s employment;
(m) investigation by the worker’s employer of any alleged misconduct:
(i) of the worker; or
(ii) of any other person relating to the employer’s workforce in which the
worker was involved or to which the worker was a
(n) communication in connection with an action mentioned in paragraphs (a) to
The decision at first instance
[6] During the
trial at first instance, the appellant had contended that as a matter of both
construction and logic the legal onus
of establishing that the injury was
caused wholly or primarily by reasonable management action remained
on the respondent as the worker. That contention was put on
the basis that the
entitlement to compensation depended on the worker proving an injury. To prove
an injury, the worker was required
to satisfy the definition of
‘injury’ within the Act, including the exclusionary provisions in
which form part of the definition of injury. On the
appellant’s argument, that required the worker to positively identify
the events that caused the injury arose ‘out of or in the course of the
worker’s employment’ and that they
were not caused wholly or
primarily by ‘management action’ in the relevant sense. The trial
judge’s analysis and
findings on that issue are as follow.
have found only one specific consideration by any Court of
subsection 3A(2)
specifically since their introduction on 1 October 2015.
That is the Decision of Judge Armitage in the Work Health Court in
[2019] NTLC 3
”). In paragraph 7 of
Judge Armitage said as follows:
“Accordingly,
creates a defence to a claim for mental injuries
caused solely or primarily by reasonable management action. In other words,
the worker establishes that a mental injury has arisen out of or in the
course of the employment (which in this case is accepted),
the entitlement to
compensation will be defeated if
the employer establishes
(my emphasis)
that the mental injury was wholly or primarily caused by reasonable management
action. Accordingly,
the Employer must satisfy the Court that
(i) the conduct of actions complained of by the worker constitute management
action as defined in
(ii) the management action was taken on reasonable grounds; and
(iii) the management action was taken in a reasonable manner; and
(iv) the reasonable management action wholly or primarily caused the mental
Judge Armitage in
provided no analysis of the question of which
party bore the onus, and the passage I have quoted in the preceding paragraph
that the question had not been argued before her and that she proceeded
on the uncontested basis in that case that the employer bore
The underlying issue has been considered by superior courts. In
ABC Marketing and Sales Pty Ltd
[2012] NTSC 21
Mildren J of the NT Supreme Court discussed from first principles the onus of
proof in what have been termed “avoidance”
cases. He said the
general rule is “
he who asserts must prove
” and this usually
involves an evidential as well as a legal onus on the same party. He cited with
Currie v Dempsey
(1967) 69 S.R. (NSW) 11
where Walsh JA said at
“The burden of proof in establishing a case lies on a plaintiff if
the fact alleged (whether affirmative or negative in form)
is an essential
element of his cause of action, for example if its existence is a condition
precedent to his right to maintain the
action. The onus is on the Defendant, if
the allegation is not a denial of an essential ingredient in the cause of
action, but is
one which, if established, will constitute a good defence, that
is, an “avoidance” of the claims, which prima facie,
the plaintiff
In the present case I consider that the essential elements to be established
to meet the definition of “injury” and thus
of the Worker’s
cause of action are as set out in
subsection 3A(1)
of the Act, namely that he
sustained a physical or mental injury and that it arose out of or in the course
of his employment. There
are no other elements to be proved identified in
subsection 3A(1).
The question of reasonable management action is identified as
a separate issue set out in a separate subsection.
Subsection 3A(2)
is not part
of the initial definition of “injury” set out in
subsection 3A(1).
Rather, it calls for consideration of a further state of affairs after the
definition of “injury” has been met, and
then only in respect of a
mental injury, which, if established, would constitute a good defence - that is,
an “avoidance”
of the Worker’s claim.
Subsection 3A(2)
as it now appears in the Act has made some changes to the
exclusion question in the definition of “injury” from the previous
definition. However, I can see nothing in these changes or in the overall
language or scheme of
of the Act as a whole or in
subsection 3A(2)
specifically which might require a change to the previous approach by NT courts
to the question of onus. Because
subsection 3A(2)
presents a somewhat different
version of the exclusion previously contained in
subsection 3(1)
of the Act, the
superior court Decisions of
are not strictly
binding on this Court in considering the new subsection. Even so, I consider
the Decisions of the Northern Territory
Supreme Court and of the Work Health
Court identified above continue to represent the correct approach in the
Northern Territory
to “avoidance” cases, including the onus arising
by virtue of
subsection 3A(2)
of the Act.
I rule that where an employer seeks to rely on
subsection 3A(2)
of the Act to
exclude a claimed mental injury then that employer bears both the legal and
evidential onus of proving the exclusion.
I rule that discharging that onus requires the employer to prove each of the
four elements identified by Judge Armitage in paragraph
I have set out in paragraph 179 above. I rule that the Employer bears that onus
in this proceeding.
[7] It is common
ground that if the trial judge was wrong in that analysis, such that the answer
to any of the questions of law referred
to the Full Court is ‘yes’,
there has been an error of law, the appeal should be allowed and the matter
referred back
to the Work Health Court to be determined according to
The nature of the ‘management action’
[8] The issue
raised by the questions referred is whether the words of
amount to a condition precedent to any entitlement to compensation such that a
worker is required to prove that the subsection
does not apply, or whether that
subsection creates an exception or exclusion to a general entitlement to
compensation which the employer
may rely upon as a defence such that the
employer bears the onus of establishing the defence. That general point of
distinction
concerning the onus of proof was considered in
Djordjevitch
, in which the High Court said that where a statute
an ... exclusion which assumes the existence of the
general or primary grounds from which the liability ... arises but denies the
... liability in a particular case by reason of additional or special facts,
then it is evident that such an enactment supplies considerations
of substance
for placing the burden of proof on the party seeking to rely upon the additional
or special matter ...
principle was revisited by the High Court in
Director of Public Prosecutions
v United Telecasters Sydney Ltd
, in which Brennan, Dawson and Gaudron JJ
said in the criminal context that where the scope of a provision is cut down
of definition rather than by way of proviso, exception or saving
... there is no reason to suppose that ... the legislature intended
subsection should operate without limitation unless an accused brought himself
within the terms of [the exclusionary
provision]’.
Toohey and McHugh JJ said that:
When a statute imposes an obligation
which is the subject of a qualification, exception or proviso, the burden of
proof concerning
that qualification, exception or proviso turns on whether it is
part of the total statement of the obligation. If it is, the onus
in respect of
the qualification, exception or proviso is on the party asserting a breach of
the obligation. If it is not, the party
relying on the qualification, exception
or proviso must prove that he or she has complied with its
determination has been said to turn ultimately on whether the exception contains
a matter which is ‘in substance a
fresh enactment, adding to and not
merely qualifying that which goes
That distinction is
not always an easy one to make. As French J observed in
Bropho v Human
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
While the incidence of
the burden of proof of the exemption was not contested on the appeal it is not,
in my opinion, a question that
should be regarded as settled. Whether an
exemption from a statutory liability is to be demonstrated by the person upon
is sought to impose the liability is a matter of substantive statutory
construction not a mere matter of form. The constructional
choice which
typically arises in such cases was identified long ago by Lord Mansfield in
(1756) 1 East 643:
... it is a known distinction that what arises by way of proviso in a statute
must be insisted upon by way of defence by the party
accused; but, where
exceptions are in the enacting part of the law, it must appear in the charge
that the defendant does not fall
within any of them.
Professor Julius Stone observed that in the case of a statutory cause of
action “... it is frequently a matter of some refinement
to decide where
the burden is placed” — J Stone and WAN Wells,
Its History and Policies
, (1991), p 699. The substantive rather than the
formal nature of that distinction was referred to in
Dowling v Bowie
[1952] HCA 63
(1952) 86 CLR 136
and also in
Vines v Djordjevitch
, where it was said (at
... whether the form is that of a proviso or of an exception, the intrinsic
character of the provision that the proviso makes and
its real effect cannot be
put out of consideration in determining where the burden of proof lies.
Banque Commerciale SA en liquidation v Akhil Holdings Ltd
(1990) 169 CLR 279
Chugg v Pacific Dunlop Ltd
[1990] HCA 41
(1990) 170 CLR
at 257 where Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ said:
The distinction does not depend on the rules of formal logic:
. Rather, the categorization of a provision as part of the statement
of a general rule or as a statement of exception reflects its
ascertained by the process of statutory
construction.
constructional choice has also been the subject of consideration by the High
Court in the workers’ compensation context.
The decision in
Island Stevedoring & Lighterage Co Ltd v Jacobsen
involved the proper
construction of a provision in the
Workers’ Compensation Act
which provided that ‘where a worker has
received injury without his own default or wilful act on any daily or other
journey mentioned in the Act’, the worker or his dependants in
case of his death shall receive compensation from the
The matter at issue was
whether the onus was on the dependants of the deceased worker to prove that the
injury was received ‘without
the worker’s own default or wilful
act’, or on the employer to establish that the injury was the result of
on the part of the worker.
majority (Rich, Dixon, McTiernan and Williams JJ, Starke J dissenting)
held that notwithstanding the form of the provision,
which suggested that the
absence of the worker’s own default or wilful act was a precondition to
the entitlement to compensation,
it should be interpreted as providing a ground
for excluding or disqualifying the applicant from the benefit of the section so
the onus of proof was on the employer to prove that the injury was caused
by the worker’s own default.
[13] Justice
Rich noted the employer’s contention that the form in which the provision
was drafted treated the absence of default
or wilful act as part of the
description of the injury, with the consequence that the burden of negativing
default was placed on
the worker or his dependants. His Honour stated that this
contention ran contrary to the decision of the Privy Council in
Metropolitan
Coal Co Ltd v Pye
in relation
to the definition of ‘injury’ in workers compensation legislation
which included ‘a disease ... other
than a disease caused by silica
The Privy Council had
determined that a worker who proved a disease arising out of and in the course
of his employment did not bear
the further onus of establishing that the disease
was not caused by silica dust. Rather, the onus rested on the employer to prove
that the disease in respect of which the worker would otherwise be entitled to
compensation was in fact a disease caused by silica
[14] In the
application of that principle, Rich J concluded that the substantial meaning of
the provision had to be weighed against
the form of its expression. That
substantial meaning was to lay down a general rule of liability for injury, and
to introduce by
way of exclusion the case of an injury caused by a special
element in the form of default or wilful act on the part of the worker.
Honour ultimately found that they were things which ‘according to the
sense of fairness and justice which inspires the
common law, we usually require
to be proved against not disproved by the
[15] Justice
Dixon (as his Honour then was) addressed the question in the following
The answer depends upon the interpretation of the provision.
For the burden of proof is a legal consequence of the nature of the
qualification
placed by the words “without his own default or wilful
act” upon the general conditions of liability stated in the clause.
these words are but part of the legislative attempt to define the conditions
upon which the worker’s right to compensation
arises, then, like all other
ingredients or elements in a cause of action or title to claim, proof of the
fulfilment of the conditions
they describe must lie with the claimant. But if
the true nature of the qualification is to introduce new matter, not as part of
the primary grounds of liability, but as a special exception or condition
defeating or answering liability otherwise existing, then
the onus of proof lies
with the party setting up default or wilful act by way of answer.
The form in which the clause is cast, no doubt, favours the view that the
words in question express part of the description of the
primary or general
grounds of liability. For they occur in the formulation in a single proposition
of the conditions in which the
worker or his dependants “shall receive
compensation from the employer.” But, although in such a question the form
which an enactment is thrown is a consideration of much importance, it is by
no means decisive. The substance of the provision must
be considered and weight
must be given to the nature of the general conditions laid down and to the
substance and real effect of
the particular qualification. Further, an
interpretation is to be preferred which will give the provision an operation
with the principles of the common law. Notwithstanding the form of
the clause, I think that the considerations of substance show
qualification, expressed by the words “without his own default or wilful
act,” amounts to a particular exception
or answer, the proof of which lies
upon the employer.
[16] Justice
Dixon then identified the three matters which led to that
conclusion.
The first was that
the existence of default or wilful act did not go to the character of the
journey or the definition of injury.
It was to introduce a new factor
concerning the cause of the injury, such that the primary grounds of liability
remained true but
the consequence was avoided by the addition of that new and
special fact.
[17] Although in
the present case the question of reasonable management action is incorporated
into the provision which first defines
injury in general terms, it is on proper
characterisation a new factor involving causation.
[18] The second
matter identified by Dixon J was that the new and special fact was described
negatively, and as a general rule the
proof of a negative is not imposed on a
[19] Again, in
the present case the stipulation or qualification has the negative formulation
that mental injury is not an injury
if caused wholly or primarily by reasonable
management action. Casting the onus of proof on the worker would require the
a negative.
[20] The third
matter identified by Dixon J was that the new factor involved fault or
misconduct, which will generally only defeat
a right when alleged and proved.
Although the conception of reasonable management action in the Act is not framed
in terms of fault
or misconduct, in practice and in evidentiary terms it will
almost invariably involve assertions of that type against the worker.
[21] Justice
McTiernan expressed the general principle in these terms:
to this question is governed by the interpretation of the words “without
his own default or wilful act.” If
the words “without his own
default or wilful act” are to be interpreted as a condition precedent to
the right which is
created by s. 3, the onus is on the applicant to prove that
the injury was received without the worker’s own default or wilful
But if the words are to be interpreted as providing a ground for excluding or
disqualifying the applicant, whether a worker
or any dependant, from the benefit
of the section, the onus is on the employer to prove that the injury was
received by the worker’s
own default or wilful act.
[22] His Honour
concluded that construction question did not depend merely on the formal
arrangement of the words in the relevant
section, but was to be answered having
regard to the intention underlying the legislative scheme. In the application
of that intention,
it would be a departure from the principles of the
legislation to make a worker’s conduct a condition precedent to the right
to receive compensation. His Honour endorsed earlier New South Wales authority
in finding that a condition for the absence of fault
on the worker’s part
was not a factor which must be established by the worker as a necessary
ingredient of a right to
compensation.
[23] The present
matter falls to be determined having regard to those general principles
concerning the legal onus of proof.
Decisions on analogous
provisions in other jurisdictions
conformity with those general principles, up to this point in time the cases and
practice in the Northern Territory have proceeded
on the basis that once the
worker has established that an injury arose out of or in the course of
employment, the employer will then
bear the onus of establishing any assertion
that the injury was the result of reasonable management action. Those cases and
are discussed later in these reasons. A number of other Australian
caused either
wholly or substantially by reason of reasonable administrative or disciplinary
action. However, the approach to the
question of legal onus in relation to
those provisions is neither uniform nor settled.
progenitor of s 3A of the Act was the definition of ‘injury’ in
Commonwealth Employees’ Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1988
(Cth), which came into operation on 1 December
The definition excluded
injuries suffered by an employee as the result of reasonable disciplinary action
taken against the employee,
reasonable administrative action in relation to the
employee, or a failure on the part of the employee to obtain a promotion,
or benefit in connection with his or her employment.
Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation and Other Legislation Amendment Act
(Cth) made significant amendments to the exclusions in the definition
of ‘injury’ with effect from 13 April 2007. The
definition of
‘injury’ was transferred to a new s 5A, which uses similar
terms to s 3A of the Act but is quite differently
structured. Subsection
5A(1) defines injury with reference to the common conceptions of injury
simpliciter
, disease and aggravation, and then immediately excludes
injury suffered ‘as a result of reasonable administrative action taken
a reasonable manner in respect of the employee’s employment’.
Subsection 5A(2) then provides a non-exhaustive definition
of the term
‘reasonable administrative action’.
[27] There is a
large body of authority in the federal jurisdiction dealing with the
construction and operation of those exclusionary
provisions in their various
forms since 1988. However, no authority has been identified in that
questions of law which have been referred to
this Court. That may be attributable to the fact that under the Commonwealth
neither the original decision-maker, nor the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal as the review tribunal, exercises judicial power. As
the Full Federal
Court observed in
Australian Telecommunications Commission v
[T]he Tribunal spent some time in dealing with questions
as to onus or burden of proof as discussed in cases such as
Commonwealth v
[1978] HCA 47
141 CLR 296]
McDonald v Director-General of Social
[(1984) 1 FCR 354] and
Re Twyman and Commonwealth
Likewise, in this appeal, counsel for Mrs Barker based his address on
issues as to onus of proof. Yet, common law concepts of onus
of proof are
rarely appropriate for the Administrative Appeals Tribunal even in compensation
cases, as was pointed out in
McDonald v Director-General of Social
Reitano v Commonwealth
noted in (1985) 9 ALN
[28] The case of
Commonwealth v Muratore
which is referred to in that passage involved an
application to the Workers’ Compensation Commission of New South Wales for
judicial review of the decision of a delegate of the Commissioner for
Employees’ Compensation. The delegate had determined
to reduce the weekly
compensation previously paid to the employee on the assertion that he was able
to earn a specified weekly amount
in some suitable employment or business. The
Workers’ Compensation Commission, and ultimately the High Court, held that
Commonwealth bore the onus of proof of matters entitling it to have the
original determination varied. Although the Full Federal
accepted that general approach to the fact-finding process would have
application in apposite circumstances, the Court also stated
Director-General of Social Security
was good authority for the proposition
that there is no legal onus of proof in proceedings before the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal.
prevailing approach under the Commonwealth structure is that each of the
Commission, the Board and the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal is an
administrative decision-maker, the relevant decision-maker is under a duty to
arrive at the correct or preferable
decision according to the material before
it, and reviews before the Tribunal are inquisitorial in
While it is correct in
one sense to say that a party who may be affected by the determination must
satisfy the requirements in the
statute, that is only to recognise the operation
of the legislative scheme under which the benefit or interest is sought rather
to impose an onus of proof.
Under the Northern Territory scheme, the power to determine applications for
compensation and related matters is reposited in the
Work Health Court, which
exercises judicial power as a court of record and
Although those
principles concerning the legal onus of proof in the Commonwealth context have
no direct application to proceedings
before the Work Health Court, they do
explain the dearth of Commonwealth authority concerning which party bears the
legal onus of
establishing whether an injury has been suffered as a result of
reasonable administrative action.
appellant’s reliance on authorities such as
must be considered
in light of the fact that they are dealing with the administrative
decision-making processes under the Commonwealth
legislation. That case
involved whether an adjustment disorder suffered by the employee was materially
contributed to by her failure
to obtain promotion. The Full Federal Court held
that the injury was attributable to that failure notwithstanding that there may
have been other operative causes, and it followed that the adjustment disorder
was not an ‘injury’ as defined. The Court
was no debate that the factual findings made by the Tribunal amount to a
conclusion that the disease or injury suffered was
as a result of the failure to
obtain the promotions.
In order to succeed, the appellant must assert, as she does, that operative
causes are not excluded and that given the provision’s
purpose some
modifier should be read into the words to restrict the effect of the exclusion
to circumstances where there were no
other employment related causes. We do not
agree. The operation of the provision had the evident purpose of removing from
of compensation a disease, injury or aggravation which was a result of
something. We see no evident purpose to remove from the field
of compensation a
disease, injury or aggravation which was only a result of that thing. The words
do not readily admit that construction.
The cases on multiple causes in tort or
general law do not assist that
reference to the appellant worker ‘asserting’ that operative causes
were not excluded was to an argument concerning
statutory interpretation made in
the course of the appeal on the basis of the undisputed factual findings made by
the Tribunal.
The Court’s observation in that respect in no way suggests
that the appellant worker bore the legal onus of establishing that
was not caused by her failure to obtain promotion.
[32] Similarly,
Comcare v Martin
has nothing to say about the onus of proof in relation
to administrative action. The passage relied upon by the appellant identifies
only that the legislative purpose of ensuring that reasonable human resource
management actions not give rise to liability would
be defeated if the operation
of the exclusion was dependent upon the subjective psychological drivers of the
employee’s reaction.
anything, the description in that case of the relevant operation of s 5A of
Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
‘exclusion’ would suggest that the party seeking to take the benefit
of the exclusion would bear the onus were the
matter to be determined in the
exercise of judicial power.
authority from the other Australian jurisdictions which have similar
exclusionary provisions is sometimes instructive, but
the interpretation of each
provision will depend upon its particular terms.
Mental Health Services Inc v Margush
, the South Australian Full Court
considered that part of the
Workers Rehabilitation And Compensation Act 1986
(SA) which provided that an illness or disorder of the mind caused by stress
is compensable
if and only if
: (a) stress arising out of employment was a
substantial cause of the disability; and (b) the stress did not arise wholly or
predominantly
from reasonable disciplinary action, reasonable administrative
action or the failure to obtain a promotion, transfer or benefit.
Chief Justice
Doyle (with whom the other members of the Court agreed) stated:
is my opinion that
of the Act places the burden upon the Worker to
prove the matters identified by that subsection. The structure of the
suggests this. The subsection specifies the circumstances under
which a particular type of disability is compensable. Such a disability
compensable "if and only if" the circumstances specified in sub-paragraph (a)
and sub-paragraph (b) are established. Each paragraph
is essential to the
compensability of the disability. There is no particular reason to regard the
paragraphs as having a different
operation. Each of them states a qualification
which must be established if the relevant disability is to be compensable. In
opinion the structure of the subsection suggests that it states matters to be
established by a claimant for compensation, and not
a basis of liability
followed by some grounds of exculpation or exclusion of liability: cf
Djordjevitch
[1955] HCA 19
(1955) 91 CLR 512
[35] The result
in that case recognised both the unique and emphatic nature of the statutory
language; and a structure which strongly
suggested that the worker bore the onus
of establishing both the causal nexus between the stress-related condition and
the employment
(which is where the onus of proof of that matter will ordinarily
lie in workers’ compensation law and practice), and that the
condition did
not result from reasonable administrative or disciplinary action or a relevant
failure. The relevant provision has
since been amended, and there is no South
Australian authority dealing with the question of onus in the amended form.
[36] The courts
in Victoria appear to have adopted something of a hybrid approach when dealing
with the section in the
Accident Compensation Act 1985
(Vic), which
provided that compensation is not payable in respect of a stress injury
‘unless the stress did not arise wholly
or predominantly’ from what
might be compendiously described as reasonable administrative action. The
appellant draws attention
to the fact that the Victorian provision has the clear
appearance of an exclusion rather than forming part of the definition of injury.
Having regard to the general principles which have already been described, that
formal characterisation is by no means decisive.
O’Brien v Sacred
Heart Primary School
, the County Court stated:
I have a very
clear view of what the outcome in this case should be: it will not turn on the
onus of proof. However, my opinion is
as follows. First, the defendant has the
onus of satisfying the court on the balance of probabilities that the employer
took reasonable
action in a reasonable manner to dismiss the plaintiff. If the
court is so satisfied, the plaintiff bears the onus of satisfying
the court on
the balance of probabilities that the stress did not arise wholly or
predominantly from such action: cf.
State of Victoria v. Blythman
[1999] VSC 498
Finn v. State of Victoria and MMI Workers Compensation
(Victoria) Ltd
, Judge G.D. Lewis, 6 October 2000;
Gaweda v. Stone
Container (Australia) Pty Ltd
, [1998] AILR 669;
WorkCover Corporation
(SA) v. Summers
(1995) 65 SASR 243
Beattie v. State of Victoria
decision of my own of 2 August
[37] It is plain
from the introductory sentence that this analysis of the respective onera did
not form part of the
ratio decidendi
. Even if it did, the Victorian
provision under consideration in that case was unique in that it contained the
double negative that
compensation
payable in respect of a stress
injury unless the stress
arise wholly or predominantly from
reasonable administrative/disciplinary action. The practical effect of the
County Court’s
formulation concerning onus is that the employer bore the
initial onus of establishing that the injury claimed by the worker was
to reasonable administrative or disciplinary action. If that onus was
discharged, the worker then bore the onus of establishing
that the injury did
not arise wholly or predominantly from that action. That is little different to
the ordinary position in workers’
compensation law and practice by which
the worker will carry the onus of establishing that the injury arose out of or
in the course
of employment.
Parker & Anor v
the Queensland
Supreme Court considered the definition of ‘injury’ in s 32 of
Workers’ Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 2000
separate subsection within that definition provided that injury did not include
a psychiatric or psychological disorder
arising out of or in the course of
reasonable management action. The Industrial Magistrate had found that the
applicant worker had
the onus of proving on the balance of probabilities that
the management action was unreasonable. The Industrial Magistrate’s
determination did not address the question of which party had the onus of
proving that the injury was, or was not, caused by management
relevant question before the Supreme Court was whether a subsequent review body
had committed jurisdictional error in determining
the need for a temporal
connection between the management action and the psychiatric or psychological
disorder. The Court did not
deal directly with the question of onus. The
subsequent decisions of the Industrial Court of Queensland in
Simon Blackwood
(Workers’ Compensation Regulator)
Fuller v Simon
Blackwood (Workers’ Compensation
, on which the
appellant also relies, state without analysis or authority that the worker
carried the onus of demonstrating that the
event said to precipitate the injury
did not constitute reasonable administrative action. Again, those decisions
were silent on
the question of which party bore the onus of establishing that
the disorder was attributable to management action in the first place.
Catholic Education Office of WA v
the Western
Australian Court of Appeal was concerned with the definition of
‘injury’ in the
Workers’ Compensation and Injury Management
(WA), which excluded a disease caused by stress wholly or
predominantly arising from dismissal, discipline or the failure to obtain
benefit unless, in effect, that action was ‘unreasonable and harsh on the
part of the employer’. There was no real
dispute that the
employee’s injury was caused by stress associated with what may
conveniently be described as disciplinary
action. An arbitrator, and then
subsequently a commissioner, had found that the worker had failed to discharge
the onus of proving
that the disciplinary action was not the sole or predominant
cause of the stress-related condition. The Court of Appeal observed
the determination of who bore the onus of proof on that issue was not disputed
by the employee, and did not conduct any
analysis or make any determination in
relation to that matter.
[41] That review
of the authorities reveals that the decision of the South Australian Full Court
SA Mental Health Services Inc v Margush
is the only determination by a
superior court in Australia that a worker bears the legal onus of establishing
that a psychological
injury did not result from reasonable administrative or
disciplinary action. The decision of an intermediate court of appeal in
Australian jurisdiction will ordinarily be highly persuasive, but the fact that
both provisions contain similar exclusions
with the same policy underpinning
does not dictate the same result. The language and structure of the South
Australian provision
is markedly different in the manner already described. The
issue which presents in this jurisdiction is the substantive statutory
construction of s 3A of the Act, which must be conducted on its own terms.
That is an exercise which must also be conducted having
regard to the general
principles concerning onus in the workers’ compensation context which were
laid down by the High Court
Darling Island
Stevedoring
The proper construction of
essential question is which party to an application for compensation bears the
legal onus of establishing that the mental
injury claimed by the worker is not a
compensable injury because it was caused wholly or primarily by reasonable
management action.
Subsection 3A(1) of the Act contains a definition of
‘injury’ which is capable of standing alone. In fact, the
of ‘injury’ as originally enacted was in those terms
before the Act was later amended to incorporate qualifications in
relation to
‘reasonable administrative action’, ‘reasonable disciplinary
action’ and ‘failure ... to
obtain a promotion, transfer or
benefit’. Those qualifications have subsequently been replaced by the
compendious description
of ‘management action’. As a matter of
statutory form at least, subs 3A(1) states the general or primary grounds
which injury may be established (and from which the liability to pay
compensation arises), while the exceptions in subs 3A(2) of
the Act operate
to deny liability in a particular case by reason of additional or special facts
concerning reasonable management
operation is more readily characterised as the separate enactment of some ground
of exception or exclusion to a general
entitlement. To put it in the language
Darling Island Stevedoring
, the operation of the provision as
a whole is to lay down a general rule of liability for injury, and to introduce
by way of exclusion
the case of a mental injury caused by a special element in
the form of reasonable management action on the part of the employer.
Similarly, to adopt the test in
Vines v Djordjevitch
, s 3A(2) of the
Act creates an exclusion which assumes the existence of the general or primary
grounds for liability in s 3A(1) but
denies that liability in a particular
case by reason of additional or special facts, such that considerations of
substance place
the burden of proof on the party seeking to rely upon the
exclusion. That is certainly the manner in which it was characterised
responsible Minister in the second reading speech:
currently a defence available to employers for a mental injury claim based on
reasonable administrative action. It is proposed
to replace the current
formulation of administrative action with management action to improve guidance.
The amendment provides a
detailed explanation of what comprises management
action and this will make the situation much clearer for employers and
[44] Similarly,
the explanatory statement relevantly provided:
Section 3A provides a
definition of “injury” that includes a defence for a claim against
the employer for mental injury
if caused by management action taken on
reasonable grounds and in a reasonable manner by the workers employer.
[45] Although
the use of the word ‘defence’ is not determinative, it plainly
suggests a legislative intention that the
employer would carry the burden of
proving that the injury is caused wholly or primarily by ‘management
action’. That
is consistent with the approach which had been taken by
Northern Territory courts prior to the 2015 amendment, at which time the
definition of ‘injury’ was expressed not to include ‘an injury
or disease suffered by a worker as a result of reasonable
disciplinary action
taken against the worker or failure by the worker to obtain a promotion,
transfer or benefit in connection with
the worker’s employment or as a
result of reasonable administrative action taken in connection with the worker's
employment’.
There is no suggestion in the second reading speech or the
explanatory statement of any legislative intention to alter that prior
formulation was considered to place an obligation on the employer to prove that
the injury was the result of one of the
disqualifying factors. In
Northern Territory of Australia
, Barr J found that the employer had to prove
that the worker’s injury was as a result of reasonable administrative
action taken
in connection with the worker’s
employment.
While it is no
doubt true to say, as the appellant does, that the parties in
were in agreement on that matter, and conducted their respective cases
accordingly, at the very least that agreement reflected the
prevailing authority
which governed the operation of the provision up to that time. In particular,
Swanson v Northern Territory of Australia
Martin (BR) CJ
... the Magistrate was required to determine whether the
[employer] had proved that the injury was suffered by the [worker] “as
result of” reasonable administrative action taken in connection with the
[worker’s] employment.
approach is also consistent with what was said in
Millar v ABC Marketing and
Sales Pty Ltd
that case involved an assertion of double compensation in respect of the same
injury, in the course of his reasons Mildren
J explored matters of general
principle concerning the onus of proof. His Honour observed that the general
rule is that ‘he
who asserts must prove’, and that party will
ordinarily carry both the legal and evidential onus. In illustration of the
rule, Mildren J cited the following passage from the decision of Walsh
Currie v Dempsey
, which was also relied upon by the trial judge in
the present matter:
The burden of proof in establishing a case, lies
on a plaintiff if the fact alleged (whether affirmative or negative in form) is
essential element in his cause of action, eg if its existence is a condition
precedent to his right to maintain the action. The
onus is on the defendant, if
the allegation is not a denial of an essential ingredient in the cause of
action, but is one which,
if established, will constitute a good defence, that
is, an “avoidance” of the claim which, prima facie, the plaintiff
[48] In the
application of that test also, the better characterisation is that the exclusion
of injury caused by management action
is not a condition precedent to the right
to maintain the action in the same way that a requirement for
default or arbitration
might be. Rather, it is a matter of causation which, if established, will
constitute a good defence to the
claim for the employer. In
Robertson v
Territory Insurance Office
, the same principle was applied in analogous
circumstances with the same result:
As the four grounds of exemption
pleaded by the respondent in its further amended answer are not denials of
essential ingredients
in the applicant’s claim but are four statutory
grounds of avoidance of the applicant’s claim pursuant to s 10(a) and
s 9(1)(e) of the Act, the respondent bears the legal burden of proof of
each of the four grounds of exemption it has pleaded in its
further amended
Currie v Dempsey
(1967) 69 SR (NSW) 116
Dillingham Constructions Pty Ltd
[1974] VicRp 3
[1974] VR 24
provisions of the
Motor Accident (Compensation) Act 1979
(NT) referred to
in that passage denied the entitlement to benefits for a person who has suffered
an injury while ‘using a
motor vehicle in such a manner that it created a
substantial risk of injury to the person’, or where the injury was
during the criminal use of a motor vehicle. It is implicit in that
finding that exemptions or exceptions of that type constitute
a ground of
defence rather than an essential ingredient of the cause of
The significance of the pleadings
Millar v ABC Marketing and Sales Pty Ltd
, Mildren J also made reference
to the guidance provided by the pleadings on the question of who bears the legal
Ordinarily, a defence
which is not an essential element of the cause of action will be pleaded by the
defendant, who will in turn
bear the legal onus of proving that defence. By way
of example, if a defendant wishes to assert that a plaintiff has failed to
his loss, the defendant must plead that matter and bears both the
evidentiary and legal burden of proof. The pleadings in the present
instructive in that respect.
Statement of Claim dated 8 October 2020, the respondent pleaded relevantly that
he sustained a mental injury during the course
of his employment with the
appellant (paragraph 3), and that the injury arose as a result of a number of
incidents which took place
between June and December 2019 (paragraph 4). The
Statement of Claim made no reference to reasonable management action. That is
unremarkable and unexceptional. It has not been the practice in this
to plead not
only the existence of the injury in question, but also the absence of any
disentitling factor. In fact, in the great
majority of cases the cause of the
mental injury will be multifactorial and the worker’s attribution of cause
in the claim
will not comprehend or contemplate management action. It is only
if and when the employer alleges that the injury was caused by
management action that the issue will come into focus. So it was in this
[52] By Notice
of Defence dated 30 October 2020, the appellant pleaded
relevantly:
The Employer denies Paragraph 3 of the Statement of
Claim and states that the Worker did not suffer an injury arising out of or in
the course of his employment or, in the alternative, if an injury was so
suffered, it is not an injury compensable pursuant to the
given any such injury (which injury is denied) was caused wholly or
primarily by management actions contemplated by section 3A of
appellant ultimately filed a Notice of Defence to an Amended Statement of Claim
which pleaded substantive facts and provided
extensive particulars of the
management actions. Those particulars concluded with the pleading that by
reason of the foregoing matters
the injury was wholly or predominantly caused by
management action taken by the employer; and the management action was taken on
reasonable grounds and in a reasonable manner by the employer. On the pleadings
at least, they were matters in respect of which
the appellant bore the legal
onus and carried an evidentiary burden.
conclusion is reinforced by the nature of the matters traversed in the pleading.
In circumstances where the establishment
of the exception or exclusion depends
upon matters within the exclusive or peculiar knowledge of one party, it is that
will ordinarily bear the legal onus in relation to proof of that
exception or exclusion. In the particular circumstances of this
case, while the
respondent was no doubt aware of the content of the interactions he personally
had with the various officers and
employees of the appellant which were said by
the appellant to constitute the relevant management action, he was not in a
to know or prove the nature and content of the dealings between those
officers and employees
which might go to both the
characterisation of those dealings as management action and the reasonableness
of that action. To place
the legal onus on the respondent in those
circumstances would be to put him in the untenable position of having to prove a
ie that the injury was not caused wholly or primarily by reasonable
management action, of which he did not have full knowledge.
distinction between legal onus and evidential onus
[55] This is not
to say that a worker will never bear an evidential burden, as opposed to the
legal onus, in cases where it is asserted
that the injury was caused by
management action. As the reasons at first instance and the terms of the
questions referred suggest,
there is a distinction between the legal and
evidential onus. The onus of proof as a matter of law and pleading requires the
which carries that burden ultimately to establish its case to the
requisite standard. The evidential onus refers to the burden of
adducing or
pointing to evidence which demonstrates that the case is established, or not
established as the case may be. As Barwick
CJ, Kitto and Taylor JJ stated in
Purkess v Crittenden
, the legal onus is always stable but the evidential
burden may shift during the course of the trial according to the preponderance
of the evidence led.
[56] That was
another matter adverted to by Mildren J in
Millar v ABC Marketing and Sales
His Honour stated
that although one party’s knowledge of the essential facts may lessen the
amount of evidence required to
be led by the other party in discharge of an
evidentiary burden borne by it, the legal burden does not shift during that
In the workers’
compensation context, a worker making a primary application for compensation (as
opposed to an appeal against
cancellation) will ordinarily be required to prove
the essential conditions of a cause of action, namely an injury arising out of
or in the course of employment that resulted in or materially contributed to his
or her incapacity.
will also ordinarily be
in that application.
circumstances where the employer has pleaded reasonable management action, in
the ordinary course the evidence which the worker
adduces to address the defence
pleaded by the employer in discharge of the evidentiary burden which the worker
carries in relation
to that issue will come largely in the course of the
worker’s evidence in chief and cross-examination, and otherwise in the
worker’s case. The evidentiary burden will then shift to the employer to
adduce evidence which establishes on the balance
of probabilities that the
injury was caused wholly or primarily by reasonable management action. There
may be cases in which an
employer calls evidence in that respect which requires
the worker to call evidence in rebuttal, but that need will rarely arise in
practice because of the pre-trial discovery and disclosure processes.
[58] In the
present case, the appellant bore both the legal onus of establishing that the
injury was caused wholly or primarily by
reasonable management action, and an
evidential onus of producing evidence sufficient to displace, in persuasive
terms, the evidence
already adduced by the respondent to demonstrate that it was
not. However, it was not an essential ingredient of the respondent’s
claim to disprove that the injury was referable to management action, that the
management action was reasonable in nature, and that
the injury was caused
wholly or primarily by that management action. The appellant pleaded the issue
as a matter which, if established,
constituted a good defence to the
respondent’s claim, and it fell to the appellant to prove that defence.
Answers to the questions of law referred
questions of law referred to the Full Court are answered as
Question 1:
Did the trial judge err in law in deciding that the appellant (employer)
bears both the legal and evidential onus of proof that any
mental injury
suffered by the respondent (worker) is excluded by reason of
No, although that determination should not be understood to mean that the
respondent (worker) did not also carry an evidential burden
in relation to that
Did the trial judge err in law in deciding that the onus on the appellant
requires the appellant to prove each of the following:
(a) the conduct of actions complained of by the respondent constitute management
action as defined in
(b) the management action was taken on reasonable grounds; and
(c) the management action was taken in a reasonable manner; and
(d) the reasonable management action wholly or primarily caused the mental
No, although that determination should not be understood to mean that the
respondent (worker) did not also carry an evidential burden
in relation to those
___________________________
Yao v Northern Territory of
[2022] NTWHC 004 at [179]-[185].
Vines v Djordjevitch
[1955] HCA 19
Director of Public Prosecutions
v United Telecasters Sydney Ltd
[1990] HCA 5
(1990) 168 CLR 594
Director of Public Prosecutions
v United Telecasters Sydney Ltd
[1990] HCA 5
(1990) 168 CLR 594
at 611-612.
Minister of State for the Army
[1944] HCA 4
(1944) 68 CLR 261
274-275, citing
Rhondda Urban District
Council v Taff Vale Railway Co
[1909] UKLawRpAC 20
(1909) AC 253
Bropho v Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission
[2004] FCAFC 16
(2004) 135 FCR 105
Darling Island Stevedoring
& Lighterage Co Ltd v Jacobsen
[1945] HCA 22
(1945) 70 CLR 635.
Metropolitan Coal Co Ltd v
[1936] UKPCHCA 1
(1936) 55 CLR 138
(reversing the decision of the High Court in
Metropolitan Coal Co Ltd
[1934] HCA 9
(1934) 50 CLR 614).
Darling Island Stevedoring
& Lighterage Co Ltd v Jacobsen
[1945] HCA 22
(1945) 70 CLR 635
Darling Island Stevedoring
& Lighterage Co Ltd v Jacobsen
[1945] HCA 22
(1945) 70 CLR 635
Darling Island Stevedoring
& Lighterage Co Ltd v Jacobsen
[1945] HCA 22
(1945) 70 CLR 635
at 643-644.
Darling Island Stevedoring
& Lighterage Co Ltd v Jacobsen
[1945] HCA 22
(1945) 70 CLR 635
Darling Island Stevedoring
& Lighterage Co Ltd v Jacobsen
[1945] HCA 22
(1945) 70 CLR 635
Darling Island Stevedoring
& Lighterage Co Ltd v Jacobsen
[1945] HCA 22
(1945) 70 CLR 635
at 645-646.
The title of that Act was
amended to the
Safety Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
effect from 24 December 1992.
Telecommunications Commission v Barker
[1990] FCA 700;
Bushell v Repatriation
[1992] HCA 47
(1992) 175 CLR 408
per Brennan J at 424-425;
[1997] FCA 1409
(1997) 150 ALR 318.
Beezley v Repatriation
[2015] FCAFC 165
(2015) 150 ALD 11.
Work Health Administration
Horne v Sedco Forex Australia
[1992] NTSC 4
Hart v Comcare
[2005] FCAFC 16
145 FCR 29.
Hart v Comcare
[2005] FCAFC 16
Comcare v Martin
[2016] HCA 43
258 CLR 467
SA Mental Health Services
Inc v Margush
[1995] SASC 5246
. That approach was subsequently
adopted by members of the Full Court without further analysis in
Corporation (SA) v Summers
(1995) 65 SASR 243
Keen v Workers
Rehabilitation and Compensation Corporation
(1998) 71 SASR 421.
Sacred Heart Primary School
[2000] VCC 44.
Parker & Anor v Q-Comp
[2008] QSC 175.
Simon Blackwood
(Workers’ Compensation Regulator)
[2014] ICQ 27
Fuller v Simon Blackwood
(Workers’ Compensation Regulator)
[2016] ICQ 12
Catholic Education Office of
WA v Granitto
[2012] WASCA 266.
Catholic Education Office of
WA v Granitto
[2012] WASCA 266
. The decision was subsequently
cited without further analysis by the District Court in
Pilbara Iron Company
(Services) Pty Ltd v Suleski
[2017] WADC 114
as authority for the
propositions that the worker has the onus of proving that one of the excluded
matters was not wholly or predominantly
the cause of the stress, and that any
disciplinary action was unreasonable and harsh.
Second Reading Speech,
to Work Legislation Amendment Bill 2015
, Northern Territory,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 18 June 2015, 6743 (Peter Styles).
Corbett v Northern Territory
of Australia
[2015] NTSC 45
Swanson v Northern Territory
of Australia
[2006] NTSC 88
Barnett v Northern
Territory of Australia
[2010] NTMC 70
Andreasen v ABT (NT)
[2015] NTMC 026 at [27]-[33].
Millar v ABC Marketing and
Sales Pty Ltd
[2012] NTSC 21
Currie v Dempsey
69 SR (NSW) 116
Maddalozzo v Maddick
[1992] NTSC 46
(1992) 108 FLR 159
at 163, in which Mildren J held that giving notice of an
injury 'as soon as practicable' under s 80(1) of the
Work Health Act
(NT) was a condition precedent to the right to compensation under the
Act, whereas s 182 requiring a claim to be made within six
months of the
occurrence of the injury, disease or death in question was a procedural section
which simply placed a limitation on
the maintenance of proceedings for
compensation under the Act. The relevant part of s 80(1) of the
provided that 'a person shall not be entitled to compensation
unless notice of the relevant injury has, as soon as practicable, been
or served on the worker’s employer'.
Robertson v Territory
Insurance Office
[2005] NTSC 74
Millar v ABC Marketing and
Sales Pty Ltd
[2012] NTSC 21
Purkess v Crittenden
[1965] HCA 34
(1965) 114 CLR 164
Millar v ABC Marketing and
Sales Pty Ltd
[2012] NTSC 21
Citing a passage from the
reasons of Lord Mansfield CJ in
Blatch v Archer
[1774] EngR 2
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (356 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter