URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTADComm/2001/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:16:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ankin, Gavin & Ors v Northern Territory of Aust [2001] NTADComm 2 (26 April 2001)
COMPLAINANTS: Gavin Ankin
Reggie Bara
Marcus Cameron
Stanley Kerr
Clarence Mamarika
Desmond Mamarika
RESPONDENT: Northern Territory of Australia
TRIBUNAL: Steve Southwood QC
Hearing Commissioner
ISSUE: Application to review Counsel Assistings’ appointment in the
hearing & to disqualify Commissioner from hearing the
complaints.
DATE OF HEARING: 24 April 2001
DATE OF DECISION: 26 April 2001
REASONS FOR DECISION
1. On 24 April 2001 the Respondent made an application that
1.1. I review the appointment of Mr Tippett as Counsel Assisting me in this
hearing, or
1.2. I disqualify myself from hearing the Complaints made by the Complainants in
this proceeding.
2. The basis of the Respondent’s application was that there was an
apprehension that I might be partial against the Respondent
if Mr Tippett
remained Counsel Assisting. This was because the role of Counsel Assisting was
a special role and Mr Tippett had preconceived
views about the matters or some
of the matters in issue. In effect, there was an apprehension that my judgment
may be contaminated
by Mr Tippett’s preconceived views if he remained
Counsel Assisting.
3. The basis of the assertion that Mr Tippett had preconceived views about the
issues in the proceeding were statements he had reputedly
3.1 on 8DDD FM Drivetime at 4.00pm on 28 July
3.2 to the Northern Territory News on or about 4 August 1999;
3.3 to the Northern Territory News on or about 18 August 1999 about the need
for an Aboriginal Interpreter Service to overcome delays
and problems which were
being experienced in the Courts in the Northern
4. After hearing submissions from Counsel for the Respondent, Ms Eastman;
Counsel for the Complainants, Mr Sheldon; and Mr Tippett
on 24 April 2001, I
dismissed the Respondent’s application. Following are my reasons for
dismissing the Respondent’s
application.
5. The Respondent’s evidence consisted of:
5.1 a written document headed
“4.00pm 8DDD FM DRIVETIME - JON TIPPETT AND DENIS BURKE - ABORIGINAL
INTERPRETER SERVICE DG970652
PROOF FOR OFFICE USE ONLY”
5.2 what appears to be a photocopy of page 19 of the Northern Territory News of
4 August 1999;
5.3 what appears to be a photocopy of page 6 of the Northern Territory News of
18 August 1999.
6. The Respondent did not attempt to verify the statements attributed to Mr
Tippett in the above documents in any way. When asked
where the document
referred to in paragraph 5.1 hereof came from, Counsel for the Respondent was
only able to say the document came
from a transcript service. The document
itself contains the following statement: “this transcript is taken from a
tape recording,
and freedom from errors, omissions or misunderstandings cannot
be guaranteed”.
7. There being no denial of the contents of the documents, Counsel for the
Respondent made the submission that the Respondent could
prove what Mr Tippett
had said and presumably what his opinions were merely by asserting that Mr
Tippett had made the statements
attributed to him in the documents. No
objection was taken to this course by the complainants.
8. I have some concerns about what weight should be given to what is attributed
to Mr Tippett in the documents supplied by the Respondent.
Arguably little
weight should be given to any of the documents particularly the document
referred to in paragraph 5.1 above.
9. However, even assuming Mr Tippett did say all of the matters attributed to
him in the documents tendered by the Respondent and
assuming none of the
statements have been taken out of context, the Respondent’s application
still fails.
10. It is important that:
10.1 The statements attributed to Mr Tippett were made some 20 months ago or
thereabouts;
10.2 The substance of what is attributed to Mr Tippett in the document referred
to in paragraph 5.1 above is:
10.2.1 the problems caused in the Courts by the unavailability of
interpreters of Aboriginal languages have existed for a long time;
10.2.2 the High Court of Australia held in the case of
Ebatarinja v
[1998] HCA 62
(1998) 194 CLR 444
that no person in this country can be tried
properly or fairly unless that person is tried in a language that the person
Indeed, the High Court specifically stated if the defendant does not
speak the language in which the proceedings are being conducted,
the absence of
an interpreter will result in an unfair trial (para 22 p 454). In support of
this proposition the High Court approved
decided in 1885;
10.2.3 that judicial officers for many years have called for the assistance
of interpreters of Aboriginal languages;
10.2.4 that what is needed is an organised and properly accredited service
with paid employees;
10.2.5 that the only obstacle to the provision of an Aboriginal Interpreter
Service was the government’s will to do it;
10.2.6 that there was a role for the Federal Government to play in the
provision of such services;
10.2.7 that the Northern Territory Government has to take the initiative;
10.2.8 it was obvious that the community needed an Aboriginal Interpreter
10.3 The substance of what is attributed to Mr Tippett in the Northern
Territory News on 4 August 1999 was that delays such as did,
in fact, occur in
R v Mandijarra
would continue to occur without an interpreter
services in Aboriginal languages;
10.4 The essence of what is attributed to Mr Tippett in the Northern Territory
News on 18 August 1999 was:
10.4.1 the Northern Territory Government has an obligation to provide the
Community with an Aboriginal interpreter service;
10.4.2 the obligation was about people being fairly tried;
10.5 In the article on 18 August 1999 it is attributed to the Chief Minister,
Mr Burke, that he said he had taken the matter up
with Prime Minister John
Howard and was expecting a response later in the week. If what is attributed to
Mr Burke is accurate then
obviously he recognised a need for interpreters of
Aboriginal languages;
10.6 The document referred to in paragraph 5.1 above also suggests that
comments were made by the Chief Minister following Mr Tippett.
No transcript
has been provided of what Mr Burke said. The failure to provide such transcript
is some evidence that the transcript
of what Mr Burke said would not have
assisted the Respondent in this application. See
Commercial Union
Assurance v Fercom
(1991) 22 NSWLR 389
10.7 Since 18 August 1999 the Northern Territory Government with the assistance
of the Commonwealth Government has provided an Aboriginal
Interpreter
10.8 Each complaint in his original respective complaint, inter alia, complains
10.8.1 he is an Aboriginal person;
10.8.2 his first language is an Aboriginal language;
10.8.3 he was unable to properly understand the proceedings against
10.8.4 he required an interpreter to assist him understand the criminal
10.8.5 an interpreter of his language was from time to time unavailable to
assist him.
10.9 In response to the complaints made by the complainant the Respondent has
variously admitted:
10.9.1 “I confirm that the facts alleged in the above mentioned
matters (Ankin, Bara, Cameron, Cooper, Kerr, Mamarika, Mamarika)
. The position of the Respondent is that there can be no
discrimination on the basis of race or failure to accommodate a special
respect of the failure to provide an Aboriginal Interpreter Service”
(letter of Solicitor for the Northern Territory
dated 21 March 2000);
10.9.2 “As I indicated in earlier conversations
the facts are not
. The office of Ethnic Affairs provides a limited
interpreter/translator service to non-English speaking immigrants and refugees.
It was a condition of the Commonwealth funding in the initial establishment of
the program that such services are to be provided
to non-English speaking
immigrants and refugees, who are considered to be disadvantaged” (letter
of Solicitor for the Northern
Territory dated 28 August 1999);
“As I have indicated throughout, there is not likely to be
any serious dispute as to the factual basis of the individual complaints
clients and I know of no evidence which would cast doubts upon their assertions
that they were handicapped, by reason of
their lack of sufficient skill in the
English language in their ability to fully understand Court proceedings and to
instruct a solicitor”
(letter of Solicitor for the Northern Territory
dated 3 November 1999).
11. The statements attributed to Mr Tippett are to the following
Ebatarinja v Deland
confirms the necessity for Aboriginal
interpreters in appropriate circumstances if there is to be a fair
11.2 Mr Tippett’s experience was that he had been in cases where
interpreters were necessary and where delays and problems
had occurred when
interpreters were unavailable;
11.3 the Northern Territory Government should take the initiative and establish
an interpreter service.
12. There is no evidence that Mr Tippett said:
12.1 the failure to provide interpreters of Aboriginal languages was
discriminating or a breach of the Anti Discrimination
12.2 the Respondent was under a legal duty to provider
interpreters.
13. The Respondent clearly acknowledges a need for interpreters of Aboriginal
languages and that the complaint were handicapped in
the ability to fully
understand Court proceedings and to instruct their solicitors. I do not
understand it to be the Respondent’s
13.1 an Aboriginal Interpreter Service is not required,
13.2 that non English speaking Aboriginals may not be handicapped in Court
proceedings if interpreters are not available,
13.3 that it does not have a role to play in the provision of such
14. Mr Tippett has made no comment about the specific matters raised by the
complaints in this proceeding.
15. The major issue in this proceeding is whether the failure of the Northern
Territory Interpreter Service to provide interpreters
was discriminatory.
16. It cannot be said that Mr Tippett currently holds preconceived views which
affect the specific issues in this case.
17. Further:
17.1 Mr Tippett as Counsel Assisting is subject to my direction and control
(see ss 94(2));
17.2 Mr Tippett will not be involved in determining the issues which are the
subject of the complaints. That is purely a matter
Commissioner.
18. Given all of the above it cannot be said there is a reasonable apprehension
of possible partiality of the kind asserted by the
Respondent or otherwise by an
observer with sufficient knowledge of the subject to make a reasonable
Dated: 26 April
..........................................................
SOUTHWOOD QC
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (149 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter