URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCAT/2024/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:17:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Guinea; Guinea v Gem Energy Australia Pty Ltd [2024] NTCAT 20 (6 December 2024)
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
Small Claims Act 2016
File No: 2024-02008-CT
IN THE CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
MICHAEL LEONARD GUINEA
NIRMALA WATI GUINEA
1ST APPLICANT
2ND APPLICANT
GEM ENERGY AUSTRALIA PTY LTD
PRESIDING MEMBER:
MARK O'REILLY
6 DECEMBER 2024
HEARING TYPE:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
decision of Member Perry on NTCAT file 2023-02545-CT dated 26 April 2024 is
6 December 2024
BY THE TRIBUNAL
DELEGATE OF REGISTRAR
Guinea; Guinea v Gem Energy Australia Pty Ltd
DECISION NUMBER:
[2024] NTCAT 20
MICHAEL LEONARD GUINEA
1ST APPLICANT
NIRMALA WATI GUINEA
2ND APPLICANT
GEM ENERGY AUSTRALIA PTY LTD
MATTER TYPE:
Review Jurisdiction -
Small Claims Act 2016
2024-02008-CT
HEARING DATE:
13 NOVEMBER 2024
DECISION OF:
MARK O'REILLY
DATE OF ORDERS:
6 DECEMBER 2024
APPEARANCES and REPRESENTATION (if any):
MICHAEL GUINEA, NIRMALA GUINEA AND DANIEL GUINEA
RESPONDENT:
LILY ATKINSON-SHEPPARD AND JACK HOOPER
REASONS FOR DECISION:
26 April 2024 NTCAT Tribunal Member Perry, exercising original jurisdiction in a
proceeding under the
Small Claims Act 2016
made a decision to dismiss
proceeding number 2023-02545-CT. This is an internal review of Member
Perry’s decision pursuant
section 140(1)
Northern Territory
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2014
Background to the
4 December 2020 the Respondent installed a PV solar system on the
the Applicants’ home in Darwin. After a heavy storm a short time after
the installation of the PV solar system, the Applicants’ roof leaked
in three places under the PV panels.
of the Respondent attended on 5 January 2021, 20 January 2021, 22 January 2021
and 25 January 2021 and made some attempts to
seal the roof which were
unsuccessful.
some point the Applicants refused further access to the Respondent’s
agents unless they produced an electrician’s
an unsuccessful attempt at a mediated outcome the Applicants ultimately had the
entire roof replaced which required the removal
and reinstallation of the solar
panels. The total cost was $21,300.00. It was this amount that was claimed by
the Applicants in
the original proceeding which was filed on 16 July
Applicants’ claim was based on allegations of negligence; breach of
contract; and a breach of consumer guarantees under
the Australian Consumer Law
Building Act 1993
Applicants’ claim was dismissed by Member Perry essentially on the basis
that the Applicants had failed to establish causation:
”I am unable to determine on balance what caused the leaks or the
extent that the Respondent’s work in installing the
solar panels and hot
water system contributed to the leaks, if at
The Internal Review
Northern Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2014
relevantly provides that:
(1) A party to a proceeding in the Tribunal’s original jurisdiction may
apply to the Tribunal for an internal review of a decision
made by the Tribunal
in the proceeding.
(3) An application under subsection (1) must be:
(a) accompanied by a written statement setting out the grounds on which the
application is made...
(4) An internal review on an application under subsection (1) may be brought
only with the leave of the President.
provides that:
(1) An internal review of a decision (the
original decision
conducted by the Tribunal on an application under
section 140(1)
(a) a determination of whether the original decision was or was not affected by
any error of fact or law; and
(b) the correction of any identified error of fact or law in respect of the
(2) Subject to subsection (3), the Tribunal must hear and determine the
internal review by way of a reconsideration of the evidence
or material that was
before the Tribunal when the original decision was made.
(3) The Tribunal may allow a party to the internal review to give further
evidence or material on the internal review if the Tribunal
considers that it
would be in the interests of justice to do so.
22 July 2024 the Tribunal issued the following orders:
otherwise ordered, the review of NTCAT’s decision in proceeding number
2023-02545-CT (‘the original proceeding’)
will be conducted by a
Member in chambers without the need for parties to attend on or after 12 August
section 46(2)(a)
Northern Territory Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2014
the review hearing will include an examination of the
evidence and material that was before the original decision maker including
sound recording of the original proceeding.
party wishing to:
on new evidence or material pursuant to
section 46(2)(b)
Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2014
oral submissions for the purpose of the review
must make an ordinary
application [Form 3] by no later than 4:00pm on 5 August 2024.
ordinary application made pursuant to order 3 above must have attached to
further evidence or material for which consideration is sought;
explanation in writing as to why the evidence was not put forward in the
original proceeding; and/or
written outline of any submissions upon which the party intends to
THE TRIBUNAL NOTES THAT:
orders 3 and 4 parties should not assume that they will be permitted to rely
upon evidence not put forward in the original
proceeding. Whether they will be
permitted to do so will be affected by the reasons the evidence was not put
5 August 2024 the Applicants sought an extension of time in which to make an
application to rely on new evidence. The application
sought a brief extension
to 7 August 2024.
6 August 2024 the Tribunal received an ordinary application to “present
new evidence or material pursuant to
section 46(2)(b)
of the Northern Territory
Civil and Administrative Tribunal.” As was required, the Ordinary
Application had the material attached
to it. A covering email
“The delay in providing this statement was due to Mr Stanton being on
leave, providing this statement on his return. Additionally,
the submission
date, Monday 5 August, was a public holiday in the Northern Territory. The Form
3 supplied on 5 August provides the
justification for and significance of Mr
Stanton’s statement.”
have no difficulty allowing the Applicants an extension of time in which to make
the application to introduce new evidence.
Respondent objects the introduction of that evidence.
Applicants did not comply with the requirement that they provide an explanation
in writing as to why the evidence was not put
forward in the original
proceeding. The explanation provided by them only goes to the extension of time
oral and written submissions the Applicants submitted that the failure to call
that evidence during the original hearing was because
“the Respondent
introduced a new claim regarding pressure cleaning in their final
submission.”
to the Applicants the issue of pressure cleaning as a possible cause or
contributing cause of the leaking roof was raised
by the Respondent during the
course of the final hearing:
“The suggestion in the closing minutes of the Part-Heard hearing on 8
February 2024 that pressure cleaning was a possible cause
was not analysed.
This suggested possible cause was not in the Hearing Book and the applicants
were provided no time to
It is not clear to me that the possibility of pressure cleaning being a cause of
the leaking was in fact raised during the hearing
on 8 February. Rather it
seems to have first been raised overtly by the Respondent in written submissions
following that hearing.
The evidence of pressure cleaning, though had been
before the Tribunal from early in the
proceeding.
my view it was open to the Respondent to raise the fact of pressure cleaning as
a possible cause of the leaks on the basis of the
evidence that was before the
Tribunal. It was similarly open to the Member to consider it.
Nevertheless
I have decided to consider that evidence for the purpose of the internal review.
As will be seen I do not think that
the evidence materially adds to the
proceeding.
some Directions Hearings and the filing of written submissions, the proceeding
was listed for an oral hearing before me on
13 November
critical issue for determination of this dispute is causation.
is no dispute that the Respondent installed the solar system and that a short
time later roof leaks became apparent.
Applicants’ position is that the roof leaks can be attributed to poor
workmanship or a lack of care on the part of the Respondent.
established it may be that remedies lie one of breach of contract, negligence or
by way of consumer protections under
various pieces of
legislation.
succinct summary of the Applicants’ position can be found at page 170 of
the hearing book in the original proceeding. In
correspondence to the
Respondent dated 29 March 2021 the Applicant wrote:
“In conclusion, the installation of the solar panels by Gem Energy
caused the leaks based on photographic evidence and undeniable
logic of Scottish
philosopher David Hume in his 1739 “Treatise of Cause and Effect”.
This logic of the events being:
contiguous in time, i.e. the short time interval
between installation (cause) and the leak (effect); the cause must be prior to
effect, i.e. the leak followed the installation, and a lengthy period of
stability requires a cause to bring about an effect i.e.
the lengthy period to
having no leaks needs a cause such as solar panel installation, to bring about
the effect, being a leaking
other words, as I understand it, the Applicants’ position is that the
be attributable to the installation of the solar panels
because the roof had not leaked for a long time before the installation and
did leak soon after the installation.
Respondent denies any responsibility for the leaks. Their position is that they
fulfilled the terms of their contract and performed
the work to a satisfactory
standard. They maintain that the coincidental timing of the leaks does not
establish liability on their
the course of the dispute a number of pieces “expert” evidence going
to causation emerged which have been relied upon
Applicants rely on an undated “report” by Developing the North (DTN)
which is comprised of a series of photographs
and brief commentary. That report
was first provided to the Respondent on 23 April 2021 and
“Notes from site visit;
appears to be leaking where solar panel has been installed
have been made to over seal this however has failed
left hand side where no works have been carried out does not appear to be
report also includes a quote for the replacement of the roof at an amount of
$20,648.10. I have not been provided with any explanation
as to what kind of
entity “Developing the North” is or who was the author of the report
or what qualifications or expertise
they may have. Even assuming that the
author was suitably qualified to provide an opinion, as I understand it the
assessment of
the roof by DTN was not conducted while it was raining and the
roof actually leaking
understand that the internal cavity of the roof was not inspected. In any case
it must be noted that the report is brief
and provides little detail and no
attempt to understand or explain with specificity the cause of the leaking
Applicants also refer to correspondence to them from their insurer TIO dated 14
November 2022 which contains the following:
“”we agree with your response that the causation of the damage
was due to poor workmanship/inherent defects, once again
this is an exclusion
apart of the policy.”
If TIO ever arranged for an inspection of the leaking roof it has not been
provided to the Tribunal. Rather, the correspondence seems
to suggest that TIO
have adopted the assumption or belief of the Applicants as a basis upon which to
deny a claim.
Respondent refers to a more detailed assessment by David Rojas of Eco Tech
Electrical dated 3 February 2021. That “report”
included this
assessment of the leaking roof:
“There were no penetrations made anywhere near that area by us during
install or at any other time...I entered the roof a couple
of times and
eventually found what I believe to be the source of the leak (not under the
solar system)...On an inspection of the
roof there was a rust patch forming on
the location where the leak was coming
I understand from the recording of the original hearing on 2 November 2023
that David Rojas inspected the interior cavity of the roof
while it was raining.
Nevertheless, I am not inclined to place much weight on this account of the
leaking. I have not been provided
with any evidence about David Rojas’
qualifications to assess a leaking roof. Further, David Rojas has a direct
interest in the outcome as he was subcontracted by Gem Energy to install the
solar system. I understand that it was David Rojas who
attended the premises a
number of times to try to stop the leaking.
a Statutory Declaration dated 24 October 2023 of Adam Bates who was an employee
of Eco Tech Electrical involved in the installation
confirms that there were
“no new penetrations made to the roof apart from the Dektite
Energy also engaged an independent party to conduct an assessment of the roof.
A short letter from Thomas Kelly, the managing
director of TK constructions
emailed to Gem Energy on 19 February 2021 includes:
“It is my opinion that the water leak is from a pre existing condition
and has nothing to do with the solar installation. There
is evidence at the
dining room window of an old water leak and the videos that I saw when it was
raining shows water tracking in
through capillary effect. There are some other
possible water ingress points I have noted but the laps are the major concern in
my opinion...The best option would be to replace the sheets and flashings in the
problematic areas, as the roof is over 35 years
old and the laps are to (sic)
fatigued to ever get a positive
Kelly was cross-examined in the original proceeding. His evidence was that he
was a carpenter with certificate 3 in building construction
framework, formwork
and finishing and had conducted hundreds of reroofs and new roofs over a very
long time. Mr Kelly could not recall
any signs of poor workmanship in the
installation but did comment on the roof sheets being over 35 years
His evidence was that it
is very rare that you will get anything more than 35 years wear out of a roof.
His opinion remained that
the water leaks were most likely explained by a pre
existing issue and were related to the age of the roof sheets.
Applicants dispute the evidence of Mr Kelly. In my view, however, Mr
Kelly’s is the most objective, on point and reliable
evidence going to the
cause of the leaking roof.
considering all of the evidence relied upon going to causation, Mr Perry decided
that he was unable to determine that the actions
of the Respondent in installing
the solar panels caused or contributed to the leaking roof. Contrary to a
submission of the Applicants,
Mr Perry did not decide “that pressure
cleaning was the cause of the
decided that “there is more than one possible cause of the damage to the
Applicants’ roof. The roof’s
age and condition prior to the work
done by the Respondent, the pressure cleaning of the roof (considering the
roof’s age)
and the work done by the Respondent are all possible causes of
the damage and without strong evidence, the one is as likely the cause
leaks as another.”
agree. Despite the Applicant’s position that there is an
“undeniable logic” that the leaking was caused by the
actions of the
Respondent, the same logic can be applied to the work of SolarCoat who pressure
cleaned, treated rust and painted
the roof prior to the
installation.
note that the parties attempted to reach a negotiated outcome with the
assistance of Consumer Affairs. As part of that process
the Respondent
suggested that a third party building inspector be engaged to independently
assess the roof leaks. Following an unsuccessful
attempt to agree on a suitable
person to conduct the assessment that option was rejected by the
Applicants.
Essentially,
the basis upon which the Applicant’s claim was dismissed was that they had
not provided sufficient evidence in
support of their claim. I agree with that
further evidence introduced by the Applicants into the Internal Review
proceeding does not alter my position. The Applicants have
provided email
correspondence to themselves from Roy Stanton of SolarCoat dated 6 August 2024
which includes this:
“What I can tell you from my many years of being in business and also
specialising in roof coating applications, is high pressure
cleaning a roof with
water will not cause a corrugated roof to leak, unless there are signs of heavy
rust...which we would have
The new material also includes an email from 18 July 2021 containing this
observation:
“...you will see the exposed laps in Completed photos 3 that were
present when we completed the roof...As roof leaks are a hard
one to find some
times and the age of your property could be a factor also, the annex 1 report
certainly shows some very piss poor
workmanship after we had painted the
“Annex 1” is a series of photographs of the roof with no
identification of the allegedly “piss poor” work.
do not place great weight on the evidence of Mr Stanton regarding the likelihood
of damage being caused by high pressure cleaning.
His opinion has been provided
several years after the event in very brief form and is not any kind of
assessment of the cause of
the leaking roof. Like Mr Rojas, he has an interest
in the outcome of any finding of liability.
any case Mr Stanton does seem to concede that high pressure cleaning may cause
damage in some circumstances. His observation of
the age of the roof and the
“exposed laps” is consistent with the evidence of Mr Kelly regarding
Grounds for Internal Review
applicants assert a number of errors in the original decision. I will address
each of them
Applicants assert a denial of natural justice by the Original Decision maker
“abruptly ending the half-day hearing after only 30 Minutes (Part-Heard
Hearing, 8 February 2024), denying the Applicants the
opportunity to present
their full case or rebuttal. This prejudgement violates the principles of
natural justice and procedural
In support of this ground the applicants refer to principles in
MIIA (2006)
In that case
the High Court recognised that:
“It has long been established that the statutory framework within which
a decision-maker exercises statutory power is of critical
importance when
considering what procedural fairness
The Court held that procedural; fairness had not been afforded as the
tribunal “did not give the appellant a sufficient opportunity
evidence, or make submissions, about what turned out to be two of the three
determinative
issues arising in relation to the decision under
was not the case in this matter. The Hearing on 8 February did conclude after a
period of 30 minutes or so but that was following
an earlier hearing of around
90 minutes duration. The hearing on 8 February was only concluded after the
Member had established
that no other evidence was to be called. He then allowed
the parties an opportunity to make written submissions in support of their
respective positions. Both parties took that opportunity with the Applicants
taking a further opportunity to reply to the submissions
of the Respondent
including the submission regarding high pressure cleaning.
considering the process in the original proceeding for the provision of material
and the conduct of the hearings, in my view
it is clear that both parties were
afforded an opportunity to be heard and to provide the evidence and submissions
upon which they
wished to rely. The material provided by the Applicant runs to
many hundreds of pages. I find no error on the part of the original
maker on this basis.
second ground upon which the application for internal review is based is that
the Member “applied the incorrect legal standard
and neglected these
Consumer Guarantees central to
ACCC v Booktopia
Applicants go on to say that “the member misinterpreted the ACL(NT)
principles of compensation by claiming unjust enrichment
instead of the
Applicant’s consumer rights to a just remedy for
case referred to by the Applicants does not seem to be on point in this
proceeding. It was a case wherein the parties had agreed
that the Respondent
had engaged in misleading or deceptive conduct under the relevant Act. The
parties also agreed on the penalty.
Applicants assert that the Respondent’s promotional material was
misleading as there was no reference to the potential that
subcontractors might
perform the installation work. That possibility, however, was included as a
term of the contract at clause
7.8. That clause also required that any installer
must be Clean Energy Council accredited. In my view the Applicants have not
established
any misleading conduct in that respect.
onus in proceedings relying on the ACL rests with the Applicant. The Applicants
in this matter must establish that the respondent
breached statutory guarantees
under the ACL. The Member referred specifically to the Applicants’
reliance on “the principle
Res Ipsa Loquitur
as the basis of
their claim, along with alleged breaches of
Consumer Affairs
and Fair Trading Act 1990
(NT) and the Australian Consumer Law consumer
guarantees”
order to establish a claim for damages under the ACL, the onus is on the
Applicants to establish causation. As already addressed,
that was the principle
issue in dispute in this proceeding. A finding that the Respondent’s
actions or failure caused the
leaking was necessary to proceed to any
consideration of compensation under either the ACL or on the basis of
negligence.
Member’s reference to unjust enrichment was something of an addendum to
his decision. Having already determined that the
Applicants had not made out
their claim, the Member observed that in any case an award for the full amount
of the roof replacement
would have been excessive. Whether that is so or not
does not impact the final decision. The finding of the Member was that the
claim had not been proven.
third asserted error is in relation to the Member’s consideration of
Schellenberg v Tunnell Holdings Pty Ltd
. The Applicants
assert that the Member’s reasoning did not display “any analysis of
[the principles he referred to] to
the present case. He stated his conclusion
rather than the reason for the result reached.” I do not agree. The
Member quoted
the High Court decision at some length in attempts explain and
summarise the principle of
res ipsa loquitur
. He clearly, though, also
applied the principle to the current case. At paragraphs [11] and following,
the Member’s essential
finding was that “there are two possible
explanations for the roof leak”.
Applicants assert that “the Member erred in law when he failed to assess
breaches under the ACL(NT) and the NT
Building Act 1993
.” In my view no
error has been established on this basis. The Member was aware that the
Applicants claim included a claim
on the basis of “alleged breaches of
Consumer Affairs and Fair Trading Act 1990
(NT) and the
Australian Consumer Law consumer
guarantees.”
determined that the Applicants had not established to the requisite standard,
any responsibility for the leaks on the
part of the Respondent.
the Member’s reasons make no mention of the
Building Act 1993
Applicants’ case on the basis of a breach of consumer guarantees either
under the ACL or the
Building Act 1993
required the Applicants to
establish that there had been some failure on the part of the Respondent.
Causation was an essential element
of the Applicants’ claim. In
circumstances where causation had not been established it was not necessary for
the Member to
consider those pieces of legislation any
Applicants assert that the “Member erred in law by misapplying the
doctrine of
res ipsur loquitur
by requiring the elimination of all other
possible causes of the roof damage contrary to
Schellenberg v Tunnel Holdings
(2000). A reading of the original decision reveals that the Member
did not require the elimination of all other possible causes of
the damage.
Rather he noted that on the evidence “there were two possible explanations
for the roof leaks – (i) that
the leaks were caused by the actions of the
Respondent; and (ii) that the leaks were caused by the pressure cleaning of the
prior to the installation of the solar panels.”
coming to that position the Member cited the following from
Schellenberg:
“[For] Australian courts the phrase
res ipsa loquitur
fact from which, if it be unexplained, it is permissible to infer negligence:
but that the onus in the primary sense –
that is the burden of proving the
case against the defendant – remains with the plaintiff. To say that an
accident speaks
for itself does not mean that if no evidence is given for the
defendant the plaintiff is entitled in law to a verdict in his favour.
occurrence speaks of negligence, but how clearly and convincingly it speaks
depends upon its
circumstances.”
the circumstances of this case the Member was not satisfied that the leaking
roof spoke clearly and convincingly of negligence
on the part of the Respondent
or at all. I agree.
Applicants assert that “the Member’s binary approach to causation
misapplied the balance of probabilities standard.
He ignored SolaCoatNT’s
comprehensive cleaning and waterproofing process. Wrongly, he absolved the
Respondent and involved
a third-party, thereby ignoring established principles
of causation as in
March v E & MH Stramare Pty Ltd
Strong v Woolworths Ltd
am not aware that the Member had before him any evidence of the process adopted
by SolarCoat. In any case, he did not absolve the
Respondent but was simply not
satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the Respondent was liable. It
should also be emphasised
that he made no findings about whether or not
SolarCoat was responsible. His final determination was that causation had not
established. For the reasons already given I agree with that
determination.
Applicants assert that “the Members unsupported speculations on
causation” amounted to factual errors. I have dealt
with the issue of
causation above.
Some other issues
they are not directly raised as grounds for the internal review I will deal
briefly with some other issues raised by the Applicants.
pre-building inspections.
was an obligation on the Respondent to ensure that the
Building Act
was complied
with before undertaking the work. Accordingly a Building Permit was applied for
and granted on 19 November 2020.
That permit was signed by Duncan Cooke. On the same date a “
Certificate of Compliance Structural Design” was also signed by Duncan
Cooke. That form includes a section under the heading
“COMMENTS/EXCLUSIONS” which contains the following:
“The following items are excluded and shall be certified separately:
Existing Roof
Structure”.
Applicants rely heavily on this sentence in the Certificate of Compliance. In
oral submissions they referred to
of the Act which allows a building
certifier to require further information before granting a building permit.
That may be so but
it is not what happened in this case. The permit was applied
for and was granted with an accompanying certificate of compliance.
December 2020 a Certificate of Occupancy was issued.
is not apparent to me that the Building Certifier was requiring under the Act,
as he had the power to do, any further certification.
apparent is that the permit was issued. The Applicants have not pointed to any
breach by the Respondent of the Act or Regulations.
any case I do not think this question about compliance with the
Building Act
goes to the heart of the issue. If the Respondents have been in some way
non-compliant they may be open to some sanction under the
Act and Regulations.
In order, though, for the Applicants to establish a claim for damages they would
need to establish some connection
between the non-compliance and their loss.
There is, on the evidence, no issue with the structural integrity of the roof.
is restricted to the roofing itself. More importantly, the evidence
does not establish any negligence or failing on the part of
the Respondent in
relation to the roofing.
note also the terms of the contract between the parties which provided at clause
We will take every reasonable precaution in installing the system at the
Premises. However, we will not be liable in respect of:
(a) The structural integrity of the roof;
(b) The roof’s ability to carry the weight of the system;
(c) Any effect installation of the system has on any roof manufacturer’s
warranty; or
(d) Any damage to the roof or premises which is not due to our negligence or
breach of this agreement.
Non-compliance
Applicants have also referred to the fact that initially aspects of the
installation were assessed as being non-compliant. The
evidence of Adam Bate
during the hearing on 2 November 2023 was that these areas of non-compliance
were minor in nature and easily
remedied. Ultimately the Certificate of
Occupancy was issued. The Applicants have not established that any particular
non-compliance
amounted to negligence, a breach of contract or a breach of
consumer guarantees. Further they have not established that they contributed
the roof leaks.
Qualifications of workers
the Applicant asserts that certain of the workers who attended at the premises
involved in the installation were unqualified
or inadequately supervised. They
complain also of the use of subcontractors.
of those issues are relevant without the Applicants establishing that the
Respondent was in some way responsible for the roof
the reasons above I will dismiss the application for internal review and confirm
the order of Member Perry on NTCAT file numbered
2023-02545-CT dated 26 April
6 DECEMBER 2024
MARK O'REILLY
Sound Recording of Original
proceeding on 2 November 2023 at
Written submissions filed
18 October 2024 at [page 8].
Ibid at page 7.
See for example
submissions of the Applicant filed on 28 September 2023 and the Invoice from
SolaCoat at page 101 of the Hearing
Book in the original
proceeding.
Original Proceeding
Hearing Book (OPHB) at page
Original hearing on
OPHB at page
Ibid at page
OPHB at page
OPHB at page
Recording 2 November
2023 at 01:15:13
Applicants’ written submissions filed 18 October
Internal Review
Hearing Book (IRHB) at page
Ibid at page
See paragraph [35]
above and the recording of the original hearing on 8 February 2024 from
(2006) 231 ALR
Original Decision at
(2000) 170 CLR
Original Decision at
Original decision at
OPHB at page
OPHB at page [94].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (48.5 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter