URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTLC/2023/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:20:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Inquest into the death of Kumanjayi Holmes [2023] NTLC 7 (24 March 2023)
Inquest into the death of Kumanjayi Holmes
[2023] NTLC 7
TITLE OF COURT: Coroner’s Court
FILE NO(s): A0056/2021
DELIVERED ON: 31 March 2023
DELIVERED AT: Alice Springs Local Court
HEARING DATE(s): 30 and 31 March 2023
FINDING OF: Judge Elisabeth Armitage
CATCHWORDS: Child death in care, inherited
genetic disorder, removed from family due to disability
REPRESENTATION:
Counsel Assisting: Jodi Truman
Counsel for Department of
Territory Families: Michael McCarthy
Judgment category classification: A
Judgement ID number:
[2023] NTLC 7
Number of paragraphs: 66
Number of pages: 18
IN THE CORONER’S COURT
SPRINGS IN THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
No. A0056/2021
the matter of an Inquest into the death of
ON: 31 OCTOBER 2021
AT: ALICE SPRINGS HOSPITAL
Judge Elisabeth Armitage
Introduction
deceased was born on 24 May 2006 to Roxanne Morton and Damsien Kelly-Holmes. Her
mother asked that she be referred to as Kumanjayi.
Kumanjayi was born in the
Alice Springs Hospital at full term via normal delivery, she weighed 2,980 grams
and there were no antenatal
or postnatal complications. She had an elder
brother and two younger siblings. She was Aboriginal with family connections to
Creek, Utopia and Murray Downs communities.
passed away on 31 October 2021 at the Palliative Care Ward of the Alice Springs
Hospital. She was fifteen years and five
months old. She was loved by her
family and foster mother and they miss her and grieve her passing. Her death was
“reportable”
as immediately prior to her death she was a
“person held in care” being a “child who is in the CEO’s
as defined in the
Care and Protection of Children Act
This inquest is
Her life before coming into the care of
Department of Territory Families, Housing and Communities
her early years, Kumanjayi and her family predominantly lived at Murray Downs
Station, however they also moved between Harts Range,
Ampilatwatja, Arlparra and
Tennant Creek.
20 November 2012, when Kumanjayi was just six years of age, a notification was
received by the Department of Territory Families,
Housing and Communities
(“TFHC”) from the mobile “Family as First Teachers”
(“FAFT”) unit. It
was reported that Kumanjayi’s eyesight was
deteriorating and her mother needed assistance to get her to specialist
appointments.
2013 Kumanjayi was diagnosed with severe rod-cone dystrophy and epilepsy.
Rod-cone dystrophy (aka cone-rod dystrophy) is an eye
disorder that causes
progressive vision loss. Kumanjayi was treated with medication.
a second notification in September 2014, her teacher advised TFHC that Kumanjayi
was “blind” and had epilepsy,
and the school and her mother were
teaching her Braille.
2 December 2015 a nurse attached to the Royal Flying Doctor Service submitted a
third notification reporting that:
7.1 Her eyesight
was deteriorating and her seizure disorder was requiring medication twice per
7.2 She was
refusing to go to school or take her medication and her mother was struggling
with these challenging behaviours;
7.3 She required
a comprehensive assessment which was difficult to arrange because her family
were mobile between communities; and
7.4 Her mother
had indicated that at times she was unable to meet her needs and was
contemplating “giving her up” to TFHC.
was also said that Kumanjayi and her siblings were exposed to instances of
domestic violence between their parents. This was confirmed
in a fourth
notification on 15 December 2015 when a hospital social worker reported that
Kumanjayi’s father had seriously assaulted
her mother when the children
were present and her mother was in hospital. Sadly, on 24 January 2016, police
again reported another
serious assault by her father on the mother witnessed by
the children, which again resulted in her mother’s hospitalisation.
father was charged and later convicted and sentenced to 4 months imprisonment
for that assault.
January 2016 her mother was saying she needed respite as she was struggling to
manage Kumanjayi’s care. In conversations
with a health worker on 2
February 2016 and again with TFHC on 21 March 2016, her mother confirmed her
request for respite or assistance.
the seventh notification, on 15 April 2016, it was reported
Kumanjayi had been transported to the Tennant Creek Hospital by ambulance after
having an epileptic seizure. TFHC workers attended
the hospital and spoke to her
mother. They provided her mother with a housing support letter and commenced
making other arrangements
to support her mother.
on 29 April 2016, before any substantive support was provided, Kumanjayi was
again transported to hospital following a seizure
at home. When the ambulance
attended, all adults at the house were considered to be intoxicated. TFHC case
work became focussed on
identifying a responsible family member who could care
for Kumanjayi and provide respite.
4 May 2016 Kumanjayi had been hospitalised four times in 2016 for seizures.
Medical staff considered she was dishevelled in appearance
and identified that
she had suffered a fractured right ankle which was placed in a cast. It was
apparent that she was not receiving
the medication she needed to control her
epilepsy. As no suitable family members had been identified as carers, and as
recognised that she could no longer manage her care, with her
mother’s consent, Kumanjayi was placed into the care of the CEO.
nine (9) years of age at the time.
Her life in Tennant Creek in
the care of TFHC
was initially placed with a Family Day Carer in Alice Springs. After four days
her cast cracked and Kumanjayi was taken
to hospital. Kumanjayi refused to
provide adequate care
to Kumanjayi.
was then placed with Community Staffing Solutions where she remained until 29
July 2016. On that day she was placed into the care
of Ms Angela Teasdale
(“Ms Teasdale”) in Tennant Creek. During her foster carer
assessment, Ms Teasdale had advised that
she was willing to care for a child
with a disability because she was employed as Workforce Development
Consultant/Project Co-ordinator
with the NDIS and had an in-depth knowledge of
disability services and the “extra lines of support for children on a
plan”. Ms Teasdale further reported that due to living and
working in remote communities she had an “in-depth knowledge
disabilities” and “FASD, global delays, learning disabilities,
cognitive impairments, acquired brain injuries, severe
mental health, AOD,
suicidal ideation and suicide prevention strategies” were areas of
Kumanjayi initially commenced living with Ms Teasdale she could still walk, but
as the disease progressed she required a walking
frame followed by a wheelchair.
Kumanjayi was enrolled at the Tennant Creek Primary School, and arrangements
were made for afterschool
and respite care. There was regular communication
between Ms Teasdale and TFHC staff. TFHC reported that Ms Teasdale was proactive
in organising extra-curricular activities for Kumanjayi, and the positive
relationship she established with Kumanjayi was evident.
TFHC maintained contact with Kumanjayi’s parents, it was difficult at
times due to their continuing transient lifestyle.
There were also issues with
alcohol. Despite this, case notes indicate that Kumanjayi’s mother
proactively sought out information
she was saddened that she could no longer care for Kumanjayi, she acknowledged
Kumanjayi’s best interests to be
cared for by Ms Teasdale.
29 June 2017, a Protection Order was made in relation to Kumanjayi, with
Parental Responsibility to the CEO until 23 May 2024 which
would have been
Kumanjayi’s 18
12 July 2017, a Carer Re-Approval Report was completed for Ms Teasdale. Ms
Teasdale’s ongoing commitment to Kumanjayi was
well established and she
advocated strongly for her support. The Report approved Ms Teasdale to be a
Specific Foster Carer for Kumanjayi
for a period of two years.
to Kumanjayi’s significant needs, extra support was provided to Ms
Teasdale including respite for six weeks from September
to October 2017 when
Kumanjayi was placed with Safe Pathways in Alice Springs.
case note on 17 November 2018 indicated Kumanjayi’s neurologist was
investigating Batten disease as a possible diagnosis for
her degenerative
condition. Batten disease is caused by an abnormal variant in the CLN3 gene
found on chromosome 16. The National
Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke explains that this gene directs the production of a protein called
battenin. Most
children suffering from Batten disease have a missing part in
the gene and this protein is not produced. Due to the progression of
the disease
children experience: rapidly progressive vision loss which begins between ages 4
and 7, learning and behaviour problems,
slow cognitive decline (dementia), and
seizures commence around age 10. In their teenage years children with Batten
disease develop:
slow movement, stiffness, and loss of balance (also referred as
Parkinsonism), and lose their capacity for speech and language. Sadly,
with this disease become increasingly dependent on their caregivers and have a
shortened life expectancy of between 15 and
3 January 2019, test results for Kumanjayi confirmed a clinical diagnosis of
Batten disease (CLN3). Ms Teasdale was “flattened”
Kumanjayi’s diagnosis and she determined to fill Kumanjayi’s life
with as much experience and fun as possible. Complicating
her condition were
additional diagnoses of Autism Spectrum Disorder, Intellectual Disability-Severe
Impairment Secondaries, Cone
Rod Dystrophy, Epilepsy and Incontinence.
these diagnoses, arrangements were made for her mother to have access with
Kumanjayi. Efforts were made to locate her father
to inform him of the
diagnoses, however he could not be found.
2019, Kumanjayi had infrequent access with her mother and siblings who had
relocated to Katherine. TFHC provided travel
funding in January and July 2019
for such visits. Attempts were made to establish regular phone contact however
consistent and reliable
telephone contact proved challenging.
2019 TFHC case work focused on addressing Kumanjayi’s complex needs. A
multi-disciplinary care team was established consisting
of a NDIS coordinator,
Brain Injury Support, Paediatrician, Neuropsychologist, Paediatric Neurologist,
Mobility Instructor, Occupational
Therapist, Physiotherapist and Eye Specialist.
Kumanjayi was also referred to the Alice Springs Hospital Palliative Care team,
work commenced on end of life decisions with her mother consistent with
TFHC’s End of Life Planning Procedure for children
1 September 2019, Ms Teasdale was re-approved by TFHC to be a Specific Foster
Carer for Kumanjayi and a respite carer for another
child, for the period 12 May
2019 to 11 May 2021. In August 2019, Ms Teasdale planned to relocate from
Tennant Creek to Alice Springs.
In October 2019, Ms Teasdale and Kumanjayi moved
to Alice Springs so Kumanjayi could have increased access to services. Her TFHC
case management was transferred to the Alice Springs office.
to the aggressive and debilitating nature of Batten disease, Kumanjayi by then
required care twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven
(7) days per week arranged
and overseen by Ms Teasdale. It is clear that Ms Teasdale ensured that
Kumanjayi was supported and loved
by those who cared for her.
engagement with the National Disability Insurance Scheme
National Disability Insurance Scheme (“NDIS”) is an initiative of
the Commonwealth Government that funds costs associated
with disability. It was
legislated for in 2013 and entered into full operation in 2020. Administration
of the NDIS is handled by
the National Disability Insurance Agency
(“NDIA”). The operation of the NDIS is overseen by the NDIS Quality
and Safeguards
Commission (“NDIS Commission”).
to the introduction of the NDIS, the Northern Territory Government delivered
disability services through the Aged and Disability
Program administered by the
Department of Health. The Northern Territory's trial of the NDIS commenced on 1
July 2014 in the Barkly
region with the Northern Territory Government formally
transitioning to the full-scheme NDIS on 1 July 2019. Since 2019, the NDIA
been responsible for the delivery of disability services under the NDIS.
Kumanjayi was referred to the NDIS in July 2014, as at November 2014 she had not
been “formally” accepted into
the scheme.
attempted to clarify her NDIS status. On 4 and 15 December 2015 they emailed the
NDIS enquiring whether she was a client but
received no response. A third email
was sent on 18 January 2016. On 25 January 2016, some 18 months after the
initial referral,
the NDIS manager responded by email that she would
“follow up” with the family to “discuss NDIS with them”.
8 February 2016 TFHC sent an email to the NDIA, the child health nurse and
school principal, to organise a professionals meeting
to discuss Kumanjayi.
There is no evidence that meeting took place.
21 March 2016 TFHC again made contact with NDIS. An NDIS worker committed to
updating Kumanjayi’s NDIS plan and organising
support through Vision
Australia and Catholic Care. A copy of Kumanjayi’s NDIS case plan was
finally provided to TFHC in August
2016 and additional applications for
incontinence funding and swimming assistance were made.
appears from the material provided by TFHC that from 17 November 2015, Kumanjayi
had a NDIS plan which was initially due to expire
on 15 November 2016. Her
progressive disease meant that her support needs increased quite rapidly and her
NDIS plan required frequent
review. However, despite advocacy by both Ms
Teasdale and TFHC, the reviews did not occur in a timely manner and her supports
not meet her increasing level of need.
27 March 2017, TFHC received the reviewed support plan. As Kumanjayi was in the
care of the CEO, TFHC was responsible for reviewing
her plan to ensure it
properly provided for her needs. TFHC and Ms Teasdale considered the proposed
support plan to be insufficient
for Kumanjayi’s needs. Assistance was
sought from Brain Injury South Australia, which was the responsible agency for
NDIS appeals,
and on 13 April 2017 an application for review was lodged.
9 May 2017, the outcome of the review by the NDIS was received. The NDIS made
some changes to increase supports to Kumanjayi, however,
it was considered they
were still not sufficient to provide for her needs. For example, the new plan
did not make provision for a
Coordinator of Supports (which had previously been
included) seemingly with the expectation that TFHC would coordinate support.
However, children not in the care of TFHC were entitled to such assistance. It
appeared that the NDIS was assessing Kumanjayi as
a “child in care”
and not simply as a child with disabilities.
1 June 2017, Brain Injury South Australia made application for legal funding for
Kumanjayi to lodge an appeal which was granted
on 1 June 2017.
order to provide evidence of the further supports required, Kumanjayi required a
cognitive and autism spectrum disorder assessment.
As the NDIS refused to fund
the assessment, TFHC provided the funds. On 25 July 2017, Kumanjayi participated
in the multidisciplinary
assessment with Novita in South Australia. She was
assessed as suffering from a range of complex disabilities across all areas of
development that fell within a “moderate to severe” range which were
likely to be “lifelong”. Ultimately
the cost of this assessment was
recovered on appeal, as the report,
“..provided extremely
valuable opinions and advice as to the nature and extent of the
applicant’s disabilities and the
supports she requires and...also
qualifies as a reasonable and necessary support for the
applicant.”
16 August 2017, a conciliation conference was held between Ms Teasdale,
supported by TFHC, and the NDIA. Agreement was reached
for additional support,
coordination hours and funding for assistive technology. The matter was also
listed for a hearing at the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal (“AAT”)
in October 2017.
Unfortunately,
the decision of the AAT was not received until 7 March 2018. The decision varied
Kumanjayi’s NDIS plan from May
2017 to include the following additional
39.1 Support
coordination in the sum of $12,228.32.
39.2 Increased
social and community participation in the sum of $2,200.
supports in the amount of $8,779.96.
39.4 Cognitive
assessment in the sum of $1,020.
39.5 Assistive
technology in the sum of $10,080.
39.6 Improved
daily living in the sum of $11,375.70 plus the cost of an orientation
assessment.
39.7 Improved
relationships in the sum of
the question of which agency was the appropriate provider of respite funding,
the Deputy President stated:
“... the applicant cannot
participate in the usual respite arrangements which apply to children in foster
care. Because of her
significant disabilities, difficult behaviours and complex
needs, when her foster mother is not available to care for her, she must
placed in disability supported accommodation on a temporary basis. I see no room
for doubt that this expense is attributable to
the applicant’s
disabilities, is not more appropriately funded as part of a universal service
obligation and therefore must
be met as a reasonable and necessary support under
the NDIS. I note my conclusion in this regard is consistent with the COAG
Principles,
which expressly acknowledge that additional respite care required as
a result of a child’s disabilities so as to enable sustainable
arrangements for them will be a reasonable and necessary support under the
considered that the revised plan appropriately accommodated Kumanjayi’s
needs and made provision for her to access a range
of supports. Because of the
constant deterioration of her health, she was allocated to the NDIS Complex
team, she had a dedicated
planner and her needs were reviewed every six months.
Between 2018 and 2020, the NDIS delivered approximately $360,000 every six
months to support Kumanjayi. Ms Teasdale said,
“..Batten’s you have to plan to be proactive...it
was so important to have the funding from the NDIS because the more
could do with her to keep her physically active, the better it would be for
a review in May 2021, the NDIS reduced her annual funding to $246,874, a
decrease greater than 50% in comparison to her
funding for the past two years.
From the perspective of TFHC and Ms Teasdale the decision was inexplicable given
her care needs were
increasing.
medical records from Congress seem to confirm that her condition was
degenerating and her level of need was increasing. Her progress
notes for 29
June 2021 include the following:
“..wheelchair bound but
able to transfer with two helpers and device
-essentially blind.
-NDIS issues: funding has been reduced, but actually needs increased
funding/support, given degenerative neurological condition
Increasing dementia
Increasing alzheimers shake
Needing greater support 2/1
More loss of continence
Requires assistance with
26 May 2021 TFHC lodged a Freedom of Information (“FOI”) request to
the NDIS to ascertain its justification for reducing
supports. On 21 July 2021
the NDIS FOI team sent an email outlining that it had “not actioned the
FOI request” as it
“may have been misplaced” by the FOI
and resource intensive review and appeal processes were recommenced. Following
an unsuccessful review, the appeal was scheduled
to be heard in November 2021.
Her NDIS funds were depleted in about August and she passed away before the
listed appeal date.
Teasdale described the experience with NDIS this
“...it was sad because I had to be able to give her my
love and support and care for her, but at the same time deal with challenging
monster of a system that was disgracefully and inhumanely negating any level of
impact of disability that she had, and I should
never have been put in that
position [and] ...because the funding had been diminished completely the staff
weren’t being paid
was distressing for her carers and TFHC staff that there was so much complexity
in securing NDIS funding for services to meet Kumanjayi’s
significant and
growing care needs arising from her disabilities. There is currently a Royal
Commission inquiring into the operation
of the NDIS and I do not wish to
pre-empt its findings but note that Kumanjayi was an extremely vulnerable
recipient of the NDIS
for whom the scheme should have operated better.
Her care in Alice Springs until her passing
6 February 2020 her parents expressed a wish that Kumanjayi remain in TFHC care
but did not support a Permanent Care Order being
granted to Ms Teasdale as they
wanted Kumanjayi to remain connected to family.
the care provided by Ms Teasdale was considered by TFHC to be excellent, from
time to time there were grievances that arose
between Ms Teasdale and
Kumanjayi’s support workers and school. At one stage these grievances
resulted in the withdrawal of
some support services. However TFHC considered
that in cases as complex and difficult as this case, it was not uncommon for
to be tensions between carers and service providers.
considered that Ms Teasdale was an exceptional advocate for Kumanjayi and she
constantly sought improved and higher standards
(including from TFHC themselves)
on her behalf. For example, early on Ms Teasdale identified a tricycle that
would support Kumanjayi’s
movement and independence. Following intense
and persistent advocacy, funding for this was provided by the NDIS and TFHC
staff witnessed
Kumanjayi’s joy when she independently achieved mobility
on the tricycle. Later, when her mobility was extremely limited, Ms
requested specialist transport for Kumanjayi to allow her to continue to attend
school, appointments and extracurricular
activities. Although the NDIS did not
fund the purchase or lease of a vehicle, on 13 October 2020, the CEO approved
for TFHC to lease
a vehicle with specialised wheelchair access for Kumanjayi at
a cost of $36,146.67.
August 2021 Kumanjayi’s TFHC care plan documented that she required 2-3
staff to support any mobility activities at school
and was spending most of her
days in a wheelchair. She required support to move around in her wheelchair and
used a harness to ensure
she was safe. Her toileting required the support of
2-3 people and took from 30 to 90 minutes and it was not uncommon for Kumanjayi
to become very distressed. She needed full assistance to eat and drink.
these challenging circumstances, Ms Teasdale continued to ensure that she
participated in recreational, leisure and social
activities. Kumanjayi
continued to enjoy swimming, visits to the Desert Park and Reptile Centre,
movies, cultural and music events.
26 August 2021, there was only two weeks of funding left in Kumanjayi’s
TFHC care plan and her NDIS funding was depleted.
TFHC determined to provide
$147,700.14 additional funding for Kumanjayi’s care from September 2021 to
her death in order for
her to remain in the care of Ms Teasdale with the
appropriate supports. The crisis situation which was allowed to develop placed
unnecessary stress on Ms Teasdale and Kumanjayi’s immediate care team.
While the process of calculating and securing additional
funding was complex,
TFHC acknowledged it would have been prudent to address her funding situation
earlier, so as to avoid the crisis.
This was an appropriate concession.
2 October 2021, Kumanjayi was admitted to the Alice Springs Hospital Emergency
Department (ED) due to increased abnormal movements,
aspiration pneumonia and
constipation. The hospital records reveal a decline in her health over the
previous three months. Kumanjayi
was transferred from ED to the Paediatrics ward
and discharged back into the care of Ms Teasdale on 10 October 2021.
14 October 2021, Kumanjayi’s condition deteriorated and she was
re-admitted to hospital. Her disease had progressed to such
an extent that on
27 October 2021 she was transferred to the Palliative Care Ward for end-of-life
care. During her last days, TFHC
arranged for her family to attend and remain
in Alice Springs and she was surrounded by her family and Ms Teasdale when she
away on 31 October 2021 at 6.25pm.
her passing, TFHC supported her family with all funeral arrangements and, in
accordance with the family’s wishes,
her funeral was at Murray Downs where
she spent her early childhood.
Cause of Death
her death, and having reviewed the medical records, Dr Marianne Tiemensma,
Forensic Pathologist, recommended there was:
“... no reason
to believe that the decedent died from any other than her known, underlying
natural conditions, and this is not
considered to be an unexpected or
unexplained death, and there is no suggestion of neglect or lack of
Tiemensma suggested that the cause of death be certified as “Complications
of Batten disease (CLN3)” and that in her
opinion there was “(n)o
need for a medico-legal autopsy”. Her mother and Ms Teasdale accepted
that recommendation and
no autopsy was conducted.
coronial investigation found no suspicious circumstances surrounding her
Conclusions
the time that Kumanjayi was in the CEO’s and Ms Teasdale’s care she
was loved and cared for, and her needs were
provided for as best they could be
in the circumstances of her disease. I commend Ms Teasdale on the care she
provided to Kumanjayi.
conducted a Practice Review (“the Review”) following her passing,
and the Review formed part of the evidence in this
inquest. It was unfortunate
that there were significant challenges in funding Kumanjayi’s care needs
at sufficient levels and
in a timely manner. At times there seemed to be a
stalemate between the NDIS and TFHC as to which agency had responsibility to
her care services. But Ms Martina O’Brien, Executive Director of
Families central Australian region, explained that;
the relative age of the scheme there remained uncertainty with respect to the
division of responsibilities between the
Department and the NDIS (which) was
only resolved through proceedings at the AAT. Child Protection Practitioners are
not experts
in disability support and it is clear that, at times, these
processes caused them some
difficulty.”
spite of these difficulties, the involvement of TFHC and its Disability and
Development Team (“DDT”) established in
2020 contributed positively
to the provision of services to Kumanjayi. I understand that the purpose of the
DDT is to support children
in care, like Kumanjayi, to ensure they receive
appropriate supports and NDIS funding in accordance with their needs.
behalf of the TFHC, Ms O’Brien explained that there is work occurring
nationally to streamline communications between the
NDIA and the various child
protection agencies in each Australian jurisdiction. The DDT is currently
working with the NDIA on a data
sharing agreement which should allow the
Department to have greater access to the details of the NDIS plans of children
in out-of-home
addition, I am told that the DDT now has a monthly ‘operational
meeting’ with the NDIA where they are able to discuss
issues relating to
NDIS plans for children in out-of-home care. Ms O’Brien is hopeful that
improved communication and a more
collaborative working relationship between
TFHC and the NDIA will reduce the need for appeals and the risk of NDIS plans
out of funding. These monthly meetings were commenced in response to the
difficulties identified in the management of Kumanjayi’s
make no recommendations in relation to this death.
to s34 of the Act, I make the following formal findings:
identity of the deceased person was Damilia Kelly Holmes born 24 May 2006 at the
Alice Springs Hospital, in Alice Springs in the
Northern Territory of
time and place of death was approximately 6.25pm on 31 October 2021 at the Alice
Springs Hospital Palliative Care Ward, in Alice
Springs in the Northern
Territory of Australia.
cause of death was complications of Battens disease (CLN3).
Particulars
required to register the death:
deceased was a female.
deceased’s name was Damilia Kelly Holmes.
deceased was a child.
deceased was of Aboriginal descent.
death was reported to the Coroner.
post-mortem examination was not carried out with the consent of the
Coroner’s office.
cause of death was confirmed by Dr Marianne Tiemensma.
deceased’s mother was Roxanne Morton, and her father was Damsien
Kelly-Holmes.
Dated this 31 day of March
_________________________
ELISABETH ARMITAGE
TERRITORY CORONER
Coroners Act 1993
and National Disability Insurance Agency
[2018] AATA 431
(6 March 2018) per
Deputy President K Bean at [49]
Ibid at [52]
Statutory declaration of
Angela Teasdale dated 24/11/2021 at
Central Australian
Aboriginal Congress Patient Summary for Damilia Holmes printed 06/12/2021
12.45.34, entry 29/06/2021
Statutory declaration Angela Teasdale dated 24/11/2021 at
Affidavit, Martina
O’Brien, dated 11/10/2022 at [137-138]
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (290 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter