URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCCA/2024/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:18:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Forrester v The King [2024] NTCCA 15 (20 December 2024)
Forrester v The King
[2024] NTCCA 15
PARTIES: FORRESTER, Jerome Kennedy
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: CA 15 of 2023 (22111022)
DELIVERED: 20 December 2024
HEARING DATE: 28 November 2024
JUDGMENT OF: Kelly, Brownhill & Huntingford JJ
CATCHWORDS:
CRIMINAL LAW – Appeal against conviction – Violent act causing
death – Whether the trial judge erred in rejecting
an application to
discharge the jury – Whether trial judge erred in permitting the Crown to
reopen its case – Circumstances
were foreseeable and not exceptional
– Rejecting application to discharge the jury resulted in a substantial
miscarriage of
justice – Whether the trial judge erred in summing up
– Real prospect that the appellant would have been acquitted on
that he was acting in self-defence if the established errors had not been made
– Appeal allowed – Conviction
set aside – Retrial ordered.
Criminal Code 1983
(NT), s 43BD, s 161A (1), s 411 (3), s 413
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
Alford v Magee
[1952] 25 ALJR 753
; Azzopardi v The Queen
[2001] HCA 25
; BD v The Queen (No 2)
[2017] NTCCA 8
Crofts v The Queen
[1996] HCA 22
(1996) 186 CLR 427
; Killick v The Queen
[1981] HCA 63
(1981) 147 CLR 565
Lawrence v The Queen
[1931] ArgusLawRp 87
(1981) 38 ALR 1
; Liberato v The Queen
[1985] HCA 66
; MLW v The Queen
[2022] NTCCA 2
Murray v The Queen
[2002] HCA 26
211 CLR 193
[2003] HCA 13
(2003) 212 CLR 299
; Shaw v The Queen
; The King v Wasaga (No 2)
[2024] NTSC 98
; The Queen v Chin
[1985] HCA 35
(1985) 157 CLR 671
; Tully v The Queen
[2006] 230 CLR 234;
v DPP (Vic)
[1987] HCA 26
(1987) 162 CLR 645
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: T Game SC with T Moses
Respondent: L Babb SC with L Auld
Solicitors:
Appellant: Northern Territory Legal Aid Commission
Respondent: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 59
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Forrester v The King
[2024] NTCCA 15
No. CA 15 of 2023 (22111022)
JEROME KENNEDY FORRESTER
CORAM: KELLY, BROWNHILL & HUNTINGFORD JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 20 December 2024)
Introduction
[1] This is an
appeal against conviction on a single charge of engaging in a violent act
causing death contrary to s 161A(1) of the
Criminal Code
a trial by jury which took place between 28 November 2022 and 5 December
2022. There are two grounds of appeal:
Ground 1: The trial judge
erred in rejecting the appellant’s application to discharge the jury on 1
December 2022 after the
Crown prosecutor’s closing address and instead
permitting the Crown to re-open its case, to recall and cross-examine two Crown
witnesses and then to make a further closing address. In particular:
trial judge applied the wrong test to the question, or failed to consider at
all, whether or not the Crown should be permitted
leave to re-open its case;
trial judge failed to adequately consider the unfair prejudice and forensic
disadvantage to the appellant occasioned by the course
proposed to be
Ground 2: The trial judge erred in his summing up
by directing the jury that on the question of self-defence it was a question of
whether or not the jury accepted or rejected the appellant’s out of court
statements that he was head-butted by the deceased
and that, if they rejected
them, that was “the end of the matter”.
[2] The charge
of engaging in a violent act causing death arose out of an altercation which
occurred on the veranda at House 15, Knuckeys
Lagoon Camp at approximately 11 am
on 2 April 2021. The appellant struck Ronald Weetra (the deceased), who fell
back and hit his
head, causing injuries which led to his death.
[3] The main
issue at trial was whether or not the appellant was acting in self-defence. The
defence case was that the deceased had
head-butted the appellant, and the
appellant was defending himself when he struck the deceased.
Crown opening
[4] The Crown
opened its case on 28 November 2022. During the opening, the prosecutor
described what the Crown said occurred leading
up to the altercation on the
veranda and the fatal punch. Regarding the crucial point of time, the prosecutor
At that point it looks like all those who could have had some
stay or say in what happened next, left the veranda and left that area
that space to [the appellant] and to [the deceased].
Nobody sees what
happened next other than there was a chest off, face to face, noses almost
, two people right into each other’s grill. Out on the veranda
outside the house, there was shouting and raised voices.
Nobody saw what
happened next.
So we can rely on only the things that other people who were there tell us
and part of that is about the observations of what [the
deceased] was doing
immediately in the lead up to and immediately at the time after
the hit, that
nobody saw, but somebody heard
Now it may be that Maxine did see what happened, but she’s going to
tell you that she didn’t see a thing
. Geneva is going to tell you that
she came outside and there were people, Shane, Shane’s nephew, who’s
the accused, her
auntie, who is Maxine and Troy, Shane’s brother, around
[the deceased] who was lying on the ground still breathing but with
blood coming
from his face. And she heard them say to the accused, “You shouldn’t
have hit him”. And he said back,
“He was looking for that
punch”. We know what that means, it means he was asking for it, he
deserved it.
prosecutor made reference in the opening to a 000 call made after the deceased
had been punched and was lying on the veranda
of the house. He
Then there’s a phone call to 000, because it’s
serious. You will hear that phone call in full and you're going to hear
say is the accused in the background, carrying on, being restrained and saying,
we say you’ll be able to hear, “I
shouldn’t have hit him. For
fuck’s sake”.
prosecutor also talked about the fact that the veranda had been cleaned up,
[The deceased] was taken away and the prognosis was pretty
dire. Once he was received into the hospital they made a very quick assessment
and believed that his next of kin ought to be notified, [the deceased]
wasn’t going to make it. That information was relayed
soon as it could be and police realised that there was a very serious incident
here that needed further investigation.
Police returned back to the scene once
again to ensure that the crime scene was established.
In that time that – between their first attendance – these are
the two first responders – and the time that they
returned, around about 2
o'clock, so a break of about three hours, both the ladies had been taken home to
wherever they’d come
the veranda had been hosed down; and things
that had been left had been placed in a bin, essentially the scene had been
prosecutor also made some very general remarks about loyalty in the context of
assessing the evidence. He said:
One thing that his Honour has
already told you about, you need to be mindful about is the things that you feel
are intrinsic to your
experience as human beings, how people relate to one
another, how people tell their stories, how they tell you the things that they
saw and felt around them at the time that it was happening.
You also know that people make choices about the things they say they saw and
the things that they didn’t say they saw. You
know as well as anybody that
there are loyalties that you maintain, that there are things that you choose to
say because it may protect
somebody else or it might protect yourself. Because
in this morning, this one time, [the deceased] didn’t truly have a single
family member at House 15. The accused had three. One of those ladies was a
young person, a child who was 15. Another was her auntie,
a lady that she
listened to and that she followed.
When we put all these things together, finding a line that you accept and
understand to be the reality of what transpired, what actually
happened and how
it happened, you’ll be applying common sense to the facts that fall from
the evidence that you’ll hear
from those witnesses that were there or had
some involvement when that happened on that day on 2 April
[8] During the
opening, the prosecutor stated that the accused could be heard in the background
of the 000 call, saying the words,
“Shouldn’t have punched him, fuck
Though not explicitly
labelled as such in the opening, this would clearly have been relied on as an
prosecutor also said that the first time the accused mentioned being
head-butted, and claimed he was acting in self-defence,
was two days later at
the police station.
[10] It should
be noted that:
Crown specifically opened on the basis that none of the witnesses had seen what
occurred at the crucial point of time; “
Nobody saw what happened
the prosecutor made some generalized remarks about loyalty and the fact that the
witnesses were related to the accused, not
the deceased, he did not state that
the Crown alleged there had been a cover-up, or that the witnesses had seen what
had happened;
sinister motive was ascribed to the cleaning up of the veranda; it was not said
to be part of a cover up.
The evidence
evidence was then heard over three days on 28, 29 and 30 November 2022. The
Crown called five witnesses to the events leading
to the death. None of those
witnesses gave evidence that they saw the physical altercation leading to the
death. The Crown did not
suggest otherwise to any of the witnesses other than,
obliquely, Maxine Gumbula. It was not put to Maxine Gumbula that she did see
what happened, but in cross-examination by the prosecutor pursuant to
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
Uniform Evidence Act
’), this exchange
Okay. Now, the reasons why you didn’t want to say
these things to the police was because you did not want to get involved in
family situation between [the accused] and [the deceased] and his brothers,
didn’t you?---Yes.
Yes. Maxine, you’re under oath here and you’re asked to tell the
truth: did you see [the accused] hit [the deceased]?---No,
I didn’t see
[the accused] hit [the deceased].
evidence of the five witnesses was to the following effect:
(a) Devina Murrungun gave evidence that she was asleep inside House 15 when the
altercation occurred. She woke to shouting
She went outside and saw
the deceased “laying down and everyone standing around her
The appellant
“was trying to help” the deceased. She recalled hearing Maxine
Gumbula ask the appellant why he hit the
deceased and she heard the appellant
answer: “He need (sic) the punch”, or alternatively he was looking,
or asking, for
recalled that the appellant said that the deceased started
She said the appellant was
initially “talking shit” when she came outside but then became
worried about the deceased.
She denied seeing what occurred and the prosecutor
clarified that he was not suggesting that she saw any physical altercation
the appellant and the
(b) Maxine Gumbula initially gave evidence that she was asleep inside House 15
when the altercation occurred.
She woke up to the appellant shouting for help. She said that she remained
inside. The Crown was given leave under s 38(1) of the
Uniform Evidence
to cross-examine Maxine Gumbula describing her evidence that she
remained inside the house as “diametrically opposed to the
case”. In cross-examination by the Crown, the witness adhered to her
evidence that she did not go outside, and that she
did not see what had
occurred. She agreed with a series of leading propositions that she told the
appellant that he shouldn’t
have hit the deceased and that he told her
that the deceased was asking, or looking, for the
(c) Troy Forrester gave evidence that he saw the deceased and the appellant
arguing on the veranda outside House 15. He told them
to stop arguing and once
he felt that the intensity of the argument had dropped, he went back
A minute or two later he
heard the argument resume.
he went back outside, the deceased was already on the
The appellant was
nearby. He immediately moved to help the
He said he was
“in shock, trying to help” his friend and did not recall what anyone
else was doing.
He said that the
deceased had an underlying heart condition. It was not suggested to Troy
Forrester that he saw any physical altercation
between the deceased and the
appellant. He was not asked about any discussion concerning what happened
between the appellant and
the deceased and he indicated that he did not talk to
the appellant about what
After the deceased
left by ambulance and police had attended and left, Troy said that he and Shane
Forrester cleaned up.
(d) Shane Forrester gave evidence that he saw the deceased and the appellant
standing facing one another on the veranda outside House
15 with their heads
close together almost touching, but not
They weren’t
arguing but the situation was “strange” and he ran over to place
himself between and separate
When he moved between
them, they moved around him. He said he told the deceased and the appellant
words to the effect of “come
on now” and “now leave it”.
They separated but did not respond
As he went back
inside, Shane Forrester said he heard a “sudden
When he went back
outside, the deceased was laying on the ground with the appellant
No one else was present.
Tristram Forrester then came outside and later, Troy Forrester came out after he
Shane Forrester
recalled the appellant was
“probably a bit of
He said he asked
the appellant what had happened but couldn’t recall the response. He was
permitted under s 32 of the
Uniform Evidence Act
to refresh his memory
from a prior statement made to police.
It was then put to him by
the prosecutor and he agreed that the appellant had said something like,
“The Lord has something
in store for
It was not put to him
that he saw any physical altercation between the deceased and the appellant. He
was not cross-examined.
(e) Tristram Forrester gave evidence that he was inside House 15 making a coffee
or tea. He saw the appellant and the deceased “having
looking at each other in a “serious”
After the appellant and the
deceased moved out of his line of vision, he heard two
Shane Forrester told him
to call the police and when he went outside, he saw the deceased laying down on
the veranda.
initially notice the appellant but later recalled that the appellant said,
“Please Ronald, get
He described the
appellant as “angry sad”. Tristram Forrester was permitted under s
Uniform Evidence Act
to refresh his memory from a prior
statement made to police. He was also cross-examined by the prosecutor by leave
given under s
Uniform Evidence Act
. Under cross-examination by
the prosecutor, Tristram Forrester agreed that the appellant said, “Now
I’m going to go to
gaol”, or words to that effect, while the
deceased was on the ground waiting for the
[13] The Crown
closed its case on 30 November 2022.
[14] The defence
did not go into evidence. In this appeal, the appellant said that at the trial
the defence had relied on evidence
led by the Crown of the appellant’s
version of events: that the deceased head-butted him in the face, and he was
self-defence. Further, the defence was also content to rely on the
surrounding contextual evidence to the effect that immediately
altercation, the deceased and the appellant were standing close together arguing
or in silent conflict; the deceased was
intoxicated; and he had removed his
shirt at some point. There was also evidence that, during the previous night,
the deceased had
been involved in two aggressive arguments. During one argument
with Troy Forrester, the deceased broke a chair. Further, the appellant
that it had not been suggested by the Crown that the appellant struck the
deceased more than once or that the strike itself
(rather than the fall) caused
the deceased’s death.
The Crown closing address
Thursday, 1 December 2022, the prosecutor gave his closing address to the jury.
In the closing address, the prosecutor made
the following
will not be lost on you that [the deceased] did not have a single family member
in that group that were there at House 15 on
that particular morning.
You know that Troy and Shane are direct blood brothers. You know that Troy
and Shane are the direct uncles of the accused. Troy and
Shane are cousins to
Tristram. The accused is a distant or a second cousin to Tristram. They are all
related by blood.
The further away you get from the accused, the more obvious it is that there
is something – there is an agenda. There is an
issue to protect; that the
information that they’re providing to you is guarded by other allegiances
and other loyalties and
other factors, other than necessarily giving you the
absolute truth.
Because we’re relying on people who had connections to the accused,
you’ve got to be careful and think about what it is
that they’re
telling you and why they’re telling you. You have to think about the
information that they’re passing
on when they were firsthand there; when
they were right in the mix; when
they’re telling you bits and pieces
You know how the world works. You know that if there is something going on
which is intense, is flaring up, is leading to a confrontation,
walk away. You don’t turn away. You don’t go and decide to do
something that you hadn’t done previously
that morning. You’re
watching. If you’re not intervening, you’re making sure you’ve
got eyes on what’s
So, if we’re putting all that in the mix and working out that some
things aren’t necessarily being told to you as they
actually happened,
what can you rely on? What are the things that you can knock down and say, this
happened this way? This is what
was happening at this point in time, okay?
The back of the head connecting with the ground is the fatal injury. It
caused the brain injury that was the loss of life. We know
that. All right.
Nobody, at this point, you are led to believe on the evidence that’s
provided, not one single person saw that hit. Not one,
So, now, you’ve got to go to information where you can qualify or
colour or take a lens to that particular piece of information
that you’re
being asked to believe, and that is the 000 call. Now, the 000 call, it has
revealed a number of things that wasn’t
readily apparent.
There are most clearly three distinct voices in the background, putting aside
Tristram who was on the phone to the caller –
or the operator, okay.
He’s referred to most often as “the caller” in the transcript
that you’ve got. Now,
Tristram is the only one in that group who is
attending to [the deceased], doing what he can to make sure that he’s
the best treatment that he can provide.
Now, you will note that at one point he says, “Can somebody help
here?” So, something is going on around him where they’re
focusing on the deceased.
I can tell you that what we say you will hear is someone shouting in a very,
very anguished, angry voice, “Why the fuck you
gotta fucken do that for?
What’s wrong with you?” Now, we say that that is either Troy or
Shane, I think it’s more
likely Troy, because you’ll be able to
compare him to the voices, if you hear him respond.
There is somebody saying something to one of those men, “Why did you do
that? Why did you have to do that? What is wrong with
says that when you did something without of good reason, without any reason.
.... you hear this, and I say that it’s Shane speaking to one of the other
men there, and he said – and it’s much
softer. There has been some
shouting, and some calling and there has been some backwards and forwards
already, saying, “Bro,
you shouldn’t have hit him. It’s a
fucking sick man.”
And then closely thereafter, at about 6:42 on the counter, you are hearing
for the first time there the accused saying, “I think
head-butted me, head-butted me,” and he says it maybe twice.
how these words are punctuated in the transcript, but it maybe that here the
prosecutor was saying, ... you are hearing for
the first time the accused
saying, I think, “The fucker head-butted me, head-butted me.”]
And then a little bit later, there’s a little bit of inaudible, a little
bit of shouting, “All right, is he on his side?”
there’s, “He was looking for it. He was looking for that punch. He
was looking for that.” Okay. Now, that
response at that point,
that’s four minutes of gestation between the time that one of those men
said to him, “What’s
wrong with you? Why did you do that?” And
he has come up, “He’s head-butted me.” He’s giving
explanation.
“He was – he was looking for it”. Like,
that’s what it was. That’s when the justification first arises.
What that interplay and that interchange between them all there, what is
happening is, you’ve got a clue as to whether or not
Shane and Troy
actually saw what happened. Interestingly, through the course of the evidence,
you’ve had three of those men,
Tristram, Shane and Troy, give you
differing accounts of who was out on the veranda at the material time. ...
[16] He then
referred to the fact the house was small and open and to the ‘mud
map’ of it drawn by one of the police witnesses.
might be a Rastafarian flag there acting as a curtain on some occasions, but
it’s not there then.
All right. There is an explanation for why that curtain might not have been
there when that was filmed, and I will get to that also,
there’s a flow-on effect from my submission to you that Troy and Shane
knew exactly what had happened outside, and Maxine, to
an extent, too.
She might have seen something as well, because even on Troy’s account,
even if he wasn’t outside, look at his map, mud
map that he drew. He has
got a chair sitting right in the middle of the lounge room.
So you can see, and spatially connect that to the video, that he has got a
beeline through that doorway, that’s where he’s
sitting and seeing.
Okay. We know where the stains were outside. We know where the body was in terms
of where he was being treated,
and that’s all from the mud map that was
drawn by the scene of crime officer who spatially calculated and distanced all
places that make sense for this particular examination.
got all of these things militating against the idea that nobody heard or saw
. Shane, in particular, wanted you to believe that the sound had
been sucked out of the universe. You couldn’t even hear the
So whatever confrontation that Tristram had heard or that Troy saw unfolding,
was actually a silent battle between two minds. It was
mute. There was no noise
whatsoever.
Well, you know that’s patently ridiculous, and not –
and not clear, because somebody is making a decision to obfuscate,
that is, to
cloud and dissemble about the true circumstances of the events, because
there’s big bikkies at stake here
. Someone is going to get in trouble
for what happened to [the deceased], and that person is going to be the accused.
So you might think that a cover up starts, that they start to make up an idea
to be there, because the
ambulance is going to be there, because someone has been hurt and a report has
So let’s talk about the fact that we’ve got the continuation
of the cover up there at the scene.
Pretty much as soon as [the deceased] is
being loaded onto the gurney to go into the ambo – by the way, Shane is
telling you
that he was talking, so he was okay. You know, it wasn’t so
serious, it wasn’t so bad. And then Officer Harvey made it
very clear that
he was just mumbling and making sound, that this man was not talking, was not
regaining consciousness, was not recovering
in any way, shape or form.
can be pretty confident that everybody there thought the worst for [the
deceased] and that things were going to end badly.
Knowing that, knowing that set up, it has to flavour the way that they
behave or the way they relate to each other.
It must have been something
that was preying on everybody’s minds about what was going to happen next.
But what did Troy and
Shane do. Started cleaning up the house. They got out the
hose and they started washing it away. Collected bottles and cans and started
putting that in the bin. Making sure that the place was tidy.
I said why did you do that to Troy??? and he said, “Nobody told me not
to.” Pretty good answer I suppose. But
the fact that they were doing it
so immediately after what happened to [the deceased] when they were such in
shock and so traumatised
by what happened, begs the question.
Then everybody is there saying didn’t see it.
“case theory” being put to the jury by the prosecutor was that at
least Troy, Shane and Tristram (and possibly
happened and were lying about it, and that they engaged in a ‘cover
up’ to protect the appellant, which included
their actions in cleaning up
the veranda. Without saying so expressly, or supporting the theory by reference
to any of the evidence
given by those witnesses, the prosecutor was plainly
implying that, not only did these witnesses see what had happened, but that
they saw was not consistent with the accused acting in
self-defence.
The Defence application for the jury to be
[18] Following
the Crown closing address, the appellant applied for the jury to be discharged
on the basis that the Crown had addressed
the jury in the way just described,
which was “speculative”, had not been proved in evidence or put to
the various witnesses,
and was contrary to the way the Crown case had been
framed in the opening and, indeed, in the entirety of its case right up until
the closing address.
[19] During the
hearing and determination of that application, the trial judge pressed the
defence to specify what precisely the defence
would have done differently if
given prior notice of the “cover up” case theory. Defence counsel
responded that that
was not something that could be done on the run without
notice, but did articulate some areas of prejudice that arose from the running
of such a case without notice. He said that the defence would have spoken to
family members and friends and investigated the relationships
with a view to at
least testing the “cover-up” theory. They may well also have
conducted the cross-examination of the
witnesses differently and cross-examined
more extensively. Further, defence counsel contended that the defence ought to
the opportunity to make considered forensic decisions about whether to
go into evidence and about what, if any, evidence it should
adduce with notice
of the case ultimately to be run by the Crown.
[20] One of the
building blocks of the “cover-up” case theory was the submission by
the prosecutor in closing that the
accused and the witnesses must have known
that the deceased was very seriously injured and likely to die. He
You can be pretty confident that everybody there thought the
worst for Ronnie and that things were going to end badly.
That was contrary to what was put in opening where the prosecutor talked
their first visit at
which time:
The accused was no longer there and he certainly wasn’t at House 14.
He’d actually got a lift by Shane who was driving
into town to go and
check on [the deceased] to see how he was faring.
Wasn’t a little bit
later until it was received that [the deceased] was going to pass away and it
was going to be a far more
serious outcome than everyone had feared.
[21] In relation
to that aspect of the change of case theory, defence counsel protested that
there was simply no evidence on which
the prosecutor could legitimately ask the
jury to infer that everybody there thought the worst for the deceased and that
things were
going to end badly. Further, it was submitted that, had the defence
been put on notice that that was going to be said in support
of the cover-up
theory, the defence would have explored the basis for it in cross-examination of
the ambulance officers who attended
the scene. In response to that argument, the
prosecutor agreed to withdraw that submission.
December 2022 the trial judge refused the application to discharge the jury and
instead gave the Crown leave to re-open
its case, put further questions to Troy
Forrester and Shane Forrester by way of cross-examination pursuant to s 38 of
Uniform Evidence Act
, and then to address the jury a second time in
The jury was told the
Court had granted the Crown leave to recall the witnesses.
Crown case re-opened
Forrester was recalled
cross-examined by the Crown, said he could not recall where he was standing in
relation to Tristram when Tristram was making
the 000 call or what, if anything,
he and Shane Forrester said to each other or to the accused. The 000 call was
played to him and
he agreed that he could hear the accused shouting quite loudly
at times, in an aggressive way, and that he (Troy) may have said,
fuck you got to fucking do that for, what’s wrong with you?” or it
may have been Shane.
[24] He again
denied that he saw what had happened between the accused and the deceased. He
said, “I thought he might have done
it, but I didn’t see it. I did
not see what happened.” He said the accused was the only one there, so he
he done it, he must have hit him or done something.”
Forrester agreed that he was seated inside the lounge room, in the chair, near
the doorway, but did not agree that he could
see the deceased and the accused
through that space, either through the window or the door.
[26] He agreed
that he was in a really tough position because he was there giving evidence
who died, but did not agree that he
was trying to protect his nephew, the accused. He said, “No. I’m not
protecting my
Forrester said he and Shane did not talk about what they might have to discuss
if the police arrived. He said, “No
we did not talk about covering up for
[the accused]. ... I would never do that to my friend. He’s my
[28] Asked about
hosing down the veranda as soon as the deceased had been placed on the gurney
and into the ambulance, he said, “Yes,
I was tidying up my house.”
He agreed that he was getting rid of the blood at the position where the
deceased hit the ground
and started bleeding, and said, “Yes, but I
wasn’t told not to clean up from the police.” He denied that he knew
the police were coming back.
[29] He also
said, “I thought my friend was going to be okay, because he was talking
then agreed that the deceased was just
mumbling and snoring, and that he himself was confused. He agreed that that
snoring was really
representative of the deceased being completely unconscious
and non-responsive.
[30] It was put
to him that he didn’t want to see his nephew go to gaol and he said,
“Yes, that’s the – [the
deceased] has to get justice for what
happened to him. If he goes to gaol, he has to go to gaol.”
Forrester was recalled.
cross-examination by the Crown, the 000 call was played to him and he agreed
that he might have said, “Bro you shouldn’t
have hit him, it’s
a fucking sick old man,” but he did not agree that that implied that he
saw what happened. He said,
“No, I didn’t see what happened ...
because I had my back to everything. ... I didn’t see no head. If God is
witness, I didn’t see anything, I was walking back into the house, and
that – that was behind me.”
[32] Then this
exchange occurred:
[The deceased] didn’t do anything, did
he?---As far as I’m concerned, no, he didn’t do anything.
Because you were there, right there on the spot?---Yeah, I was there, but I
didn’t see what happened directly.
Mr Forrester, you don’t like being in this situation, do you?---No, no,
because I haven’t apologised to the family. I’m
under duress. It
– it has been on my mind, I just never apologised to the family, because
I’m a man of dignity, morals
and values. That’s the way I am. And,
you know, that hurts me.
He explained: “I was walking back into the house and I heard something,
and then I – and then we had come back out, I
had come back out, I turned
around, [the deceased] was on the ground. It happened that quick.”
[33] He denied
being part of a cover-up. Asked, “Is this because you don’t want to
say that thing that you know that will
get your nephew, your blood relative, the
man who is alive in that box, into trouble?” Shane Forrester said,
not about him being – he got a – justice, I want
justice for the family.”
[34] Asked,
“Did you discuss protecting your nephew with Troy and other members of the
family?” he said, “No. There
was nothing about protection or
anything. It’s about justice and it’s about what’s
[35] Asked about
hosing down the veranda, he said, “Well, do you know what, the police,
when they was there, they shouldn’t
have went, come back, we didn’t
want that there. We was traumatised. We didn’t want it – that there
on the ground.
My brother decided, no, no, I’m going to get rid of that.
He was – a lot of things were going through our heads.”
[36] He said
that the deceased and his welfare was their main concern and he said he was not
interested in the welfare of the accused.
[37] Finally
this exchange occurred:
Are you saying that there really
wasn’t an agreement at that point, when you were trying to work out
exactly how to deal with
everything, that if the police turned up, everybody
should just say you were sleeping inside and didn’t see anything?---We
wasn’t really trying to think about dealing with things. We were just in a
moment of anger, respect, and everything else that
happened that morning, you
know, I can’t believe I’m here, having to say this in court, but
Well, last question then, Mr Forrester, last question. You were angry?---Very
Because Jerome hit [the deceased] for no good reason?---That’s what it
boils down to.
The further Crown closing address
[38] After Troy
Forrester and Shane Forrester were recalled the Crown closed and addressed the
jury for a second time on 2 December
During that second closing
address, the prosecutor said, in relation to the “cover-up”
Clearly we have recalled Troy Forrester and Shane Forrester.
Those witnesses are important witnesses. You must all agree. They are
that are front and centre involved, at some point, with the confrontation
between [the deceased] and [the accused], okay,
whether it’s at the table
out on the veranda as it’s moving along in the doorway at various points,
they’re actually
in the mix. Now, what I neglected to do, and what I
failed to do properly, was to give them the opportunity to provide answers
most importantly, the idea that there was some sort of cover up, all
right. So that wouldn’t be lost on you as something that
was front and
centre in the course of proceedings this morning.
Now, as to who saw what, and who saw the things that I say were transpiring
that must have been able to be seen, have now had answers
from the two key
witnesses that were in a position to best do so.
Okay, so about this cover up that I’ve suggested that was present for
you to be able to factor into your considerations. Now,
I’ve referred to
the fact that there was the prospect and undeniable prospect that these
witnesses were in a position to see
what I say would have clearly been able to
You may reach that conclusion yourself. It may – it’s a matter
for you. The determination of fact is entirely your preserve.
This is up to you
to make these conclusions, based on the evidence that you’ve heard. Of
course, nothing that I’m trying
to tell you is to change that basic
premise. It’s the facts that you find. I’m suggesting ways of
looking at it. Now,
in terms of what I suggested about whether or not those boys
clearly saw what was happening, they’ve all denied it, both Troy
deny they saw it happen in front of their eyes. They give explanations for why.
Now, I had said to you, phrases such as,
“You’ve got two clues there
that might make it seem very clear that they knew exactly what happened and what
done.” That’s a matter for you to determine, whether the
words that they say were referable to that view.
Their evidence today has been they did not see it, and that’s not why
they said those things. Troy more so than Shane. All right.
I also said that
they knew exactly what happened. And that’s me saying that that was an
inference that you could have drawn
from that – from their absence of
information and where you would expect it. That’s an inaccuracy that
permitted to do. It’s up to you to work out precisely
what they did and didn’t see. All right. I can’t confirm
that they saw it. That’s not a fact that I can present to you to make your
decision about. Whether they saw or heard
anything, they have now very clearly
[said] what they did see and what they didn’t see.
The idea that there was some obfuscation or there was some cover up that they
were actively engaged in, that they were doing, that
they acknowledged was part
of their conduct and their behaviour, you have now heard that they have denied
it, clearly.
The prosecutor then referred to some of the evidence given when the witnesses
were recalled.
[39] Defence
counsel protested that it should not have been put to Troy Forrester that the
deceased was “in dire straits”
when the ambulance officers attended
because there had been an agreement that the Crown was going to withdraw that
submission. The
trial judge warned the prosecutor that he would “just need
to be careful about that,” and said to defence counsel, “Yes,
it’s noted, [defence counsel]. It’s on the transcript. And [the
prosecutor] is going to withdraw it, when the Crown finalises
happened, in the second address, the prosecutor did not explicitly withdraw the
submission that the witnesses knew the
deceased was in a very bad way when he
was taken away by ambulance but said instead, essentially, that it was a matter
for them as
to what they make of that issue. His actual words
So firstly, though – and I want to correct what I
addressed to you about in terms of the belief that [the deceased] was in dire
straits. Now, the fact of his situation, that he was unconscious but still
breathing, mumbling and making sounds. And you heard the
snoring as a breathing
pattern, and to whether or not they were making an assessment as to how dire
that was, that’s a matter
for you as to whether they thought that that was
the case or not. I presented an argument or submission that they all believed
he was in significant danger, and peril, and in dire straits. That’s
not anything that I could point to you and say, “That
was an absolute held
belief.” But there might be evidence that you see there that might give
you that reason to believe so,
but my submission to you was inaccurate in that
[41] Defence
counsel protested again and when the jury returned, after he had addressed them
for the second time, the prosecutor said:
“One last thing,
ladies and gentlemen, before my learned friend gives you his closing address.
And that is, in my first closing
address to you, I said the following:
‘You can be pretty confident that everybody there thought the worst for
[the deceased]
and that things were going to end badly.’ I withdraw that
as a submission. It is not pressed. You need to disregard it.”
brought it to the jury’s attention for the third time – the fourth
if one counts the insinuations in the questioning
of Troy Forrester when he was
recalled – and the retraction was not linked to the cover up submission.
Specifically, the jury
were not told that the withdrawn submission had been an
important plank in the Crown’s cover up theory.
December 2022, the judge summed up, the jury retired to consider their verdict
and, later that day, returned a verdict of
appellant has appealed against the conviction.
appellant’s contentions on Ground 1
appellant contends that there are a number of problems with the prosecution
being permitted to close in this manner; and
being permitted to reopen its case
after the close of both the Crown and the defence case, and after the prosecutor
had addressed
[46] The first
problem was that the picture being painted by the prosecutor in the closing
address was very different from the opening,
in which the prosecutor said that
the witnesses did not see what happened. The prosecutor did not open on the
basis that the witnesses
were lying or that there had been a cover up. The Crown
specifically opened on the basis that none of the witnesses had seen what
occurred at the crucial point of time. The closest the prosecutor had come was a
vague, general reference to the witnesses being
related to the accused.
[47] The second
problem was that this position was maintained throughout the trial until the
prosecutor's first closing address to
the jury. It was not put by the Crown to
any witnesses that they saw what occurred. Immediately prior to the
Crown’s closing
address the prosecutor relied on this in support of a
Weissensteiner
direction, arguing that the appellant was the only person
who knew what had gone on
This was the case the appellant had prepared
to meet. It was fundamentally a case about the inferences that might be drawn
surrounding context observed by the witnesses and from the
appellant’s own conduct. This meant that the defence was taken completely
by surprise and had no opportunity to meet the case being put.
[48] The third
problem was that there was no evidence to support this case theory. Each of the
witnesses had said in evidence that
they were not on the veranda when the fatal
punch occurred, and it was not suggested to them by the prosecution that they
evidence which it seems the prosecutor had relied upon was the remarks
made by two of the witnesses in the background of the 000
call to the effect of,
“Why the fuck you gotta fucken do that for? What’s wrong with
you?” and “Bro, you
shouldn’t have hit him. It’s a
fucking sick man.” This evidence does not support a conclusion that the
must have seen the punch, or that what they saw was inconsistent with
self-defence. It is entirely consistent with the evidence given
by the witnesses
that there had been a verbal altercation between the two men on the veranda;
that they did not see the punch; and
that they went onto the veranda afterwards
and saw the accused standing up and the deceased lying on the ground bleeding
from his head. Of course they could tell that the accused had hit the
deceased from those observations alone and the questions were
entirely natural
in those circumstances.
[49] The fourth
problem was that the cover up theory was not put to any of the witnesses accused
of the cover up to give them an opportunity
to meet the accusation before the
Crown closing address. The accusation that they had engaged in a cover up to
protect the accused
was a serious one – a criminal conspiracy to pervert
the course of justice. The prosecutor should not have addressed the jury
fashion without the accusation having been put to the witnesses. Nor should such
an accusation have been made without a proper
basis and the appellant contended
that there was no such basis; there was no evidence of a cover up.
[50] The final
problem was that changing the basis of the Crown case in this fashion
“weaponized” the deficiencies in
the evidence adduced in the Crown
case as evidence of a cover up to protect the appellant and therefore as
evidence of guilt.
appellant contended that the correct course for the trial judge to have taken in
the circumstances was not to permit the
Crown to re-open its case, but instead,
to discharge the jury. The trial judge’s decision to permit the recall of
Shane Forrester was based on
Anderson v The
Gleeson CJ said that “it was unfair to allow the Crown to promote [a
speculative case theory] without the Crown being
put in the position of
recalling [the relevant witness] and re-opening his evidence in
The appellant contended that trial judge appears to have
treated this remark as delineating the options available to the Court following
the first prosecution address: either the Crown case must be confined to exclude
a case theory unsupported by the evidence, or the
witnesses must be recalled,
with the Crown then permitted to rely on its new case theory.
appellant argued that reliance on
was misplaced because the
facts and issues in
were materially different to those in this
at the close of the Crown case the prosecutor asked
defence counsel whether or not he required the relevant witness to be recalled
for further cross-examination. Defence counsel declined the opportunity. What
was being rejected in
was any argument that the Crown was
permitted to proceed based on the election. The issue as to whether or not the
recall of a witness
at some later point in time after the Crown had closed its
case did not arise. Equally, after the Crown closed to the jury on the
allegations not put to the witness, the trial judge in
whether the accused wished to apply for a discharge of the jury. The accused
declined that opportunity. The appellant contends,
therefore, that
is not an authority concerning the appropriate resolution of an application
by the defence to discharge the jury.
Leave to re-open
appellant argued that the Crown required leave to re-open its case and that, in
suggesting and then granting leave, the trial
judge did not have regard to or
engage with any of the authorities which govern that question.
appellant relied on the principles in the following authorities.
(a) The occasion must be very special or exceptional to permit the Crown to
re-open its case after closing. Typically, leave should
be refused unless the
Crown could not have foreseen the issue to which the evidence goes:
(1952) 85 CLR 363
(b) Leave must be refused if a consequence of its grant would be to prejudice
the accused:
Killick v The Queen
[1981] HCA 63
(1981) 147 CLR 565
(c) Part of the reason for constraining the Crown from re-opening is that
“[e]vidence tendered by the Crown after the defence
has closed its case
may assume an inflated importance in the eyes of the jury”:
[1981] HCA 63
(1981) 147 CLR 565
at 569. That is, the assessment of prejudice
must look to both the content of the evidence and the manner in which it will be
to the jury.
(d) There is no fixed rule as to when leave should be granted but the touchstone
is fairness to the accused:
[2003] HCA 13
(2003) 212 CLR 299
explanation given by the Crown in this case is that leave to re-open was
required because the prosecutor had neglected, ahead
of the trial, to listen
sufficiently carefully to the 000 call in order to make sense of the background
commentary captured on that
recorded evidence. Having listened to that evidence
over the course of the trial, the Crown took a different view of the evidence.
The appellant contended that this
fell well short of the
standard of “most exceptional” or “very special”
circumstances formulated in
Shaw v The Queen
(1952) 85 CLR 363
[56] As to the
question of unfair prejudice and forensic disadvantage to the accused, the
appellant made the following submissions.
(a) The course taken by the trial judge unfairly promoted the cover up theory.
Two witnesses were recalled after all the other evidence
had been heard and the
Crown had addressed the jury. The jury were told that the Court had granted
leave to the Crown to recall those
witnesses after hearing argument. The jury
heard from those witnesses and then the Crown was given a second opportunity to
on the new case theory. The thrust of that address was confirming that
the cover up theory was a matter for the jury. The course
taken could only have
caused the jury to conclude that the cover up theory was sufficiently important
to justify an exceptional course
being taken, thereby favouring its acceptance.
This perception must have been reinforced by the trial judge’s focus on
cover up evidence in his summing up, in which the trial judge made explicit
the logic which had been only hinted at by the prosecutor
in his closing
The course taken
allowed the Crown to isolate and refine this aspect of its case.
(b) The course taken by the trial judge forced the appellant mid-trial
(importantly, after the evidence was closed and the Crown
had made its closing
address) to answer a very different case to the one which had been prosecuted up
to that point. To do so properly,
necessitated a different approach to the whole
of the evidence, both what was adduced and what was not. It required
reconsideration
of the exercise of forensic judgements made in advance of, and
during, the trial. The appellant did not have any opportunity to question
or other witnesses in relation to the Crown’s new theory. The appellant
had previously asked no questions of Constable
Harvey and only limited questions
of Senior Constable Odgard. These were two of the police who attended the
incident. Neither officers’
partner for that shift gave evidence or was
required by the appellant. Consequently, none of the police witnesses was asked
secured for later examination — presumably because there
was no forensic
value identified in doing so. This may have answered the allegation that
cleaning the veranda after police left was
part of a cover up to protect the
appellant. None of the lay witnesses was questioned in relation to the usual
state of cleanliness
of the veranda. This also may have gone some way towards
answering the suggestion that cleaning the veranda was part of a cover up.
(c) Generally, the way the appellant had treated the Crown witnesses in
cross-examination poorly positioned the appellant to deal
with the cover up
theory. The appellant took the approach of asking as few questions as possible,
did not explore the close relationships
between the witnesses and the deceased,
and did not confront any of the witnesses on differences in their evidence. This
played into
the theory that these witnesses were supporting the appellant. A
different forensic choice may have been made if the Crown had opened
developed the cover up theory before the closing address. By way of example, if
the theory that Shane Forrester saw the physical
confrontation was taken
seriously, the appellant may have wanted to further explore the connection
between his description of the
deceased and appellant standing with their heads
close together and the appellant’s complaint that he was head-butted. The
appellant may have wanted to put to the witness that he saw the head-butt and,
if the proposition was denied, offered an alternative
that the witness was
protecting the reputation of the deceased by staying silent. This course was
less readily open where the appellant
had declined to cross-examine the witness
earlier, and had not developed through each witness the close relationship
between Shane
Forrester and the deceased.
(d) Because of its late emergence, the appellant was poorly prepared to meet the
cover up theory. The cover up theory fixated on
comments by Troy Forrester
and/or Shane Forrester to the effect of, “Why the fuck you gotta fucking
do that for; what's wrong
being inconsistent with not
having seen the incident. That is, the cover up theory dismissed the prospect of
assumption or conjecture
informing those comments. At least one difficulty with
the theory was the recording of the appellant explaining to Troy and/or Shane
“He head-butted me .... He was looking for it,”
and none of
the witnesses disputing that narrative. This issue was not developed in the
defence case. It would have been difficult
to do so without an agreed transcript
of the 000 call attributing comments to particular persons and evidence from all
relevant witnesses
not easily be done through Troy Forrester and Shane Forrester alone.
It posed an
unfair forensic disadvantage for the appellant to embark on an exploration of
this issue at the end of the trial without
knowing what the witness might say.
appellant contended that, even after the Crown recalled Troy Forrester and Shane
Forrester, the cover up theory remained
entirely speculative and should not have
been left to the jury in the manner in which it was. The language of a
suggested a conspiracy to pervert the course of justice.
It introduced a serious allegation. This risked diverting the jury from
proper inquiry of the appellant’s guilt to a proxy issue — whether
Troy Forrester and Shane Forrester were protecting
the appellant. Its timing
risked unduly elevating the significance of this proxy issue. The path of
reasoning was based on:
(a) the actions of Shane Forrester and Troy Forrester cleaning the veranda being
seen as an attempt to remove evidence incriminating
the appellant in
circumstances where there was no evidence that any incriminating evidence or
apparently incriminating evidence was
cleaned up, and the witnesses denied they
were covering up by doing so;
(b) an allegation that Tristram Forrester was the only person helping the
deceased during the 000 call which ultimately had to be
corrected and was
abandoned by the prosecutor since it was contrary to all of the evidence;
(c) attributing meaning to comments in the 000 call in circumstances where the
witnesses responsible for the comments, when recalled,
denied that meaning, and
gave a reasonable alternative explanation that was open;
(d) requiring the jury to prefer the Crown’s interpretation over the
witnesses’ own as to why the witnesses could be
heard in the 000 call
castigating the appellant, and further requiring the jury to be satisfied that
the dishonest witnesses’
observations informing their comments could be
relied on as reliable accounts of what occurred in circumstances where the
denied having seen anything.
contention amounts to a submission by the appellant that there was no basis for
the serious allegation that the witnesses
had engaged in a cover up in order to
protect the accused – essentially a conspiracy to pervert the course of
justice. The
respondent contended that there was a basis for the cover up
allegations, namely that when police first arrived at the scene, the
said not just that they had not seen what happened, but that they did not
what had happened, when they plainly did, as evidenced by their
comments to the accused captured in the background to the 000 call.
respondent also relied on evidence that the accused lied to police saying he did
not know what had happened and was not contradicted
by the witnesses who were
presumably within earshot and knew that the accused had hit the deceased.
[59] In our
view, while it cannot be said that the allegation of a cover up was made
entirely without basis, that basis was not articulated
by the prosecution at the
trial and, in any case, was tenuous at best given the following.
(a) The remarks made to the accused by Troy Forrester and Shane Forrester in the
background of the 000 call are equally consistent
“knowing” (ie, assuming) that the accused hit the deceased because
the accused and the deceased were the only
ones on the veranda and had been
arguing. There is no need to explain those remarks by supposing that the
witnesses all lied when
they said they did not see the blow struck.
(b) The cleaning up of the veranda took place after police had been, not before,
and the prosecutor could point to no relevant evidence
that had been destroyed
or made unavailable.
(c) During at least part of the time when the Crown suggested the witnesses had
colluded with each other and agreed to protect the
accused, they were being
recorded in the background of the 000 call, presumably unknown to them, and
their conversation was not concerned
with agreeing to cover things up for the
benefit of the accused but rather berating the accused.
(d) There may be many reasons why a group of Aboriginal men who had just been
through the traumatic experience of having a guest
hit by another guest, knocked
unconscious and bleeding on their veranda, and taken away by ambulance, may
initially have been reluctant
to be very forthcoming with police.
(e) Part of the theory as articulated by the prosecutor at the trial seems to
have been based on an assertion that only Tristram
Forrester was assisting the
deceased – an assertion that was withdrawn as it was contrary to the
(f) Another part of the theory as advanced by the prosecution at the trial was
that the witnesses all knew when the ambulance arrived
that the deceased was in
a bad way and suspected that things would end badly – a submission which
was also withdrawn.
appellant contended that the appellant's trial miscarried. The error was
significant and radically altered the course of
the trial. Had the trial judge
refused the Crown leave to re-open, the Crown would have had to abandon the
cover up theory, Troy
Forrester and Shane Forrester would not have been
recalled, and the Crown would not have been permitted two jury addresses. The
was unfair to the appellant such that he has lost the possibility of an
The respondent’s contentions as to Ground
[61] In addition
to the contentions of the respondent referred to already, the respondent
disputed the relevance of the authorities
relied upon by the appellant,
contending that these were authorities on the question of whether the Crown
should be permitted to
re-open its case to call rebuttal evidence after the
accused had given evidence and were not relevant to the question of whether
trial judge was wrong to allow the Crown to recall the witnesses in the present
case, in particular as in this case the appellant
did not give evidence at the
The respondent contended
that the trial Judge was correct to look at this as a
Browne v Dunn
and that the method of dealing with the potential unfairness to the defence
adopted by the trial judge was the appropriate
one in the circumstances and in
fact had the desired effect.
respondent contended that the trial did not miscarry, pointing out that the
result of allowing the Crown to re-open its case
and recall the witnesses Troy
Forrester and Shane Forrester, was to elicit evidence favourable to the defence.
Both of the recalled
witnesses strongly rejected the suggestion that they were
trying to protect the accused, or that they had been involved in a cover
continued to strongly deny that they had seen what
Consideration as to Ground 1
test for whether an appeal should be allowed on the ground that the trial judge
should have dismissed a jury is set out in
Crofts v The Queen
recently applied by
Brownhill J in
The King v Wasaga (No 2)
[2024] NTSC 98.
In an appeal
on the ground that the trial Judge’s refusal to discharge the jury was a
substantial miscarriage of justice, the
High Court stated that the question is
whether, in the circumstances, there was such a high degree of necessity for the
discharge that the failure to have ordered it has resulted in a
mistrial and added:
No rigid rule can be adopted to govern decisions
on an application to discharge a jury for an inadvertent and potentially
prejudicial
event that occurs during a trial. The possibilities of slips
occurring are inescapable. Much depends upon the seriousness of the
in the context of the contested issues, the stage at which the mishap occurs;
the deliberateness of the conduct; and the
likely effectiveness of a judicial
direction designed to overcome its apprehended impact. ... Much leeway must be
allowed to the
trial judge to evaluate these and other considerations relevant
to the fairness of the trial, bearing in mind that the judge will
usually have a
better appreciation of the significance of the event complained of, seen in
context, than can be discerned from a
reading of the transcript.
[64] However, in
this case, the only practical alternative to discharging the jury as requested
by the defence at the time was the
one adopted by the trial judge –
permitting the Crown to re-open its case after the appellant had closed his case
the Crown’s closing address, in order to give those witnesses
the opportunity to answer the allegations. That being the case,
the authorities
on when it is appropriate to permit the Crown to re-open its case relied upon by
the appellant fall to be applied
and a review of those authorities does not
support the limitation sought to be placed on them by the respondent.
was, as the respondent submitted, a case concerned with the question of
whether the Crown should have been permitted to call rebuttal
evidence after the
accused had given evidence. The accused, who was charged with murdering his
partner, gave no doubt unexpected
evidence that he did say to police who
attended the scene: “Stop sitting round here and go and find the bastard
that throttled
When asked why he used the word “throttled” (given that there was
apparently no indication at that stage that such was
the cause of death) the
accused said he had heard the police talking saying she had been throttled or
strangled. The trial judge
allowed the Crown to reopen its case to recall seven
police witnesses to contradict the evidence of the accused. The High Court held
that the prosecution’s application to reopen the Crown case to call
evidence in rebuttal should have been refused. In doing
so, the High Court
expressed the principles to be applied in general
the principle is that the prosecution must present its case completely before
the prisoner’s answer is made.
There are issues the proof of which do
not lie upon the prosecution and in such cases it may have a rebutting case, as
when the defence
is insanity. When the prisoner seeks to prove good character
evidence may be allowed in reply. But the prosecution may not split
its case on
The Court possesses a power to allow further evidence to be
called, but it must be exercised according to rule and the rule is against
reopening the Crown case unless the circumstances are most exceptional.
are not disposed to lay down the rule in the terms adopted from Tindal C.J. in
R. v. Frost
(1839) 4 St Tr (NS), at p 386. It is a matter of practice and
procedure, and in such matters, even where the procedure is criminal
directed to safeguarding the position of the accused, there is less reason for
closely following English authority than where
the development of the
substantive law is involved. It is, for example, difficult to apply the rule
where the jury ask for the recall
of a witness or further proof or disproof of a
It seems to us unsafe to adopt a rigid formula in view of the almost
infinite variety of difficulties that may arise at a criminal
trial. It is
probably enough to say that the occasion must be very special or exceptional to
warrant a departure from the principle
that the prosecution must offer all its
proofs during the progress of the Crown case and before the prisoner is called
upon for his
The argument that ss. 430, 431 and 448 of the
(Vict.) combine to make it impossible for the prosecution to call
further evidence after the prisoner has entered upon his defence,
events concluded it, is, we think, unsound. But the policy of these provisions
strengthens
the principle which makes a departure from the rule allowable
only in exceptional circumstances.
Further, although we have not thought it
proper to adopt the formula of Sir Nicholas Tindal, the English cases make it
plain enough
generally speaking an occasion will not suffice for
allowing an exceptional course if it ought reasonably to have been foreseen.
Again, it may be pointed out that even an unexpected occasion may be of such a
nature that it would have been covered, had the Crown
case been fully and
strictly proved. (at p380) [emphasis added]
, Fullagar J, who delivered a separate judgment
remains true and important that the Crown should be permitted to adduce evidence
after the close of the case for the defence
only in exceptional circumstances
and when it is reasonably clear that the accused will not be unfairly prejudiced
by the admission
of the evidence.
A wide discretion must be conceded to the
judge presiding at the trial, but it should be regarded as limited in that way,
and it is to be remembered that the practical effect of evidence on the minds
of a jury may differ according ?? as the evidence is
adduced in chief or by way
of replication
. But the discretion ought not to be regarded as further
limited or as governed by any rigid rule or formula. [emphasis added]
accused was charged, together with a co-accused, with importing prohibited drugs
into Australia. The co-accused had been apprehended
at Sydney Airport with 3.126
kilograms of heroin in a suitcase. At trial, both accused gave evidence that
they had no previous relationship
with each other. The Crown was on notice that
a defence of that nature was likely to be run because of a statement made to
by the accused following his arrest. The Crown had in its possession
separate application forms signed by both of the co-accused
for the purpose of
obtaining visas to enter Australia. Both forms listed the same phone number for
the applicant. Although it would
have assisted the Crown’s case to
establish a connection between the two co-accused, the Crown did not rely on
these forms
in evidence in chief.
[68] When the
accused gave evidence, he denied previously knowing the co-accused. He was
questioned briefly about the application
form but was not asked about the
telephone number. The co-accused also gave evidence. He was cross-examined on
the application for
the visa including the telephone number. The two accused
applied to discharge the jury on the ground that they had been unfairly
prejudiced by the evidence regarding the telephone number. The application was
rejected and the trial judge allowed the Crown to
tender the forms in a case in
[69] The NSW
Court of Criminal Appeal held that the trial had miscarried. The High Court
agreed. Gibbs CJ and Wilson J
The evidence
that Choo had used the respondent’s telephone number in his application
form was so material that fairness dictated
that the prosecution should have
given notice to the respondent of its intention to adduce the application forms
in evidence. ...
if such notice had been given, it is possible that neither the
respondent nor Choo would have entered the witness box. Moreover,
the evidence
was elicited, not by the cross-examination of the respondent, but, after his
case had closed, in the cross-examination
of Choo. Had the respondent been asked
whether Choo had used his telephone number, and if so why he had done so, he
would have had
an opportunity to furnish his explanation during the ordinary
course of cross-examination and re- examination. As it was, he had
to return to
the witness box to give his explanation, thus fixing the jury’s attention
on what was undoubtedly damaging evidence,
and giving it an emphasis that it
would not have had if the trial had taken its regular course.
[70] As the
respondent submitted,
was likewise a case concerning whether the
Crown should have been permitted to re-open its case to call rebuttal evidence
accused had given evidence, but, as in
, the principles
were expressed in general
principles that govern the exercise of the discretion of a trial judge to call
evidence after the close of the case for the defence
have been discussed in this
Shaw v. The Queen
[1952] HCA 18
(1952) 85 CLR 365
, at pp 378-380, 383-384,
Killick v. The Queen
[1981] HCA 63
(1981) 147 CLR 565
568-571, 575-576 and
Lawrence v. The Queen
[1931] ArgusLawRp 87
(1981) 38 ALR 1
, at pp 3, 7,
The general principle is that the prosecution must present its case
completely before the accused is called upon for his defence.
the trial judge has a discretion to allow the prosecution to call further
evidence after evidence has been given for the
defence, he should permit the
prosecution to call evidence at that stage only if the circumstances are very
special or exceptional
and, generally speaking, not if the occasion for calling
the further evidence ought reasonably to have been foreseen.
The principle
applies where the prosecution seeks to call evidence to rebut matters raised for
the first time by the defence; if
the rebutting evidence was itself relevant to
prove the prosecution case (unless, perhaps, it was no more than marginally,
or doubtfully relevant:
Reg. v. Levy and Tait
(1966) 50 Cr App
, at p 202) and the need to give it could have been foreseen it will,
generally speaking, be rejected. The principle would not prevent
the prosecution
from giving in reply evidence directed to an issue the proof of which did not
lie on the prosecution, such as insanity,
or from rebutting evidence of the
accused's good character, provided that the prosecution had not anticipated the
raising of an issue
of this kind and led evidence with regard to it, for the
prosecution must not split its case on any issue. Also, it has been held
evidence may be given in reply to prove some purely formal matter the proof of
which was overlooked in chief. [emphasis added]
principles articulated in
by the plurality and by Fullagar J, were
quoted in the joint judgment of Gibbs C.J., Murphy and Aickin JJ in
In that case, the
question was whether the trial judge was wrong to permit the Crown to adduce
evidence after the close of the case
for the defence to rebut an alibi sworn to
by the accused in the course of his evidence, and not previously the subject of
at the trial, but which the Crown ought reasonably to have foreseen
would be raised by the accused at the trial, because it had been
put forward by
him in earlier proceedings. Again, it was a case concerning rebuttal evidence
called after the accused had given evidence,
but the general principles set out
were applied. The plurality
general rule that all available evidence on which the prosecution intends to
rely in proof of the guilt of the accused should
be presented before the close
of the case for the Crown is not merely a technical rule, but an important rule
of fairness.
Evidence tendered by the Crown after the defence has closed its
case may assume an inflated importance in the eyes of the jury. The
that the last piece of evidence which the jury hears is given in contradiction
of evidence already given by or on behalf
of the accused tends to tilt the
scales in favour of the prosecution. [emphasis added]
respondent contended that in each of the decisions relied on by the appellant,
the purported unfairness arose in circumstances
where the accused person had
given evidence in the defence case, following which the prosecution was allowed
to re-open its case.
In other words, the Crown was permitted to adduce
“rebuttal” evidence and the unfairness was obvious. The accused
may not have gone into evidence had they known the full extent of the
prosecution case against them. Furthermore, the rebuttal evidence
adduced by the
prosecution was particularly damaging to the credibility of the accused
persons’ testimonial accounts or gave
particular emphasis to features of
the positive defence case which were adverse to the accused persons. The
rebuttal evidence adduced
was often damning to the accused person’s
credibility and/or generated admission evidence upon which the Crown could rely
establishing guilt, which was given particular prominence in the sense of
being the last evidence that the jury would receive. The
respondent contended
that, by contrast, in the present case the appellant called no evidence, and the
decision to permit the Crown
to re-open its case had no bearing on the
appellant’s decision about whether to give evidence and did not carry the
undermining testimony that he had presented to the jury. As a result,
the kind of unfairness that a trial judge must protect against
in considering
whether to permit the Crown to re-open did not arise.
contention cannot be accepted. The potential unfairness in allowing the Crown to
reopen its case after the close of the
defence case does not lie only in the
potential for rebuttal evidence to be damning to the accused person’s
credibility, and
the rule is not restricted to cases in which the accused has
given evidence. As explained in
, the principle that such a course
should be permitted in exceptional circumstances only is an application of the
general principle
that the prosecution must offer all its proofs during the
progress of the Crown case and
before the accused is called upon for his
The defence is entitled to know the whole of the Crown case before
making a forensic decision whether or not to call evidence.
[74] In holding
that the trial judge ought not to have allowed evidence in rebuttal after the
close of the defence case, the plurality
made the following
observation:
opinion, the circumstances in which the evidence of Mr. and Mrs. Eyles was
tendered in rebuttal were not very special or exceptional.
It was foreseeable
that the applicant would set up the alibi at the trial. Full details of the
alleged visits to Mrs. Eyles had been
given at the extradition proceedings. The
Crown took none of the steps that were open to it to ascertain whether the
applicant would
persist in relying on the alibi. The evidence of Mr. and Mrs.
Eyles, when given after the case for the applicant had closed, dealt
blow to the applicant’s case -
a blow which unfairly gained force from
the time when it was delivered. [emphasis added]
relevance of timing and the question of giving undue prominence to an issue when
the prosecution is permitted to reopen its
case was also adverted to by Fullagar
however, a whole series of witnesses was called with a view to excluding or
minimising the possibility of the truth of the accused’s
explanation,
there was danger that, in the eyes of the jury, a comparatively unimportant
issue might be magnified out of all proportion and that
altogether undue weight
might be attached to evidence which, on any view, ought to have been scanned
with caution. [emphasis added]
[76] In our
view, similar considerations arise here. Allowing the Crown to re-open and to
recall the witnesses gave undue prominence
to the cover-up theory which unfairly
gained force from its timing, despite the fact that the evidence adduced from
the recalled
witnesses did not support that theory. The jury heard the cover up
theory from the prosecution in its first closing address; then
reinforced in the suggestions put strongly to the two witnesses, Troy Forrester
and Shane Forrester after they were recalled,
and reiterated by the prosecutor
in the Crown’s second closing address. It was given further prominence in
the trial judge’s
summing up in which the trial judge made explicit the
reasoning only obliquely referred to by the
prosecutor:
am going to go next to what is said by the two uncles; to Troy Forrester and to
Shane Forrester, their statements that were
made during the 000 call and while
they were endeavouring to assist the deceased. Troy made this statement,
shouting at the accused:
“Why the fuck you gotta fucken do that for?
What’s wrong with you?” During that period Shane Forrester made the
following statement: “Bro’ you shouldn’t have hit him.
It’s a fucken sick man.”
Now, implicit in those statements is what they have seen is the accused do
something to the deceased, not the deceased do anything
to the accused. Now
those statements can be a result of what they actually saw. And the Crown
position is it is pretty clear that
they are speaking about what they actually
saw. And they did not see any head-butt at that point in time.
The Crown says if you take all of those circumstances into account plus the
statement, they must have seen what was going on and there
is no suggestion in
terms of any statements they made that they saw the deceased head-butt the
accused. [emphasis added]
[77] In our
view, the trial judge ought not to have permitted the Crown to reopen its case
to recall Troy Forrester and Shane Forrester
and put to them its
“cover-up” case theory after the close of the defence case. The
circumstances – namely that
the prosecutor had belatedly realised what was
in the background conversations in the 000 call and had neglected to put these
to the witnesses in the Crown case, were not exceptional and were
foreseeable.
[78] It was
unfair to the appellant to do so for the reasons submitted by the appellant and
set out at [49] above in particular. It
follows that, given the radical
departure from the Crown opening in the prosecutor’s closing address; the
failure to put the
cover up allegations to the witnesses during the Crown case;
the tenuous basis for the cover-up theory; and the potential for prejudice
the defence from reopening the Crown case, the trial Judge ought to have acceded
to the defence application to discharge the jury.
[79] In our
view, these matters combined compel the conclusion that there was such a high
degree of necessity for the jury’s
discharge that the failure to have
ordered it has resulted in a substantial miscarriage of justice.
[80] This ground
is made out and the appeal will be allowed.
[81] In the
second ground of appeal, the appellant contended that the trial judge erred in
his summing up by directing the jury that,
on the question of self-defence, it
was a question of whether or not the jury accepted or rejected the
appellant’s out of court
statements that he was head-butted by the
deceased and that, if they rejected them, that was “the end of the
direction complained of was as follows:
You may also
think that the main questions involve the following subsidiary issues. Do you
accept or reject the accused’s statements
which constitute his evidence
that he was head-butted. You are able to accept or reject his statement as to
whether, in fact, what
he said occurred did occur, and that needs to be
considered by you.
The second subsidiary matter is do you accept or reject the accused’s
statements in the watch house which constitute his evidence
that he was acting
in self-defence.
If you reject the accused’s evidence that he was
head-butted, that is the end of the matter for your considerations. If you
reject his evidence that he was head-butted, that is the end of the issue of
self-defence in this case. In that case the defence
of self-defence ceases to be
raised in this trial.
[83] The essence
of the complaint is that the impugned direction has the effect of reversing the
onus of proof. The appellant contended
that the direction created a false
dichotomy between acceptance or rejection of the appellant’s account that
he was defending
himself after being head-butted. In
Liberato v The Queen
[1985] HCA 66
(1985) 159 CLR 507
at 515 Brennan J said:
The jury must be told
that, even if they prefer the evidence for the prosecution, they should not
convict unless they are satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt of the truth of that
[84] His Honour
The jury must be told that, even if they do not positively
believe the evidence for the defence, they cannot find an issue against
accused contrary to that evidence if the evidence gives rise to a reasonable
doubt as to that issue. His Honour did not make
that clear to the jury.
appellant contended that that same criticism applies here. The trial
judge’s direction left no allowance for the jury
to be undecided as to
whether or not the appellant was defending himself from a head-butt, and so left
with a reasonable doubt. It
did not allow the jury to not accept the
appellant’s evidence but consider that it might be true, and so
respondent contended that the principle enunciated in
applicable in this case since here, unlike
or the kinds of
sexual offence cases in which
directions are commonly given, the
case did not involve two different accounts; there was no occasion for the kind
of “preferential”
reasoning warned against in
respondent also contended that the trial judge’s remark (“that is
the end of the matter”) must be seen
in the context in which it was made;
following full and proper directions given by the trial judge in relation to the
issue of self-defence.
The respondent contended that the appellant’s
complaint focuses inappropriately on what the trial judge said briefly during
long charge to the jury in relation to evidence in support of the proposition
that the appellant had been acting in self-defence
and how the jury might go
respondent’s contention cannot be accepted. It is true that the trial
judge did give the standard directions in relation
to the onus of proof
generally and specifically to self-defence. However, it is not sufficient for a
trial judge to give those directions
in a general or generic way. They should be
related to the issues and the evidence in the trial. In
the High Court
(Dixon, Williams, Webb, Fullagar and Kitto JJ) said:
complete agreement with what was said by Owen J in
Commissioner for Road
Transport v Prerauer
(1950) 500 SR (NSW) 271
at 277. And it may be recalled
that the late Sir Leo Cussen insisted always most strongly that it was of little
use to explain the
law to the jury in general terms and then leave it to them to
apply the law to the case before them. He held that the law should
be given to
the jury not merely with reference to the facts of the particular case but with
an explanation of how it applied to the
facts of the particular case. He held
that the only law which it was necessary for them to know was so much as must
guide them to
a decision on the real issue or issues in the case, and that the
judge was charged with, and bound to accept the responsibility of
deciding (1)
what are the real issues in the particular case, and (2) of telling the jury, in
light of the law, what those issues
passage has been cited with approval in many subsequent cases including
Azzopardi v The Queen,
v The Queen,
Because the
criminal law has become as complex as it now is, “bench books” of
standard forms of instructions to the jury
are readily available for the
assistance of trial judges. Properly used, such books are invaluable. But there
is a risk that the
prescription of common forms of instruction, which must
necessarily be framed without reference to specific facts, and thus in abstract
terms, will be used without relating them to the issues that the jury has to
decide. The proper use of standard forms of jury instructions
requires the judge
first to identify what are the real issues in the case, then to identify the
relevant instructions that are to
be given to the jury and then, and most
importantly, to instruct the jury by relating the standard form of instruction
to the real
issues in the case. The bare recitation to a jury of the relevant
sections of a bench book of standard instructions, unrelated to
the real issues
in the case, does not fulfil the trial judge's task.
[90] On the
topic of self-defence, the trial judge first gave generic directions, and then
followed those with a consideration of
the evidence on the issue. In our view,
it was in this consideration of the evidence, which was the most important part
of the summing
up on self-defence, that the trial judge fell into error. In
relation to self defence, his Honour said:
As to engaging in
self-defence, if we go over onto the next page
[of the aide memoir]
is set out there is that self-defence is justified.
person who causes the death of another person in self-defence is not criminally
responsible for the death of the other person. A
person engages in self-defence
only if the person believes that the conduct is necessary to defend himself
conduct is a reasonable response in the circumstance as the person reasonably
perceives them to be.
an accused person engages in self-defence he is entitled to use force that is
intended to cause death to another person provided
the accused’s conduct
is a reasonable response in the circumstances as the accused reasonably
perceived them to be.
Now, that is not an issue in this case but it
does show you the breadth of the notion of self-defence. It applies in that
circumstance
which many of you may think is a fairly extreme circumstance where
someone has actually intended to kill the other person but that
is not this
case. It is just simply to demonstrate the breadth of the justification of
self-defence.
As a matter of common sense, you should also note that a person defending
himself cannot weigh precisely the exact measure of conduct
that is necessary to
defend himself. A person who has to react instantly to imminent danger cannot be
expected to weigh precisely
the exact measure of conduct that is required to
defend himself.
There is no requirement that the accused must have retreated before engaging
in self-defence. There is no requirement that an accused
must be physically
attacked before engaging in self-defence. The burden of proof as to self-defence
- that is it not coming into
operation, is on the Crown.
Once the evidence
that is before you, the jury, raises a reasonable possibility that the accused
punched the deceased in the head
because he was engaging in self-defence, the
Crown must prove beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was not engaging in
self-defence.
So that burden in this case is also on the Crown.
Before you can find the accused guilty of the crime charged on the indictment
you must be satisfied that the Crown has proven each
and every one of elements
1, 2, 3 and 4 above, beyond reasonable doubt. To prove the accused was not
engaging in self-defence the
Crown must prove either;
a) The accused did not believe that the conduct was necessary to defend himself
b) The conduct was not a reasonable response in the circumstances as the accused
reasonably perceived them.
So, only one or other of those need be proven by the Crown. The Crown does
not have to prove both.
If the Crown has not done so you must find the accused not guilty. If the
Crown has done so you must find the accused guilty.
Now, it is a matter for you because you are the judges of the facts in this
case but you may think the main question for you to consider
is whether the
Crown has proven that the accused was not engaging in self-defence because in
effect the defence accepts that there
is really no dispute about the other
elements that go to make up the offence charged on the indictment.
You may also think that the main questions involve the following
subsidiary issues. Do you accept or reject the accused’s statements
constitute his evidence that he was head-butted. You are able to accept or
reject his statement as to whether, in fact, what
he said occurred did occur,
and that needs to be considered by you.
The second subsidiary matter is
do you accept or reject the
accused’s statements in the watchhouse which constitute his evidence that
he was acting in self-defence.
If you reject the accused’s evidence
that he was head-butted, that is the end of the matter for your considerations.
reject his evidence that he was head-butted, that is the end of the issue
of self-defence in this case. In that case the defence
of self-defence ceases to
be raised in this trial.
The accused is entitled to rest on the statements that he has made outside of
the courtroom in relation to being head-butted and in
relation to acting in
self-defence, that is evidence before you. He is not required to give evidence
before you in this courtroom.
You cannot use the fact - and you must not use the
fact - that the accused did not give evidence to draw any adverse inferences
You cannot and must not do that.
However, you are entitled to thoroughly examine whether you accept or reject
his evidence. You are entitled to thoroughly examine
what he said outside of the
courtroom and determine what weight you are prepared to give to that evidence
and you must do so in the
context of the whole of the evidence that has been
presented to you during the course of this trial.
The Crown says that you may find the following matters of relevance
considering whether to accept or reject the accused’s evidence that he was
head-butted
and in effect the Crown says you should reject that
Firstly, the lies told to officer Shannon Harvey.
Secondly, the lack of detail, gaps and vagueness of the statements made by
the accused about that matter.
Thirdly, the inconsistent statements made by the accused and finally, the
statements of the three uncles about what they said to him
during the course of
the attendance that was on him prior to the ambulance arriving - and I will come
to these matters in some detail.
If you accept his evidence that he was head-butted, the following
questions then arise and in particular, has the Crown proven that
acting in self-defence in specific detail.
Just pausing there, the defence, on the other hand, says he made clear
statements about what happened. He said at the beginning he
was head-butted. So
that statement emerges during the attendance upon him pretty quickly after the
incident itself and he then goes
on to adhere to that statement when he speaks
to the police.
The defence also says that the deceased was potentially more violent than
anyone has given evidence about.
The circumstances of his potential behaviour are that the deceased was
involved in two arguments the night before not just one. He
continued to be
drunk in the morning and he may have been volatile in those circumstances. The
defence says it is pretty apparent
from the evidence of Troy Forrester, Tristram
Forrester and Shane Forrester that they did not see the whole of the incident
where they were and obviously what is of significant importance is what
occurred at the time these blows were struck. So they are
the questions that you
may think are of particular relevance in assessing what weight you are prepared
to give to the statements
made by the accused outside of this courtroom.
appellant contended that the underlined portions of the trial judge’s
summing up on the issue of self-defence tended
to suggest to the jury that the
onus was on the defence to prove that the accused was acting in self-defence. We
agree. The trial
judge effectively told the jury that they did not get to
consider self-defence unless they accepted the accused’s evidence
was head-butted.
particular, the summing up unnecessarily mixed up two questions: the issue of
whether self-defence had been raised, and the
issue of whether the Crown had
proved beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was not acting in
self-defence.
question of whether self-defence had been raised – ie should be left to
the jury - was a question for the trial judge,
and in this case there was no
dispute that self-defence had been raised by the accused’s statements that
he had been head-butted.
Once that issue had been determined, and the issue of
self-defence was left to the jury, the sole question for the jury was whether
the Crown had proved beyond reasonable doubt either that the accused did not
believe it was necessary to do what he did in order
to defend himself or that
his response was not a reasonable one in the circumstances as he perceived them.
The jury was not concerned
with the issue posed by the trial judge in the
impugned direction: “If you reject the accused’s evidence that he
head-butted, that is the end of the matter for your considerations. If you
reject his evidence that he was head-butted, that is the
end of the issue of
self-defence in this case.
In that case the defence of self-defence ceases to
be raised in this trial.
[94] The issue
of self-defence had been raised; it had been left to the jury by the trial
judge. It was not for the jury to decide
afresh whether self-defence had been
raised and putting the issue the way it was put by the trial judge had the
potential to lead
the jury away from their proper task which was only to
consider whether the Crown had proved beyond reasonable doubt that the accused
was not acting in self-defence, as defined in s 43BD of the
. In that regard, we note:
Although self-defence is still
commonly referred to as a defence, the ultimate onus of proof with respect to
self-defence does not
rest on the accused. Since
Woolmington v. Director of
Public Prosecutions
[1935] UKHL 1
; (1935) AC 462, it has been clearly
established that
once the evidence discloses the possibility that the fatal
act was done in self-defence
a burden falls upon the prosecution to
disprove that fact, that is to say, to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the
fatal act was
not done in self-defence
. The jury must be instructed
accordingly whether or not the plea is actually raised by the accused:
Director of Public Prosecutions v. Walker
(1974) 1 WLR 1090
[emphasis added]
[95] The trial
judge’s directions to the jury should simply have instructed them in
practical terms what the Crown had to prove
in order to prove that the appellant
had not acted in
self-defence.
[96] A further
difficulty is that the impugned directions suggested to the jury that their task
was to ask, “Do I believe the
accused’s statements to police that
the deceased head-butted him?” instead of the correct question for their
determination,
“Is there a reasonable possibility that the deceased
head-butted the accused and that the accused believed it was necessary
what he did to defend himself?”
[97] Immediately
after the directions on self-defence, the trial judge gave the following
direction in relation to the onus and burden
may go to the burden of proof. As I said at the beginning of the trial, the
accused man comes into this court with the
presumption of innocence in his
favour. The law regards an accused person as innocent until the Crown proves his
guilt beyond reasonable
doubt to the satisfaction of you, the members of the
The burden of proving the charge against the accused lies wholly on the
Crown. The accused does not have to prove anything.
Now, the fact that he does not have to prove anything does not mean that you
are not entitled to carefully examine what he has said
outside of this courtroom
and determine whether you accept or reject what he said outside of this
courtroom. You are perfectly entitled
to do that and you should do so as part of
your deliberations as to whether the Crown has proven this matter or not.
Nothing short of proof beyond reasonable doubt will do. It is not enough for
the Crown to show a mere suspicion of guilt or even to
show that the accused is
probably guilty. You are to find the accused not guilty of the charge on the
indictment unless his guilt
has been proven to your satisfaction beyond
reasonable doubt.
As I said at the beginning of the trial, the words “beyond reasonable
doubt” are ordinary English words. The words mean
what they say.
“Reasonable” means reasonable and “doubt” means doubt.
If you think the evidence is incomplete or unreliable or otherwise inadequate
and without more you think there is a reasonable possibility
that the accused
may have been engaging in self-defence then in those circumstances you must give
the accused the benefit of the
doubt and find him not guilty.
On the other hand, if you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the
accused did commit the offence charged on the indictment
then in that
circumstance of course you must do your duty and find him guilty of the charge
on the indictment.
respondent emphasised the underlined words in this direction as a correct
statement of the burden of proof on the issue of
self-defence and contended
that, on the whole, the trial judge correctly directed the jury that their task
was to consider the evidence
and to determine whether the Crown had proved
beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was not acting in self-defence. That
cannot be accepted. The general or generic directions on both
self-defence and onus of proof were unexceptional. However, in the
vital part of
the summing up where the trial judge related those directions to the issues and
evidence in the case, in our view the
trial judge fell into error and misled the
jury as to the nature of their task in the manner outlined above and this caused
a substantial
miscarriage of justice.
[99] Ground 2 is
made out. The appeal will be allowed on this ground as
Acquittal or retrial
s 411(3) of the
Criminal Code
, if the Court allows an appeal against
a finding of guilt, the Court must quash the finding of guilt and direct a
judgment and verdict
of acquittal to be entered.
s 413 of the
Criminal Code
, the Court may order a new trial if the
Court considers that a miscarriage of justice has occurred and, having regard to
circumstances, such miscarriage of justice can be more adequately
remedied by an order for a new trial than by any other order that
the Court is
empowered to make.
[102] On the
evidence, and if the established errors had not been made, there was a real
prospect that the jury would not have been
satisfied, beyond reasonable doubt,
that the accused did not believe it was necessary to do what he did in order to
defend himself
and that his response was not a reasonable one in the
circumstances as he perceived them. In other words, there is a real prospect
that the appellant would have been acquitted on the basis that he was acting in
self-defence. As set out above, on the evidence
at the trial, the witnesses
present said they did not see what happened; the appellant said he was
head-butted by the deceased; and
the evidence was not sufficient to prove that
each of those witnesses were lying, that they did see what happened, and they
accused punch the deceased but did not see the deceased head-butt the
[103] However,
it cannot be said that there was no evidence that might conceivably sustain a
conviction, and in those circumstances,
the appropriate remedy is to order a
To order an
acquittal would constitute a judicial determination of the proceedings against
the appellant otherwise than on trial
by jury in circumstances where it has not
been held that the evidence adduced at trial required the jury to acquit the
That would usurp the function of both the jury and the prosecutorial
authorities.
authorities make it plain that, where the Court orders a retrial, it is
nevertheless open to the Director of Public Prosecutions
to determine not to
proceed with a retrial having regard to the strength of the Crown case and other
relevant factors. It will be
a matter for the Director of Public Prosecutions
whether or not to proceed with a further
prosecution.
Disposition
grounds 1 and 2 are made out, the appeal is allowed, the appellant’s
conviction is set aside, and a retrial is ordered.
_______________________
Transcript 28/11/2022 p4-5;
Transcript 28/11//2022 T43.
T129-130, T155.
T133-134, T156.
T164, T186.
T164-165, T187.
Another basis for the discharge
application was reference that the Crown prosecutor had made to the second
reading speech during
the course of his closing address to the jury. However,
the trial judge directed the jury to put any reference made to the second
reading speech to one side explaining why it was "totally irrelevant for your
purposes today”, and this ground does not appear
to be relied on by the
appellant for the purposes of this appeal.
In granting leave to recall
these witnesses, at T303, the trial judge foreshadowed giving a direction to the
jury in these terms:
“And having seen the evidence, subject to
disbelieving it, but they’ll also – they would also be directed,
the lines of, if you don’t accept their evidence, all you do is
reject it, but it doesn’t convert it into a positive
yes they did see what
happen.” However, it does not appear that such a direction was in fact
Transcript 02/12/2022
Transcript 02/12/2022
Transcript 02/12/2022 T2 –
5, AB369-372.
(1991) 53 A Crim R 421
The Queen v Chin
[1985] HCA 35
(1985) 157 CLR 671.
Shaw v The Queen
(1952) 85 CLR 363
at 383-384 (Fullager J).
Lawrence v The Queen
[1931] ArgusLawRp 87
(1981) 38 ALR 1
at 3 (Gibbs CJ).
T (3.12.22) 381-387.
212 CLR 299
196 ALR 421
77 ALJR 849
Gleeson CJ, Gummow,
Kirby and Hayne JJ referred to
Niven v The Queen
[1968] HCA 67
in which the High Court held that a reference to “evidence in
rebuttal” in the Tasmanian
Criminal Code
should be understood as
applying to
evidence sought to be adduced by the prosecution after
the accused's defence was complete.
v The Queen
[1996] HCA 22
(1996) 186 CLR 427
at 440 per Toohey, Gaudron, Gummow and Kirby
JJ and at 432 per Dawson J (in dissent, but not as to the principle). See also
MLW v The Queen
[2022] NTCCA 2
per Grant CJ, Southwood and
Brownhill JJ.
contradictory evidence from police officers as to whether the accused had said
“who throttled Sylvia” or “who
did Sylvia”.
At 383-384.
[1985] HCA 35
(1985) 157 CLR
at 676-677.
[1981] HCA 63
(1981) 147 CLR
[1952] 25 ALJR 753
[2001] HCA 25
(2001) 205 CLR 50
[2002] HCA 26
(2002) 211 CLR 193
[2006] 230 CLR 234 at 248-249
at [93] p261.
Zecevic v DPP (Vic)
[1987] HCA 26
(1987) 162 CLR 645
See observations by Wilson,
Dawson and Toohey JJ in
BD v The Queen (No
[2017] NTCCA 8
– [17] and the authorities cited
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (502 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter