URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTSC/2025/71.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:23:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Peters v Northern Territory of Australia [2025] NTSC 71 (29 September 2025)
Peters v Northern Territory of Australia
[2025] NTSC 71
PARTIES: PETERS, Michele (by her litigation guardian Gregory Peters)
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
TITLE OF COURT: SUPREME COURT OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: 29 of 2017 (21717889)
DELIVERED: 29 September 2025
HEARING DATE: 7 August 2025
JUDGMENT OF: Smyth A/AsJ
CATCHWORDS:
Party under disability – compromise of claim – management of
settlement amount ordered to be held on trust by private
Parens patriae
disability – power of Court to inquire as to whether person remains
a disability and whether now capable of managing financial affairs – test
to be applied – termination of trust
and direction to trustee to pay
settlement to plaintiff
Supreme Court Rules 1987
(NT), 15.08, 79.05
Cadwallender (by his next friend Stavroulla Cadwallender) v The Public
[2003] WASC 72
Re Erdogan’s Application
[2012] VSC 256
(2012) 36 VR
[2015] NSWSC 498
Renehan v Leeuwin Ocean Adventure
Foundation Ltd
[2006] NTSC 28
; referred to.
Lindsay G, ‘
The Incapacitated Plaintiff and Personal Injury
Compensation Proceedings’
, Paper given at the New South Wales Bar
Association: Personal Injury and Common Law Conference, Sydney, 11 March
Luntz H and Harder S,
Assessment of Damages for Personal Injury and
(Sydney, LexisNexis, 5th ed, 2021)
REPRESENTATION:
Plaintiff: G Mullins KC
Defendant: E Farquhar
Interested Party: L Moldenhauer
Solicitors:
Plaintiff: A Little Legal Help Pty Ltd
Defendant: Solicitor for the Northern Territory
Interested Party: Sparke Helmore Lawyers
Judgment category classification: B
Judgment ID Number: Smy2511
Number of pages: 16
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Peters v Northern Territory of Australia
[2025] NTSC
No. 29 of 2017 (21717889)
MICHELE PETERS (BY HER LITIGATION GUARDIAN GREGORY PETERS)
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
CORAM: SMYTH A/AsJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 29 September 2025)
Plaintiff makes application for a variation of the orders of
Luppino M (as
he then was) dated 6 June 2017 (“the original order”) by way of
summons filed 19 June 2025, which was amended
orally on the day of the
[2] The original
order was made consequent upon the approval of a compromise of a claim between
the Plaintiff and the Defendant.
This application seeks an order removing the
Australian Executor Trustees Limited as trustee of the Plaintiff’s
funds and directing payment of the remaining settlement amount to the
Plaintiff to manage herself. In short, the basis of the order
is that the
Plaintiff is now no longer suffering from the disability that warranted the
original order and is capable of managing
her own financial affairs. As such, it
is open for her to have the original order varied to reflect the change in her
circumstances.
following affidavits, for the purpose of this application, were relied on at the
hearing and taken as read: Michele Peters
made 16 July 2025 and 7 August 2025,
Gregory Peters made 16 July 2025, Katrina Harper made 31 July 2025 and Susan
Little made 17
July 2025, 1 August 2025 and 7 August
[4] By writ
filed 10 April 2017, the Plaintiff, by her litigation guardian, commenced
proceedings in this Court seeking damages arising
from personal injury caused by
an alleged breach of the Defendant’s duty of care, in circumstances of a
surgical procedure
undertaken at the Royal Darwin Hospital. In particular, the
Plaintiff’s claim arose out of the alleged failure of the Defendant
perform the Plaintiff’s laparoscopic right adrenalectomy surgery to a
reasonable standard on 21 October 2014. The alleged
injury to the Plaintiff
comprised permanent brain damage which left the Plaintiff with serious
stroke-like disabilities, including
memory loss, cognitive deficits, left-side
of body deficits, bilateral loss of peripheral vision, vertigo and ongoing
fatigue. The
Plaintiff’s need to commence proceedings by a litigation
guardian arose from the injury that she sustained as a consequence
surgical procedure referred to in the proceedings. The proceeding was
subsequently settled before proceeding to trial.
relevant times, during the ligation and in respect to the settlement of the
proceeding, the Plaintiff was assessed as being
incapable of managing her own
financial affairs. Four main expert reports were relied on during the
litigation by the Plaintiff
and Defendant in respect to her disability, which
included the:
(a) Report of Professor Lorraine Dennerstein, psychiatrist, dated 2 February
(b) Report of Ms Michelle French, occupational therapist, dated February
(c) Report of Dr Barry Rawicki, neurologist, dated 2 March 2016; and
(d) Report of Dr Judith Frayne, neurologist, dated 15 December 2016.
[6] Without
setting out the precise details of those reports, they collectively describe a
picture of a Plaintiff who suffered a significant
brain injury and required
significant on-going support in respect to many if not all aspects of daily
living, including managing
her finances. Dr Rawicki relevantly opined:
“As a result of the
cerebral ischemia, Mrs Peters has significant impairment and disability and
significant changes to her lifestyle
and participation... She has major
disability related to her stroke... She is unable to perform any complex
community tasks. She
is unable to pay bills or be involved at all in managing
the finances. She is unable to add or subtract even basic numbers. She
unable to go shopping because she can’t remember what needs to be bought
and because of her poor exercise tolerance and
settlement of the matter, pursuant to Supreme Court
, the Court
approved the compromise of the claim and ordered that the settlement sum be held
on trust for the Plaintiff, the nominated
trustee being Australian Executor
Trustees Limited. That order, directing the settlement amount to be held on
trust, did not refer
expressly to the power upon which the order was made. It
is clear, however, that the Court possesses a power, under its
hold settlement amounts on trust.
[8] Thereafter
the settlement was managed by the nominated
until this application was
Ceasing to be Under a Disability
[9] There is a
presumption that a person of full age is capable of managing his or her own
Where a Court determines
that a person who is awarded damages (or monies following the approval of a
compromise) is unable to manage
their own affairs, the Court may direct that the
amount be paid to a public official or some other person. The Court is then
to make an order for the protective management of the
That is what happened in
this proceeding.
[10] Given the
Court’s powers to determine that a person is under a disability and to
direct that their settlement monies be
held on trust, it is conversely within
the Court’s powers to determine if a person has ceased to be under a
disability and
is otherwise entitled to manage their own
It has been stated that
the Plaintiff bears the onus to prove that she has the capacity or competency to
manage her affairs and
is therefore no longer under a
disability.
Alternatively, it has
been suggested that the Court should adopt an inquisitorial approach to such a
process, and therefore it may
be inappropriate to speak of an onus of proof at
Whether there is an onus or
not is not necessary for me to decide because, as set out in the reasons below,
if one is imposed on
the Plaintiff, it has been discharged.
determining whether a person has ceased to be under a disability and is capable
of managing their own financial affairs, the
Court will apply similar criteria
to those which apply when an order for management is
The question is whether
the circumstances which prompted the Court’s intervention have ameliorated
so that the beneficiary
of the Court’s protection may take back control of
the property managed for his or her benefit. A most helpful discussion
test for incapacity can be found in
Re Erdogan’s
Application
I agree with
the statement of Dixon J, in
Re Erdogan’s Application
on-going debate as to whether a subjective or objective test is to be applied is
perhaps of no real substance. The correct
approach is to focus on whether the
beneficiary has sufficient cognitive function to be capable of understanding the
general nature
of what he or she is doing by his or her participation in
managing his or her affairs. That question is necessarily directed to
circumstances of the beneficiary and the affairs that he or she must manage.
The test, as in
Re Erdogan’s Application
, is as stated by Dixon
beneficiary must show that he or she has the capacity or competency to manage
his or her affairs and is, therefore, no
longer a person under disability... A
beneficiary must demonstrate the capacity to make decisions in relation to his
or her property
and financial affairs. The inquiry is into the quality of
cognitive function and mental capacity, which inquiry is partly illuminated
medical perspective and is partly a factual inquiry for the decision maker. In
each context the focus remains on the circumstances
beneficiary.”
[12] In respect
to evaluating capacity, the inquiry will usually require an assessment of
medical or neuropsychological opinion, with
consideration of the following key
considerations:
(a) capacity to understand, with the assistance of proper explanation and
advice, the issues that will arise in self-management of
his or her financial
affairs. The identification of capacity requires the identification of the
nature, extent and significance of
the issues that will arise for consideration
by the beneficiary in the management of financial affairs.
(b) capacity to make rational decisions. The issue of capacity is not to be
assessed by whether the beneficiary’s decision
is that which would be made
by a person of ordinary prudence. Not every person has the ability to manage
competently his or her financial
affairs unaided. The inquiry is not into the
competence of the management process or the probable outcomes in the future.
right but it must be rationally reached. The jurisdiction
protects against
vulnerability, not against mistakes.
(c) capacity to direct or implement the transactions that are, or may be,
[13] Evaluating
such capacities or competencies requires identification of the cognitive ability
to implement or participate in processes,
particularly:
(a) an ability to identify and comprehend the existence of an event,
transaction or issue which requires management — a decision
(b) once the matter is identified, insight into, and understanding of, the
matter is needed. The person must be able to understand
or appreciate and recall
the relevant facts, the alternatives available, whether by action or inaction,
including seeking advice
or assistance where appropriate, with sufficient
clarity to permit rational choice or decision.
(c) the person must have the capacity to reason, to make a rational decision or
choice about the steps to be taken or avoided to
achieve an appropriate outcome
or otherwise give effect to or implement a transaction.
Disposition
[14] The factual
foundation for the variation of the original order is set out in the various
affidavit material. Relevantly, the
Little affidavit of 17 July 2025
(a) Ms Little was previously the solicitor acting for the Plaintiff in this
proceeding. She had maintained contact with the Plaintiff
and her husband in a
non-professional capacity since settlement until about mid-2017.
(b) During the period mid-2017 to 2024, Ms Little had no contact with the
Plaintiff but resumed contact with her in mid-2024. From
that period Ms Little
observed significant improvements, from her previous interactions, in the
Plaintiff’s functional and
cognitive capabilities.
(c) In about mid-late 2024, Ms Little had qualified as a sole practitioner and
was instructed by the Plaintiff to engage a neuropsychologist,
with a view to
obtaining a report to determine if the Plaintiff’s capacity had improved,
such that she was capable of managing
her own financial affairs.
(d) In January 2025, Dr Chantal Roddy, a neuropsychologist, was engaged to
provide a neuropsychological report. A copy of Dr Roddy’s
annexed to the affidavit of Ms Little made 17 July
Roddy’s report, in summary, relevantly opines:
(a) Mrs Peters presents with relative personal weaknesses in working memory,
perceptual reasoning and visual memory on a background
of otherwise
age-appropriate cognition that is in keeping with pre-morbid estimated
functioning. Visual processing and poor visual
memory are likely linked to her
stroke which impacted bilaterally in her occipital lobes. In other domains
assessed, her cognition
is at or exceeding that of her age-matched
(b) Mrs Peters’ functioning is notably improved relative to her 2016
assessments of post stroke functioning. While there are
some residual deficits,
Mrs Peters had demonstrated improvements in several areas of functioning. She
is now able to manage many
daily and financial tasks independently, whereas she
previously required assistance and support to do
(c) While Mrs Peters had difficulty with visual memory and visual skills, these
areas do not have a direct impact on her capacity
to independently manage her
financial affairs. Her comparatively strong auditory-verbal memory and
executive functioning skills
appear to allow her to compensate for her areas of
difficulty. She does not demonstrate any cognitive impairments which preclude
her from managing her financial affairs
independently.
(d) It is my view that Mrs Peters demonstrates a sound understanding of the
nature and extent of her financial portfolio. She is
able to explain the types
of accounts, purpose of each account, and the processes through which these are
managed without prompting.
She demonstrates a clear understanding of her income
which aligns with collateral information provided and breakdown of expenditure.
Mrs Peters shows an appreciation of the need for prudential spending to ensure
that her income and investments are able to continue
to support her and Greg for
the remainder of their lives. Mrs Peters has also indicated that she has
benefited from and will continue
to benefit from receiving financial advice from
experts to guide her investment and
(e) To the best of my knowledge, there is no evidence of any unduly risky,
impulsive, or otherwise irresponsible financial decisions
made by Mrs Peters in
the management of her financial affairs. Mrs Peters presents as cautious and
demonstrates an appreciation
of the need for prudential budgeting and timely
management of bills. She is aware of financial risks including possible
exploitation
by others, cyber-crime, or irresponsible spending leading to
depletion of her assets.
(f) Mrs Peters is able to understand and appreciate the need to plan for the
future with respect to her finances. She is able to
explain that she needs her
investments and savings to last another 10-15 years comfortably so that she and
Greg are provided for.
Mrs Peters understands that were she to plan large
purchases or events, that these would need to be balanced to ensure that these
do not overly deplete her assets. She indicates that she does not plan any such
purposes and will continue to be guided by financial
(g) Mrs Peters has demonstrated that she is able to plan, organise and execute
financial responsibilities independently. To the
best of my knowledge, she had
independently managed her finances for the last few years without incident. Her
executive functioning
skills and organisational skills are age-appropriate and
she has in place strategies to manage and track financial transactions.
Collateral information outlines that she has done so without assistance from
Greg (her husband) for a number of years
(h) Mrs Peters is aware that there exists a level of potential risk or influence
from others with regard to her finances. She is
mindful of this and has managed
this without any evidence of adverse events in the past few years. She asserts
that she has only
made financial decisions after careful consideration and
consultation with Greg and her financial
advisor(s).
(i) My view is that Mrs Peters is able to act in her best interests without
external oversight. She has demonstrated that she values
professional financial
advice to help guide her investments and oversee her portfolio. There is no
evidence on current assessments
to indicate that Mrs Peters requires the control
of a trustee to continue. I am satisfied that she has the capacity to manage her
finances independently in
(j) It is my view that Mrs Peters does demonstrate the cognitive and functional
capacity to independently manage her financial affairs.
She currently
demonstrates she is able to make informed decisions with an appreciation of the
impact of these decisions. She is
aware of potential financial risks and
exploitation and takes measures to protect from these risks. I am satisfied
that Mrs Peters
is able to act in her own best interests, with appropriate
caution and care in managing her current and future
[16] As noted
above, the observations in respect to the Plaintiff’s improved condition
were supported by Ms Little’s own
observations, and by others including Ms
Jane Campbell, the Plaintiff’s former financial
and Mr Gregory Peters,
the Plaintiff’s husband.
In terms of continued management of her portfolio, it was the Plaintiff’s
evidence that notwithstanding the discharge of the
current trustee, it was her
intention to continue to retain on-going expert financial advice in respect to
financial management.
market value of the Plaintiff’s estate, as at 25 July 2025, remains
considerable.
opinion, in the circumstances, the Plaintiff has discharged the onus (if one
applies) in respect to her recovery from the
relevant disability. As stated in
Cadwallender,
adequate proof of recovery from disability is shown, there is no longer any
justification to continue the trust or withhold
the transfer of the corpus to
the beneficiary absolutely. I am satisfied on the evidence that the Plaintiff
has the capacity to
understand, with the assistance of proper explanation and
advice, the issues that will arise in self-management of her financial
the capacity to make rational decisions and the capacity to direct or implement
the transactions that are, or may be, required.
[18] I therefore
make the following orders:
(1) The litigation guardian be removed from these proceedings;
(2) The trustee company currently managing the Plaintiff’s trust fund
pursuant to the order of Master Luppino made 6 June 2017,
namely, Australian
Executor Trustees Ltd (AET), do all things necessary to wind up the trust upon
which it holds moneys or any other
property on behalf of the Plaintiff pursuant
to the order of Master Luppino made 6 June 2017 and transfer the whole of the
of the moneys or other property held on trust, after payment of all
proper expenses and allowances, to the Plaintiff whose receipt
sufficient discharge for the trustee;
(3) AET prepare and deliver to the Plaintiff accounts of receipts, payments or
other expenses made from the trust property and the
Plaintiff shall have
twenty-one (21) days from the date of receipt of those accounts or such further
time as this Court might allow,
to object to the accounts or any part thereof.
In the event of any objection/s made which cannot be resolved by agreement
such further time as the Court may allow, AET shall pass its accounts for
the administration of the trust before the Registrar of
(4) Liberty to apply in relation to any matter arising from the accounts or
passing of these accounts and the matter generally;
(5) The costs of this application and of the preparation and passing of the
accounts of the trustee to be taxed, if not agreed, shall
be paid from the trust
----------------------------------
Annexed to the Little affidavit of
25 May 2017, annexures SML3, SML5, SML7 and the Little affidavit of 17 July 2025
annexure SL2.
Annexure CML5 of the Little
affidavit of 17 July 2025.
Renehan v Leeuwin Ocean
Adventure Foundation Ltd
[2006] NTSC 28
[46] and cases mentioned therein,
including in particular
Cadwallender (by his next friend Stavroulla
Cadwallender) v The Public Trustee
[2003] WASC 72
Cadwallender
”). Supreme Court
provides that
money in Court or to be paid into Court can be ordered to be held by a person
for the benefit of a person under a disability,
and where no person is
nominated, the money is to be paid to the Public Trustee to hold on trust for
the benefit of the person.
In this circumstance it is not apparent that
settlement money was in Court or to be paid into Court, rather it was proposed
the Defendant pay the money directly to the nominated trustee to hold on
trust. In the absence of an order under
parens patriae
trustee to hold the payment on trust.
Represented and referred to in
this application as the interested party, namely Australian Executor Trustees
Re Erdogan’s
Application
[2012] VSC 256
(2012) 36 VR 579
Re Erdogan’s
Application
[2015] NSWSC 498
Cadwallender
Re Erdogan’s
Application
See Luntz H & Harder S,
Assessment of Damages for Personal Injury and Death, 5th Ed. 2021, LexisNexis, p
1020 and Lindsay G,
The Incapacitated Plaintiff and Personal Injury Compensation
Proceedings, Paper given at the New South Wales Bar Association: Personal
and Common Law Conference, Sydney, 11 March 2017 at [120].
See Luntz H & Harder S,
Assessment of Damages for Personal Injury and Death, 5
LexisNexis, p 1032;
Re Erdogan’s Application
Re Erdogan’s
Application at
Re Erdogan’s
Application
Re Erdogan’s
Application
at [73-74].
Annexure SL6 (“the Roddy
Report”). A summary of the neuropsychological tests conducted included:
Test of premorbid function
(TOPF), Wechsler Adult Intelligence Test
Ed (WAIS-IV), Wechsler Memory Test – 4
(WMS-IV) – Older Adult, California Verbal Learning Test –
Ed. (CVLT-3) – Alternate Form, DKEFA Tower of London Test
and Verbal Fluency Test, Victoria Stroop Test, Trail Making Test,
Anxiety and Stress Scales – 21-item version (DASS-21). See Annexure SL6
(appendix A) of the Little Affidavit 17
Pages 13-14 Roddy Report.
Page 14 Roddy Report.
Page 14 Roddy Report.
Page 15 Roddy Report.
Page 15 Roddy Report.
Page 16 Roddy Report.
Page 17 Roddy Report.
Page 17 Roddy Report.
Page 18 Roddy Report.
Page 18 Roddy Report.
Affidavit of Little made 1
August 2025.
Affidavit of Gregory Peters
made 16 July 2025.
Affidavit of Michele Peters
made 16 July 2025 at [18] and Michele Peters made 7 August 20.25 at [4-7].
Affidavit of Katrina Harper
made 31 July 2025 at [4].
Cadwallender
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (184 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter