URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCA/2023/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:16:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Northern Australian Beef Limited v Bilba Capital Pty Ltd & Ors [2023] NTCA 5 (16 May 2023)
Northern Australian Beef Limited v Bilba Capital Pty Ltd &
[2023] NTCA 5
PARTIES: NORTHERN AUSTRALIAN BEEF LIMITED (ACN 150 153 192)
BILBA CAPITAL PTY LTD
(ACN 623 007 787)
JIM LAOURIS in his capacity as REGISTRAR-GENERAL (NT)
ROBERT SARIB in his capacity as SURVEYOR-GENERAL (NT)
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: AP 2 of 2022 (22207790)
DELIVERED: 16 May 2023
HEARING DATES: 4 & 5 July 2022
JUDGMENT OF: Grant CJ, Blokland & Barr JJ
CATCHWORDS:
LAND LAW – Torrens title – Exceptions to indefeasibility –
Omitted or misdescribed easements
Whether easement ‘misdescribed’ in land register within meaning
s 189(1)(c)
Land Title Act 2000
(NT) – Development
approval did not create right
and did not result in misdescription
within meaning of exception to indefeasibility – No occasion for order for
rectification
pursuant to
Land Title Act
Land Title Act 2000
Licensed Surveyors Act 1983
Planning Act 1999
Australian Hi-Fi Publications Pty Ltd v Gehl
[1979] 2 NSWLR 618
Billiet v Commercial Bank of Australasia Ltd
[1906] SALawRp 19
[1906] SALR 193
Constructions Pty Ltd v Sahab Holdings Pty Ltd
[2013] HCA 11
(2013) 247 CLR 149
and Imperial Oil Ltd v Turta
[1954] SCR 427
Dobbie v Davidson
23 NSWLR 625
Golding v Tanner
[1991] SASC 3013
(1991) 56 SASR 482
[1903] NSWStRp 70
(1903) 3 SR (NSW) 535
Hillpalm Pty Ltd v Heaven’s Door Pty
[2004] HCA 59
(2004) 220 CLR 472
Hutchinson v Lemon
(1983) Qd R 356
v Registrar General
(1967) 69 SR (NSW) 361
Kitching v Phillips
[2011] WASCA 19
KI Seaport Pty Ltd v Abstraxion Pty Ltd & Anor
[2020] SASC 113
Marsden v McAlister
(1887) 8 NSWLR 300
Benefits Fund of Australia Ltd v Fisher
[1984] 1 Qd R 606
(1977) 1 BPR 9356,
Overland v Lenehan
(1901) 11 QLJ 59,
Rock v Todeschino
[1983] Qd R 356
Stuy v BC Ronalds Pty Ltd
[1984] 2 Qd R 578
Tighe v Pike
[2016] QCA 353
, referred to.
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: D Robinson SC
First Respondent: D McConnel SC
Solicitors:
Appellant: Clayton Utz
First Respondent: Ward Keller
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 43
IN THE COURT OF APPEAL
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Northern Australian Beef Limited v Bilba
Capital Pty Ltd & Ors
[2023] NTCA 5
AP 2 of 2022 (22207790)
NORTHERN AUSTRALIAN BEEF LIMITED (ACN 150 153 192)
BILBA CAPITAL PTY LTD
(ACN 623 007 787)
First Respondent
JIM LAOURIS in his capacity as REGISTRAR-GENERAL (NT)
Second Respondent
ROBERT SARIB in his capacity as SURVEYOR-GENERAL (NT)
Third Respondent
CORAM: GRANT CJ, BLOKLAND and BARR JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 16 May 2023)
[1] This is an appeal from a finding by the Supreme Court that an easement
had been ‘misdescribed’ in the land register
within the meaning of
s 189(1)(c)
Land Title Act 2000
(NT), and a consequential
order pursuant to
Land Title Act
directing the
Registrar-General to correct the description of the easement in the land
Factual background
[2] The appellant (
) is the registered proprietor of Section 5543
Hundred of Strangways (
Section 5543
). The first respondent
) is the registered proprietor of adjoining Section 5544 Hundred of
Strangways (
Section 5544
). Sections 5543 and 5544 were previously
designated respectively as Sections 5410 Hundred of Strangways (
) and Section 5409 Hundred of Strangways (
Section 5409
owned by Suncode Pty Ltd (
[3] On 11 February 2011, while the two parcels were still owned by Suncode,
an easement was registered creating a 10 metre wide right-of-way
over part of
Section 5409 in favour of the Power and Water Corporation (
to allow access from the Stuart Highway to an Electricity Supply easement and a
Water Supply easement situated further
north on Section 5409 (
pre-existing
PWC easement
[4] On 1 July 2011, Suncode and NABL entered into a deed pursuant to which
NABL took an option to acquire Section 5410 within a period
of six months for an
option fee of $132,500.
[5] On 12 September 2011, the surveying firm Earl James & Associates
) prepared Drawing Number 11/8197/2 and provided it to
Suncode’s solicitor. The drawing was expressed to be for the purpose
proposed Development Application under which Section 5409 would be divided into
Lots A and B, and Section 5410 would be consolidated
with Lot B. Proposed Lot B
was a small wedge of land two hectares in size and located contiguous to the
Stuart Highway road reserve
on its eastern boundary and contiguous to the rail
corridor running between Sections 5409 and 5410 on its western boundary.
Lot A was the greater and remaining portion of Section 5409 (also
contiguous to the Stuart Highway road reserve on the east and the
rail corridor
on the west), which was 90.5 hectares in size and lay to the north of proposed
Lot B and shared a boundary with it.
[6] The drawing depicted a right-of-way easement running west from the Stuart
Highway road reserve across proposed Lot B until it
met the rail corridor, and
then running north-west adjacent to the boundary of the rail corridor until it
met the southern boundary
of proposed Lot A. It is of note for present purposes
that the drawing depicted that part of the right-of-way easement running from
the point of intersection with the Stuart Highway way reserve to the rail
corridor as 20.1 metres in width, and that part running
north-west along the
rail corridor, by extrapolation from other measurements, as approximately 20
metres in width. The drawing contained
the notation:
All areas and dimensions are subject to survey
Right of Way over Lot B in favour of Lot A
[7] On its face, the purpose and effect of the proposed Development
Application as described in Drawing Number 11/8197/2 was to give
direct access
to Section 5410 from the Stuart Highway across that wedge of land which was to
be subdivided from Section 5409 and
consolidated with Section 5410 (proposed Lot
B), while at the same time preserving access to Section 5409 from the Stuart
by grant of the right-of-way easement across proposed Lot B in
favour of Section 5409.
[8] On 21 September 2011, EJA prepared revised Drawing Number 11/8197/4. The
revised drawing was for the purpose of the same proposed
Development Application
and contained the same detail as Drawing Number 11/8197/2, with the exception
that the right-of-way easement
over proposed Lot B was not depicted with a width
measurement and had been relocated to run north along the boundary with the
Highway road reserve until it met the southern boundary of proposed Lot
[9] On 21 December 2011, Suncode and NABL entered into a variation of the
option deed to make the consolidation of proposed Lot B
with Section 5410 a
condition of purchase by NABL. On that same day, NABL exercised the option to
purchase Section 5410 on those
terms, and Suncode and NABL entered into a sale
agreement which included those terms. The parties’ obligations in
to the creation of the proposed access easement were contained in
clause 17.1 of the sale agreement as follows:
17.1 Right of Way
(a) The Purchaser agrees that on Completion it will grant to the Vendor as the
owner of the balance of Section 5409 Hundred of Strangways
(being the area
described as Lot A on the Plan) a right of way easement over that part of Lot B
shown on the Plan as “right
of way easement” (“the ROW
Area”) on the terms provided for in Schedule 3 of the
Law of Property
(b) The Purchaser further agrees to carry out the following works at no cost to
the Vendor and within 12 months from Completion:
(i) Construct a formed roadway to heavy duty truck standard which is kerbed,
guttered, tarred and sealed from the Stuart Highway
entrance to the railway
(ii) Construct an unsealed road from the Stuart Highway entrance along the ROW
Area to allow access for vehicles and agricultural
machinery at a width of 3
times the width of a sedan passenger motor vehicle; and
(iii) Fence the boundary of Lot A and Lot B as shown on the Plan, with gates at
the eastern end of that boundary to allow access
to Lot A from the ROW Area.
[10] On 30 January 2012, planning consultants submitted an application for
Development Consent on behalf of Suncode as owner and with
the authority of NABL
as the prospective purchaser. That application was for the subdivision and
consolidation of Sections 5409
and 5410 pursuant to
(NT) in accordance with Drawing Number 11/8197/4.
[11] On 14 February 2012, PWC sent a letter to the Development Consent
Authority (
) requiring the pre-existing PWC easement to be surveyed
and included on any new title to be issued as a result of the subdivision
consolidation.
[12] On 21 February 2012, the Director of Roads Planning produced an internal
memorandum which stated:
Road Network Division, Department of Lands and Planning has no objections in
principle to the above-mentioned development, subject
to the following comments
and requirements:
proposed Right of Way over Lot B in favour of Lot A is too close to the
intersection of the access to Section 5410 and the Stuart
Highway and may result
in the backing up of vehicles on the Stuart Highway. The Right of Way should be
established over the existing
access track adjacent to the railway corridor to
provide sufficient separation between the access track and the Stuart
existing access track to proposed Lot A may be retained for the current land
use, but will not be permitted if the land use on
Lot A changes to an improved
use. This is consistent with concerns reflected in the previous formal
agreement for access to the
subject land.
proposed work (including provision of services) within, or impacting upon the
Stuart Highway road reserve shall be in accordance
with the standards and
specifications of the Road Network Division, Department of Lands and
Developer, his Contractor or Service Provider is required to obtain a
“Permit to Work Within a Road Reserve” from
the Department of
Construction and Infrastructure prior to the commencement of any works within
the Stuart Highway road reserve.
[13] The principal concern
expressed in that memorandum was that the proposed right-of-way easement over
Lot B depicted in Drawing
Number 11/8197/4 was too close to the intersection
between the Stuart Highway and the existing access road to Section 5410. That
concern was subsequently communicated to the DCA, and the DCA advised the
planning consultants acting for Suncode that the Road Network
Division required
the proposed access easement to be relocated to the existing access track
adjacent to the railway corridor.
[14] On 16 March 2012, the application for approval of the subdivision and
consolidation of Sections 5409 and 5410 was considered
at a meeting of the DCA.
The agenda for that meeting listed a number of matters to be taken into account
Planning Act
including the following objective
Litchfield Planning Concepts and Land Use Objectives 2002
Objective 2.4 (Mobility and Transport) – To provide the shire with a
coordinated, integrated and efficient transport network.
appropriate all season and heavy vehicle access for agricultural, horticultural,
extractive and industrial activities.
[15] On 20 March 2012, the
principal of EJA, a NABL representative and the solicitor acting for NABL met
with representatives of PWC.
At that meeting, PWC and NABL reached an agreement
for EJA to prepare a survey plan to create a new right-of-way in favour of PWC
to replace the pre-existing PWC easement running adjacent to the railway
corridor, and to create the access right-of-way in the same
general position as
depicted in Drawing Number 11/8197/2.
[16] On 22 March 2012, the DCA gave the planning consultants written notice
that it had determined to grant consent to the proposed
subdivision and
consolidation subject to the conditions specified in Development Permit DP
12/0174. That Permit contained the following
conditions precedent:
to the endorsement of plans the developer shall resolve the location of the
proposed right of way with the Department of Lands
and Planning (Road Network
Division) to the satisfaction of the consent authority.
to the endorsement of plans and prior to commencement of works (including site
preparation), amended plans to the satisfaction
of the consent authority must be
submitted to and approved by the consent authority. When approved, the plans
will be endorsed and
will then form part of the permit. The plans must be drawn
to scale with dimensions and two copies must be provided. The plans
generally in accordance with the plans submitted with the application but
modified to show ... the location of the proposed
right of way
[17] Over the course of 22 and 23 March 2012, EJA performed a field survey
for the proposed subdivision and consolidation, and requested
Surveyor-General to issue new lot numbers and a plan number in accordance with
Development Permit DP 12/0174.
[18] On 27 March 2012, the planning consultants provided the Director of
Roads Planning with a copy of Drawing Number 11/8197/2 showing
the location and
configuration of the proposed right-of-way easement in accordance with condition
precedent 1 of the Development
Permit. The covering email stated:
In reference to Road Network’s comments on the application to subdivide
Section 5409 Hundred of Strangways and consolidate with
Section 5410, we have
amended the subdivision drawing to relocate the right-of-way to Section 5409 to
a location adjacent to the
rail corridor. A copy of your comments and the
amended drawing is attached.
Could you please indicate whether the location of the right-of-way shown in
the drawing is acceptable to you.
[19] On 28 March 2012, the solicitor for NABL sent Suncode’s solicitor
a copy of Development Permit DP 12/0174 and sought Suncode’s
relocate the proposed right-of-way from the location depicted on Drawing Number
11/8197/4 (which was annexed to the Sale
Agreement entered into on 21 December
2011) to the location depicted on Drawing Number 11/8197/2. That letter
relevantly stated:
[O]ur client wishes to proceed with the purchase and is working hard to
satisfy the Condition Precedent under the Sale Agreement,
including the steps
required to obtain the titles required for completion. Considerable progress has
been made toward satisfying
the Conditions Precedent:
Precedent – clause 2A(a)(i) - Separate Titles:
(a) On 22 March 2012, the Development Consent Authority granted Development
Permit DP12/0174 (“the Permit”), a copy of
which is attached.
We have instructed Earl James & Associates (“EJA”)
to finalise the survey work, survey plans, obtain the consents
required under
the Permit and take all other steps required to obtain separate titles.
(b) You will note condition precedent 1 to the Permit, which requires the right
of way (being the right of way to be granted over
Lot B in favour of Lot A being
that part of Section 5409 to be retained by your client) to be relocated from
the position shown on
the plan attached to the Sale Agreement.
I attach a revised draft plan showing the proposed new location of the right
of way, which it is proposed will also be the location
of a new access easement
in favour of Power and Water Corporation (“PWC”) in stead (sic) of
the current right of way
held by PWC.
Can you please confirm your client’s agreement to the change in the
location of the “ROW Area” for the purposes
of clause 17.1(a) of the
Sale Agreement. The works provided for in clause 17.1(b) will be undertaken on
this new location.
Can you please advise if you have any queries as to the matters noted above,
and in particular confirm your client’s agreement
(i) the new location of the ROW Area under clause 17.1(a) of Sale Agreement;
[20] The director and principal of Suncode subsequently signed an endorsement
indicating Suncode’s agreement in writing in the
following terms:
Suncode Pty Ltd hereby agrees to:
(a) The new location of the Right of Way Area as set out on Survey Plan [sic]
[21] On 2 April 2012, the planning consultants sent an email to the Director
of Roads Planning attaching Drawing Number 11/8197/2
and stating:
I am trying to finalise the endorsement of drawings attached to the
subdivision permit for this land, to enable the sale contract
to be settled. The
matter of the location of the right of way is the only thing to be done to
obtain endorsement of the drawings.
Could you please have a look at the attached amended drawing, and give me a
response that I can forward to DCA.
[22] On Tuesday, 3 April 2012, the Department of Lands and Planning responded
in the following terms:
The location of the right of way easement on the attached subdivision drawing
is acceptable, provided that where the easement meets
the Stuart highway (sic)
road reserve, it coincides with the existing access intersection to the Stuart
[23] On 3 April 2012, the Road Network Division advised the planning
consultants that the location of the proposed right-of-way as
depicted on
Drawing Number 11/8197/2 was acceptable, on condition that the entry from the
Stuart Highway road reserve to proposed
Lot B was at the same point as the
existing access intersection with the Stuart Highway. The planning consultants
forwarded that
approval to the DCA, together with Drawing Number 11/8197/2, in
satisfaction of condition precedent 1 of the Development Permit.
The covering
email stated:
Development Permit DP2012/0174 approved the subdivision and consolidation of
Sections 5409 and 5410 Hundred of Strangways. A copy
of the permit is
The conditions precedent required the location of the right of way to Section
5409 to be resolved with the Road Network Division,
and an amended subdivision
drawing showing the relocated right of way.
The agreement of Road Network Division is in the attached email.
The amended drawing sent to Road Network Division for its concurrence is
Please accept these items in satisfaction of the conditions precedent and
arrange for an endorsed drawing to issue.
[24] On 16 April 2012, the DCA endorsed Drawing Number 11/8197/2 (which had
been hand numbered 2012/0064/1 by the Department of Lands
and Housing) with a
stamp signed by a delegate of the DCA stating:
This is the drawing referred to in Development Permit DP12/0174 issued by the
Development Consent Authority on 16.4.2012.
[25] That endorsed drawing included the right-of-way easement across proposed
Lot B in its original width of 20 metres. Under cover
of an email on that same
day, the DCA sent the endorsed drawing to the planning consultants with a letter
which stated:
Thank you for the plans submitted which address the requirements of Condition
Precedent of Development Permit DP12/0174.
Please find attached, for your records, an endorsed copy of the required
plans numbered 2012/0064/01 which now forms part of the permit.
You are reminded that Conditions of Development Permit DP12/0174 states:
‘The works carried out under this Permit shall be in
accordance with the
drawings endorsed as forming part of this permit.’
[26] On 18 April 2012, the Surveyor-General allocated Sections 5543 and 5544
as the new lot numbers and LTO 2012/066 as the plan number
for the subdivision
and consolidation of Sections 5409 and 5410. Under that allocation, Section
5409 was redesignated as Section
5544 with the excision of that area of land
described as Lot B in Drawing Numbers 11/8197/2 and 2012/0064/1. Section 5410
addition of Lot B was consolidated and redesignated as Section
[27] On 18 April 2012, the surveyor from EJA who had conducted the field
survey produced a Survey Report for LTO 2012/066. So far
as is relevant for
these purposes, that report provided:
The survey of Section 5543 and 5544 has been carried out in accordance with
Development Permit DP 12/0174.
The survey realigns the boundary between Section 5409 and 5410 which are in
the same ownership. The purpose of the re-alignment is
to facilitate the
development of Section 5543 by allowing improved access from the Stuart
Existing Water Supply and Electricity Supply easements have been retained
over Section 5543 and 5544.
New Right of Way easements have been shown:
“A” over Section 5543 in favour of Section 5544 and PAWC.
“B” & “C” over Sections 5543 and 5544 in favour
of PAWC to enable vehicle access to the Water Supply and
Electricity Supply
[28] The field book drawings prepared as part of the field survey showed
easement “A” running west on Section 5543 from
the Stuart Highway
road reserve until it reached the rail corridor, and then north-west adjacent to
the rail corridor until it met
the proposed new dividing boundary with Section
5544. That part of the easement running west from the Stuart Highway road
to the rail corridor is depicted with a width of 20.33 metres. That
part of the easement running north-west adjacent to the rail
corridor is
depicted by extrapolation from other measurements with a width of approximately
10 metres. Easement “B”
is a continuation of easement
“A” running adjacent to the rail corridor north-west across Section
5544 from the proposed
new dividing boundary with Section 5543. The width of
easement “B” is depicted by extrapolation with a width of
approximately
10 metres. Easement “C” runs across Section 5543
adjacent to the western boundary of the rail corridor to provide access
PWC Water Supply easement transecting Section 5543 on an east-west orientation.
Easement “C” is expressly depicted
with a width of 10 metres. A
provisional Survey Plan LTO 2012/066 was produced in accordance with the field
survey and incorporated
those easements in those widths. The provisional Survey
Plan was subsequently endorsed in an Examination Report by an EJA supervising
[29] Neither the field book drawings nor the Survey Report nor the
Examination Report provide any reason why that part of easement
running north-west adjacent to the rail corridor is depicted with a width of
approximately 10 metres, rather than
the apparent width of 20 metres depicted in
Drawing Number 11/8197/2 (which had been subsequently endorsed as Drawing Number
2012/0064/1
and incorporated into Development Permit DP 12/0174). There was no
evidence of any instructions given by any person on behalf of
either Suncode or
NABL to any person at EJA to vary the dimensions of the right-of-way easement in
favour of Lot A from those depicted
in Drawing Number 2012/0064/1.
[30] On 19 April 2012, EJA advised PWC by email that the DCA had approved the
subdivision and consolidation, provided PWC with copies
of Development Permit DP
12/0174, endorsed Drawing Number 2012/0064/1 and provisional Survey Plan LTO
2012/066, and sought PWC’s
consent to the extinguishment of the existing
PWC right-of-way easement on the basis that new access easements would be
favour of PWC as depicted on provisional Survey Plan LTO 2012/066.
[31] On 3 May 2012, the principal of EJA sent an email to various
authorities, including PWC and the Road Network Division, which
The DCA has approved the subdivision of the above properties in order to
create two lots.
We have been advised that no changes to the existing service arrangements are
required at this stage and that further works will be
undertaken when proposed
Section 5543 is developed for a planned abattoir.
These works will include an upgrade of the entrance from the Stuart Highway
and changes to the power connection to Section 5543.
In order for the subdivision to be processed would you please confirm that
the Condition[s] of DP12-0174 have been satisfied.
[32] The email again attached a copy of the Development Permit (including
Drawing Number 2012/0064/1) and a copy of provisional Survey
Plan LTO 2012/066
without any reference to the discrepancy between the width of the right-of-way
easement shown on the two drawings.
On 3 May 2012, an authorised representative
of PWC executed the document necessary to extinguish the pre-existing PWC
right-of-way
[33] On 4 June 2012, Suncode executed provisional Survey Plan LTO 2012/066,
and on 5 June 2012 EJA lodged executed Survey Plan LTO
2012/066, the Survey
Report, the Examination Report and the field book with the Surveyor-General.
[34] On 8 June 2012, the principal of EJA sent an email to the DCA attaching
letters of clearance from a number of authorities and
a copy of executed Survey
Plan LTO 2012/066. The email stated:
DP12/0174 approves the subdivision of the above lots in order to create 2
Attached is a copy of the survey plan that has been lodged with the
Surveyor-General and the clearances for the Development Permit
conditions.
Would you please arrange for the issue of
This subdivision deals with the land that is to be the site of the new
We understand that the Government is [quite] anxious for this subdivision to
be finalised as soon as possible so I am sure that everyone
involved would
appreciate it if you could give it some priority.
[35] On 13 June 2012, the delegate of the Registrar-General informed the
Surveyor-General that the documents required for the registration
of the Plan of
Subdivision had been lodged and the conditions for registration were otherwise
[36] On 21 June 2012, the delegate of the DCA sent an email to officers of
the Registrar-General and Surveyor-General attaching Survey
Plan LTO 2012/066
and stating:
To whom it may concern
I certify pursuant to
section 62(1)(a)
& (b)(i) of the
as a duly authorised delegate of the consent authority that:
Planning Act
has been given in relation to this
subdivision; and
subdivision work required under
has been carried out in accordance with
the requirements of the consent authority.
This clearance relates to
LTO2012/066.
Sections 62(1)(a)
and (b)(i) of the
Planning Act
relevantly that the Surveyor-General must not approve a plan of survey submitted
Licensed Surveyors Act 1983
subdivision of land unless satisfied that consent under
Planning Act
has been given for the subdivision, and, if works are
required to be carried out under
, that those works have been carried out
in accordance with the requirements of the consent authority.
[38] On 28 June 2012, the Surveyor-General approved Survey Plan LTO 2012/066
pursuant to
Licensed Surveyors Act
. The approved
Survey Plan continued to depict the right-of-way easement in question with a
width of approximately 10 metres, rather
than the apparent width of 20 metres
depicted in Drawing Number 11/8197/2.
[39] On 29 June 2012, an Application for Separate Titles by Plan of
Subdivision was registered with the Land Titles Office. That
registration
resulted in the cancellation of the titles for Section 5409 (CUFT Volume 767
Folio 565) and Section 5410 (CUFT Volume
767 Folio 564), and the issue of new
titles for Section 5543 (CUFT Volume 767 Folio 572) and Section 5544 (CUFT
Volume 767 Folio
573) over the land. The right-of-way easements as described in
approved Survey Plan LTO 2012/066 were created on registration of
subdivision.
[40] On 12 July 2012, NABL purchased Section 5543 from Suncode and became the
registered proprietor of the lot.
[41] On 9 October 2015, Wellard Group Holdings Pty Ltd purchased Section 5544
from Suncode and became the registered proprietor of
the lot. On
8 December 2015, there was an intra-group transfer of Section 5544 to a
related entity. On 29 June 2018, Bilba purchased
and became the registered
proprietor of Section 5544.
[42] On 18 September 2019, NABL commenced proceedings against Bilba in the
Supreme Court alleging: (a) that Bilba’s road trains
were encroaching on
NABL’s land outside the right-of-way easement running across Section 5543;
(b) that Bilba’s road
trains were crossing onto the inbound lane of the
access road to Section 5543 from the Stuart Highway, causing the potential for
road train traffic to back up on both the inbound lane and the slip lane from
the Stuart Highway immediately before the entrance;
and (c) that Bilba’s
road trains were risking damage to a subterranean gas pipeline traversing the
[43] It is common ground that the right-of-way easement over Section 5543 is
the only means of access to Section 5544 from the Stuart
Highway, and that the
present width of 10 metres is too narrow for road trains entering and exiting
Section 5544 to turn without
encroaching onto parts of Section 5543 which are
not subject to the easement.
[44] On 13 August 2020, Bilba’s solicitors made application to the
Surveyor-General and the Registrar-General to correct ‘the
land register
as to the boundary of the Right of Way Easement [over Section 5543] pursuant to
s 17 of the
Land Titles Act 2000
by way of a corrected Approved
Survey Plan (pursuant to
Licensed Surveyors Act
substituted on the land register for Sections 5543 and 5544’. The
correction sought to have the right-of-way easement
registered in the same
dimensions depicted in endorsed Drawing Number 2012/0064/1, as incorporated into
Development Permit DP 12/0174.
The basis for that application was, in essence,
that subs 62(1)(a) of the
Planning Act
required that the plan of
survey could only be approved under
Licensed Surveyors
if consent had been given for the subdivision or consolidation under
Planning Act
, and consent had not been given to the
right-of-way easement as misdescribed in Survey Plan LTO 2012/066.
[45] On 18 September 2020, the Registrar-General and the Surveyor-General
advised: (a) that on consideration of the materials and
submissions they did not
consider there was an error in the land register due to the registration of
Survey Plan LTO 2012/066 or
that the Survey Plan was incorrect; and
(b) that the Survey Plan had been approved and registered in accordance
with the correct
process and relevant approvals.
[46] On 16 October 2020, Bilba commenced proceedings in the Supreme Court
seeking an order under
Land Title Act 2000
directing the Registrar-General to correct the land register to have the
right-of-way easement recorded as 20 metres in width.
Bilba’s contention
was that as the registered proprietor of Section 5544, it was entitled to the
benefit of the right-of-way
easement which had been ‘misdescribed’
in the relevant sense because it was shown on Survey Plan LTO 2012/066 as
wide, whereas Development Permit DP 12/0174, which incorporated
endorsed Drawing Number 2012/0064/1, specified an easement of 20
metre width.
On that basis, Bilba contended that it was entitled to an order under
Land Title Act
directing the Registrar-General to correct the
register accordingly.
[47] On 23 February 2021, the Supreme Court ordered that the proceedings
alleging encroachment be consolidated with the proceedings
rectification, and that the rectification question be tried before the trial of
the consolidated proceedings pursuant to
Supreme Court
(NT). The Registrar-General and the Surveyor-General properly
advised that they would abide the outcome and did not seek to take
part in the
proceedings.
The decision of the Supreme Court
[48] The Supreme Court determined that the rectification question involved
two separate issues, viz:
(a) whether there had been an omission or misdescription of the right-of-way
easement as described in Survey Plan LTO2012/066 registered
on 29 June 2012
within the meaning of
ss 189(1)(c)
Land Title Act 2000
(b) if so, whether the Supreme Court should make orders under
Land Title Act
to give effect to a correction of the description of the
right-of-way easement consistently with the dimensions depicted in Drawing
Number 2012/0064/1.
[49] After conducting an analysis of the relevant legislative scheme, the
Supreme Court conducted a review of the evidence. That
review disclosed that
none of the parties involved in the negotiations at the time of the subdivision
and consolidation turned their
mind to any discrepancy between the width of the
easement as described in Survey Plan LTO2012/066 and the dimensions depicted in
Drawing Number 2012/0064/1.
[50] The Court then considered the expert evidence given by a licensed
surveyor called on behalf of Bilba. That evidence was to the
effect that a
licensed surveyor must produce a plan of subdivision in accordance with the
development permit, including in accordance
with the plans endorsed on the
development permit. In doing so, all easements stated in the development permit
conditions or endorsed
plans are required to be shown on the survey plan, if the
plan is going to be the instrument used to create that easement. The final
location and dimensions of an easement may be subject to the field survey being
carried out first, but the easement on the survey
plan must be compliant with
the development approval. If they are not, the Surveyor-General should
requisition the licensed surveyor
to amend the plan to meet the requirements of
the development approval.
[51] By decision delivered on 8 February
the Supreme Court ultimately
found that a mistake was made by EJA in drawing the Survey Plan; and that the
expert opinion of the
licensor surveyor was consistent with the legislative
regime requiring a plan of survey to be drawn in conformity to any development
permit, and requiring the Surveyor-General not to approve a plan of survey for a
subdivision otherwise than in accordance with a
development permit. The Court
concluded on that basis that the easement had been ‘misdescribed’,
without any analysis
of the meaning of that term as it appears in the relevant
statutory exception to indefeasibility. The Court indicated it would make
consequential orders under
Land Title Act
effect to a correction of the description of the easement consistent with the
dimensions depicted in the endorsed drawing.
[52] By Notice of Appeal filed on 8 March 2022, NABL appealed the whole of
the judgment of the Supreme Court finding there was a misdescription
easement and determining that the Court would exercise the power under
Land Title Act
to give effect to a correction of the
description. Various grounds of appeal are pleaded, but they are in essence
that the trial
judge erred in finding that the easement was misdescribed within
the meaning of
s 189(1)(c)
Land Title Act
; and that the trial
judge failed to take into account material factors in determining whether to
direct a correction. If the appellant
is successful on the first ground, there
is no occasion for correction and it must necessarily succeed on the second
[53] No direction has been given under
, because on 4 May 2022 the Supreme Court made orders staying
judgment until 28 days after the determination of the appeal, and giving
parties liberty to apply.
The indefeasibility provision
[54] Division 2 of
Law of Property Act
deals with easements.
Section 156
provides that, in the case of a subdivision,
an easement is created by the registration of a plan of subdivision within the
Land Title Act
. The term ‘plan of
subdivision’ is relevantly defined to mean a plan approved by the
Surveyor-General under
Licensed Surveyors Act
relating to the subdivision of a lot.
Section 101
Land Title Act
provides for the creation of an
easement by the registration of a plan of subdivision.
Section 102
Land Title Act
provides that an easement may be created by registering a
plan of subdivision showing: (a) the nature and location of the easement
created; (b) the lot or part of the lot to be burdened by the easement; and (c)
the lot or part of a lot to be benefited by
the easement.
[56] The indefeasibility of title provision is contained in
Land Title Act
Section 188(1)
provides that a registered proprietor of
an interest in a lot holds that interest subject to registered interests
affecting the lot
but free from all other interests. The exceptions to
indefeasibility are contained in
Section 189(1)(c)
provides that a registered proprietor of a lot does not obtain the
indefeasibility conferred by
Land Title Act
‘the interest of a person entitled to the benefit of an easement if its
particulars have been omitted from or misdescribed
in the land
Section 191
Land Title Act
(1) If there has been fraud by the registered proprietor or
section 189(1)(c)
to (f) applies, the Supreme Court may make the order it considers just.
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), the Supreme Court may, by order, direct
the Registrar-General:
(a) to cancel or correct the indefeasible title or other particulars in the land
(b) to cancel, correct, execute or register an instrument;
(c) to create a new indefeasible title;
(d) to issue a new instrument; or
(e) to do anything else.
[58] The exception to indefeasibility in
s 189(1)(c)
was originally found in the
Real Property Act
which also had force in the Northern Territory until it was repealed in 2000.
Placitum IV of
of that legislation provided the exception in the
following terms:
Where a right-of-way or other easement ... has been omitted or misdescribed
in any folio of the Register or certificate as to title,
or other instrument of
[59] Similar provisions exist in all Australian
, but the law relating
to omitted or misdescribed easements as an exception to indefeasibility has
evolved in a way which has been
described as ‘complex [and]
unsatisfactory’
‘jurisdictionally
idiosyncratic’
. Much of the
difficulty in that respect surrounds the extent to which implied easements,
prescriptive easements and equitable easements
operate as exceptions to
indefeasibility in the Torrens system, and the different statutory formulations
which have been adopted
in different jurisdictions and subsequently amended in
response to judicial decisions. The present case does not involve an easement
created prior to the adoption of the Torrens system, or any argument concerning
implied easements, prescriptive easements and equitable
easements, and the
Northern Territory exception remains drafted in terms similar to the first
legislative incarnation, but, as will
be seen, is now modelled on the
corresponding Queensland
[60] Bilba does not assert that the easement has been ‘omitted
from’ the register.
Section 189(3)
Land Title Act
provides that for the purpose of the exception in subsection (1)(c), an easement
is taken to have been ‘omitted’ if it
was in existence when the
servient tenement was first registered but particulars are no longer recorded
against that lot, or where
the easement was registered but later omitted by an
error of the Registrar-General.
The present circumstances do not constitute an omission in the relevant sense.
[61] A number of observations may be made about the exception in
s 189(1)(c)
Land Title Act
and the statutory prescription of
‘omitted’. First, it allows the term ‘omitted from’ a
narrow operation
which is limited to interests which have been registered but
subsequently left out of the register. Second, no specific provision
for implied easements, prescriptive easements and equitable easements as an
exception to indefeasibility. Third, where the
relevant exception to
indefeasibility has no application, the right claimed can only be enforced
, if at all.
[62] In that statutory context, Bilba’s contention is that the
right-of-way easement has been ‘misdescribed in’
the land register.
There is scant authority on the meaning of that term as it appears in
s 189(1)(c)
Land Title Act
and the various analogous
provisions. Taking its ordinary meaning, the term ‘misdescribed in’
means nothing more or less
than ‘described incorrectly’. The
adoption of that ordinary meeting gives rise to a degree of ambiguity, because
is unclear by whom and in what fashion the easement must have been
misdescribed in order to attract the application of the exception.
particular, there is the anterior question of whether that particular exception
is also limited to easements which have been
registered but subsequently
misdescribed in the register.
[63] The Torrens statutes across Australia have all included a quite separate
exception to indefeasibility, in varying forms, for
the wrong description of the
land or its boundaries. It has been said that the gist of the exception is that
where land has been
included in a grant, certificate or folio by wrong
description of parcels or boundaries, then title to that land remains with the
original owner.
Bilba does not
suggest that provision has application in the present circumstances. Rather, it
has drawn attention to a number
of authorities dealing with that particular
exception to indefeasibility as a means of informing what is meant by the term
‘misdescribed’
s 189(1)(c)
Land Title Act
which deals with a separate head of exception.
[64] A provision of that type appearing in s 44 of the
Real Property
1861 (Qld) was considered by the Queensland Court of Appeal in
Overland v Lenehan.
Chief Justice Griffith concluded that ‘an error in description of
boundaries cannot be relied upon to displace the title,
otherwise good, of a
person in possession of land erroneously included in the title’. The
exception is subject to limitations.
First, it is confined to a physical
misdescription of boundaries, parcels or area, and does not include a
‘wrong description’
that may arise from a failure to record a
reservation, lease or fresh
It may be noted in the
present case that the boundaries of the land were not misdescribed in that
sense. Rather, Bilba’s
contention is that the full breadth of the
right-of-way was not reserved. Second, while the wrong description exception
to, and generally usually concerns, surveying mistakes, the mistake in
question is one which purportedly includes a portion of land
in the title that
neither the transferor nor transferee intended to be
[65] The wrong description exception is directed to circumstances in which
parcels or boundaries are misdescribed in a way which ignores
the existence of
valid title to land, either subsisting at general law prior to conversion to
Torrens system land or already registered
under the Torrens system. It is for
that reason that the corresponding exception now appearing in
s 189(1)(d)
Land Title Act
is cast in terms of ‘the interest of another
registered proprietor making a valid claim under an earlier existing
indefeasible
title for all or part of the lot’. The authorities dealing
with that category of exception have limited application and utility
determining the meaning of the ‘misdescription’ of an easement as it
s 189(1)(c)
Land Title Act
, which ultimately
must be construed in its statutory and historical context.
Stuy v BC Ronalds Pty
the Supreme Court of
Queensland considered a situation in which a parcel of land was sold subject to
an agreement in writing that
the owners of the lot sold and the adjoining lot
would each grant to the other an easement of right-of-way over a common driveway
which ran at its centre line along the boundary between the two lots. The
purchaser of the lot required the use of the full width
of the driveway in order
to allow access by trucks to an industrial shed on the lot, and that was how the
driveway had been used
prior to sale. Easements were never registered in
accordance with the agreement. The adjoining lot was sold on a number of
and the subsequent purchasers sought to construct a fence along the
boundary line which would have precluded the use of the driveway
to access the
industrial shed. The party claiming the benefit of the easement sought to
invoke the exception against indefeasibility.
[67] The corresponding exception to indefeasibility in the Queensland
legislation was then cast in similar, but not identical, terms
to the Northern
Territory provision. Section 44 of the
Real Property Act
1861 (Qld),
which was the legislation in force at the time, provided the exception in
relation to ‘the omission or misdescription
of any right of way or other
easement created in or existing under the same land’. The Court held that
for an easement to
fall within the exception, it must have been created in or
exist upon the land. Under the
Real Property Act
, that could only occur
by the registration of an instrument. An agreement between the parties for the
grant of an easement did not
mean that an easement had been created in or
existed upon the land. At its highest, an equitable interest was created which
enforceable against the registered proprietor who agreed to grant the
easement. Such an equity is a personal liability which is
not enforceable
against successors-in-title.
[68] As part of the property law reforms in Queensland, the
Real Property
1861 was repealed and the relevant exception to indefeasibility was
Land Title Act 1994
. The exception is
provided for ‘the interest of a person entitled to the benefit of an
easement if its particulars have been
omitted from, or misdescribed in, the
freehold land register’. It was that provision on which
s 189(1)(c)
Land Title Act
in the Northern Territory was modelled, and they
are in the same terms.
provision was in slightly different terms to that contained in the
Property Act
1861, raising the question whether the construction adopted in
Stuy v BC Ronalds
had application to the new provision.
also did not deal with the situation in which an easement is
registered pursuant to a development permit other than in strict compliance
the permit.
[69] Both those questions were addressed in a more recent series of
Queensland cases. In
Pike & Anor v Tighe &
the Planning and
Environment Court of Queensland considered a development approval which was
subject to a condition that an access
and utilities easement was to be provided
‘to allow pedestrian and vehicle access, on-site manoeuvring and
connection of services
and utilities’ for the benefit of the dominant
tenement. It was a further condition of the approval that the easement
registered in accordance with the
Land Title Act 1994
conjunction with the Survey Plan’. An easement document was subsequently
drafted which described the purpose of the grant
of the easement as
‘access’, without any reference to services and utilities. The
draft Survey Plan was approved by
the proprietors of the dominant tenement and
subsequently registered. When the matter came to light, the proprietor of the
tenement sought to invoke the exception to indefeasibility. The
Planning and Environment Court
determined:
Whilst the easement per se as registered on the titles is correct insofar as
its real property description is concerned, the purpose
as described in the
registered instrument is incorrect and is inconsistent with the Development
Approval. There is no distinction
that could rationally be drawn between a
misdescription in the boundaries or area on a site plan or other document and a
misdecription
in the purpose of an easement.
There is clearly no “omission from” the register in this case.
The easement is registered. However, there is arguably
a “misdescription
in” the easement as registered insofar as its purpose is concerned, if the
purpose as described in
the Development Approval runs with the land.
In other words, the purpose of the easement in my view is capable of being
corrected in the instrument that has been registered.
respondent’s indefeasibility of title is otherwise protected.
... An interest in a lot, in this case an easement, is created upon
registration of the instrument (the easement document). That has
occurred here.
The indefeasibility of that interest in this case depends on whether there is a
misdescription in the purpose for
which the easement was created. I have found
that there was, that the condition in the development approval binds a
subsequent buyer
of a lot in the completed subdivision and that the
misdescription is open to be corrected so as to have it conform to the condition
in the development approval, a condition that I have found runs with the land in
respect of a reconfiguration of a lot and consistently
with my construction of
relevant legislation including the
Land Title Act
and section 242 of [the
Sustainable Planning Act 2009].
[70] That ruling was subsequently reversed on appeal to the Queensland Court
of Appeal in
In overturning the
decision below, Fraser JA (with whom the other members of the Court agreed)
... Upon the findings and the evidence no easement was ever granted for any
“on-site manoeuvring and connection of services,
and utilities”. The
primary judge’s analysis assumed, incorrectly in my respectful opinion,
that condition 2 of the approval
granted an easement for those purposes. Rather,
it imposed a conditional obligation upon the proprietor of the original lot to
and register such an easement. Assuming all else in the first
respondents’ favour, including that s 245 of the
Sustainable
Planning Act
(see [18] of these reasons) attached that obligation to lot 1
upon its creation and rendered that obligation binding upon a subsequent
registered proprietor of that lot, in the proceedings in the Planning &
Environment Court the first respondents could invoke
no more than a personal
right to apply for an enforcement order (see [16] of these reasons) for the
grant of such an easement: see
Hillpalm Pty Ltd v Heaven’s Door Pty
[2004] HCA 59
(2004) 220 CLR 472
Wirkus v Wilson Lawyers
[2012] QSC 150
[71] The reference to
Hillpalm Pty Ltd v Heaven’s Door Pty
is to seriously
of the majority of the High Court dealing with the
consequences of the use of land otherwise in accordance with a development
The Court noted that some cases had spoken of planning restrictions
giving rise to rights
, and observed that in order to be valid
those statements must find their foundation in the relevant statutes. If a
subdivision consent
operated to create a right
, that would present
a fundamental challenge to the effective operation of the Torrens system, and
particularly the guarantee of indefeasibility
by registration and the limited
exceptions to that guarantee. If a subdivision consent did create a right
, that would give rise to a clear inconsistency between the planning
scheme and the Torrens system. The majority was not required
to determine the
matter, because it was common ground between the parties that the registered
proprietor’s title was not subject
to any interest arising from the
subdivision approval. That was because the only rights arising from that
approval were enforceable
by personal action, rather than by any action or
application to rectify the land register.
[72] The situation obtaining in Queensland would therefore appear to be that
for the omission or misdescription of an easement over
land already within the
Torrens system to fall within the exception, it must have been created in or
exist upon the land. The act
of registration necessary to create an easement
will vary depending on the circumstances. In
the Queensland
Supreme Court considered a situation in which the plan of subdivision which was
registered showed an easement over
one of the newly created parcels for the
benefit of the other. No instrument specifically creating the easement was
executed or
registered, and certificates of title were issued which made no
reference to an easement. The Court concluded that the plan of subdivision
an ‘instrument’ within the meaning of the
Real Property Act
1861, and upon its registration it passed the right-of-way easement interest
recorded in the plan. As a result, the easement was
registered for the purposes
of the legislation and came into existence upon registration of the plan. The
easement was properly
considered to be registered, but ‘omitted’
from the certificate of title by reason of the failure of the Registrar of
Titles to record the easement which had been created by the registration of the
plan. The decision in
Hutchinson v
is to similar
[73] This reading of the legislation is consistent with appellate authority
from New South Wales. The corresponding exception to
indefeasibility in
Real Property Act
(NSW) is ‘the
omission or misdescription of an easement subsisting immediately before the land
was brought under the provisions
of this Act or validly created at or after that
time under this or any other Act’. While the first limb of that exception
protects easements in existence prior to the land being brought under the
Torrens system of title (whether arising by prescription,
implication or express
the exception arises
only in relation to land already under the Torrens system where an easement has
been validly created by execution
and registration of an instrument and the
easement is omitted or misdescribed
thereafter.
It should be noted
that the position in relation to land already under the Torrens system is not
contingent on the inclusion of
the words ‘validly created’ in the
current form of the exception. The form of the exception under consideration
James v Registrar General
was in different terms, but was still found
to require that the easement had been registered (or at least that the parties
all that was required to comply with the statutory formalities for
creating easements and lodged the necessary documents for registration),
then omitted or misdescribed
thereafter.
the Western
Australian Court of Appeal considered a situation in which the condition of a
subdivision approval provided for one of
the proposed lots to be transferred to
the local authority for use as a communal training and obedience area for dogs.
The subdivision
material made reference to the location of walkways from the
other proposed lots in the subdivision to provide access to the communal
although the terms of the contracts of sale for the other proposed lots made no
mention of the communal area or access. The
necessary documents were lodged
with the titles office and titles to the lots in the subdivision were issued to
the developer. The
condition requiring the transfer of the proposed lot for use
as a communal area was not satisfied prior to registration. That was
to oversight on the part of the planning body when approving the subdivision
plan for registration. As a consequence,
the certificates of title made no
reference to any right of access over, or use of, the proposed lot in favour of
the other lot owners.
The developer company was subsequently deregistered, and
the lot designated for use as a communal area was sold to purchasers who
constructed a house on the lot and erected fences on its boundaries. One of the
other lot holders subsequently commenced proceedings
seeking to enforce the
right-of-way access to and across the designated communal area.
[75] The relevant exception to indefeasibility in the
Transfer of Land Act
(WA) was for ‘any easements acquired by enjoyment or user
or subsisting over or upon or affecting such land ... notwithstanding
respectively may not be specifically notified as encumbrances on [the
certificate of title]’.
The Court held that the grant of an easement could not be inferred or implied as
a term of the contract of sale given the formal
written contract and the formal
transfer, and no equitable easement had been created. All the contract of sale
afforded was a right
to terminate if the relevant condition of the subdivision
approval had not been complied with prior to completion. The Western Australian
legislation is in materially different terms to the corresponding Northern
Territory provision, and has broader operation. Despite
that breadth of
operation, the Court in
Kitching v Phillips
observed (without having to
determine the matter) that the exception to indefeasibility did not protect
easements enforceable in
equity by contract or estoppel – at least not
against subsequent purchasers for value without
[76] The relevant exception to indefeasibility in
Property Act
(SA) remains:
Where a right-of-way or other easement ... has been omitted or misdescribed
in any certificate, or other instrument of title ...
[77] KI Seaport Pty Ltd v Abstraxion Pty Ltd &
is the only South
Australian authority which deals with circumstances of this type. The relevant
question in that case was whether
an easement for electricity supply purposes
created by the registration of a plan of subdivision was misdescribed, because
not connect with an already existing easement on adjoining land which
contained the three phase power supply. The Court found the
established that when the easement was created on subdivision it was intended to
allow the transmission of three phase power
from the already existing easement
on the adjoining land. On that basis, the Court was satisfied that the easement
had been ‘misdescribed’
in the relevant sense and directed the
Registrar-General to correct the description of the easement on the certificate
of title accordingly.
[78] That decision involves two primary conclusions. The first is that the
exception to indefeasibility extends to easements implied
by common intention or
necessity over land already under the Torrens system, and that such an easement
was created. The second is
that the implied easement, which connected the
easement created by registration of the plan of subdivision with the already
easement on the adjoining land, was not an unregistered easement but
rather formed part of the registered easement because of misdescription.
reasons for decision do not contain any discussion of the authorities dealing
with the scope of this particular exception to
indefeasibility.
[79] Even leaving aside the proposition that the implied easement was a
registered interest, we are unable to accept that either conclusion
application to the circumstances under consideration in this case. Consistently
with the authorities from New South Wales and
Queensland, we consider that on
proper construction the relevant exception to indefeasibility only arises in
relation to land already
under the Torrens system where an easement has been
validly created by execution and registration of an instrument and the easement
is omitted or misdescribed thereafter. We note in that respect that
s 189(1)(c)
Land Title Act
is modelled on the Queensland
provision, and they are in the same terms.
[80] That approach also receives support from two textual and contextual
factors. First, it would seem an anomalous result if the
exception in
s 189(1)(c)
Land Title Act
was limited to interests which
have been registered but subsequently ‘omitted’, but extended to the
‘misdescription’
of interests said to have arisen or been created
both inconsistently with and prior to the registration which created the
Second, and in the absence of a broadly worded exception as has been
adopted in Victoria, Western Australia and Tasmania, that narrower
approach is
more consistent with the attainment of the object of the legislative scheme to
confer indefeasible rights unless the
circumstances fall squarely within one of
the limited exceptions.
Application to the present circumstances
[81] There was no anterior agreement between NABL and Suncode containing
particulars of a proposed easement 20 metres wide, and no
evidence of any
pre-contractual dealings directed specifically and expressly to the width of the
easement beyond the clause of the
sale agreement making reference to a
‘ROW Area to allow access for vehicles and agricultural machinery at a
width of 3 times
the width of a sedan passenger motor vehicle’. The
dealings concerning the different drawings sought only Suncode’s
to relocate the proposed right-of-way from the location depicted on Drawing
Number 11/8197/4 to the location depicted on
Drawing Number 11/8197/2.
[82] Even if the dealings between NABL and Suncode leading up to the
registration of the subdivision and consolidation did constitute
an agreement
for the grant of an easement as depicted on Drawing Number 11/8197/2, they did
not create an easement under the terms
legislation.
That easement came
into existence
eo instante
with registration of the plan of subdivision.
That plan of subdivision was the only instrument relevant to creation of the
There was no other ‘instrument of easement’ (cf
Land Title Act
), or registered ‘deed of
Land Title Act
[83] Given that the easement only came into existence on registration of the
plan of subdivision, it follows that the only ‘particulars’
easement are those shown in the plan of subdivision. There is only limited
scope for the particulars of the easement to have
been omitted or misdescribed
in the relevant sense: specifically, if the particulars of the easement shown on
the plan of subdivision
were not transposed correctly onto the certificates of
title issued for the two lots created by registration of the plan of
subdivision,
or if they were subsequently removed from or amended in the land
register. That is not the case here. The right-of-way depicted
in the drawing
endorsed on Development Permit DP 12/0174 did not constitute the
‘particulars’ of an easement for the
purpose of the exception in
s 189(1)(c)
Land Title Act
because no easement in those terms
was created in accordance with the Torrens legislation.
[84] The fact that the Development Permit incorporated a survey plan in which
the width of the right-of-way was 20 metres also did
not create an easement in
that configuration. Nor did it give rise to a requirement or entitlement
running with the land that the
plan of subdivision incorporate an easement of
that specific width. For the reasons described in
Hillpalm Pty Ltd v
Heaven’s Door Pty Ltd
a subdivision consent does not, as a general proposition, operate to create a
. The terms and operation of the planning scheme in the
Northern Territory do not require any conclusion contrary to that general
proposition. Section 61 of the
Planning Act
provides that a subdivision
or consolidation of land must be done in accordance with a plan of survey
approved under
Licensed Surveyors Act
provision relevantly requires that the Surveyor-General may approve a plan of
survey if satisfied in respect of the matters
referred to in s 62 of the
Planning Act
. That provision provides in turn that the Surveyor-General
must not approve a plan of survey unless satisfied that consent has been
for the subdivision or consolidation, and that any works required to be carried
out have been completed in accordance with
the requirements of the consent
[85] Those provisions fall well short of establishing that a plan of survey
must be precisely in accordance with a plan endorsed on
a development consent.
That is particularly so given that there is – as there was in this case
– a long process of certification
and approval by the relevant authorities
of a draft plan of survey for subdivision after the original development consent
has issued.
The question whether a subdivision transaction is in contravention
of the planning requirements is addressed by s 63 of the
. That section creates an offence for entering into a subdivision
transaction in contravention of the scheme, and provides that a
transaction
purporting to subdivide in contravention of the scheme is void. Whether there
has been a contravention will depend upon
the extent to which any variation
between an endorsed plan and the subsequent plan of subdivision has been
endorsed by the relevant
authorities, and the materiality of that variation.
Those considerations were no doubt taken into account by the Registrar-General
and the Surveyor-General in determining that there was no error in the land
register due to the registration of Survey Plan LTO 2012/066;
and that the
Survey Plan had been approved and registered in accordance with the correct
process and relevant approvals. It is those
provisions, rather than
indefeasibility provisions, which are concerned with the integrity of the
planning scheme.
[86] The prospective easement depicted in Drawing Number 2012/0064/1 was, at
most, enforceable as between the immediate parties to
its creation, but an
easement in those dimensions was never recorded in the land register. In its
relevant operation, the development
approval imposed a conditional obligation
upon Suncode to provide and register an easement over Section 5543 to provide
Section 5544 from the Stuart Highway. NABL had an
in personam
right to apply for an enforcement order for the creation of such an easement in
accordance with the development approval, although
such action was unlikely
given that the easement was for the benefit of Section 5544 and under the sale
agreement NABL was to purchase
Section 5543. So far as Suncode’s right or
entitlement is concerned, it executed provisional Survey Plan LTO 2012/066
the easement with a width of 10 metres. Although Suncode might
theoretically have claimed an entitlement to the benefit of an easement
width of 20 metres, it did not choose to have that interest either registered or
protected by caveat and it was defeated by
the subsequent registration of Survey
Plan LTO 2012/066. The development approval did not create a right
enforceable by the successive owners of Section 5544 against the title
to Section 5543, and did not result in a misdescription for
the purpose of the
exception in
s 189(1)(c)
Land Title Act
[87] That being the case, there is also no occasion for an order for
rectification pursuant to
Land Title Act
Disposition
[88] As noted above, no formal orders have yet been made to give effect to
the decision of the Supreme Court. For the avoidance of
doubt, we make the
following orders:
appeal is allowed.
determination and orders arising from the judgment of the Supreme Court
delivered on 8 February 2022 are set aside.
[89] We will hear the parties in relation to any consequential orders and
costs if need be.
_____________________________
The pre-existing PWC easement was
described in Certificate of Title Volume 753 Folio 845 Dealing Number 743342 and
in Drawing Number
10/6448/6 created by Earl James & Associates on 20 January
Northern Australian Beef
Limited v Bilba Capital Pty Ltd & Ors
[2022] NTSC 10.
Land Titles Act 1925
Real Property Act 1900
s 42(1)(a1)
s 185(1)(c)
Real Property Act 1886
Land Titles Act 1980
Transfer of Land Act 1958
Transfer of Land Act 1893
Peter Butt, ‘Conveyancing
and Property’
(2017) 91 Australian Law Journal 401
Lynden Griggs, 'Omitted easements
in the Torrens system: Devising a better strategy'
(2018) 26 Australian Property
Law Journal 333
Dobbie v Davidson
(1991) 23 NSWLR 625
, 649. In that case, Priestley JA notes that the words
'omission or misdescription of any right-of-way or other easement' appear
the first time in
of the 1858 Torrens Statute and were repeated
without change in each later corresponding section in the 1860 and 1861 Torrens
It would seem that this statutory
prescription extends to circumstances in which an easement is purposefully but
wrongly removed
by the Registrar-General. In
Castle Constructions Pty Ltd v
Sahab Holdings Pty Ltd
[2013] HCA 11
(2013) 247 CLR 149
, the High Court held that the
deliberate removal of an easement from the Register was not an 'omission' for
the purpose of the relevant
New South Wales exception to indefeasibility.
However, the New South Wales legislation contains no statutory prescription of
term 'omission'.
See, for example,
Commercial Bank of Australasia Ltd
[1906] SALawRp 19
[1906] SALR 193
Golding v Tanner
[1991] SASC 3013
(1991) 56 SASR 482.
P Carruthers and N Skead, "The
prior certificate of title and wrong description of land exceptions to
indefeasibility: Resolving
the overlap"
(2009) 17 APLJ 240.
Overland v Lenehan
(1901) 11 QLJ 59.
Medical Benefits Fund of
Australia Ltd v Fisher
[1984] 1 Qd R 606
CPR and Imperial Oil Ltd
[1954] SCR 427.
See, for example,
(1977) 1 BPR 9356. See also
Marsden v McAlister
Hamilton v Iredale
[1903] NSWStRp 70
(1903) 3 SR (NSW) 535.
Stuy v BC Ronalds Pty
[1984] 2 Qd R 578.
The new scheme in Queensland
also incorporated a statutory prescription of 'omission' to be where an
easement: (1) was not recorded
on the register when the land became registered;
(2) was previously recorded in the register but currently is not recorded; and
was registered but later left of the certificate of title by error of the
Pike & Anor v Tighe
[2016] QPEC 30.
Pike & Anor v Tighe
[2016] QPEC 30
, [107]-[110].
Tighe v Pike
Tighe v Pike
Hillpalm Pty Ltd v
Heaven’s Door Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 59
(2004) 220 CLR 472
Rock v Todeschino
Hutchinson v Lemon
(1983) Qd R 356.
The Queensland legislation was subsequently amended to deny
the benefit of registration to a purported easement appearing only in
registered plan: see
Real Property Act
1861, s 119A;
& Grittner v Hadley
[2008] QSC 268.
There is conflicting authority
in New South Wales as to whether the term 'omission' is limited to something
left out as a result
of some failure on the part of the Registrar-General, or
whether it has a broader meeting to include easements derived by prescriptive
right but not subsequently noted on the title when the servient land was brought
under the Torrens system: see
Australian Hi-Fi Publications Pty Ltd v
[1979] 2 NSWLR 618
Dobbie v Davidson
(1991) 23 NSWLR 625
Hemmes Hermitage Pty Ltd v Abdurahman
(1991) 22 NSWLR 343.
James v Registrar
(1967) 69 SR (NSW) 361
Australian Hi-Fi Publications Pty Ltd v
[1979] 2 NSWLR 618
; and see generally Butt
1996) [2069], B Edgeworth,
Butt’s Land Law
(Lawbook Co.,
7th ed, 2017), [12.750].
The term 'validly created' is
best seen as the adoption of Wallace P’s formulation that the exception
extended beyond easements
in existence before the land was brought under the
Torrens statute, and extended to an easement which had been 'duly created' in
accordance with the provisions of the Torrens statute but subsequently omitted:
James v Registrar General
(1967) 69 SR (NSW) 361
Kitching v Phillips
[2011] WASCA 19.
Under the broad terms of this
exception, all easements and public rights-of-way are given paramountcy over a
registered proprietor's
indefeasible title. The Victorian exception is in
similar terms.
Kitching v Phillips
[2011] WASCA 19
, [96]-[104]; relying on
Milne v James
[1910] HCA 55
(1910) 13 CLR 168
Barry v Heider
[1914] HCA 79
(1914) 19 CLR 197
Queensland Premier Mines Pty Ltd
[2007] HCA 53
(2007) 235 CLR 81.
The Tasmanian exception to indefeasibility in
relation to easements is also broadly worded, but it has been held that
easements do not prevail over the interests of a bona fide purchaser
for value without notice: see
Clarence City Council v Howlin
[2019] TASFC
KI Seaport Pty Ltd v
Abstraxion Pty Ltd & Anor
[2020] SASC 113.
They were also insufficient to
create an easement by implication in the configuration and width asserted by
Bilba, but it is unnecessary
to decide that matter having regard to the
construction of
s 189(1)(c)
Land Title Act
that we have
Hillpalm Pty Ltd v
Heaven’s Door Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 59
(2004) 220 CLR 472
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (381 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter