URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTADComm/1998/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:16:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Poole, Ray v Darwin Speedway Riders [1998] NTADComm 1 (30 April 1998)
POOLE v DARWIN SPEEDWAY RIDERS & DRIVERS
ASSOCIATION
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Darwin Speedway Riders & Drivers Association
('DSRDA") is a motor sports club and holds motorbike and motorcar races at
Valley Speedway near Darwin.
Mr Ray Poole was a voluntary
in-field official at the DSRDA for about 11 years prior to 1996. Ms Lisa Spooner
had also been a voluntary
in-field official for the previous three or four
years. She and Mr Poole were, in the context of the DSRDA, colleagues and
In late 1995 DSRDA decided to change its procedure for selecting
in-field officials and in early 1996 invited written applications
in-field official positions. "In-field" simply means that they were positions at
or near the field or race track. At various
times the positions were also
referred to as corner marshalls or in-field marshalls. Mr Poole and Ms Spooner
applied for but were
not offered positions as in-field officials for the 1996
Mr Poole complains that DSRDA unlawfully discriminated against
him in not offering a position. He claims that he was not offered a
because of his association with Ms Spooner.
Ms Spooner made a separate
complaint of sex discrimination arising out of the same events. The complaint
was heard separately and
dismissed by Acting Commissioner Bradshaw. A complaint
of victimization by Ms Spooner was upheld by the Acting Commissioner.
DSRDA advised the Registrar of the Commission that it did not wish to be
heard in these proceedings and was not heard. However, three
witnesses from the
club were served with subpoenas to give evidence. They were Mr Geoffrey Blake,
the president of the club in 1994,
1995 and early 1996, Mr Peter McIver, vice
president in 1995 and early 1996, and Mr Paddy Ryan, clerk of course for motor
early 1996.
Anti-Discrimination Commission may deal with a complaint made in relation to
discrimination in any area of activity referred to
Anti-Discrimination Act
("the Act"). See
"Clubs" are an area of
activity to which the Act applies. See
"club" is defined in the Act to mean "an incorporated or unincorporated
association of not less than 30 members that –
(a) is established for social, literary, cultural, political, sporting,
athletic, recreational or community service purposes or any
other similar lawful
(b) provides and maintains its facilities, wholly or partly, from funds of
the association; and
(c) sells or supplies liquor for consumption on its premises."
Uncontradicted evidence was given before Acting Commissioner Bradshaw that
1. Was an incorporated association
or more members
3. Was established for sporting purposes
4. Provided and maintained its facilities, at least partly, from its own
Sold liquor for consumption
on its premises at the relevant time.
of the Act, that DSRDA is a club within the meaning of the
Discrimination
Discrimination is defined in
"(1) For the purposes of this Act, discrimination includes –
(a) any distinction, restriction, exclusion or preference made on the basis of
an attribute that has the effect of nullifying or
impairing equality of
opportunity; and
(b) harassment on the basis of an attribute,
in an area of activity referred to in
(2) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), discrimination takes
place if a person treats or proposes to treat another
person who has or had, or
is believed to have or had -
(a) an attribute;
(b) a characteristic imputed to appertain to an attribute ; or
(c) a characteristic imputed to appertain generally to persons with an
less favourably than a person who has not, or is believed not to have, such
an attribute."
Mr Poole relies upon
section 19(1)(r)
of the Act which provides as
"(1) Subject to subsection (2), a person shall not discriminate against another
person on the ground of any of the following attributes:
association with a person
who has, or is believed to have, an attribute referred to in this
According to the
Interpretation
"person" includes a body corporate. As an incorporated association DSDRA
is a body corporate.
The application of
section 19(1)(r)
of the Act in
the present case is unclear. Assuming Mr Poole can prove:
that he was less favourably
treated by DSRDA; and
that this was because of his
association with Ms. Spooner;
the question
remains whether he needs to prove anything more
A plain reading
section 19(1)(r)
suggests two possible interpretations.
literal interpretation is that Mr Poole need only prove that Ms. Spooner is a
woman - that is, that she has the attribute
of "sex" referred to in
Alternatively, it may be that Mr Poole has to demonstrate that
he was discriminated against because Ms. Spooner is a woman.
the ambiguity it is necessary to determine which interpretation is more likely
to have been intended by Parliament.
The first interpretation leads to
absurdity. Under that interpretation the fact that Ms. Spooner is a woman is
irrelevant - Mr Poole
could equally complain of discrimination on the basis of
association with a man who, of course, would also have the attribute of
Further, the Act includes in its objects:
"[the elimination of]...discrimination against persons on the ground of race,
sex, sexuality, age, marital status, pregnancy, parenthood,
breastfeeding,
impairment, trade union or employer association, religious belief or activity,
political opinion, affiliation or activity,
irrelevant medical record or
irrelevant criminal record in the area of work, accommodation or education or in
the provision of goods,
services and facilities, in the activities of clubs or
in insurance and superannuation..."
The second interpretation is more consistent with such an object. It
recognizes that the victims of sexist, racist or other discriminatory
may include persons other than those against whom such attitudes are held.
If the above interpretation is
, as I believe it is, Mr
Poole needs to prove that it is more probable than not (see s91 of the Act)
(i) that he was less favourably treated by DSRDA than a person without the
attribute of association with a woman; and
(ii) that this was:
because of his
association with Ms. Spooner; and
(b) because of the fact that Ms. Spooner is a woman.
My factual findings are largely an adoption of the very
period of many years prior to early 1996 Mr Poole and Ms Spooner acted as corner
marshals at race meetings conducted by the
club; in the case of Mr Poole for
particular, had extensive
experience as a corner marshal and had trained many
track officials over this period. The main role of the corner marshals prior
1996 was to assist motorbike riders who had fallen off and to assist in
restarting cars that had stopped eg because they had "spun
out". From 1996 the
role seems to have much the same except that the title was changed by DSRDA to
that of in-field marshal and the
officials location was changed from corners to
the middle area of the field. Mr Poole and Ms Spooner were close associates in
context of the clubs activities, and shared one end of the race track when
discharging their duties as corner marshals. Mr Poole
gave evidence that he
would have spent more time with [Ms Spooner], associated with the speedway and
working there, than anybody
In-field/corner marshals were not
paid a wage. The only rewards they received were free entry to the speedway,
some free soft drinks
and the payment of their track insurance by the club. The
main reward for the dedicated officials was that of personal satisfaction
the enjoyment of performing the role.
Mr Poole and Ms Spooner were
members of an informal group of race officials ie the group of people who worked
at the race meetings
to conduct the races. The officials group, which had no
formal standing or power, was formed as the result of a practice instituted
the club and particularly on the initiative of its president at the time, Mr
Geoffrey Blake. The practice was aimed at ensuring
that race officials were
given an opportunity to put points of view or raise issues with the clubs
committee. For this purpose the
officials met regularly. Ms Spooner was either
appointed informal secretary of the group, or fell into that role. A
spokesperson
- the identity of whom changed from time to time - for the
officials' group would attend at the committee meetings, held every few
during the racing season March - October and raise with the committee any
concerns the group may have had about issues they
saw as affecting them in the
performance of their role. Roughly 90 percent of the issues were safety related
and the remainder were
administrative and mostly related to the groups
dissatisfaction with certain of the committees actions or decisions.
introduction of the officials' group, and the presence of its representatives at
committee meetings, was not welcomed by all on
the committee. Many on the
committee, and most notably the vice-president Peter McIver resented what they
saw as a time-wasting and
disruptive intrusion by persons who had not been
elected by the club membership to have any say in the running of the clubs
By late 1995, a considerable amount of friction had developed
between the officials group and the committee. Mr McIver in particular
to have been openly hostile and dismissive towards Ms Spooner, who was present
at every committee meeting in 1995, either
in the capacity of spokesperson or as
secretary to the officials' group. Ms Spooner took notes at these meetings. She
also published
an officials newsletter which reported generally on club
activities including the committee meetings.
The fragile relationship
between the officials' group and the committee reached breaking point in
November 1995. In the previous month,
Ms Spooner had made a written complaint to
the committee against a Mr Lyndon Schlein. Mr Schlein was a senior male member
club. For example he was the course announcer in 1995-1996. The complaint
arose from an incident that occurred on the track when
Mr Schlein either, on one
view, assaulted Ms Spooner or, on another view, pushed her to a place of safety.
The incident was witnessed
by Mr Poole, and, according to him, clearly involved
an assault upon Ms Spooner.
The committee handled the complaint by
delegating responsibility to the then president of the club, Mr Blake. (It is
possible that
this may have happened before Ms Spooner formally made a written
complaint). Mr Blake spoke to Mr Schlein and arranged for Mr Schlein
apologise to the committee. The committee then forwarded a written version of
the apology to Ms Spooner. The apology was couched
in general terms and
contained no particular acknowledgment of the validity of the complaint.
On 14 November 1995 the race officials met to discuss the committees
written response to Ms Spooners complaint against Mr Schlein.
The outcome of the
meeting was that on 15 November 1995 they wrote to the committee claiming that
the committee had shown favouritism
in dealing with the complaint in a less
formal way than that which is set out in the clubs rules. The letter was written
by Ms Spooner
and signed (although the exhibited copy does not include the
signatures) by more than a dozen officials, including Mr Poole. The
expressed the view that the rules required the alleged perpetrator to appear
before the committee to explain his or her actions.
The letter contained no
allegation that the Mr Schlein had been favored because Ms Spooner was a woman.
On 18 November 1995 there was a meeting of the committee. In accordance
with the DSDRA's usual practice this meeting was also attended
by a large number
of people who were not committee members. At this meeting the officials letter
was discussed. In the course of
the discussions Ms Spooner was singled out for
personal criticism by Mr McIver and by other club members. Mr McIver was
vice-president
of the club, a member of the committee and influential in the
decision making processes of the club. Mr McIver, in particular, expressed
view that Ms Spooner was a troublemaker; a view he repeated in evidence before
this Commission. The minutes of the meeting record
that a suggestion was made to
Ms Spooner that she no longer act as an official. Although other members of the
officials group, including
Mr Poole, were present and supported Ms Spooner it is
clear that she bore the brunt of the criticism.
Sometime after this meeting
Mr McIver visited Ms Spooner privately and spoke frankly about his reasons for
criticising Ms Spooner
at the meeting. On this occasion Mr McIver asked Ms
Spooner to resign as a corner marshal. Mr McIvers admitted motivation at this
time was to get rid of the troublemakers in the officials ranks. At about this
time, quite possibly at the same meeting, Mr McIver
admits having said to Ms
Spooner that he wasnt going to be told by a woman how to run his club.
Throughout 1994 and 1995 the committee, Mr McIver and particularly Mr
Blake, implemented a series of significant changes in the club
operations. This was a response to a downturn in the DSDRA's fortunes during the
early 1990s and a perceived need to streamline
and professionalise it. When Mr
Blake assumed the presidency he had wide ranging plans for the DSDRA. His agenda
covered most areas
of its activities, including the role and organisation of
officials. In his view, there was the need for improved communication between
the officials and the club hierarchy. Part of his response was the introduction
of the practice referred to above by which officials
were given a voice at
committee meetings. He was also of the view that the clerk of course, Ian
Jordan, who had responsibility for
overseeing the officials while car and
motorbike races were underway was overworked and otherwise unsuitable for the
In late 1995 Mr Blake pushed for the appointment of Mr Paddy
Ryan as the clerk of course for car races in the 1996 racing season.
believed that Mr Ryan would do a better job than Mr Jordan. The 1995 committee
supported the appointment of Mr Ryan and
he was approached by Mr Blake regarding
his willingness to take on the position. Mr Blakes recollection of his
discussions with Mr
Ryan at this time is that the only major proposed change to
the officials arrangements for 1996 was in relation to the procedure
selection. For the first time, written applications for officials positions
would be sought. This appears to have been
Mr Ryans idea. Mr Blake recalls that
there may also have been general discussion about the number of persons working
on the in-field
and the desirability from a safety point of view of reducing
those numbers. However, there was no specific discussion at the time
this might be achieved. Mr Blake stressed in evidence that he was content for Mr
Ryan to have considerable say (subject
to the committees approval) in the manner
in which the officials system operated in 1996. Indeed, this was consistent with
at the time of taking over the presidency, namely:
“... that basically there would be someone in charge of the officials;
that they would be a conduit for concerns; they would
also be responsible for
training; theyd basically be running the show in the officials department....
Mr Ryan has a similar recollection - although he recalls saying
to Mr Blake that he was only prepared to take on the position if he
was able to
select [his] own crew that [he] would be very comfortable with.. Shortly after
Mr Ryans conversation with Mr Blake, Mr
Ryan recalls that he informally
discussed with various members of the executive of the committee, including Mr
Blake, Mr McIver and
Mr Goldini, who became president in 1996, his intentions
regarding the officials' system for 1996. The "executive" consisted of the
president, Mr Blake, the vice-president, Mr McIver, and the secretary and
treasurer. It is not clear whether it was formally constituted
or simply an
informal group constituted for convenience. The upshot of those conversations
was that Mr Ryan was to have a reasonably
wide discretion in the selection and
organisation of the officials:
“I was told to go and pick a crew that I could work with, who I felt
comfortable with, who were competent in my opinion and
that had to be approved
by the executive committee.”
One of the initiatives Mr Ryan
discussed with the executive (although it is unclear exactly when) appears to
have been the abolition
of the corner marshals positions, because he wanted to
cut back on the people in the centre. Mr Blake recalls that this possibility
discussed and that Mr McIver was certainly in favour of such a change. These
discussions were apparently informal i.e. outside
committee meetings.
or about 7 February 1996 Mr Ryan on behalf of DSDRA sought written applications
for the in-field officials positions.
In February 1996 Ms Spooner and Mr
Poole each applied for advertised positions.
Once applications closed,
Mr Ryan made recommendations to the clubs committee as to the applicants to be
selected. He indicated to
the committee that there were more applicants for the
positions than there were vacancies.
Whether there was in fact any
relevant reduction in the number of in-field officials' positions remains
unclear. Despite being the
author of the 1996 system, Mr Ryan was surprisingly
vague as to the precise numbers involved and the respects in which the new
differed from the old. In any case, his evidence was not that Mr Poole
and Ms Spooner had been overlooked because their old positions
existed. Neither Mr Pooles nor Ms Spooners application was recommended by Mr
Ryan. A similar fate occurred for 2 other
in-field officials who had worked at
the speedway during 1995. No evidence was directed precisely to why these
officials were not
re-appointed but it appears likely they were seen as
associated with Ms Spooner and to be "troublemakers".
There was no
evidence before this Commission to suggest that Mr Poole was anything other than
an extremely dedicated, experienced,
and competent track official, and worthy of
the complimentary references tendered. Lisa Spooner clearly lacked Mr Pooles
experience,
but there was no convincing evidence before this Commission, nor
before Mr Bradshaw, that she was incompetent.
The Non-Reappointment
of Mr Poole and Ms Spooner
It is critical to analyse the evidence of
Messrs Blake, McIver and Ryan in order to determine the reason or reasons why
DSDRA chose
not to offer officials positions to Mr Poole and Ms Spooner in 1996.
Mr Ryan was the person who received and
recommended the rejection of the applications of Mr Poole and Ms Spooner. His
evidence is
the logical starting point.
Early in his evidence Mr Ryan
said that the reason he did not appoint Ms Spooner was because he could not work
with her. Mr Ryan made
no secret of his opinion of Ms Spooner. He variously
described her as disruptive, a troublemaker, erratic and prone to doing silly
things. He regarded her as very headstrong and very hard to control and referred
to her panic mode. These characteristics, according
to Mr Ryan, were apparent
both in Ms Spooners performance of her duties as an official and in the context
of her involvement in the
officials' group. He clearly resented Ms Spooners
apparent influence amongst the officials and her presence at the committee
“....she was the organ grinder and you people (Mr Poole and the other
officials) were the monkeys that she played the tune to
and everybody did what
she wanted and that's the way she wanted it.... She had everybody under her
spell. When she ground the organ,
the music came out and everybody did their
Although Mr Ryan was firm in his views about Ms Spooner,
he was unable when pressed to give any convincing examples of behaviour on
part which could justify such views. There was, however, no evidence that his
views were the result of sexist attitudes on his
part - he simply loathed Ms
Spooner, something which was clear to other club members, notably Mr McIver and
Mr Blake and, in the
circumstances, his decision not to offer her a position was
unsurprising.
Mr Ryan does not appear to have had the same intense
dislike for Mr Poole. When asked by Mr Poole why he did not offer Mr Poole a
position, Mr Ryan responded:
“Because you would ignore some directives at different times which
wasnt suitable for me and I just didnt feel comfortable working
Mr Ryan was unable to give examples of any such conduct by Mr
Mr Ryan denied that Mr Pooles association with Ms Spooner was the
reason he decided not to recommend Mr Poole for a position for 1996.
that denial, and in light of Mr Ryans failure to offer any convincing
explanation of his decision , it is difficult to avoid
the conclusion that he
must at least have been influenced by the fact that Mr Poole was a close
associate of Ms Spooner. I find that
this is the likely explanation for Mr
Ryan's decision not to recommend Mr Poole for a position.
Apart from his involvement in the appointment of Mr Ryan as
clerk of course for cars , Mr Blake appears to have had little direct
the decision not to offer Mr Poole or Ms Spooner positions for the 1996
By the time the committee endorsed Mr Ryans recommendations in
mid February 1996, Mr Blakes ability to maintain an active involvement
affairs of the DSDRA was increasingly affected by the demands of his own
business interests. He agreed that the selection
process was something he was
prepared to leave to the committee and Mr Ryan. He recalls being advised by the
committee or Mr Ryan
that the number of applicants exceeded the available
positions, something which he understood had been contributed to by a reduction
in the number of in-field officials positions. His understanding was that the
corner marshals positions had been abolished and that
this had played a part in
the non-reappointment of Mr Poole and Ms Spooner. As observed above it is
unclear whether there was in
fact any reduction in the number of officials'
Mr McIver clearly shared Mr Ryans
view that Ms Spooner was a troublemaker. Similarly, he regarded her as
manipulative:
“Lisa was using different officials for different positions to get at
where she was trying to go. As in like causing drama.”
resented Ms Spooners presence at committee meetings. He felt that she was behind
a trend which led to there being a page
full of trivial complaints by officials
at every committee meeting. He agreed that Ms Spooner could be described as a
drama queen.
Like Mr Ryan, Mr McIver was unable to support his
assessment of Ms Spooner with convincing examples.
The evidence suggests
that Mr McIver was openly critical of Ms Spooner at committee meetings, and, in
particular, appears to have
led the attack upon Ms Spooner at the committee
meeting convened in response to the officials complaint stemming from the Lyndon
Schlein incident.
Whereas Mr Ryans attitude to and treatment of Ms
Spooner appears to have been simply a product of a severe clash of personalities
the situation with Mr McIver is more complicated. There is no suggestion that he
actively disliked Ms Spooner. In fact, there appear
to have been occasions where
Mr McIver relied upon and valued Ms Spooners organisational abilities and other
occasions where he acted
out of a sense of concern for Ms Spooner. This was
coupled, however, with an apparently firm belief that Ms Spooner was pursuing
hidden and possibly destructive agenda:
“... I was in the association trying to hold it up and keep it - keep
it happening, where Im getting a person that is - I didnt
know whether she was
trying to help the place or destroy the place or what she was trying to do, but
every time I turned around there
is this particular person causing grief all the
He gave evidence that he knew that Ms Spooner was behind
most if not all of the officialscomplaints, e.g. that she was the author
various letters which had been submitted to the committee by the officials'
group. The evidence from other witnesses, notably
Mr Jordan who described as BS
the suggestion that Ms Spooner was a manipulative troublemaker, suggests that Mr
McIvers suspicions
regarding Ms Spooner were misplaced.
Several aspects
of Mr McIvers testimony suggest that his assessment and treatment of Ms Spooner
may have been a product of deep-seated
sexist attitudes on his part. These
attitudes were demonstrated in his answers to a variety of questions relating to
his perception
of the role of women in the speedway environment. He was clearly
of the few that speedway is a male domain in which women could participate,
provided they did things the male way. Further, he appears to have ascribed what
he saw as particularly female character traits and/or
skills to Ms Spooner e.g.
the writing of articulate letters, being manipulative, and nagging. He agreed
that he considered that Ms
Spooner was doing a mans job as a corner official".
Mr McIver gave evidence that he was generally intolerant of disagreement
- he was receptive to people who had good ideas, provided
they were good ideas
from his perspective. This was particularly in the context of his activities as
vice-president of DSDRA, where
he took the view, perhaps justifiably, that the
time and effort he had invested entitled him to have particular influence over
direction the club took. Were it not for the sexist attitudes he otherwise
displayed, it might have been possible to understand his
attitude to Ms Spooner
solely in terms of his vision for the club and his role in that vision. Ms
Spooner was clearly an opinionated
person and agreed that she was inclined to
offer an opinion even if it had not been sought. It is also clear that,
particularly in
1995, she had become a fixture at committee meetings and was an
active if not the dominant member of the officials' group. It is
conceivable that a person in Mr McIvers position could have found such a person
irritating and could even have formed the view
that she was a troublemaker.
It is impossible, however, to put aside the strong suspicion that Mr
McIvers sexist attitudes contributed to his view that Ms Spooner
troublemaker and to his admitted desire to remove her from in-field officials'
duties. On the balance of probabilities, I am
satisfied that these attitudes did
contribute to Mr McIver's views and his later actions.
evidence was that Mr Poole came to be seen as a troublemaker because of his
association with Ms Spooner.
The Actions of the Committee
Although Messrs Blake, Ryan and McIver were major players in the course
of events leading to the non-reappointment of Mr Poole and
Ms Spooner to
in-field officials' positions, it is critical to note the role played by the
executive which, as noted, consisted of
the president, vice-president, secretary
and treasurer of the club.
Late in 1995 the executive approved the
appointment of Mr Ryan to the position of clerk of course for cars. That
appointment appears
to have been the initiative of Mr Blake. However, Mr McIver
indicated in evidence that he was highly supportive of the appointment.
for some time been urging changes to the officials system - specifically to get
rid of all the troublemakers in the Association.
He noted that there had been
discussions by the executive regarding such changes. He agreed that by the time
of the meeting on 21
November 1995, at which the Lyndon Schlein incident was
discussed, there was something on the drawing board to get rid of the
troublemakers.
This was implicit in his comments at that meeting. See p2 of the
minutes of the meeting. Although Mr McIver rejected the suggestion
that Mr Ryan
was selected in the expectation that he would not offer positions to Mr Poole or
Ms Spooner - and clearly it was the
case that Mr Ryan was given a wide
discretion - he agreed that the appointment was made in the knowledge that Mr
Ryan was aware of
the drama that was happening the year before (This was a
reference to events earlier in 1995 rather than 1994). Mr McIver also
acknowledged
that Mr Ryan had said to him on many occasions words to the effect
Ive had it with that Lisa Spooner and that the only person who
complained to the executive about Ms Spooner was Mr Ryan ...which he did on
several occasions.. In the circumstances, and
having regard to Mr McIvers
admitted desire to get rid of "troublemakers", especially Ms Spooner, it is
clear that Mr McIvers support
for the appointment of Mr Ryan must have been
influenced (perhaps strongly influenced) by Mr McIvers confidence that Mr Ryan
not offer an officials position to Ms Spooner or Mr Poole and the other
"troublemakers" associated with them in the officials' group.
no suggestion in the evidence that the executive formally considered Mr Ryans
proposals as to changed arrangements for the
appointment and organisation of
officials for 1996. Instead, there appear to have been a number of informal
discussions involving
Mr Ryan and members of the executive to the effect that Mr
Ryan was to get some order back into the place. Mr Blake recalls that
and particularly Mr McIver urged the abolition of the corner marshals positions.
Once Mr Ryan had received and considered the written applications for
officials' positions, he made recommendations to the executive,
which endorsed
all but one of his recommendations. There appears little doubt that Mr Ryans
decision relating to Ms Spooner and Mr
Poole must at least have been influenced
by his dislike of Ms Spooner and the fact of Mr Poole association with her. The
be said of Mr McIvers endorsement of that decision. Mr Blake gave
evidence that he was led to believe by Mr Ryan that there was an
over supply of
applicants and that the corner marshals positions no longer existed - something
which Mr Ryan and Mr McIver had advocated.
It is clear that Mr Blake did not
attach much importance to the question of whether particular positions were
retained or abolished
or particular people were appointed or not. His focus at
the time was on the big picture and he was prepared to rely on others to
out the details. Those others were principally Mr Ryan and Mr McIver. In the
circumstances, it would be unrealistic to treat
Mr Blakes endorsement of Mr
Ryans decision as entirely independent from the factors which influenced Mr Ryan
and, critically, Mr
Of the persons
involved in the decision making process which led to Mr Poole not being offered
an officials' position for 1996, the
only person who appears on the evidence to
have been acting on a prohibited ground in
of the Act was Mr McIver. There
is ample evidence to support a finding that Mr McIver had a sexist attitude to
Ms Spooner and that
this was a significant factor in his assessment of her as a
troublemaker and in his aim of ensuring that she no longer acted as an
official. Further, in Mr McIvers eyes, Mr Poole was guilty by reason of his
association with Ms Spooner and his removal
was therefore another of Mr McIvers
There is no evidence suggesting that any other person involved in
the decision making process was motivated by sexist attitudes. In
other words,
it cannot be said that a majority of the persons involved in the making of the
decision not to offer Mr Poole a position
were acting on the ground of his
association with Ms Spooner and because she was a woman.
impossible to say whether the executive would or would not have made the
decisions leading up to the non-appointment of Mr Poole
but for Mr McIvers
involvement in the decision making process. However, it is clear that Mr McIver
was a very influential member
of the executive and that his influence at the
relevant time was especially high owing to Mr Blakes reduced involvement in club
It would be altogether artificial for him to be regarded as simply a
voter. He played a critical role in the course of events leading
to Mr Ryans
appointment as clerk of course for cars, the abolition of the corner marshals
positions and the executives endorsement
of Mr Ryans decision not to offer
positions to Mr Poole or Ms Spooner. Of all the persons involved in that course
of events (Mr Ryan
not being a member of the executive) Mr McIver was the
dominant force.
Section 20(3)
of the Act reads:
"For discrimination to take place, it is not necessary that –
(a) the attribute is the sole or dominant ground for the less favorable
treatment ...".
I take "ground" in this context to mean reason or cause.
IW v City of Perth
[1997] HCA 30
146 ALR 696
Nevertheless a ground
or reason should be "a substantial or significant reason for the conduct" or a
"substantial or operative factor".
Bailey v Australian National
at 75, 552 and cases discussed there.
I am not satisfied that
the dominant ground for the failure to offer Mr Poole a position was his
association with Ms Spooner and because
she was a woman.
However, I am
satisfied that these were substantial factors in Mr McIver's motivations and
actions and thus operative factors in the
chain of events which led to Mr Poole
not being offered a position.
The "But For" Test
v City of Perth
the High Court considered a 13 vote to 12 decision by Perth
City Council to refuse to approve the use of premises or a drop in center
HIV infected people. Five of the councillors in the majority were motivated by
prohibited discriminatory reasons. The High Court
dismissed the appeal on other
grounds but three members of the Court; Toohey, Gummow and Kirby JJ, made
various obiter statements
question posed was how to identify the relevant ground of decision of the
when different members of the counsel voted for different reasons.
Toohey J said the choice was between three tests:
1. The "but for" test, so that in a 13-12 vote it was enough that one member of
the majority was motivated by discriminatory reasons;
2. The relevant ground was the one on which the majority made
the decision; or
3. The relevant ground was the one on which the majority of the majority made
the decision.
The latter two positions appear to have been argued by the
City of Perth.
Toohey J said at 718:
"The `but for' test, which has featured in some decisions relating to
causation in negligence actions, has been rejected as a definitive
causation".
Nevertheless, he observed that it had a part to play in the
matter before the Court. It must be remembered that his Honour was considering
corporate decision and where one vote decided the matter but where only 5 of the
25 votes cast were cast for a prohibited reason.
Gummow J also approved
the "but for" test in the circumstances of the case before him. He also (at
p732) expressed the opinion that
the principles of administrative law relating
to corporate bodies ought to be applied. So, where a member of a decision making
is affected by bias a Court will not enter into difficult evidentiary
inquiries as to the extent to which that person may have influenced
Kirby J also approved of "but for" test although he did not
suggest this is an exclusive test but rather appropriate in the context
case before him.
There is nothing in the obiter dicta expressed in
v City of Perth
to suggest that the "but for" test ought to be applied in
the circumstances of this case. I am satisfied that it is inappropriate
Corporate Liability
I am satisfied that DSRDA is
directly responsible for the actions of the executive and for the actions of Mr
McIver so far as he influenced
the course of events leading to the decision of
Mr Ryan and the executive not to offer a position to Mr Poole. Mr McIver was a
member of DSDRA and he, in his role as a member of the executive,
represented its "mind or will". See
Bogie v University of Western Sydney
(1990) EOC 92-313
Lennard's Carrying Co Ltd v Asiatic Petroleum Co Ltd
[1915] AC 705
Ford & Austin's Principles of Corporation Law
Edition, p584.
Compensation
Mr Poole claims monetary
compensation under section 88(1)(b) of the Act, that is ... for loss or damage
caused by the prohibited conduct.
There is, in other words, the need for a
causal link between the conduct complained of and the loss allegedly suffered.
Mr Poole gave evidence regarding the effect upon him of his
non-appointment as an official in 1996.
He complained that he had lost
earnings in connection with his employment as a bobcat operator as a result of
being refused access
to building sites. He was unable, however, to demonstrate a
link between any such losses and the actions of the club.
evidence that his social life has been severely affected as a result of not
being reappointed to a position he had filled
for many years. Speedway had
clearly been his passion and during the racing season he appears to have been
involved in speedway related
activities as frequently as three or four days per
week. He met about half of his friends, and about 80 percent of the people he
associated with, through speedway. Since losing his official's position he feels
he has been shunned by his former friends and associates.
He no longer has any
involvement with speedway. Whereas he once had a brilliant and active social
life he now appears to have none.
His only remaining recreational pursuit is
fishing - which he does alone.
Mr Poole also gave evidence that his
immediate response to not being offered an official's position was one of
humiliation and anger.
Commonsense suggests that the profound impact of
this incident upon Mr Pooles life was less a result of his losing the official's
position than a consequence of a perception (largely contributed to by his
complaint to this Commission) that his actions have been
damaging to the club.
To the extent that he has been treated as badly as a result of his complaint he
may have the separate remedy
of a complaint of victimisation. The availability
of such a remedy does not, however, mean that the club should escape liability
in respect of at least some of the impact upon Mr Pooles social life. In a club
environment such as the DSRDA it is quite foreseeable
that a member will be
ostracized for taking a stand against unlawful treatment where doing so produces
perceived damage to the clubs
reputation or finances.
Ms Spooner was
awarded compensation of $7,000.00 for victimization. Although there may be
somewhat different issues to be considered
in assessing compensation in Mr
Poole's case I believe this is also an appropriate amount to award to Mr Poole
for offence, embarrassment
and humiliation suffered as a result of DSDRA
1. That the respondent, Darwin Speedway Riders and Drivers Association Inc.,
pay to the complainant, Mr Rayond Poole, $7,000.00 within
...............................................
ANTHONY YOUNG
Hearing Commissioner
30 April 1998
Section 19(1)
Act is ambiguous and somewhat clumsy. Having regard to the Commissioner’s
function under
section 13(1)(p)
of the Act counsel assisting, Mr Brauxner,
submitted that the above ambiguity could be resolbved by deleting
® and re-drafting the introductory words as
(1)Subject to subsection (2) a person shall not
discriminate against any other person or any associate of that other person n
ground that the other person has any of the following
attributes....”
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (62.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter