URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTSC/2025/57.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:22:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mental Illness Fellowship of Australia (NT) Inc v Sandrey [2025] NTSC 57 (12 August 2025)
Mental Illness Fellowship of Australia (NT) Inc v Sandrey
[2025] NTSC 57
PARTIES: MENTAL ILLNESS FELLOWSHIP OF AUSTRALIA (NT) INC
(ABN 19 010 762 321)
SANDREY, Hayden
TITLE OF COURT: SUPREME COURT OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: 2024-02126-SC
DELIVERED: 12 August 2025
HEARING DATE: 30 June 2025 and 1 July 2025
JUDGMENT OF: Kelly J
CATCHWORDS:
Breach of contract of employment – whether defendant breached restraint
of trade clause by soliciting former clients within
six months of termination of
his employment – held no breach of restraint of trade clause
Whether defendant breached s 183 of the
Corporations Act
equitable duty to employer by misusing confidential information to benefit
himself or another to the detriment of the former
employer – held no
breach of s 183 or equitable duty
Corporations Act
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
REPRESENTATION:
Plaintiff: C Ford SC
Defendant: Self represented
Solicitors:
Plaintiff: De Silva Hebron
Defendant: Self represented
Judgment category classification: B
Judgment ID Number: Kel2511
Number of pages: 44
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Mental Illness Fellowship of Australia (NT) Inc v Sandrey
[2025] NTSC 57
No. 2024-02126-SC
MENTAL ILLNESS FELLOWSHIP OF AUSTRALIA (NT) INC
(ABN 19 010 762 321)
HAYDEN SANDREY
CORAM: KELLY J
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 12 August 2025)
defendant, Hayden Sandrey (“Mr Sandrey”) was employed by the
plaintiff, Mental Illness Fellowship of Australia
(“MIFANT”) as an NDIS Support Co-ordinator and Recovery Coach
pursuant to a contract of employment entered into
on 25 November 2021. He
started work on 13 December 2021.
February 2022, Mr Sandrey was given a letter of Variation of his contract of
employment adding a clause headed
Restraints of Trade
in the following
For a period of 6 months after your employment terminates,
howsoever occurring, you must not directly or indirectly:
(a) canvass, solicit or induce any person or company who is or was a client of
ours within the 12 months immediately before the employment
ended, and with whom
you had direct dealings during the employment, to have services that are the
same as or similar to ours provided
by anyone other than us; and
(b) canvass, solicit or induce any employee of ours with whom you have work with
(sic) to work for anyone other than us or to cease
employment with us; and
(c) Your obligations under this paragraph survive termination or expiry of your
employment.
(Punctuation in original.)
[3] The letter
was signed by Lorraine Davies, Executive Officer of MIFANT. Mr Sandrey was
asked to sign the letter and did so under
a statement that read: I, HAYDEN
SANDREY have read and agree to the Restraints of Trade clause as stated
[4] Mr Sandrey
was presented with, and signed, three other letters varying the terms of his
employment contract during 2022, none
of which are relevant to these
proceedings.
[5] MIFANT is a
not-for-profit charitable organisation that provides “recovery
based” support to people living with a
mental health condition. It also
provides a range of NDIS services for people with a psychosocial disability
including that of Recovery
Coach, Support Co-ordination, Social and Community
Participation and Community Access.
Sandrey’s role as Support Co-ordinator was to access service providers to
provide support for people with NDIS funding
for those supports, for example
support workers, psychologists or social workers. The role of a Recovery Coach
is broadly similar
but also entails providing personalised support to clients
“fostering their recovery and
well-being”.
[7] While Mr
Sandrey was working for MIFANT, he was also studying for a nursing degree. As
part of those studies, he was required
to do a number of placements as part of
his practical training. He took paid leave to do one such placement and unpaid
do another. In 2024 he asked for further leave without pay to do his
final placement. This was refused and, as Mr Sandrey had to
placement in order to complete his nursing degree, he felt he had no option
other than to resign. He did so by email dated
12 April 2024 and finished
work with MIFANT on 26 April 2024. On that date, Mr Sandrey was asked to sign,
and did sign, a statutory
declaration stating (inter alia), “I do not have
in my possession any hard or digital copy of Mental Illness Fellowship of
Australia (NT) confidential or proprietary information”.
[8] On 27 May
2024, Mr Sandrey started work at TK Community Care Services Pty Ltd
(“TK”) as an NDIS Support Co-ordinator
and Recovery Coach.
[9] On 28 May
2024, Ms Elizabeth Lycett, the mother of
Salam (known as Noni), a client of MIFANT for whom Mr Sandrey had provided
services as Support Co-ordinator, sent an email
Good afternoon Emma,
As of today Tuesday 4
I am terminating services with MiFant for Camellia
Could you please forward all necessary information and documents over to
Hayden Sandrey at TK Community Care.
Please email to
supportcoordinator1@tkcommunitycare.com.au
Thank you very much for the years, now is the time to have a change.
[10] On Friday
14 June 2024, Danielle Domjam from “i.help.u” ,
Keith Godfrey’s social worker, sent an email
to MIFANT saying:
I have been requested to pass on a letter to cease all service with Keith
Please refer to the details within the letter attached and advise of receipt
and action that you will undertake as per request from
We hope this can be actioned in a timely manner and thanks for your support
to date for our mutual participant.
attached letter signed by Keith Godfrey was on TK letterhead and addressed to
MIFANT. It was dated 28 May 2024 and
Subject: Cease of
NDIS Services
Dear MIFANT,
I am writing to inform you of my decision to terminate my NDIS services with
your organisation. This decision is effective immediately
. Please provide a hand over of all documents relating to
myself prior to this date. Please direct all communications to TK Community
Care Services. As per my request please cease all communication with the client
effectively immediately.
The reasons for this cessation of services are as follows:
Choice and control.
I would appreciate if you could confirm in writing the receipt of this notice
and ensure that all ongoing services are concluded appropriately
effective date. Please provide any necessary details regarding the transition
process and next steps.
Thank you for your understanding and cooperation in this matter. Should you
require any additional information or clarification,
please do not hesitate to
Keith Godfrey
Godfrey had been a client of MIFANT receiving services from Mr Sandrey as
his Support Co-ordinator. In his affidavit of
16 October 2024 he said he is
dyslexic and that he asked TK to contact MIFANT for
[13] On 31 May
2024, MIFANT received three further letters on TK letterhead. One letter was
signed by Jason Green
Cease of NDIS Services
Dear NDIS Manager,
I am writing to inform you of the decision to terminate the provision of
Support Coordination services with MIFANT. This decision
is effective as of
I would appreciate if you could confirm in writing the receipt of this notice
and ensure that all ongoing services are concluded appropriately
effective date. Please provide all necessary details and reports to TK
Community by COB 17/06/2024.
Thank you for your understanding and cooperation in this matter.
Jason Green
[14] One letter
was signed by Sherena Quall
Cease of NDIS Services
Dear NDIS Manager,
I am writing to inform you of the decision to terminate the provision of NDIS
services with MIFANT. This decision is effective as
of 13/06/24.
I would appreciate if you could confirm in writing the receipt of this notice
and ensure that all ongoing services are concluded appropriately
effective date. Please provide all necessary details and reports to TK
Community by COB 13/06/2024.
Thank you for your understanding and cooperation in this matter.
Sherena Quall
[15] One letter
was signed by David Grant and
Subject: Cease
of NDIS Services
Dear NDIS Manager,
I am writing to inform you of the decision to terminate the provision of NDIS
services with MIFANT. This decision is effective as
of 14/06/24.
I would appreciate if you could confirm in writing the receipt of this notice
and ensure that all ongoing services are concluded appropriately
effective date. Please provide all necessary details and reports to Hayden
Sandrey from TK Community by COB 14/06/2024.
Thank you for your understanding and cooperation
in this matter.
David Grant
Green, Sherena Quall and David Grant were all former clients of MIFANT who had
been receiving Support Co-ordination services
from Mr Sandrey.
16 July 2024, MIFANT received an email from “Zoe” at NDIS advising
that Jay Knight had “requested to cease
services with Mental Illness
Fellowship of Australia (NT)”
and another email from “Gina” at NDIS advising that “NDIS
participant; Paul de Babol, has requested a change of
Coordination”.
these people were former clients of MIFANT who had been receiving support
co-ordination services from Mr Sandrey.
[18] On 4 June
2024 Emma Steel from MIFANT telephoned David Grant and asked him to come to a
meeting at MIFANT the next day. The
next day, 5 June 2024, David Grant
went to MIFANT with his support worker and had a meeting with Emma Steel. There
are conflicting
accounts of what occurred at that meeting from Emma Steel and
David Grant. This is dealt with at [24] and [25] below.
[19] On 14 June
2024, Emma Steel telephoned Jason Green. Dr Ford SC for MIFANT sought leave to
adduce hearsay evidence of what Jason
Green said in that telephone conversation.
This is dealt with at [28] to [35] below.
[20] MIFANT
alleges that Mr Sandrey breached the restraint of trade clause in his contract
of employment by canvassing, soliciting
or inducing clients of MIFANT with whom
he had had direct dealings during his employment, to have services provided by
TK that were
the same as or similar to the ones provided by MIFANT, within six
months after the termination of his employment. The clients he
is said to have
so canvassed, solicited or induced to leave MIFANT and engage TK are those seven
people referred to above: Camellia
Salam (known as Noni), Keith Godfrey, Jason
Green, Sherena Quall, David Grant, Jay Knight and Paul de Babol.
[21] There is no
dispute that those seven people were all clients of MIFANT in the 12 months
before the termination of Mr Sandrey’s
employment and that he had direct
dealings with each of them having provided support co-ordination services to
each of the seven.
The issue is whether MIFANT has proved, on the balance of
probabilities, that Mr Sandrey canvassed, solicited or induced them (or
them) to leave MIFANT and engage TK to perform
support co-ordination services for them.
[22] MIFANT
relies on the following evidence and contends that an inference can be drawn
that Mr Sandrey did solicit or induce those
people to leave MIFANT and engage
(a) Dr Ford for MIFANT pointed to evidence of “the John Valer
connection”. There is evidence that John Valer and Mr
Sandrey had a
long-standing professional connection: Mr Sandrey conceded that in
cross-examination. John Valer was a referee for
Mr Sandrey when he applied for
the position at MIFANT. John Valer was the advocate or nominee for Paul de
Babol, David Grant, Jay
Knight and Sherena Quall and referred those clients to
MIFANT at various times in 2022 or
Dr Ford also pointed to
evidence that all of these clients other than Keith Godfrey received services
from an organisation called
Carelink and John Valer is a consultant to Carelink.
It was suggested to Mr Sandrey in cross-examination that he felt some kind of
“ownership” of these clients because of the John Valer connection.
He denied it.
(b) MIFANT relies on evidence from Mr Sandrey in
cross-examination that he was frustrated when Ms Lorraine Davies, the Executive
of MIFANT, refused him unpaid leave to do his final nursing placement to
complete his degree; that he was annoyed with her and that
he believed her to be
“dictatorial, bullying and authoritarian”. Those words were taken
from a strongly worded email
sent to MIFANT by Ms Elizabeth Lycett, the mother
of Camellia Salam (generally known as Noni). Dr Ford put to both Ms Lycett
Mr Sandrey in cross-examination that Ms Lycett had got the information on
which she based the opinions in her letter from Mr Sandrey,
the unstated
implication being that this would have occurred after the termination of his
employment. Neither of them agreed that
this was the case. Mr Sandrey
explained that he had no input into the email sent by Ms Lycett and only became
aware of its existence
during these court proceedings. He said that he and Emma
Steel had gone to a meeting with Ms Lycett and Noni to tell them that Mr
was resigning. During that conversation Mr Sandrey said, “I’ve got
some bad news,” and Ms Lycett said,
“Let me guess, you’re not
getting approved for your final placement.” Ms Lycett gave essentially
the same account
been given leave to do his final placement and was resigning. She
said that the
information about Lorraine Davies being a bully was something that was told to
her in confidence by previous staff
that she had spoken to and she acknowledged
that not everyone would agree with her assessment.
(c) Dr Ford pointed to the evidence that in his
letter of resignation, Mr Sandrey wrote:
Dear Lorraine,
I am writing to formally resign my position as Support
Coordinator/Psychosocial Recovery Coach at MiFant (Mental Illness Fellowship
Australia NT), effective 26/04/2024.
I have thoroughly enjoyed my time at Mifant and am grateful for the
opportunities for growth and development that have been provided
to me during my
tenure. However, after careful consideration, I have decided to further my
I want to express my gratitude for the support and guidance I have received
from you and my colleagues during my time here. I have
learned a great deal and
will always value the experiences and relationships I have gained.
I am committed to ensuring a smooth transition during my remaining time with
the company. Please let me know how I can assist in
the handover process.
Thank you again for the opportunity to be a part of the Mifant team. I wish
the company continued success in the future.
Warm regards
Hayden Sandrey
Recovery Coach/Support Coordinator
Dr Ford contended that this letter did not reflect Mr Sandrey’s true
feelings at the time given his answers in cross-examination,
and, he contended,
Mr Sandrey hid his true feelings in order to leave MIFANT “on a good
note”. Mr Sandrey agreed in
cross-examination that he did wish to leave
MIFANT on good terms and said that he always likes to keep on good terms with
(d) MIFANT relies on the “coincidence” of Ms Lycett terminating
MIFANT’s services for Noni on 28 May 2024, one
day after Mr Sandrey
commenced working at TK
Jason Green, Sherena Quall and David Grant terminating MIFANT’s services
three days later on 31 May 2024. It is clear
from the wording of the letters
from Jason Green, Sherena Quall and David Grant and the fact that they were
written on TK letterhead
that although these clients signed the letters, the
letters were prepared by TK.
also relies on records from Telstra of texts and phone calls between Mr
Sandrey’s phone and the phone numbers of
Ms Lycett and Keith Godfrey. By
agreement these were helpfully summarised in a document which showed the
following activity:
(i) between Mr Sandrey and Ms Lycett:
one voice call
on 4 April 2024 before Mr Sandrey resigned;
78 SMS messages
between 12 April when Mr Sandrey resigned and 26 April 2024 when Mr Sandrey
left MIFANT; and
76 SMS messages
between 26 April 2024 and 28 May 2024, when Ms Lycett sent the email
terminating MIFANT’s services for Noni
effective on 4 June 2024. (The
first of these was on 9 May. They did not exchange messages every day. On the
days they did the
volume ranged between 8 messages and 34
(i) between Mr Sandrey and Keith Godfrey:
8 voice calls
and 5 SMS messages between 4 April and 12 April when Mr Sandrey resigned;
14 voice calls
and 4 SMS messages between 12 April when Mr Sandrey resigned and 26 April
when Mr Sandrey left MIFANT;
11 voice calls
and 5 SMS messages between 26 April and 28 May when Keith Godfrey terminated his
services with MIFANT (effective from
17 June 2024); and
5 voice calls
thereafter (on 4 June and 6 June 2024).
There was no evidence adduced by MIFANT about which of these calls and
SMS’s (if any) were initiated from Mr Sandrey’s
phone. There is no
evidence of any calls or messages from Mr Sandrey’s phone to any of the
other five clients in issue.
(f) Both Ms Lycett and Keith Godfrey gave evidence and were cross-examined about
these calls and messages.
(i) Ms Lycett said, “One texts a lot. Look, I’m sorry, the amount
of numbers that I text daily is - I don’t keep
record of how many. So
that’s not just to Hayden, to anybody. So, yeah.”
It was put to
her that in those 154 texts it would be natural for her to ask Mr Sandrey where
he was going after MIFANT. She said,
“I approached him and asked if he
had secured a job and where it was,” and agreed that he told her.
Ms Lycett was
adamant that Mr Sandrey had not solicited her to leave MIFANT and go to TK. She
said, “I wanted to go to him.
My daughter wanted him as the recovery
coach. ... Both my daughter and myself wanted him as the recovery coach. ...
My daughter
has quite a complex condition and the relationship she had built
with him was never going to be replaced by any of the staff in MIFANT.
was - made sense to me to continue with the support that she already
(ii) Mr Godfrey’s evidence suggested that he was the one calling
Mr Sandrey, not the other way round. He said he had
Mr Sandrey’s
number because Mr Sandrey’s mum gave it to
And he also had another
number for Hayden [presumably his work number]. It would have just said Hayden
on his phone. He would
have called either one to get hold of him.
Asked about the
phone calls after Mr Sandrey resigned he said, “I would have contacted him
but I don’t know whether he
was on his private or the one that was my
phone number.
Asked if Mr
Sandrey ever told him to phone on his office number, not his private number, Mr
Godfrey said, “He’s probably
told me that. Yeah, don’t call
me on my private but for me I don’t actually, my phone’s a bit of a
mess because
I’m dyslexic. I’ll just phone. That’s the way I
probably called him on that.”
Asked about the
calls after Mr Sandrey left MIFANT, Mr Godfrey said he was probably trying
to work something out and he was probably
asking for help possibly because he
was going through something at university. Mr Sandrey did go there with him
once to help him,
because the University missed his enrolment and it
wasn’t his fault.
(g) Mr Sandrey was also cross-examined about the communications between himself
and Ms Lycett in particular. He said he didn’t
recall all of the text
messages but he thought she may have contacted him to see how he was going. He
agreed that it seemed like
a lot of text messages to say, “How are you
going?” but said that she would send multiple text messages in one go. He
So I do believe that Liz did ask where I had gone. That was just in passing
conversation. I never suggested or coerced Liz to come
or to bring Noni over to
TK Community. If anything, she was the one that reached out to me and asked if
TK Community has availability
for service for me to provide those services to
(h) MIFANT relies on evidence from Ms Lorraine Davies, Executive Officer of
MIFANT that when he was first employed by MIFANT, Mr
Sandrey offered to
bring to MIFANT clients from his former employer, Better Connections and showed
Ms Davies texts from his boss
at Better Connections that showed a “cease
and desist letter”. These allegations were not put to Mr Sandrey in
cross-examination
but in his brief final submission Mr Sandrey denied ever
having received a “cease and desist” letter from his former
(i) MIFANT also adduced evidence from Ms
that on 28 November
2023, Mr Sandrey sent confidential information (an email from NDIS to Sherena
Quall) from his personal email
to his work email. An examination of the email
shows that the reason for this is that the document was originally sent to Mr
on his personal email by John Valer who was Sherena Quall’s
This evidence seems to
go to the submission based on “the Valer connection”. In her
affidavit of 9 August 2024, Ms
In summary, over the past five years, only two of MIFANT’s participants
have voluntarily wished to terminate its support co-ordination
services and move
to another service provider, but over the past month we have now had seven
participants wish to change services
all of whom were supported by Sandrey and
with six of them having Valer as nominee, advocate or case manager. One of
those seven
participants, David Grant, withdrew his termination as set out in my
first affidavit.
[23] The phrase
“voluntarily wished to terminate its support coordination services”
is used by Ms Davies in a highly qualified
sense as, earlier in the same
affidavit, Ms Davies deposes:
MIFANT’s participants usually
remain with MIFANT indefinitely. Since late 2018, 60 participants have received
support coordination/
recovery coach services from MIFANT. Over that time, 17
clients have ceased receiving MIFANT’s services (not including the
terminators).
Five clients
left MIFANT in around 2022 to follow a departing employee
. This was the
reason for asking Sandrey to sign the non-solicitation clause variation on 3
February 2022. Three clients died, three
moved interstate,
three could not
be contacted after MIFANT’s services started
, one was incarcerated and
two chose to leave and transfer to another support coordinator.
[24] In relation
to the assertion that David Grant withdrew his termination of MIFANT’s
services, in the affidavit of Emma Steel
dated 9 August
On or about 5 June, 2024, I requested David Grant’s
support worker to bring David Grant into our office for a meeting so that
could discuss his funding for future supports as he had just received his new
NDIS plan. Whilst at this meeting, the subject
of his termination of
MIFANT’s services as set out in the affidavits of Lorraine Davies ... was
During our conversation, he became quite agitated and angry, expressing that
he had not been informed that the first defendant Sandrey
was no longer working
for MIFANT. He remarked that he believed we were all working as a team. He
mentioned that John Valer had
told him, “the boy’s back, we need to
sign some documents.” David Grant also called the first defendant a
and said he would not tolerate that behaviour. He continued, saying,
“They think I’m dumb, but I’ve got a brain
and I’ve been
treated like an idiot. I have not been given a thorough explanation of what is
going on. I’m staying
with MIFANT.” I typed a letter regarding the
conversation which David Grant agreed with and signed.
The letter is annexed to the affidavit. It says:
When you spoke to me yesterday about my letter saying I was moving my
services to Hayden, I did not realise that Hayden didn’t
I thought you and Hayden both worked for
Carelink. John Valer just told me that Hayden was back, and I had to sign
Nothing was explained to me properly and I was confused with the whole
I would like to stay with Mifant and continue my Support Coordination/
Recovery service.
David Grant
[25] David Grant
swore an affidavit in this
and attended Court to
give oral evidence. He denied that events at the meeting of 5 June unfolded in
the way deposed to by Emma
Steel. Mr Grant deposed:
arrived at MIFANT, and I was taken into a room to wait for Emma. When Emma came
in, she asked me a piece of paper that
she handed to me. (sic) I told Emma
that I did not have my glasses on and could not read the letter. Emma just told
the letter and I did. I felt that I had no choice other than to sign
the letter. I do not know the content of the letter and to
this day I have not
read the letter nor do I want to. I later found out that this letter was used
as part of the dilemma against
Hayden and it made me feel sick.
[26] Mr Grant
adamantly reiterated this account in oral evidence adding that he now carries
his glasses with him. It is not necessary
for me to determine what actually
occurred at this meeting but I note the following.
(a) In fact the letter terminating Mr Grant’s services with MIFANT did not
say he “was moving [his] services to Hayden”.
It did not mention
Hayden Sandrey. It simply advised that he was terminating his services with
MIFANT although it did ask that
all necessary details and reports be provided to
Hayden Sandrey from TK Community by COB 14/06/2024. (The letter is set out in
at [15] above.)
(b) Mr Grant did not follow Mr Sandrey. He deposed that he did not receive any
services from Mr Sandrey other than at MIFANT.
(c) Contrary to the assertion in Lorraine Davies’ affidavit, Mr Grant
deposed that he did not in fact continue to retain MIFANT’s
services. He
deposed that he was receiving services from Carelink NT and that he had been
since leaving MIFANT
[27] MIFANT
sought to rely on hearsay evidence from Emma Steel and Kelly Hinnen.
(a) In her affidavit of 9 August 2024, Emma Steel deposed that on or about 14
June 2024 she phoned Jason Green and that Jason Green
told her he was happy with
MIFANT’s services but that Mr Sandrey had contacted him multiple
times by text and phone over a
two week period and he wished to change services
to TK. She annexed a file note of the purported conversation to her
(b) In her affidavit of 9 August 2024, Kelly Hinnen deposed that on or about 31
May 2024, she telephoned Sherena Quall to ask for
her notice of termination and that when she enquired how she got in touch with
Mr Sandrey, she said
that Mr Sandrey had called her. Ms Hinnen also
attached a file note of that telephone call.
[28] MIFANT
gave notice of intention to adduce hearsay evidence under
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
(“ENULA”). The reasons given in the notice for wanting to adduce
hearsay evidence of the representations of Jason
Green and Sherena Quall were
that both were not available to give evidence “due to their not being
competent to give the evidence”
or their being “mentally unable to
give the evidence and it is not reasonably practicable to overcome that
inability”.
Alternatively, it is said that Jason Green and Sherena Quall
were available, but it would not be reasonably practicable to call
them to give
evidence due to their mental condition. The alternative basis for the
application is that the evidence is contained
in a business record within the
meaning of ENULA
[29] I decline
to admit this evidence. First, MIFANT has adduced no admissible evidence that
either Jason Green or Sherena Quall
are unavailable within the meaning of ENULA
The dictionary in the Schedule to ENULA states:
(1) For the purposes of this Act, a person is taken not to be available to give
evidence about a fact if:
(a) the person is dead; or
(b) the person is, for any reason other than the application of
(Competence and compellability – judges and jurors), not competent to give
the evidence; or
(c) the person is mentally or physically unable to give the evidence and it is
not reasonably practicable to overcome that inability;
(d) it would be unlawful for the person to give the evidence; or
(e) a provision of this Act prohibits the evidence being given; or
(f) all reasonable steps have been taken, by the party seeking to prove the
person is not available, to find the person or secure
his or her attendance, but
without success; or
(g) all reasonable steps have been taken, by the party seeking to prove the
person is not available, to compel the person to give
the evidence, but without
(2) In all other cases the person is taken to be available to give evidence
[30] MIFANT
relies on an assertion that these witnesses are mentally unable to give the
evidence but has adduced no admissible evidence
to support that contention. The
only evidence to support it comes from Ms Lorraine Davies, the Executive Officer
of MIFANT and Emma
Steel, a support co-ordinator with MIFANT both of whom
expressed “concerns” about the advisability of either Jason Green
Sherena Quall giving evidence because of their mental health. Ms Davies’
only formal qualification is a Cert IV in mental
health. Asked to explain what
that entailed, Ms Davies said it was “a certificate before a diploma in
mental health. So it
covered – my goodness it was such a long time ago
that I did it – I covered supporting people with a mental illness and
talked about the recovery approach as well.” Ms Steel has no formal
qualifications but said she had “lived experience
through my family, over
many years” citing mental illnesses suffered by her brother and mother.
Neither of these witnesses
is qualified to give expert evidence about whether
Jason Green and Sherena Quall are mentally unable to give evidence.
[31] Further,
the assertion that Jason Green is mentally unable to give evidence is
demonstrably wrong: he swore an affidavit in this
proceeding, attended to give
evidence and was cross-examined. His evidence was that Mr Sandrey did not
approach him and ask him
to leave MIFANT and follow him and he was really
annoyed at the suggestion that this had occurred. He said, “Hayden never
asked me to leave MIFANT and he didn’t encourage me to leave
MIFANT.” He gave reasons for wanting to leave MIFANT and
continue to
receive services from Mr Sandrey. These included that he did not have a good
relationship with Emma Steel who, he said,
would forget to let him know if there
was no one available to pick him up to go to MIFANT for supports and sometimes
he would just
be left waiting. His reasons for leaving also included that he
had a good relationship with Mr Sandrey who never forgot to contact
him and who
he believed cared about him.
[32] I note that
the summary of the subpoenaed Telstra records of calls to and from Mr
Sandrey’s phone during the relevant period
prepared by MIFANT does not
include any calls between Mr Sandrey’s phone and either Sherena Quall or
Jason Green.
[33] Turning to
the application to adduce the file notes as business records, the onus is on the
party seeking to adduce evidence
to establish its admissibility. There is
evidence from both Emma Steel and Kelly Hinnen that it was usual practice to
notes of telephone conversations and to place those on the
client’s file. That would seem to qualify the file notes as business
records under ENULA
, as “documents that form part of the records kept
by an organisation in the course of a business that contain previous
representations
recorded in the documents in the course of, or for the purposes
of, the business”.
[34] The file
notes would also seem to come within
under which, subject to later
subsections, the hearsay rule does not apply to such a document (so far as it
contains the representation)
if the representation was made (inter alia) by a
person who had or might reasonably be supposed to have had personal knowledge of
the asserted fact. That would apply to Jason Green and Sherena Quall. (There
is no requirement in
that the representation be made by an employee or
agent of the organisation conducting the business.)
[35] However,
provides that subsection (2) does not apply if the representation was
prepared or obtained for the purpose of conducting, or for
or in contemplation
of, or in connection with, an Australian or overseas proceeding. MIFANT has not
established that the phone calls
made by Emma Steel and Kelly Hinnen which
elicited the conversations said to be recorded in the file notes were
made for the purpose of (or at least in contemplation of) litigation in this
proceeding. Mr Sandrey commenced employment with TK
on 27 May 2024; on 28 May
2024 MIFANT received an email from Ms Lycett terminating MIFANT’s services
with respect to her daughter
Noni; on 31 May MIFANT received three emails from
TK terminating MIFANT’s services with respect to Jason Green, Sherena
and David Grant. On that same date, Kelly Hinnen phoned Sherena Quall. A
week later, on 6 June 2024, MIFANT’s solicitors
wrote to Mr Sandrey
accusing him of breaching the restraint of trade clause in his employment
contract, asking him to give an undertaking
to cease all such activities and
threatening to institute proceedings. It would have taken at least some time to
give instructions,
obtain preliminary advice and prepare the letter. Further,
MIFANT had had recent experience with an employee leaving MIFANT and
clients with him at a cost to MIFANT approaching $200,000 and that is why the
restraint of trade clause was added to employees’
contracts in February
I infer that by 31 May
2024, the date of the file note regarding the representation by Sherena Quall,
litigation was at least in
contemplation and it seems probable that one reason
for the telephone call to Sherena Quall was to seek evidence in support of any
proceeding that might be commenced against Mr Sandrey. The situation is even
more clear cut in relation to the file note of the
telephone call to Jason Green
on 14 June 2024, a little over a week after the solicitor’s letter
threatening proceedings was
sent to Mr Sandrey. Further, on the same date, 14
June, Ms Hinnen, who is the Administration and NDIS Manager of MIFANT, wrote a
letter to Mr Godfrey’s social worker accusing Mr Sandrey (among
other things) of soliciting clients in breach of his contract
of employment.
MIFANT has not shown that the exclusion in
does not apply so that the
file notes are admissible under
[36] In written
submissions, counsel for MIFANT contended that Mr Sandrey was annoyed and
frustrated at not being allowed to take
unpaid leave and allowed or encouraged
clients and Ms Lycett to believe he had been sacked or forced to resign,
building up resentment
in them towards MIFANT. Mr Sandrey also believed
that clients who had been referred by John
were “his” clients and he was entitled to take them with him. Also,
the more clients he had, the more attractive
he would be to TK. Mr Sandrey
had many texts and calls with Ms Lycett and Mr Godfrey and it “goes
against human experience”
to suggest that neither Mr Sandrey,
Ms Lycett nor Mr Godfrey ever mentioned Mr Sandrey’s departure
from MIFANT and his new
job. The most likely explanation for these
communications is that he was soliciting his former clients. Similarly,
Mr Sandrey’s
solicitation of his former clients is a far more
believable explanation for the triple termination of Jason Green, Sherena Quall
and David Grant on the same day - 31 May 2024 – than coincidence. MIFANT
contends that Mr Sandrey deceived Mr Godfrey and
Ms Lycett into believing
he would be at TK indefinitely thus inducing them to leave MIFANT for TK to
ensure continuity of care.
Finally there appears to be an implied suggestion
that Mr Sandrey had a tendency to “poach” clients from former
as he had offered to do so for MIFANT when first employed by them,
though such a submission was not made explicit. (No tendency
notice pursuant to
was served.)
contentions are based to a large extent on speculation.
(a) There is no evidence that Mr Sandrey gave a false impression to clients that
he had been sacked or forced to resign in order
to build up resentment towards
MIFANT. The evidence of Ms Lycett and Mr Godfrey is that they gained the
impression that Mr Sandrey
had been forced to resign at a meeting at MIFANT
before the termination of Mr Sandrey’s employment at which both Mr
and Ms Emma Steel were present and (as outlined below) this impression
was not inaccurate.
(b) There is no evidence that Mr Sandrey believed clients introduced by John
Valer were “his” clients and he was entitled
to take them with him;
when that was put to Mr Sandrey he denied it and there is no other evidence to
support it.
(c) There is no evidence that Mr Sandrey deceived Mr Godfrey and Ms Lycett
into believing he would be at TK indefinitely thus inducing
them to leave MIFANT
for TK to ensure continuity of care. As outlined below, the evidence is to the
contrary; they knew he would
only be available as their support co-ordinator for
another six months whether he was at MIFANT or TK.
(d) I decline to make any finding that Mr Sandrey offered to bring clients from
his former employer to MIFANT as deposed by Ms Davies.
This allegation was not
put to Mr Sandrey in cross-examination. He independently denied the second part
of her allegation (ie that
he had shown her a “cease and desist
letter” from his former employer or ever received such a letter), and as a
self-represented
litigant he may not have thought it necessary to deny the other
part of the allegation. In any case, I would not be prepared to
evidence as tendency evidence and such a submission was not made by counsel for
[38] In oral
submissions, Dr Ford for MIFANT conceded that an exchange of SMS’s on a
social basis between a former client (or
mother of a former client) and a former
support co-ordinator who have become reasonably close to each other enquiring
health or wellbeing, which included an enquiry from the former
client about where the former support co-ordinator was working and
in what role,
answered by the former support co-ordinator, would not necessarily, by itself,
amount to a breach of the restraint
of trade clause even if followed by a
decision by the former client to switch service providers. However, he
contended that, in
this case, combined with other evidence, such communications
do support the existence of such a breach. MIFANT relies on the sheer
the text messages as being akin to grooming, cultivating a sense of intimacy and
reliance in order to induce the former
client to follow Mr Sandrey. The
additional evidence relied upon is the hearsay evidence which has been
disallowed; the evidence
that Mr Godfrey and Ms Lycett believed (falsely)
that Mr Sandrey had been forced to leave MIFANT and that he did not correct that
belief; and the evidence that Ms Lycett and Mr Godfrey made their decisions to
leave MIFANT and follow Mr Sandrey because continuity
of care was important to
them. MIFANT contends that this indicates that Mr Sandrey either lied to them
or did not correct their
misapprehension in order to induce them to leave MIFANT
on a false premise.
[39] There are a
number of problems with the additional evidence relied on and the
“grooming” theory.
(a) The evidence of both Mr Sandrey and Ms Lycett is that the volume of texts
may be misleading – both seeming to suggest that
Ms Lycett texted
briefly and repeatedly in a single session.
(b) The restraint of trade clause only restricts Mr Sandrey’s permissible
conduct in the six months
the termination of his employment. The
evidence of Mr Godfrey and Ms Lycett is that the close relationship with and
trust in Mr
Sandrey was formed well before his employment with MIFANT was
terminated. They were fulsome in their praise for Mr Sandrey’s
caring and consideration during the time he provided services to Noni and Mr
Godfrey. Similar evidence was adduced from David Grant
and Jason Green.
(i) Keith Godfrey explained that he liked having Mr Sandrey as his support
co-ordinator. He deposed:
As soon as I met Hayden, we hit it off straight away. Hayden understood that
I was trying to achieve things and he knew I was at
university and taking
control of my life.
I felt that Hayden did everything he could to help me achieve these
I had built up a relationship with Hayden built on trust. This is essential
to me. Hayden knew and understood my goals and I knew
that even though he had
other clients I never felt like I was just a number, he made me feel valued. I
had also spoken in confidence
to Hayden about personal issues that I would not
disclose to a female.
If Hayden moved from TK Community Care, I would follow him again. He has
never groomed me
but has been
the best Support Coordinator that I have ever had. Not only does he do what I
need him to do, I know that he actually
wants to do it for me and is genuinely
invested in my welfare. Hayden respects my choices and is helping me achieve my
(ii) David Grant deposed:
Hayden Sandrey was my support coordinator at MIFANT and I think he is a great
bloke, passionate about his work and he loves his clients
and his clients love
(iii) Jason Green deposed:
I was with MIFANT for several years and Hayden was my worker during that
time. Hayden is the only worker who has ever really helped
me and I believe
this is because he listens to me and delivers the service that I want and
I wanted to stay with Hayden because he gives a shit about me. Hayden is the
only person who has ever taken the time to get to know
and understand me and to
provide the level of service that I am happy with.
(iv) Elizabeth Lycett (mother of Noni)
Since Hayden took on Noni as a client she has grown and loves doing things
again. This is because Hayden understands clients with
psychosocial
disabilities.
From my observations, Hayden Sandrey has previously and continues to provide
an exceptional level of support to Noni that she is very
happy with.
(c) It is true that both Mr Godfrey and Ms Lycett believed that Mr Sandrey
was effectively compelled to leave MIFANT, but this was
not a false belief. Mr
Sandrey’s uncontradicted evidence in cross-examination was that he had to
do his final placement at
that time or lose something like 60% of the credits
from his nursing degree for which he had worked for 4 ½ years. When
was refused leave without pay to do the placement, he felt he effectively had
no choice but to resign in order to do the placement.
Both Mr Sandrey and Ms
Lycett said that in the meeting with Ms Lycett, Mr Sandrey and Emma Steel, to
tell Ms Lycett that Mr Sandrey
had resigned and would be leaving MIFANT,
Ms Lycett made the connection that he was forced to resign so that he could
placement in order to complete his degree. This meeting took place
before the termination of Mr Sandrey’s employment and not
months following. Ms Lycett said she wasn’t happy with the whole process.
However, when it was put to her that
her description of Ms Davies in an
email as “dictatorial, bullying and authoritarian” came from Mr
Sandrey, she denied
it saying: “Well, he never brought that up. It
wasn’t him that brought those conversations up.” She said the
description came from her conversations with former employees of MIFANT.
(d) Mr Godfrey said that in the similar meeting he had with Mr Sandrey and
Emma Steele, also before the termination of Mr Sandrey’s
employment,
he intuited that the resignation was forced – like a sacked football coach
who is being permitted to “resign”.
(e) Both Mr Sandrey and Ms Lycett gave evidence that she was well aware that
whether he was at MIFANT or TK, Mr Sandrey would be
leaving in order to take up
nursing approximately six months after he finished his nursing degree. The
continuity of care Ms Lycett
sought was in relation to immediate difficulties
being experienced by her daughter. In answer to the suggestion in
cross-examination
that, in that case, continuity of care was not a big factor in
her decision, Ms Lycett said:
... At that time Noni was going through a lot of changes, my daughter,
Camille. I refer to her as Noni. She was going through a
lot of changes with
medication, doctors, extreme voices being, I suppose, getting out of control and
then the changes with new drugs.
So that was happening in 2024. She then went
into Cowdy, which then she went onto a new drug. Hayden pretty much was there
the way until he finished his time in TK. We had other - other things
that had to be also dealt with as well. So Hayden pretty
much has been there
along the whole way for her journey. And I am pretty satisfied with what we
have achieved and what we have done
together as a team. I’m very grateful
for what he’s done.
(f) Mr Sandrey gave similar evidence in relation to what was important by way of
continuity in the case of Mr Godfrey. He
Well, I guess he was going for a plan review at that time, and because I had
worked with Keith for such a long period of time, there’s
a - so when you
do a plan review, you’ve got to get the OT reports, psych reports,
neuro-psych reports, doctors’ reports,
his other Dr Flavell (?) for his
acquired brain injury. He’s got his support workers. He’s got DCLS
got multiple situations occurring. He had a housing issue as
well at that time. So I think he was extremely stressed, because I
was dealing
with that as a whole and then I was no longer there. He felt, or that he
wasn’t receiving - or that they knew
what was happening. So that’s
why he was, like, “I need you to take care of this.” So then he was
that I was moving or departing in six months. In that six-month
period we got him a new plan review. We got him increased fundings
his housing issue. What else did we get - sort. There was an array of concerns
that I had managed to sort out for him
during that six-month period.
It was put to Mr Sandrey that that would have been because he had got the
funding for the support coordination, Mr Sandrey said, “No.
transitioned through from MIFANT, they had depleted his funds completely. So I
was working pro bono for two months.”
[This was after he had started
employment at TK.]
[40] So far as
the other evidence relied on by MIFANT (set out at [22] above) is
(a) I see nothing sinister in an employee writing a
polite letter of resignation, and do not infer any duplicity on Mr
part from his doing so. In any case, the sentiments expressed
in the letter of resignation are not necessarily inconsistent with
simultaneously feeling frustrated and annoyed at not being given leave without
pay to complete his nursing placement or having
negative views about
Ms Davies’ management style which he understandably refrained from
expressing in his letter of resignation.
(b) While it is clear from the wording of the letters from Jason Green, Sherena
Quall and David Grant and the fact that they were
written on TK letterhead that
although these clients signed the letters, the letters were prepared by TK, I do
not see any significance
in that for the issues in this proceeding. The letter
from Mr Godfrey was also written by someone from TK because Mr Godfrey, who
dyslexic, asked them to contact MIFANT on his
[41] Elizabeth
Lycett, Keith Godfrey, David Grant and Jason Green all gave evidence deposing
that Mr Sandrey did not solicit or encourage
them to leave MIFANT and explaining
their reasons for leaving MIFANT.
(a) Ms Lycett deposed that her daughter Noni was
unhappy with the services provided by Emma Steel for a number of reasons and
she was very happy with the service provided by Mr
(b) Keith Godfrey explained that he left MIFANT because he was not satisfied
with the service being provided by his new support co-ordinator,
Emma Steel. He
... After two months it wasn’t working out at all, I was asking about
funding for my plan and Emma gave me the wrong figures.
Because Emma had told me the wrong figures and I didn’t have the
relationship with her that I had had with Hayden, I knew it
was time to find a
new Support Coordinator. Because Ranu
[Mr Godfrey’s support worker]
was a previous employee at TK Community Care she was aware that Hayden had
moved to that company.
I then Googled TK Community Care and they have a web-based program that
responds to verbal commands. This is how I got in contact
with TK Community
Care in the first instance. TK then called me and asked where I had been
receiving supports before. I told them
I was at MIFANT and I didn’t want
to be with them anymore and didn’t want Emma to be my Support Coordinator
I asked them to contact MIFANT and tell them I wanted to cease
services because I didn’t want to do it as it would stress
TK Community Care provided me with a female Support Coordinator for a few
weeks. A short time later they offered to provide Hayden
as my Support
Coordinator. This made me feel like I was getting back on track.
At no time at all did anyone asked me to move from MIFANT to TK Community
Care, I made this choice myself as is my right, regardless
of my disability. My
ability to make choices and independence is very important to me and no one
should be allowed to take that
away from me.
(c) Mr Godfrey’s support worker, Ranu Karki also deposed to problems with
the care Mr Godfrey was receiving from Emma Steel
and the fact that she would
call Emma Steel and Ms Steel would not answer and not return her
She also deposed that
she found out Mr Sandrey had started work at TK through an email she (as a
former employee) had received from
TK and that she told Mr Godfrey about
(d) David Grant deposed:
At no time did Hayden ask me to move across to TK Community Care and I never
went to TK Community Services. The last time I saw Hayden
was when he said
goodbye to me at MIFANT and he never provided services to me again.
Hayden only ever provided services to me at MIFANT and at no other location
and I did not leave MIFANT to go to a provider where Hayden
was working. My
current provider is Care Link NT and I have been with them since I left
(e) Jason Green deposed:
When Hayden told me that he couldn’t be my support worker anymore at
MIFANT because he had been sacked, I was really upset and
annoyed. I asked him
if he was still going to be working as a support worker and if he could still
look after me. I wanted to exercise
my choice as to who I had as my support
worker. I really wanted Hayden to look after me. Hayden told me that he was
going to find
another job but when he first told me that he was leaving MIFANT
he didn’t tell me where he was going. Hayden never asked
me to leave
MIFANT and he didn’t encourage me to leave MIFANT.
I never considered staying at MIFANT after Hayden left as he is the best
worker and the best worker for me.
The fact that Hayden was leaving really pissed me off and I was going to stay
with him no matter where he went.
I understand MIFANT are accusing Hayden of asking me to leave MIFANT and
follow him. That never happened and I find that MIFANT saying
this is really
annoying and I find it insulting to me as a client as it appears they
don’t think I know what I’m doing.
They treat me like I am stupid
because of my ABI
[acquired brain injury]
and they have tried to
interfere with my choice and control over my life.
Noone else has ever asked me to leave MIFANT and I have never been approached
by anyone to encourage me to move from MIFANT to another
provider. I repeat,
this was my choice and I have that right.
[42] In summary,
the reasons given by those who gave evidence for their decision to leave MIFANT
include dissatisfaction with the
service received from Emma Steel (Ms Lycett and
Mr Godfrey) and a desire to continue to receive services from Mr Sandrey (Ms
Mr Godfrey and Mr Green).
[43] Mr Godfrey
and Mr Grant also deposed to being annoyed and upset at MIFANT treating them as
though they were unable to make decisions,
although this appears to post-date
their decision to leave MIFANT. NDIS clients have a right to choose which
service providers they
wish to use and that right to choose cannot be
constrained by any contractual arrangement between MIFANT and Mr Sandrey. The
of trade clause restricts Mr Sandrey’s freedom to solicit
former clients. It cannot restrict the former clients’ freedom
service providers whether to follow Mr Sandrey because they were happy with
the service he provided or simply to leave
MIFANT to go elsewhere because of
dissatisfaction with the services being provided by MIFANT.
[44] Both Mr
Godfrey and Mr Green’s assessment of MIFANT’s attitude to them (and
to their clients in general) is borne
out by Ms Davies’
in which she says, in
implied criticism of TK:
In my experience most, if not all, of the
participants with psychosocial disabilities are very susceptible to suggestion
and potential
manipulation. Accepting participants as clients who are following
an employee from another service provider runs the risk of facilitating
benefiting from the influence by that employee. Participants’ choice and
control in and of their lives is important but
it is open to be abused where
participants have psychosocial disabilities.
attitude to clients is also reflected in the email from Kelly Hinnen to
Mr Godfrey’s social worker, Danielle Domjan
on 14 June 2024. This is
worth quoting in full, not only to illustrate the attitude to clients it
displays, but also because it
shows a readiness to make serious allegations
against Mr Sandrey without a basis in evidence, and to tell what would
appear to be
untruths in the process. Ms Hinnen
With reference to your email today 14
June 2024 regarding Keith
Recently, our former Recovery Coach/ Support Coordinator Hayden Sandrey
ceased employment with us and has taken up employment at TK
Community Care
Services. Since his cessation of employment, he has contacted a number of
MIFANT clients and induced them to cease
supports with us to take up supports
with him at TK Community Care Services. He often uses a third party (sometimes
unwittingly)
such as yourself to make the request as he is still bound by
contractual obligations (confidentiality of client contact details)
that persist
after his MIFANT employment contract ended. Often third parties are contacted
by his colleague Brooke Scott or Supervisor
Danielle Toop.
We have serious concerns about Mr Sandrey’s motives in respect to his
actions and feel that clients are being groomed to follow
him to another
company. We have since contacted a number of clients (some of who pre-dated Mr
Sandrey’s employment at MIFANT)
for whom we have received “cease of
service” letters from TK Community Care Services and they have expressed
though they had signed the letter they had no idea that their services
were being moved to another company and nothing had been explained
When it was explained to them they would no longer receive services from MIFANT,
they chose to stay with us.
Mental Illness Fellowship NT is a small charity that has over 30 years of
providing support to those who are experiencing mental health
consequently still only specialise in providing mental health support including
for our NDIS services. We are still very
grass roots and continue to have a
founding member on the Board who, as a mother of a son with schizophrenia, her
sole purpose is
to improve the lives of people living with a mental illness. It
is therefore very concerning that Mr Sandrey is coercing vulnerable
leave our organisation for his own benefit to join a for profit company whose
main focus is SIL for all disabilities.
Mr Godfrey has “chosen” to cease services and all communication
with us immediately without any reason for leaving, however
basing it on choice
and control. We suggest that he has been coerced by Mr Sandrey not to have any
clients (who Mr Sandrey has induced) have revoked
their request to cease services once they realised that they were moving to TK
Community Care Services and no longer receiving their services from MIFANT.
We believe that the inducement of vulnerable people to make decisions
undermines their autonomy and can lead to serious negative consequences,
is why we are writing to you with regard to Keith Godfrey.
In order to ensure that Mr Godfrey was aware of his choices, we would
appreciate understanding why Mr Godfrey wants to cease services
and why he does
not want any communication with us going forward.
I look forward to hearing from you.
Kind regards
Kelly Hinnen
Administration & NDIS Manager
[46] In this
letter Ms Hinnen accuses Mr Sandrey of:
number of MIFANT clients and inducing them to cease supports with MIFANT to take
up supports with him at TK Community
Care Services;
using third
parties to make the request;
using Brooke
Scott or Danielle Toop to contact the third parties;
grooming clients
to follow him to another company;
vulnerable people to leave MIFANT for his own benefit;
coercing Mr
Godfrey not to have any contact with MIFANT; and
at the very
least being complicit with TK getting clients to sign letters ceasing services
with MIFANT without telling them what was
Given the nature of this litigation, if MIFANT
had any admissible evidence of these things, they would have adduced that
in this proceeding. They have not. Rather they rely on inference and
an assumption that because clients have left MIFANT and most
of them have gone
to TK, Mr Sandrey must have groomed them, induced or coerced them to do
[47] The letter
also contains a representation that other clients (plural) who Mr Sandrey
had induced to leave MIFANT had revoked
their request to cease services once
they realised they were moving to TK and no longer receiving their services from
MIFANT. The
only evidence MIFANT has adduced of anything like this is in the
affidavit of Emma Steel dated 9 August 2024 in which she deposes
meeting with Mr Grant referred to at [24] above and which Mr Grant strongly
disputes as set out at [25] above. No evidence
was adduced of any other client
revoking their request to leave MIFANT.
[48] I am not
prepared to infer that any of the seven clients who left MIFANT did so as a
result of any solicitation by Mr Sandrey.
Four of the seven have sworn
affidavits and given oral evidence in this proceeding, all of whom deny that Mr
Sandrey solicited or
enticed them to leave MIFANT and follow him to TK. They
gave oral evidence to similar effect which was not challenged in
cross-examination.
MIFANT has adduced no admissible evidence to suggest that Mr
Sandrey solicited the other three and the summary of Mr Sandrey’s
telephone records relied on by MIFANT does not show any telephone contact,
either voice calls or texts, with any of the clients other
than Mr Godfrey and
[49] MIFANT also
seeks a declaration that Mr Sandrey misused confidential information belonging
[50] MIFANT
claims that Mr Sandrey breached
Corporations Act
(Cth) by gaining an advantage for himself or someone else
(presumably TK) by improperly using information he obtained as an employee
MIFANT also claims that
Mr Sandrey breached his equitable duty of confidence not to use MIFANT’s
confidential information
or proprietary information for his or another’s
benefit or to MIFANT’s
MIFANT claims that
the following information was MIFANT’s confidential or proprietary
information.
(a) the name, address and contact details of MIFANT’s clients;
(b) the services MIFANT provided to its clients;
(c) the fees MIFANT charged its clients;
(d) MIFANT’s goodwill including its client connection with “the
terminators” (ie the clients who left MIFANT);
(e) the service providers to whom MIFANT referred its clients and the services
and costs of those service providers;
(f) the assessment by MIFANT and its clients of MIFANT’s performance of
its services to its clients;
(g) MIFANT’s internal staffing and cost structure; and
(h) MIFANT’s internal policies and procedures.
[51] Despite the
wide pleading of what amounts to “confidential information”, the
only breaches particularised are:
(a) that Mr Sandrey made a statutory declaration on 26 April 2024 in which he
declared that he did not have in his possession any
hard or digital copy of
MIFANT’s confidential information when he knew that to be
(b) that he canvassed, solicited or induced clients to terminate MIFANT’s
NDIS services to them and have those services performed
[52] I have
already found that MIFANT has not proved that Mr Sandrey canvassed,
solicited or induced clients to leave MIFANT and go
[53] As to the
alleged breach by signing a false statutory declaration, the wording of that
Statutory Declaration was clearly produced
by MIFANT. During an exchange
between counsel for MIFANT and the bench, counsel conceded that it was possible
that Mr Sandrey did
not know that telephone numbers he had on his phone were
“digital copies of confidential information”. In any event,
not been explained how signing a statutory declaration that was untrue
constituted a misuse of confidential information.
[54] I decline
to make a finding that Mr Sandrey breached
Corporations Act
or his equitable duty to MIFANT by misusing confidential information to benefit
himself or TK or to the detriment of MIFANT.
(a) MIFANT has not established that he solicited any of the clients who left
(b) Making a statutory declaration, even if it was knowingly false (which has
not been established) does not amount to a misuse of
confidential
information.
(c) MIFANT has not pleaded that the mere use of the telephone numbers of
Ms Lycett and Mr Godfrey amounted to a misuse of confidential
information
to benefit Mr Sandrey or TK and in any case the evidence is that the telephone
communications between Mr Sandrey and
these two clients were most likely
initiated by Ms Lycett and Mr Godfrey.
defendant has pleaded that the restraint of trade clause is unenforceable.
Given my finding that MIFANT has not proved that
Mr Sandrey breached that
clause, it is unnecessary for me to make a finding on that issue. If it were
necessary for me to make a
finding on that issue, I would have found the clause
enforceable.
(a) The restraint imposed on Mr Sandrey was for six months only after the
termination of his employment.
(b) It does not purport to prevent Mr Sandrey from earning a living. He was
free to obtain employment from TK or any other employer;
the restraint clause
only prevented him from soliciting former clients with whom he had had a
relationship within the previous 12
(c) It does not have a defined geographical
limitation. Nevertheless, given the nature of the business being conducted by
and the limited nature of the restriction, I do not consider the clause
goes beyond what is reasonable to protect the good will of
MIFANT in the
circumstances.
[56] As I have
found that MIFANT has not proved that Mr Sandrey breached the restraint of trade
clause, or that he has misused MIFANT’s
confidential information, there
will be judgment for the defendant.
[57] ORDERS:
(1) Judgment for the defendant.
(2) The plaintiff is to pay the defendant’s costs of and incidental to the
proceeding to be agreed or taxed.
Affidavit of Lorraine Davies dated
9 August 2024 para [18]
Affidavit of Keith Godfrey dated
16 October 2024 [2] and [14]
Affidavit of Lorraine Theresa
Davies dated 27 June 2025 annexure “LTD-30”
Affidavit of Lorraine Theresa
Davies dated 27 June 2025 annexure “LTD-31”
A nominee has unrestricted
access to a client’s information, including their NDIS plan and an
advocate may have access if granted
by the client.
The email from Ms Lycett is
dated 28 May, but the body of the email reads, “As of today, Tuesday
June I am terminating services with MIFANT for Camellia
Mr Godfrey said that when he
was looking for support co-ordination services, he had the number in my phone of
people who used to
work at Darwin Legal Community, who helped him in the past.
One was Hayden’s mother. He called her. She said, “Well,
don’t you get my son.” ... “He works at MIFANT.” And
he went, “Oh, I think - that’s around
the corner from me.
Okay.” As simple as that. And then he went to MIFANT and that’s
how he got Hayden.
Affidavit of Lorraine Davies dated 9 August
2024 para [41] Annexure “LTD-22”
Affidavit of Lorraine Davies
dated 9 August 2024 para [42]
Affidavit of Lorraine Davies
dated 9 August 2024 para [45]
This is the term used to
describe the seven people said to have been solicited by Mr Sandrey.
The affidavit of Lorraine
Davies dated 19 June 2024 also contains hearsay evidence that Jason Green,
Sherena Quall and David Grant
told staff members either that they did not want
to leave MIFANT or that Mr Sandrey had contacted them. I declined to admit that
hearsay evidence.
Affidavit of David Ian Grant
dated 16 October 2024 at [6]
Affidavit of Lorraine Davies
dated 9 August 2024 para [54]
Affidavit of Keith Daniel
Godfrey dated 16 October 2024
The reference to
“grooming” comes from a letter written by Ms Kelly Hinnen of MIFANT
to Mr Godfrey’s social worker,
Danielle Domjam. This is discussed at [45]
Affidavit of David Ian Grant
dated 16 October 2024
Affidavit of Jason Bannister
Green dated 16 October 2024
Affidavit of Elizabeth Lycett
dated 19 September 2024
Transcript dated 1 July 2025 p
Transcript dated 30 June 2025 p
Emma Steel gave evidence that
she was not returning Mr Godfrey’s calls or those of his support worker
because he had exhausted
his funding and she was concerned that his support
worker might not get paid.
Affidavit of Keith Daniel
Godfrey dated 16 October 2024
Affidavit of Elizabeth Lycett
dated 19 September 2024
Affidavit of Keith Daniel
Godfrey dated 16 October 2024]
Ms Steel did not dispute this.
See footnote 28 above.
Affidavit of Ranu Karki dated
16 October 2024
Affidavit of David Ian Grant
dated 16 October 2024
Affidavit of Jason Bannister
Green dated 16 October 2024
Affidavit of Lorraine Davies
dated 9 August 2024 para [17]
Amended Statement of Claim para
Amended Statement of Claim para [10]
Amended Statement of Claim para
Amended Statement of Claim para
Amended Statement of Claim para
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (394 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter