URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTSC/2025/55.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:22:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Dunn v. Yeperenye Pty. Limited & Anor [2025] NTSC 55 (18 August 2025)
Dunn v Yeperenye Pty. Limited & Anor
[2025] NTSC 55
PARTIES: DUNN, Jacinta Sheila
YEPERENYE PTY. LIMITED
TALICE SECURITY SERVICE PTY LIMITED
TITLE OF COURT: SUPREME COURT OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: 2024-01152-SC
DELIVERED: 18 August 2025
HEARING DATE: 15 April 2025
JUDGMENT OF: Smyth A/AsJ
CATCHWORDS:
Pleadings – Order for Further and Better Particulars – Principles
which apply – Pleading alleges breach of duty
of care in respect to
inspection and removal of hazards – alleged that the defendant failed to
have in place a system that
allowed for the timely observation and/or removal of
a hazards - whether further and better particulars required in the
circumstances
Supreme Court Rules 1987
Rules 13.10
Mac-Attack Equipment Hire Pty Ltd v AJ Lucas Operations Pty Ltd
Rosebridge Nominees Pty Ltd v Commonwealth Bank of Australia (No
[2014] WASC 76
Strong v Woolworths Ltd
[2012] HCA 5
(2012) 246 CLR 182
Wallace v Kam
[2013] HCA 19
(2013) 250 CLR 375
Buljat v Coles Supermarkets
Australia Pty Ltd
[2022] ACTCA 71
Mosman Park v Tait
[2005] WASCA
Arabi v Glad Cleaning Service Pty Limited
[2010] NSWCA 208
Arthur Young & Anor v Tieco International and Ors
(1995) 182 LSJS
Di Ciano v ANZ Banking Group [No. 2]
[2025] WASC 80
REPRESENTATION:
Plaintiff: C O’Connor SC
First Defendant: D Blyth
Second Defendant: No appearance
Solicitors:
Plaintiff: Ward Keller
First Defendant: Barry Nilsson Lawyers
Judgment category classification: B
Judgment ID Number: Smy2508
Number of pages: 19
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
AT ALICE SPRINGS
Dunn v Yeperenye Pty. Limited & Anor
[2025] NTSC
No. 2024-01152-SC
JACINTA SHEILA DUNN
YEPERNYE PTY. LIMITED
First Defendant
TALICE SECURITY SERVICE PTY LIMITED
Second Defendant
CORAM: SMYTH A/AsJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 18 August 2025)
[1] The First
Defendant makes application for further and better particulars in respect to
paragraph [21(a)] of the Amended Statement
of Claim (ASOC) filed 5 December
2024. The application is supported by the affidavits of Patricia Sicapore made
9 January 2025 (First
Sicapore Affidavit) and 3 March 2025 (Second Sicapore
Affidavit) respectively, which are taken as read.
[2] Paragraph
[21(a)] of the ASOC, in the context of giving particulars of the negligence of
the First Defendant, provides:
first defendant breached its duty of care:
(a) Having invited the plaintiff into the Centre failed to have in place a
cleaning system that allowed for the timely observation
and/or removal of and/or
warning of the danger of hazards in the Food Court.
Background to the Proceeding
[3] Proceedings
were commenced by Writ endorsed with a Statement of Claim. The First Defendant
filed its Defence on 8 May 2024.
On 21 November 2024 by Court order the Second
Defendant was joined to the proceeding and leave was granted to the Plaintiff to
and serve an Amended Writ and ASOC. By Amended Writ and ASOC filed on 5
December 2024 the substantive action seeks damages for personal
injury allegedly
suffered by the Plaintiff as a result of a slip and fall incident at the
Yeperenye Shopping Centre (the Centre),
which was owned and occupied by the
First Defendant. An Amended Defence in response to the ASOC has not been filed
pending this
application with the First Defendant claiming it cannot do so until
further and better particulars are provided. However, in its
Defence, filed 8
May 2024, the First Defendant admits that it owed the Plaintiff a duty of care
but denies breaching its duty. By
in interlocutory application filed 9 January
2025 the First Defendant seeks an order for further and better particulars in
to paragraph [21(a)] of the ASOC.
evidentiary basis upon which this application is made is not in dispute and can
be summarised as follows:
Defendant was the owner and operator of the Centre;
The Plaintiff
alleges attending the Centre on 9 April 2021 when she slipped on ice cream
whilst traversing the food court area;
The ASOC does
not specifically plead how long the ice cream was present on the
CCTV evidence
supports that the ice cream was present on the floor for approximately 7 minutes
before the Plaintiff slipped on
An expert report
commissioned by the Plaintiff criticises the First Defendant’s failure to
have a full time cleaner in the
Defendant’s Submissions
[5] The First
Defendant takes issue with paragraph [21(a)] of the ASOC and in particular in
respect to the inclusion of the word “timely”
on the basis it is
impermissibly vague and embarrassing. The First Defendant claims that, in the
absence of clear and proper articulation,
namely a quantitative or qualitative
reference point, the First Defendant (and ultimately the Court) cannot make any
determination
of: (1) the reasonableness of the system that was alleged to have
been required nor (2) whether the absence of such a system (if
proved) made any
difference to the outcome.
[6] The First
Defendant does not contest the proposition that reasonable care required it, as
the occupier of the Centre, to have
a reasonable system of cleaning and
inspection. The question is, the First Defendant says, what was reasonable, or
in the words
of the pleading, what was “timely”? The First
Defendant submits that to succeed at trial the Plaintiff must both plead
prove the frequency of the system of inspection that is alleged to have been
required. Additionally, it is submitted that the
Plaintiff must, in addition to
the breach, prove that if the allegedly reasonable system had been in place the
Plaintiff would not
have slipped on the ice cream. The First Defendant says
that such a determination cannot be made without a qualitative or quantitative
reference point (ie. a period over which inspection was reasonably required)
from which to consider whether the First Defendant acted
reasonably. The First
Defendant claims that a failure to do so infringes pleading rules in respect to
a claim being pleaded with
sufficient particularity to inform the other party of
the case it is required to meet. The First Defendant submits that the
Plaintiff’s
failure to articulate the frequency with which reasonable care
demanded that the First Defendant inspect and/or clean the floor has
that the First Defendant cannot understand the case that is brought against it.
Further the First Defendant says that
it is also unable to narrow the issues in
the dispute and potentially make admissions that could substantially reduce the
issues. Further, it is submitted that the Court would not, on the
currently pleaded case, be able to make any meaningful determination
central issues, namely how often the First Defendant should have inspected
and/or cleaned the floors, and whether any alleged
failure to do so made any
difference to the outcome. The First Defendant submits that the Plaintiff
should be required to tell it
(and the Court) in advance of the trial, what
frequency of cleaning and inspection is alleged to have been required as a
reasonable care. In short, the Plaintiff should be ordered to provide
further and better particulars of paragraph [21(a)] of the
ASOC, failing which
the paragraph should be struck out.
Plaintiff’s
Submissions
[7] In response,
the Plaintiff submits that the Statement of Claim, before amendment, plead at
paragraph [13(a)] precisely the same
thing in respect to the failure of the
First Defendant to have in place a cleaning system that allowed for the timely
observation
and/or removal of and/or warning of the danger of hazards in the
Food Court. At paragraph [13] of its Defence, the First Defendant,
in denial of
the breach of duty, pleaded: (b) the cleaning services allowed for a timely
deduction and/or removal of any hazards
on the Food Court floor, including
spills; (c) in providing the cleaning services, Alice Springs Cleaning Services
was obliged to
clean any spills immediately upon detection of the spill within
its rotations of the area...; (e) in any event, it is unrealistic
unreasonable to expect that the First Defendant and/or Alice Springs Cleaning
Services and/or the Second Defendant identify,
cordon off and clean a spill
within a 7 minute time frame. The Plaintiff says that in its May 2024 Defence
the First Defendant pleaded
to what was timely and sees no reason why it cannot
[8] It is the
Plaintiff’s submission that where there is an admitted duty of care to
persons using the premises of the First
Defendant, it is for a Court to
determine if the delay between the spill and the slipping was acceptable. The
Plaintiff says that
to require a plaintiff to plead the number of minutes and/or
seconds required for inspection/cleaning in order to satisfy the duty
a matter for evidence and not for particulars, and that the First
Defendant’s complaint ignores the rest of the
pleading and the expert
evidence the First Defendant has been served
Further, the Plaintiff says
all parties have the CCTV vision of the incident, all parties know when and how
the hazard came to be
on the floor of the Centre, where on the floor the hazard
was in relation to the through traffic in the area, and the amount of time
passed before the Plaintiff slipped on the hazard. The Plaintiff says it does
not understand how the First Defendant cannot
now answer the claim in relation
to the allegation when it knows how long the ice cream was on the floor, where
it was and can see
its staff nearby. The Plaintiff submits that the word
‘timely’, as pleaded, means its plain meaning – is a time
before the expiration of 7 minutes.
Plaintiff submits that the matters complained of by the First Defendant are not
matters which should be pleaded but matters
for evidence. Further, it is
submitted that in respect to slip cases the Courts have reiterated that the time
required to deal with
a hazard will depend on the facts of the particular case.
The Plaintiff states that there is nothing preventing the First Defendant
pleading that less than 7 minutes was an unreasonable time to have removed the
hazard. That of course is disputed by the Plaintiff
in its proposed expert
evidence. Further, the Plaintiff disputes that she will be required to plead
and prove the frequency of the
system of inspection that she alleges should have
applied. The Plaintiff says that all she will need to plead, as she had done,
is that there was a hazard, the hazard was not removed when it should have been
and she was injured as a result of that failure.
Why the hazard was not removed
are all matters for the Defendants at trial. The Plaintiff submits that she
does not need to plead
what was required in terms of inspection, but rather what
reasonable steps could have prevented the injury.
Particulars
[10] Supreme
Order for particulars
(1) The Court may order a party to serve on another party particulars or
further and better particulars of a fact or matter stated
in the party's
pleading or in an affidavit filed on his behalf ordered to stand as a
(2) The Court shall not make an order under subrule (1) before service of
the defence, unless the order is necessary or desirable
to enable the defendant
to plead or for some other special reason.
(3) The Court may refuse to make an order under subrule (1) if the party
applying for the order did not first apply by letter for
the particulars he
[11] The general
principles applicable to determination of a request for the Court to order
further and better particulars was set
out by Luppino M (as he was) in
Mac-Attack Equipment Hire Pty Ltd v AJ Lucas Operations Pty Ltd
(footnotes omitted):
purpose of pleadings is to define with clarity the issues which are in dispute
and to require each party to give fair and proper
notice to the other of the
case to be met.
Northern Territory of Australia v John Holland Pty Ltd
Particulars
define the issues to be tried and enable the parties to know what evidence it
will be necessary to have available at trial.
See Order 13.10(2) of
the Rules and
Bailey & Ors v The Commissioner of Taxation
Particulars
are required to ensure that litigation is conducted fairly, openly and without
surprises and incidentally to reduce costs.
See Order 13.10(2) of the Rules
Astrovlanis Compania Naviera SA v Linard
Corning Australia Pty Ltd v Girys
the generality of a pleading of a material fact may not sufficiently inform the
other side of the case to be met, particulars are
designed to limit that
generality.
Dow Corning Australia Pty Ltd v Girys
and particulars enable the relevance and admissibility of evidence to be
determined at the trial.
Dare v Pulham
and particulars are not intended to disclose the manner by which the case is to
R v The Associated Northern Collieries & Ors
Defendant is entitled to particulars of the damages claimed notwithstanding that
Order 13.12(4) of the Rules deems that allegations
of loss and damage are
denied. A claimant must particularise any items capable of substantially exact
calculation. Particulars must
give the other side access to the facts which make
such calculations possible and thus show the party the case they have to meet
and so that any necessary expert evidence can be obtained.
sufficiency of pleadings is something which can vary from case to
Dare v Pulham
approving of
Perestrello v United Paint
. Hence whether to order particulars and the extent of the order for
particulars is a matter for the Court’s discretion.
Ors v The Commissioner of Taxation
[12] And as in
Mac Attack,
relevant also is Rule 13.10 which provides:
Particulars of pleading
(1) A pleading shall contain the necessary particulars of a fact or matter
(2) Without limiting subrule (1), particulars shall be given if they are
necessary to enable the opposite party to plead or to define
the questions for
trial or to avoid surprise at the trial.
(3)-(6) Omitted
[13] As a rule,
particulars will not be ordered before service of a defence unless the
particulars are necessary or desirable to enable
the defendant to plead or for
some other special reason.
ordinary case, the convenient course for the defendant is to serve a defence
denying the allegations of which particulars
are sought and apply for the
particulars afterwards.
[14] There are
multitude of authorities, consistent with
, relating to what is
referred to as the “cards on the table” approach to litigation, such
Rosebridge Nominees Pty Ltd v Commonwealth Bank of Australia (No
where Le Miere J
The rules and
practice of this court do not permit trial by ambush. The plaintiff must lay its
cards on the table so that all the
true issues are identified and can be fairly
tried in due course. The degree of precision required in a pleading, or
particulars,
will depend upon the particular case. In some cases the delivery of
witness statements may obviate the need for greater particularity
in a pleading.
In other cases a fair trial will require greater clarity, precision and openness
in the pleading and particularising
of a party's case. In this case it is
necessary so that the defendants may know whether and how they are able to
resist the plaintiff's
damages case. Unless the defendants know how the
plaintiff puts its case they will not be able to put on lay or expert evidence
response and will not know how to cross‑examine the plaintiff's
witnesses. Furthermore, the court will not be able to assess
the relevance, and
hence admissibility, of evidence, including expert evidence, adduced by the
background to the request for particulars is set out in the First and Second
affidavits of Ms Sicapore, the First Defendant’s
solicitor, which can be
summarised as follows:
(a) On 21 November 2024 Ms Sicapore wrote to the Plaintiff’s solicitor
seeking further and better particulars, in respect to
paragraph 13(a) of the
Statement of Claim (which was prior to the filing of the ASOC but in the same
terms as 21(a) of the ASOC which
subsequently followed). The request relevantly
stated “Please provide particulars of the vague expression ‘timely
observation’”.
In a response dated 3 December 2024, the First
Defendant’s solicitors responded “we cannot ascertain the utility in
providing further explanation for the word “timely” as it appears in
the plaintiff’s pleadings.”
(b) By email of 5 December 2024 the First Defendant’s solicitors repeated
the request for further and better particulars and
stated “As a matter of
fairness, proper particulars of paragraph 13(a) should be provided addressing
precisely what timeframe
your client asserts, as a matter of reasonable care,
our client’s system of inspection should have instituted.”
(c) By letter of 3 February 2025 the Plaintiff responded seeking clarity as to
whether the request related to ‘timely observations’
‘timely removal’. In any event, the Plaintiff refused to provide
any further and better particulars on the basis
the Plaintiff need not provide a
time period and/or frequency for inspection, the particulars were not
controversial, the use of
the word “timely” did not cause confusion
and whether the First Defendant had in place a system which was timely in
observation
and/or removal to hazards in the Food Court was a matter for the
finder of fact. The correspondence noted “And in any event,
reasonable to expect that a proper system of cleaning would have operated to
observe and remove a spilt substance within a
few minutes”.
(d) On 6 February 2025, the First Defendant responded re-iterating, as it has in
this application, that without any quantitative
or qualitative reference, the
use of the word ‘timely’ is impermissible and stated “Our
client is entitled to know
the case it is expected to meet, and regardless, the
court cannot determine the issue unless your client expressly pleads the precise
system that she alleges, as a matter of reasonable care, should have been in
place. In the absence of particulars our client cannot
prepare its case. It
might, for example, be the case that your client pleads the area should have
been inspected every hour. Alternatively,
it might be the case that your client
pleads the area should have been inspected every five minutes.”
Disposition
[16] The issues
in the case for determination by the Court will be the same as in many other
slip and trip cases including:
(1) What duty of care was owed by the First Defendant to the Plaintiff?
(2) What is the risk of harm against which it is alleged the First Defendant
ought to have taken reasonable precautions?
(3) What are the reasonable precautions the First Defendant ought to have taken
to address the risk of harm caused by items being
dropped on the floor?
(4) Whether the First Defendant failed to take any or all of the reasonable
precautions found;
(5) If the First Defendant failed to take any or all of those reasonable
precautions, whether that failure caused the injury suffered
by the Plaintiff;
[17] This matter
can be distilled to the following proposition – do the pleadings rules
require the Plaintiff to provide further
and better particulars in respect to
the offending pleading? The offending part of the pleading being particulars of
of the First Defendant’s duty of care, in particular that, in
respect to its duty of care posed to those entering the Food
Court, whether it
breached that duty by failing to have in place a cleaning system that allowed
for timely observation of risks and
the removal of risks.
[18] The use of
the word “timely” qualifying “observation” has naturally
invited the First Defendant to request
the Plaintiff to tell it what is meant by
“timely”. That is, what system the Plaintiff says the First
Defendant should
have had in place and in particular what times inspections
should have taken place by reference to some reasonable standard. No doubt
will be evidence from the First Defendant as to what system of cleaning it
actually employed, and the First Defendant does
not need to await clarification
from the Plaintiff in that regard, as it will be a matter of fact as to what
system it in fact used.
The question will be though whether that system
satisfied the standard required of the duty of care and if not, in terms of
what would have and whether the Plaintiff would have suffered harm in
any event. As understood, the First Defendant will address
the practicalities
of other aspects of possible inspection regimes with reference to matters such
as the expense, difficulty and
inconvenience of such regimes. It cannot do so,
it says, without knowing what the Plaintiff means by timely.
Plaintiff says what is “timely” is to be determined at trial on the
evidence according to what is found by the
Court to be reasonable measures
employed in respect to the risk. That determination will be made by the Court
on evidence and according
to application of relevant legal principles. The
First Defendant in turn says that before the matter even gets to trial it is at
a disadvantage as it does not know the extent of what inspection it was required
to carry out, and that it should be informed of
that before trial, so that it
can prepare its case. The First Defendant says it should not be left to predict
what will be put at
trial and taken by surprise. The First Defendant says that
if the Plaintiff intends alleging that a reasonable system of inspection
required, it should properly particularise it and not leave it to a vague term
such as “timely”. The First Defendant
says it requires as a matter
of fairness, as does the Court in order to perform its function, a reference
point as to how often the
floor should have been inspected.
[20] Although
not ideal, sometimes particulars are somewhat imprecise and the case to be met
becomes apparent upon filing of evidence
or expert reports. As stated above in
Rosebridge Nominees Pty Ltd v Commonwealth Bank of Australia (No 5)
“In some cases the delivery of witness statements may obviate the need for
greater particularity in a pleading. In other cases,
a fair trial will require
greater clarity, precision and openness in the pleading and particularising of a
party's case”.
In this case it is the First Defendant’s evidence,
notwithstanding a request for further particulars, that the Plaintiff’s
expert report does not assist in clarifying the issue of what system was
required in respect to timeliness of inspections. Nor is
it ideal that some
‘slip and trip’ cases have proceeded without particulars of the
precise quantitative or qualitative
reference being pleaded.
difference in this case between others such as
Strong v Woolworths
where the Court was
required to determine how long the offending chip had been on the ground, is
that there is definitive CCTV evidence
which indicates the precise time at which
the ice cream spill occurred and the time of the Plaintiff’s slip, a time
of approximately 7 minutes.
submissions counsel for the Plaintiff said this:
“So the issue
really for the plaintiff is that she pleads that it was unreasonable to not have
had in place an inspection that
covered a seven-minute period. She
doesn’t need to plead what would have happened. She’s pleading that
seven minutes
is unreasonable. So she’s saying “timely”.
Everyone knows that the timeliness that she complains of is the seven
Because all the parties have access to the video”.
[23] Given the
above, it would seem to be the Plaintiff’s case that a reasonable
inspection period of the area in question would
have comprised an inspection
period of something less than 7 minutes. That would appear to be supported by
the Plaintiff’s
solicitor’s statement in correspondence, referred to
above, that is: “it was reasonable to expect that a proper system
cleaning would have operated to observe and remove a spilt substance within a
few minutes”. Further, the Plaintiff’s
expert report states (at
para 7.34) “there should have been a cleaner continuously conducting
dedicated inspections of the
floor for slip hazards in my
Plaintiff has the legal onus of proving on the balance of probabilities any fact
relevant to the issue of causation in the
proceedings.
Buljat v Coles Supermarkets Australia Pty
order to succeed on liability, the appellant was required to establish that the
precautions which a reasonable person in
the respondent’s position would
have taken would have resulted in the grape being detected and hence the slip
not occurring.”
[25] As noted
the principles relating to pleadings are well
established, and the sufficiency of pleadings will vary from case to case. I am
of the authorities referred to by the Plaintiff that pleadings are not
an end to themselves but instead are a means to the ultimate
attainment of
justice between parties to the
and that pleadings
themselves must not become a
Arthur Young
, Lander J in the circumstances of the pleadings in the case
against Arthur Young
, held that
“the plaintiffs must be able to give particulars of what would have been
appropriate action and particulars of what
was done, which would show the
inappropriateness of the action” and the failure to do so was embarrassing
and lacking in such
particularity such that the pleading could not stand.
Further, Lander J held that recourse to expert reports, as held at first
would not cure the deficiency in the pleadings, any reports only
amplifying the pleadings and preventing Arthur Young from properly
instructing
its experts on what it was that they had not properly done. Similarly in
Ciano v ANZ Banking Group [No. 2]
the Court determined that a pleading which
was expressed in terms of a lack of any details in relation to the phrase
measures” was defective on the basis that it was not
sufficiently clear for it to be fairly
[27] On the
basis of the above, whilst there is no doubt it will be up to the Court to
determine what a reasonable person would do
by way of response to a reasonably
foreseeable risk, and if the First Defendant’s conduct fell short, whether
that response
would have prevented the Plaintiff’s injury, the Plaintiff
has chosen to plead paragraph [21(a)] of the ASOC in a particular
qualification of any observations with the word “timely”. The First
Defendant says that it cannot properly
respond to the Plaintiff’s case
without knowing what “timely” means by reference to some qualitative
and quantitative
framework, and that it should not be left to some point at
trial before it knows. I agree. To require further particulars would
burden on the First Defendant. If the Plaintiff alleges that the First
Defendant should have had in place a cleaning
system that allowed for
observation and removal of hazards in respect to a certain time period (whether
that be continuously, every
3 minutes, 5 minutes or more), then it should tell
the First Defendant that, so that the First Defendant can properly respond by
way of preparing its case. In my opinion, further and better particulars should
be provided by the Plaintiff to the First Defendant
in respect to what is a
“timely observation” as provided in paragraph [21(a)] of the
[28] In respect
to costs, I see no reason why the ordinary rule, pursuant to Rule 63.18, should
not apply. However, if any party
seeks an order for their costs they may file
written submissions within two weeks of the delivery of these reasons, and any
application will be dealt with on the papers.
[29] I therefore
make the following orders:
(1) Within 14 days of the date of the delivery of these reasons, the Plaintiff
is to provide further better and particulars in relation
to paragraph 21(a) of
the Amended Statement of Claim, filed 5 December 2024.
(2) Subject to any application for costs made by a party, to be determined,
costs will be costs in the proceeding in accordance
with Rule 63.18 of
Supreme Court Rules 1987
-------------------------------------
The allegation is put as
“shortly before the plaintiff approached the food court ice cream... had
been dropped on to the tiled
First Sicapore Affidavit at
paragraph [13].
Second Sicapore Affidavit,
annexure PS3, at page 44.
Report of Dorhmann Consulting
dated 3 May 2024 which is at annexure PS3 of the Second Sicapore Affidavit.
[2011] NTSC 01
Rule 3.11(2).
[2014] WASC 76
[2012] HCA 5
(2012) 246 CLR 182.
Report of Dorhmann Consulting
dated 3 May 2024, at paragraph [7.34].
Strong v Woolworths
[2012] HCA 5
(2012) 246 CLR 182
Wallace v Kam
[2013] HCA 19
(2013) 250 CLR 375
- [19]). Notwithstanding those cases relate to interpretation of the
Civil Liability Act 2002
(NSW), the concepts in respect to onus are not
[2022] ACTCA 71
Also see Town of
Mosman Park
[2005] WASCA 124
: “The respondent was required to
identify with precision what a reasonable person would do, either by reference
to industry
standards or practice and the financial or other impacts of the
proposed system”. See also
Arabi v Glad Cleaning Service Pty
[2010] NSWCA 208
: “On the assumption that the
appellant could establish that the respondents had breached the duty they owed
to him, it was
necessary for him to prove that the breach caused his injuries.
To do this, the appellant had to prove, on the balance of probabilities,
proper system (on the appellant’s argument, a system requiring inspections
every ten minutes) would have avoided his
Di Ciano v ANZ Banking Group
[2025] WASC 80.
Arthur Young & Anor v
Tieco International and Ors
(1995) 182 LSJS 367
Which was not a slip and fall
case but was in respect to the adequacy of pleadings which were to the effect
that Arthur Young did
not so something or in the alternative if they did, they
did not do it properly.
[2025] WASC 80.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (201 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter