URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCAT/2024/22.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:17:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ladd v Mudford, Swift [2024] NTCAT 22 (27 December 2024)
Ladd v Mudford; Swift
DECISION NUMBER:
[2024] NTCAT 22
NOELLENE LADD
YVONNE MUDFORD
1ST RESPONDENT
LEIGH SWIFT
2ND RESPONDENT
MATTER TYPE:
Original Jurisdiction -
Burial and Cremation Act 2022
2024-02477-CT
HEARING DATE:
18 DECEMBER 2024
DECISION OF:
MARK O'REILLY
DATE OF ORDERS:
27 DECEMBER 2024
APPEARANCES and REPRESENTATION (if any):
LYMA NGUYEN AND ALYSON PENNY
RESPONDENT:
REASONS FOR DECISION:
Applicant in this proceeding is the biological mother of Kumantjayi Club who
died on 21 February 2024.
Respondents are a couple who exercised parental responsibility for Kumantjayi
for many years.
is a disagreement between the parties about how to dispose of Kumuntjayi’s
body. The Applicant wishes to bury her “on
her father’s
country” and the Respondents wish for her to be cremated and for her ashes
to remain with them.
Burial and Cremation Act 2022
(the Act) establishes who has the right to
make decisions regarding human remains. Section 14 provides
14 Decision-making powers concerning human remains
(1) The decision maker for a deceased person has the power to:
(a) make any decision required under this Act regarding the human remains of the
deceased person in accordance with this Act...”
maker” is relevantly defined under section 9 as “the senior next of
Act also provides a process for establishing who “the senior next of
kin” is. Under section 11 “a senior next
of kin” means one of
a hierarchy of people which relevantly includes:
(a) if the deceased person was an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander person
and had strong cultural and traditional ties to a community
or group – a
person who, according to the customs and traditions of that community or group
to which the person belonged, is
appropriate to perform that role;
(f) If paragraphs (a) to (e) do not apply – the deceased person’s
13 confers jurisdiction on NTCAT to determine disputes about the “senior
next of kin”:
13 Determination of senior next of kin
(1) If there is a dispute regarding who is the senior next of kin for a
deceased person, a next of kin may:
(a) request the other parties to the dispute to engage in mediation in
accordance with section 12(1) to resolve the dispute;
(b) or apply to NTCAT for a determination of the senior next of kin for the
deceased person.
this proceeding the Applicant has applied under section 13(1) for a
determination that she is the senior next of kin. The Respondents
resist that
application and assert that they are senior next of kin.
understand the parties have engaged in a process of mediation which has not
resulted in an agreement.
Applicant asserts two bases upon which the Tribunal should determine that she
is the senior next of kin.
Strong cultural and traditional
ties to a community or group
section 11(1)(a). That section requires the Applicant to establish that
Kumuntjayi was Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander
and that she had strong
cultural and traditional ties to a community or group. If those two things are
established, a senior next
of kin will be a person who, according to those
cultural and traditional ties, is appropriate to perform the
is no dispute that Kumuntjayi was Aboriginal. Both of her biological parents
are Aboriginal people from Central Australia.
is also no dispute that the Applicant would be an appropriate person culturally
to perform a role as senior next of kin.
area of contention here is whether it has been established that Kumuntjayi had
“strong cultural and traditional ties to
a community or group.” The
Act requires that criterion to be established and the onus of proof lies with
the party seeking
to establish it.
this point the Applicant relies on the evidence of the Applicant herself. In an
Unattested Declaration dated 13 November 2024
Ms Ladd declares that in around
2009, when Kumuntjayi was relocating from the community in which she had been
“I remember asking Kumuntjayi myself who “Mum” was and she
said to me, “You’re my mum.”
Ms Ladd also declares that she maintained contact by telephone while
Kumuntjayi was living interstate and that Kumuntjayi would visit
with family
“at least once a year.”
Applicant declares that she “remember[s] teaching her Alyawarr words like
“Muna”...”Wawa” and “Kurra”
She declares
“I remember Kumuntjayi learning these words and using with me when she
didn’t have to but she wanted to learn them. For
this reason I know that
her use of Alyawarr was important to her.”
Applicant also declares that Kumuntjayi maintained contact with siblings and
would address them using Aboriginal relationship
words. Kumuntjayi would also
visit her grandmother in an aged care facility in Alice Springs and was sad when
her grandmother died.
Ladd also gave oral evidence in chief along the following
Did you speak to her in language? Yes.
Did you tell her stories? Yes.
What sort of stories would you tell her? Family stories...
You talked earlier about stories you would tell Kumuntjayi. What were they
Applicant further relies on an Unattested Declaration of Miranda Club who is the
older sister of Kumuntjayi. Kumuntjayi was born
to Miranda Club’s Uncle
and his wife.
Club did not make herself available to be questioned at the hearing.
Accordingly, I do not place much weight on uncorroborated
aspects of her
unattested declaration. Nevertheless, I accept that Kumuntjayi would refer to
Ms Club as “Yaya which means
sister in Alyawarr.” I also accept
that Kumuntjayi “missed our grandmother and that she loved her a lot...she
to visit us for the funeral...” Ms Club declares that Kumuntjayi
had a close relationship with her grandmother and also recalls
“using some Alyawarr words...”
Applicant also relies on an Unattested Declaration of Ngarla Kunoth-Monks who is
an Alyawarr woman from the Utopia Homelands.
Ms Kunoth-Monks is a “woman
who actively practices [her] cultural obligations and who looks after [her]
family members accordingly
[and has] a lot of knowledge of Alyawarr cultural
practices and tradition...”
Kunoth-Monks’ unattested declaration was provided to the Tribunal on 2
December 2024. At that time I arranged the registry
to advise the parties that
Ms Kunoth-Monks is someone who is known to me. The parties were sent the
following email correspondence
on 5 December 2024:
“...In perusing the material already filed in the matter the President
became aware of an unattested declaration by Ngarla Kunoth-Monks.
declaration Ms Kunoth-Monks refers to her mother Rosalie Kunoth-Monks.
The President wants to let the parties know that he worked with Rosalie
Kunoth-Monks from time to time in her role as a court based
interpreter over a
long period of time. As a result he knows and is known by members of Rosalie
Kunoth-Monks’ family including
Ngarla Kunoth-Monks.
The President does not consider that the connection with Ms Kunoth-Monks is
of such a nature requiring him to recuse himself from
hearing the matter. He
wishes simply to bring this to the attention of the parties for their
consideration.”
reason for bringing it to the parties’ attention at that stage was to
avoid any confusion or concern that may have arisen
had Ms Kunoth-Monks’
indicated recognition of me during the course of a hearing.
11 December the legal representative for the respondents wrote to the Tribunal
effectively applying for me to recuse myself from
hearing the matter. I had the
matter listed to ventilate that application on 16 December. After hearing from
the parties I indicated
that I would not recuse myself and that I would include
my reasons for not doing so in my reasons for the determination of the
substantive
indicated to the parties on 16 December, my connection to Ngarla Kunoth-Monks is
through my knowledge of her mother. We were not
work colleagues but would work
together from time to time exercising complementary roles in the court system.
I was on friendly
terms with Rosalie Kunoth-Monks and we would chat socially
when we met outside of the work environment. Those meetings were only
chance in Alice Springs. We did not socialise together. Often Rosalie
Kunoth-Monks would be in the company of her daughter
and her grand-daughter.
interactions with Ngarla Kunoth-Monks are of a similar nature. We do not
socialise but exchange pleasantries when we meet by chance.
I do not consider
that a fair minded lay observer would have a reasonable apprehension that I
might not bring an impartial mind
to the question that I have to
I note also that Ms
Kunoth-Monks’ evidence was not challenged by the Respondents. I do not
need to make any findings of credit
in relation to her.
Kunoth-Monks did not know Kumuntjayi or the Applicant personally but declares
“According to Alyawarr culture there would have been a spiritual
connection between Kumuntjayi and [the Applicant] even before
Kumuntjayi’s
birth and this spiritual connection remains throughout the life of both mother
and child and persists even beyond
And further that:
“Even if we are taken away from country in life, country calls and
holds us as it knows our spirit. An Alyawarr person’s
spirit arises from
their country and the other people from the same area.
If an Aboriginal person hasn’t been able to be on country for whatever
reasons during their life this does not severe (sic)
their relationship to their
people and right to be returned back to their country on their death.
It is so important to the Alyawarr community that people can come back to
their country at death and be buried there because if not
we believe that their
spirit shall be forever looking for a way to come home.”
accept Ms Kunoth-Monks’ evidence regarding the cultural and traditional
practices of Alyawarr people.
my view, though, the strong ties to culture and tradition referred to in the Act
are to be considered subjective to the deceased.
They are ties and beliefs that
the deceased person must have held or recognised. It is not sufficient to
establish Aboriginality
alone. The ties must be “strong” ties.
do not think that the evidence before the Tribunal supports a finding that
Kumuntjayi had strong cultural and traditional ties to a community or group.
As recounted above, the evidence establishes that Kumuntjayi
had some interest
in and occasionally used some Alawarr words, and that she maintained contact
with members of her family. It indicates
that she recognised her own
Aboriginality and retained a connection particularly to her biological mother.
The evidence does not
speak of any particular or strong connection to cultural
beliefs or traditional practices.
What does “parent” mean?
other relevant criteria relied upon by the Applicant is section 11(1)(f):
“the deceased persons parent.” “Parent”
is not defined
in the Act.
15 February 2011 Noellene Ladd, Barry Club (Kunmantjayi’s biological
father), Yonne Mudford and Leigh Swift all signed a
“Parenting Plan”
relating to Kumuntjayi. Among other things, that plan included a provision that
the child would live
with Leigh Swift and Yvonne Mudford. It provided that
“parental responsibility [was] to be shared between the child’s
mother and the child’s father, and Leigh Edward Swift and Yvonne
Mudford”. On 22 June 2015 the Respondents were granted
parental responsibility” under the
Family Law Act.
Puruntatameri v Baird
Northern Territory Court of Appeal considered an appeal from a decision of
Justice Barr regarding a dispute between a biological
mother and a “foster
parent.” In finding for the foster parent the court reaffirmed Barr
J’s description of her
as someone who had:
“[undertaken] the primary care and responsibility for the deceased from
when he was five months old, and remained his principal
and probably sole
caregiver throughout his life. She assumed the role of mother and treated the
deceased as her son. She undertook
his school enrolments each year, she
attended school appointments with teachers, school functions, school graduations
and presentations,
as well as all sports events in which the deceased was
involved. When his schooling fell behind, the respondent enrolled him in
re-engagement program. The respondent encouraged the deceased’s
participation in his chosen sports and, as his mother, signed
him up and paid
all expenses”
that context the Court of Appeal considered earlier cases which had sought to
determine who had the rights to bury the remains
of a child. The Court of
Appeal (referring to
R v Gwynedd County Council; Ex parte B
[1992] 3 All
determined that:
“At 319, Balcombe LJ referred to the “position under the general
law”, that a parent, who has the means to do so,
is bound to provide for
the burial of his deceased child. That statement does not, it seems to us,
confine the class of persons
identified as “parent” to biological
parents, or to determine any
contest as between a biological parent and a
foster parent.”
further that:
“the case cannot be seen to confine the class of persons identified as
“parent” to biological parents, or to determine
any contest as
between a biological parent and a foster
upholding the original decision the Court of Appeal recognised
“...the Supreme Court found that, for all practical purposes, the
respondent became and remained the mother of the deceased
to the time of his
that case there were no orders granting parental responsibility or any similar
orders in place.
Applicant submits in the present dispute that:
Parental Responsibility Order made by the Family Law Court does not displace the
fact that [the Applicant] gave birth
to Kumantjayi and is accordingly her Mother
by biological fact.”
is uncontroversial but it does not address the issue. The question is not
whether the Applicant ceases to be considered a parent
but whether the
Respondents have also achieved that status. The fact of a Court order may well
be indicative, but in line with the
process adopted by the Supreme Court and
Court of Appeal, the question of parenthood must be considered on a wider basis
than biology
or court orders.
must be assumed that in drafting the Act, including conferring jurisdiction on
NTCAT, the legislature was aware of the decisions
of the Supreme Court and Court
of Appeal. It was open to the legislature to define “parents”
either narrowly or broadly.
I take the absence of any such definition to mean
that the process for determining a “parent” adopted in those cases
was appropriate.
evidence is clear that in practical day to day terms and over a long period of
time, the Respondents have been in a parental relationship
with the deceased.
That relationship was maintained up until her death.
Applicant asserts that there was some amount of duress, unwillingness and/or
lack of understanding on her part in placing Kumuntjayi
in the care of the
Respondents and agreeing to the Parenting Plan. I find that there was not.
Apart from her Unattested Declaration
Ms Ladd gave evidence in chief. She was
asked questions about a time when Kumuntjayi was 2 years old and responded along
the following
“Did you ask Yvonne and Leigh to care for your daughter in 2009?
Did you ask them to grow her up? Yeah – told them grow her up but not
to take her away.
What did you mean by grow her up? Just look after her.
Was it your intention for them to look after her for a short time or a long
time? Little bit long time.”
is some dispute around the preparation and signing of the Parenting Plan that
was entered into in 2011. Ms Ladd asserted that
all of the arrangements for the
preparation of the Parenting Plan had been made by the Respondents and that the
legal practitioner
who had been involved was known to them in a way that brought
the legitimacy of the plan into question. Initially Ms Ladd’s
was that on the day the document was signed, she had been taken to the legal
service’s office by the Respondents.
She latter indicated that she could
not recall.
cross-examination Ms Ladd’s counsel took Mr Swift to clauses 4(b) and (c)
in the Parenting Plan and suggested that those
clauses were included in the
Parenting Plan at the insistence of the Applicant. Mr Swift conceded that
clause 4(d) at least had
been included at the request of Ms Ladd and Mr
the question of whether there was any duress involved in the Parenting Plan, and
generally, I prefer the evidence of the Respondents.
Ms Ladd’s evidence
was not consistent and was given with considerable hesitation. At one point in
the proceeding she declined
to answer any more questions but later resumed.
Further, it is apparent that certain clauses of the Parenting Plan were included
at Ms Ladd’s request. They are certainly protective of certain of her
interests. I note that the legal service used was one
that exists and is funded
to provide assistance to Aboriginal clients. There is no suggestion that any
challenge has ever been made
to the Parenting Plan or complaint made about the
way the legal representative conducted himself.
any case, I find that the Parenting Plan of 2011 simply formalised an
arrangement that had been reached 2 years earlier. Ms Ladd
had placed her
daughter into the care of the Respondents who exercised at least a considerable
degree of parental responsibility
from that time.
is not necessary for me to try to identify with any degree of detail, the
reasons those care arrangements came to be. I am satisfied
that the Applicant
initiated the arrangement and that the Respondents accepted the responsibility.
I am also satisfied that the parties
were motivated by concern for the child.
Whatever initial intention there may have been on Ms Ladd’s part as to how
arrangements were to be in place, they became permanent.
is no dispute that Kumuntjayi remained living with the Respondents in Tennant
Creek until early 2015 when she moved to Western
Australia. There is dispute
Western Australia. On this point I prefer the evidence of the Respondents
move to Western Australia was done in consultation with Ms
any case they did move and in June 2015 the Family Court made orders including
an order that the Respondents had sole parental
responsibility.
Applicant asserts that she was unaware of any Family Court proceeding until
after the event when the orders were in place. In
her Unattested Declaration,
though she declares at [12] that:
“I was very confused and upset at what had happened and I tried to get
a lawyer to help me with Court but the pressure became
too much and I gave
It is further apparent that Ms Ladd was aware of and utilised the means of
communicating with her daughter which formed part of the
Family Court orders.
Regardless of Ms Ladd’s participation in the Family Court proceeding, I
must accept that the Family Court
orders were made after a proper process which
included procedural fairness to the parties. I must also accept that the orders
the objectives of the Family Law Act regarding children. As far as I am
aware there has been no challenge to those orders.
suggestions to the contrary, the evidence does not suggest any reluctance on the
part of the Respondents to allow or facilitate
Kumuntjayi. When they were living in Tennant Creek, Kumuntjayi was able to and
occasionally did climb
the fence of the Respondent’s premises and visit
her mother and family across the street. I accept Ms Mudford’s evidence
that restrictions on access to family occurred when there was alcohol misuse.
Both the Parenting Plan and the Family Court Orders
contain clauses restricting
family members’ access when under the influence of
caring for Kumuntjayi the Respondents allowed and facilitated contact between
Kumuntjayi and Ms Ladd. They provided a mobile
phone for that purpose. They
facilitated visits by Kumuntjayi to her grandmother in Alice Springs and on at
least one occasion sent
photographs of that visit to Ms Ladd. They arranged and
paid for Ms Ladd to visit Kumuntjayi in Western Australia at Ms Ladd’s
request. During that trip Ms Ladd spent time with Kumuntjayi on her own and
slept with her at night time. On moving back to Alice
Springs the Respondents
facilitated contact between Ms Ladd and Kumuntjayi at Ms Ladd’s request
when she was in Alice Springs.
They also facilitated annual trips to Tennant
Creek on Cup Day and/or Show Day. I accept the evidence that the Respondents
intended to travel with Kumuntjayi to attend her grandmother’s
funeral but that Kumuntjayi was ultimately unable to go due
to illness. Their
willingness to facilitate Kumunjayi’s attendance at the funeral is
consistent with the contact they had
facilitated up to that
Respondents continue to recognise that Ms Ladd was Kumuntjayi’s mother and
that Kumuntjayi loved her mother.
practical effect of the Family Court orders was that Kumuntjayi remained living
with the Respondents permanently up until her death. In that time the
Respondents met her day to day needs; cared for her; arranged
and paid for her
schooling; sought medical treatment for her in response to complex medical
needs; facilitated and paid for contact
with her family; and loved
of that detracts from the fact that Ms Ladd loved and was loved by Kumuntjayi.
my view there is nothing in the Act that indicates that I should “confine
the class of persons identified as “parent”
to biological
parents”. To do so, and relegate their status under the Act to “a
person who immediately before the death
of the deceased person, had a
relationship with the deceased
would not reflect the
nature of the relationship between Kumuntjayi and the Respondents.
the above reasons I am satisfied that Noellene Ladd, Yvonne Mudford and Leigh
Swift were all parents of Kumuntjayi for the purposes
13(2)(c) provides that:
(2) NTCAT must consider the following in determining the senior next of
(a) The order of people mentioned in section 11(1);
(b) If 2 or more people have equal status as the senior next of kin because of
their standing under section 11(1)(a), (f) of (h)
– whether any of those
people would provide to NTCAT an undertaking that they will organise and pay any
relevant cost of the
burial or disposal of the deceased person;
(c) If 2 or more people have equal status as the senior next of kin because of
their standing under section 11(1)(f) or (h) –
the nature of the
relationship of each of those people to the deceased person immediately before
parties have indicate a willingness and a capacity to organise and meet the
costs of the disposal of Kumuntjayi’s remains.
circumstances where I consider that the parties have equal status under section
11(1)(f), I must determine the senior next of kin
by considering the nature of
the relationship of the applicant and the respondents with the
already described, the Respondents were the full time carers for Kumuntjayi up
until her death. Contact with Ms Ladd was irregular and sporadic. In my
view I should recognise the constancy and closeness of the
Respondents’
relationship to
Kumuntjayi immediately before her death.
12 and 13 of the Act operate when there is a dispute. In my view there is
nothing in section 12(3)(a) that prevents me from
recognising two senior next of
kin who are not in dispute. Accordingly I will make an order that Yvonne
Mudford and Leigh Swift
are the senior next of kin.
discussed with the parties I will stay the decision to allow time for
consideration regarding the filing of an Appeal. That period
will take into
account rule 3.04 of the
Supreme Court Rules.
For all of the reasons
above I will make the following orders:
section 13(3)(a)
Burial and Cremation Act 2022
Yvonne Mudford
and Leigh Edward Swift are the senior next of kin for Mikala Club born 20
January 2009.
1 is stayed until 6 February 2025.
27 DECEMBER 2024
MARK O'REILLY
Johnson v Johnson
[2000] HCA 48
201 CLR 488
[2020] NTCA 12.
Section 11(1)(h).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (13.9 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter