URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTRTCmr/2015/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:21:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Maher & Walsh -v- Fordham [2015] NTRTCmr 2 (20 March 2015)
REASONS FOR THE ORDER OF THE COMMISSIONER OF TENANCIES
INQUIRY - Wednesday, 21 January 2015
THOMAS MAHER AND PATRICK WALSH (“Applicant”)
MARII FORDHAM (“Respondent”)
RT1415-0156
This is a determination of an application dated 5 September 2014 by Thomas
Maher and Patrick Walsh seeking the return of their security
deposit pursuant to
section 113 of the
Residential Tenancies Act
Act”). The application is made in respect of premises being 1/25 Rossiter
Street, Rapid Creek in the Northern
Territory of Australia (“the
premises”).
A Notice of Inquiry dated 26 November 2014 was posted to the parties. The
Inquiry was conducted on Tuesday, 3 February 2015 during
which evidence was
taken from Thomas Maher and Patrick Walsh and Marii Fordham. Mr Walsh appeared
via telephone.
The evidence before the Inquiry consists of documents submitted by Mr Maher
and Mr Walsh (“the Applicant”) in support
of their application
and kept on the Commissioner of Tenancies file numbered RT1415-0156. It also
included their oral evidence during
the Inquiry.
The evidence before the Inquiry also consists of documents submitted by Ms
Fordham (“the Respondent”) in response to the
Application and her
oral submissions.
Pursuant to the Orders dated 3 February 2015, the Applicant submitted
date-stamped photographs. The Respondent submitted documents
pursuant to the
same Order. However, she also provided other documents which included pages of
hand written notes, undated photographs,
copies of website pages which were
either undated or dated outside the relevant period (ie November 2013), invoices
which were dated
long after the Applicant vacated and other various documents.
For the most part, many of the documents, 144 in total, offered little
evidentiary benefit.
Each party’s documents were provided to the other side with leave to
make further written submissions. The Applicant provided
three and a half pages
of written submissions. The Respondent provided no further submissions.
In November 2013, the Applicant responded to a web-based
advertisement for accommodation: “Darwin Beachside Accommodation: Our
Darwin Holiday Apartments”. They met the Respondent on 17 November 2013
and viewed the premises. The Applicant told the Respondent
that they needed
accommodation because they had come to Darwin to work. They both had permanent
employment positions. The Respondent
emailed them the terms of the “the
She said in the email, “As agreed your long term stay at Darwin
Beachside accommodation is from Saturday 23 November 2013 to
23 May 2013
) (6 months)”. She also provided other terms of the agreement:
Pay bond and 2
weeks rent via EFT before moving in, then keys will be provided
Bond is two
weeks rent $2080
Rent payable
fortnightly $1040 due before you move in on Saturday and thereafter Friday
fortnightly from 6
December 2013 (
the Respondent
provided bank details for EFT payments
Power and water,
Wi-Fi with Telstra is a separate expense $69.95 per month)
included on the rent
The Respondent said that everything is
“in excellent condition” and to let her know as soon as possible if
something is
Mr Maher completed an “application form”. He was advised that
this was a “holiday let”.
There was no formal signed agreement. The Applicant took up residency at the
premises on 23 November 2013. There were a number of
extensions of time
granted and they eventually vacated on or about Friday, 13 June 2014.
The Applicant paid the bond and the rent in accordance with the
The Applicant claims that, as the electricity and water bills came in, the
Respondent left it to the guests to determine how the one
bill was to be split
among the three units. She asked guests to deposit their individual payments
into her account.
The Respondent told all guests that they were expected to leave their
residences in the same condition they found them upon vacating
the premises.
After vacating the premises, the Applicant requested the return of the bond
on a number of occasions as they believed they had left
the unit in better
condition than they found it in, save for some wear and tear.
The Respondent refused to return the bond on the grounds that her expenses
arising from alleged damage and loss, and the unit not
being left in the
required condition, were greater than bond.
They requested the Respondent provide evidence of the expenses. She emailed
them with a list of expenses without any documentary
The Applicant denies that they were lodgers in a Boarding House situation or
that it was a “holiday let” situation. They
claim that it was a
landlord/tenant arrangement, and that the
Residential Tenancies Act
The Respondent is adamant that the Act does not apply to the arrangement she
had with the Applicant. The three units were, at the
relevant time, registered
as a “Boarding House” pursuant to the
Public Health (Shops,
Boarding-Houses, Hostels and Hotels) Regulations
The Applicant’s position
The Respondent knew the Applicant came to Darwin for full-time permanent work
and that they needed somewhere to stay until they could
find more permanent
accommodation.
The Applicant tendered what looks like the first page of an REINT tenancy
lease with the following information recorded on it (the
hand written words are
in quotation marks) at the time of this meeting:
Agreement made this “
Between the Agent/Owner “
Whose office / residence is situated at
THOMAS MAHER - & PATRICK WALSH
note mobile ph no
inserted here but not reprinted for privacy reasons
FOR THE TERM OF “
Commencing on “
AT A WEEKLY RENTAL OF$ “
Willing to go to $500 $520
TO BE PAID IN ADVANCE by equal instalments of “
weekly, or fortnightly – whatever works for landlord
TO THE AGENT / OWNER “
MARII FORDHAM.
Ms Fordham’s
email address not reprinted for privacy reasons
TELEPHONE NO. : (
Mobile phone number inserted here but not reprinted for
Bank details provided in email”
ACCOUNT DETAILS (for direct payment):
AMOUNT OF SECURITY DEPOSIT: “
4 weeks rent
SAT 23 NOV -> 23 MAY $520 water Wi-Fi electricity
Mr Maher said at the Inquiry that it was his handwriting on the form. The
Respondent told the Applicant that it was a “holiday
The Applicant initially moved into the premises for six months which they
extended to 13 June 2014.
The Applicant believes they had an oral residential tenancy lease with the
Respondent because of the circumstances of the agreement,
they paid her the bond
and rent every two weeks according to that agreement.
When they moved in, there was no incoming condition inspection so Mr Maher
took photographs of the interior of the premises. He said
in the Inquiry that
the smoke detector was on the bench when they moved in. Ms Fordham denied this
and submitted that it was installed
in the ceiling when they moved in. Mr Maher
supported his submission with date stamped (2013-19-11) photographs of the smoke
on the bench and the empty cradle on the ceiling. He said the
Respondent had used tape to stick it to the ceiling which had not
Other Applicant’s photographs taken in November 2013 evidence the
interior of the premises and furniture where they were marked,
scuffed, stained
or damaged. The Applicant states that the premises were far from the
“first class” or excellent as
claimed by the Respondent. In
addition, Mr Maher claimed the shower curtain was stained when they moved in.
There was no receipt for the payment of the bond or the rental payments.
The Applicant claims the payment arrangements for the electricity and water
were completely unfair. There was only one bill for three
units. There was no
way knowing how much people had actually used. The guests decided on a
three-way split even though the Applicant
was absent from the property for
periods over the period of their accommodation at the premises. They were away
for 6 weeks at the
Christmas & New Year holiday period. They paid the bills
and they deny owing any further moneys for power and water as the usage
one resident cannot be ascertained.
The Respondent provided undated photographs of individual power meters at the
Inquiry but the Applicant had no knowledge of these
separate meters when they
were resident at the premises.
Wi-Fi was available for all three units via a password. Mr Maher claims he
only had use of it for about one month, which he paid
for. The Respondent
agreed that he paid for one month’s use. He claims he had no access for
two months after that and he
made other arrangements to access the internet. He
did not use the Wi-Fi at the premises after that. Mr Maher admitted that
did not let Ms Fordham know about this new arrangement.
In respect of the Wi-Fi re-connection fee, Mr Maher said it is possible that
the cleaner unplugged the Wi-Fi cord during the exit
clean. They disputed the
invoice for $150.00 for simply reconnecting it to the power-source.
The Applicant engaged “Edna’s Cleaning Service” for the
vacate cleaning and claim it cost $500.00.
The Applicant said at the Inquiry that they did not know about Ms
Fordham’s preferred cleaner.
The Respondent was able to point to an email she sent Mr Maher on 4 May 2014
saying “If you need a cleaning for your exit clean,
VIP Cleaners
cleans all our properties so he will know how to clean it
for you and make the beds etc and he is reasonably priced please call him
not published for privacy reasons
) or email him kash@ (
not published
for privacy reasons
The Applicant claims they left the premises in a better state than when they
entered the premises.
The Applicant did not receive a “Notice of Intention to Retain the
Security Deposit” from the Respondent.
The Respondent emailed them in response to the request for the bond. She
claimed many expenses they were responsible for as an explanation
as to why she
retained the bond but did not support her claims by providing them with any
invoices or other documents.
The Applicant said at the Inquiry that they would have returned to the unit
to make good any additional cleaning had she asked.
The Respondent provided invoices to Inquiry and afterwards pursuant to the
Order. The Applicant claimed they had not seen them before.
The Applicant noted that a number of the dates on the invoices are after the
date they vacated the premises and some relate to damage
which could have
occurred after they vacated.
The Applicant claims that some of the damaged claimed for is reasonable wear
and tear like the sliding roller door, the back of the
bookcase becoming loose,
and the shower curtain (which was not new when they moved in).
The Applicant claims that the entry where the roller door is located is a
common entry and used by the cleaners and other people,
not just the guests in
As for the Clothes Dryer, it is located in an open area and not just for the
exclusive use of Unit 1 guests. The cleaners and other
guests had access to the
Dryer. The Applicant claims it was working when they were in the premises.
In regards to the hole in the pool liner and the increase in water usage, the
Applicant denies any responsibility for it. All the
guests used the pool. The
Applicant said that the pool liner could have been damaged before the Applicant
moved in. The guests were
expected to refill the pool on a daily basis.
Mr Maher noted in the Inquiry that the pool needed a lot of topping up from
they moved in.
The Applicant claims that the claims in the Respondent’s itemised
invoice for “her time” (ie taking out the rubbish,
doing a dump
run, cleaning & organising shelves, replacing the smoke detector, purchasing
and replacing the shower curtain, re-making
beds and changing light globes etc,)
are not valid claims against the bond.
The Applicant claims that the majority of the photographs the Respondent
provided were not images of the unit they occupied and that
other photographs
were dated 2015, well after they vacated.
The Applicant claims that, as there is no “Ingoing Inspection
Report”, it is not possible to verify the Respondent’s
concerning the need for cleaning, repair of damage and replacement of things.
They claim they left the premises in a reasonably
clean state and better than
what it was when they moved in.
They said at the Inquiry that the accommodation was a poorly managed
situation and ought to have had a document outlining people’s
responsibilities.
The Applicant obtained legal advice on the nature of the arrangement between
them and the Respondent. The legal advice is that a
tenancy agreement exists
between the parties because, although the Respondent provides “holiday
lets”, the circumstances
did not support a contract for the occupation of
the accommodation for the purposes of holiday accommodation; the Act applies;
the Applicant have good grounds for the return of their security deposit
with interest.
The Respondent’s position
The Respondent says the Act does not apply to the arrangement she had with
the Applicant. The premises were rented as a “holiday
there was no “tenancy”. She admits that the period of this
“let” was longer than usual.
She provided the Certificate of Registration for the three units being
registered as a “Boarding House” pursuant to the
Public Health
(Shops, Boarding-Houses, Hostels and Hotels) Regulations
The Respondent said that the public website at the relevant time (ie November
2013) used to advertise the three units as commercial,
temporary accommodation.
She said it is different now but was unable to provide a hard copy of website
pages from November 2013.
She has been in business since 2012.
The Respondent claims that the expenses the Applicant incurred exceeded the
bond. She did not ask for the total expenses but just
kept the bond.
At the Inquiry, the Respondent listed her claims against the Applicant:
Electricity sewerage & water bill
Electricity - an additional month
Roller Sliding door
Dryer (replacement)
Wi-Fi reconnection
Cleaning (VIP)
Cleaners (no amount stated)
The Respondent’s time 4 hrs @ $40.00
The Respondent claims the Applicant owes her for electricity, sewerage and
excess water because they owe for the period between the
end date of the last
bill, which they paid, and the vacating date. The Respondent provided a number
bills and a photograph of three meters for the units. She
claimed there were three working electricity meters while the Applicant
residence. The invoice for the installation of the meters post-dates the period
of time the Applicant was in the unit.
The Applicant never saw the meters and
had no knowledge of the meters. In particular, there is a
bill for the period immediately following bill the Applicant paid up their
electricity. The document has hand written calculations
on it stating the
period the Applicant were in the unit was 31 days of this bill. There are
notations on the bill of calculations
based on one third use of the electricity,
sewerage and water for 31 days. The Respondent provided a copy of hand written
listing payments for the electricity etc by the guests from 2013 to
2014. There is no evidence from the other guests as to the
fairness or
otherwise of the method of calculation. However, among the copies of SMSs
between the Respondent and another guest “Ida”,
the Respondent told
her that she had left “the aircons running” as an explanation for
the high electricity use recorded
in the bill for the period November 2013 to
February 2014 (which was double the previous bill). The SMS is dated 4 March
The Respondent’s advice was “Best to be careful”.
There were also SMSs about the same bill and an increase in water usage, and
the pool needing to be topped more frequently.
Included among the invoices is one for replacement of the Pool Liner carried
out on 23 January 2015.
The Respondent claims that the sliding door was working perfectly well when
the Applicant moved in but it had to be repaired after
issued an Invoice for $268.20 for “Glass Door Rollers”. I
take it that the ball bearings were replaced. In any event,
the Invoice is
dated 11 August 2014.
She claims the Dryer was damaged by the Applicant and they should pay for its
replacement. I was unable to locate a receipt, quote
or Invoice for the Dryer
in the documents provided by the Respondent.
The Wi-Fi was not working when the Respondent re-entered the premises to
clean it on the weekend of 14 and 15 June 2014. She had
to use her IT
contractor to attend the premises to fix it. The invoice for the callout for
the Wi-Fi is dated 30 June 2014, some
two weeks after the Applicant vacated.
According to the
Leading Edge
Invoice, the problem was corrected by
“re-seating the phone cabling”. There was no charge for this
service. The Respondent
also had them replace the modem/router with a wireless
range extender which cost $139.00 and there was a call-out fee of $150.00.
total cost was $289.00.
The claim for cleaning by
and the Respondent’s time is
supported by an Invoice on Darwin Beachside Accommodation (DBA) letterhead dated
with reference to “text messages and email dated 29
August 2014.
There is also a separate
Invoice for $230.00 dated 14 July
The Respondent was annoyed that the Applicant had not used
” to do the cleaning because he knows exactly how she
likes the unit to look for the next guest. She complained about a dirty
having to remove a couple of items the Applicant’s left behind. She felt
she had to clean the unit to her standard
for the next guest.
The Respondent also complained that the Applicant had not replaced some of
the light globes before vacating the premises and the unit
was not in the same
condition in which she presented it to them in November 2013. The light globes
needing to be replaced were on
the first floor which required her to carry a
ladder up a tight circular staircase; this was difficult for her. The
Respondent said
she had to re-fix the back of the book case and replace the
shower curtain.
The Respondent said the smoke alarm was the responsibility of the Applicant
to maintain. She said that it was affixed to the ceiling
when the Applicant
moved in. The Applicant proved that this was not the case with a photograph he
took at that time and he said
that she had used adhesive tape to stick the alarm
to the ceiling. It is true that “The responsibility for ensuring the
in a tenanted property is maintained in working order is that of the
tenant”. However, the Respondent is the owner of a “prescribed
building”, namely a “boarding house” pursuant to the
Certificate of Registration and she is obliged to ensure
that the smoke alarm
is in good working order etc, pursuant to the
Fire and Emergency Regulations
of the Northern Territory. She failed to do that.
The Respondent said in the Inquiry that she had planned to spend the day (ie
15 June) with her son but she had to attend to the cleaning
of Unit 1. She said
she spent the day removing “dirty grout”, remaking the beds with
valances, cleaning up the dust
on the floor, the couches and the balcony,
re-organising the shelves in the kitchen, removing hooks on the fridge etc. .
The Respondent claims she does not owe the Applicant any money.
Determination of the Application
Relevantly, section 6 of the Act provides for “Agreements to which this
Act does not apply”. At subsection (1) it states:
This Act does not apply to an agreement:
(a) under which a person occupies, or it is intended a person will occupy,
premises provided for the purposes of holiday accommodation;
The Applicant
says this was a rental situation, not a “holiday accommodation”
situation, and the Act applies.
The Respondent says the rental of the unit to the Applicant’s was
always a “holiday let”, she told them that at
the beginning of the
agreement, and the Act does not apply.
Just because the premises is registered as “Boarding House” for
the purposes of “holiday lets” does not necessarily
guarantee that
the circumstances with each guest will be, in law, a “holiday let”
In the case,
Scholfield v High Surf Resorts Pty Ltd t/as Beachcomber
Surfers Paradise
[2014] QCAT 233
, a similar situation arose. The
“guest" rented the accommodation for at least seven if not nine months.
The Tribunal held
In my view, the overall period of occupancy is appropriately a primary factor
to be taken into account to determine whether or not
the occupancy is for
holiday purposes or is in truth a residential tenancy arrangement. (at
paragraph [32])
The word “holiday” is defined in the
Oxford Dictionary
as “an extended period of leisure and recreation, especially
one spent away from home or in travelling”.
The evidence is that the Applicant told the Respondent that they were in
Darwin for work and they needed to find a place in the short
term. The initial
agreement between the parties was for a six month period.
By definition, the purpose of renting of the accommodation to the Applicant
was not, and could never be considered, for “holiday
accommodation”.
They were both in Darwin for the purposes of work and the period of the
arrangement was for six months.
Scholfield’s
case, section 31(1) of the Queensland
Residential Tenancies and Rooming Accommodation Act
states the Act does
not apply to a right of occupancy given for holiday purposes. But section
31(2), however, provides that a right
to occupy premises for six weeks or longer
is not for holiday purposes unless the contrary is proved. The Tribunal held
Surf, the “landlord’ bore the onus to prove the occupancy
was for holiday purposes, and failed in doing so.
Using this interstate legislation as a guide, it is fair to say that an
accommodation rental in the Territory for about six weeks
for “an extended
period of leisure and recreation”, especially one spent away from home or
travelling is a “holiday
let” situation, and one in which the
Residential Tenancies Act
of the Northern Territory would not apply.
The Respondent in these circumstances claims that the Act does not apply
because the units are certified as Boarding Houses, the website
advertises the
accommodation as “holiday accommodation” and that she told the
Applicant at the beginning of the agreement
that it was a “holiday
In my view, the Respondent has not satisfied me that the arrangement between
the parties was one of a “holiday let” situation;
in particular, the
period of the agreement was beyond what could reasonably be considered a
“holiday period” and, Mr
Maher and Mr Walsh told her that they had
permanent employment positions.
I also find that the Applicant were not boarders or lodgers at the relevant
time for the following reasons.
A situation of board and lodging means that the person offering the
accommodation, or their agent, has unrestricted access to and
Street v Mountford
[1985} UKHL 4).
The boarder or lodger has,
for value, a grant of a right to occupy without exclusive possession of part of
the premises (
Walker v Puvesi Pty Ltd
RTT #6/1986 11 May 1987) usually on
a week to week basis (
Re Han v Seow
[2004] NSWCTTT 440
(4 August 2004)).
The boarding house or Lodging is also characterised by certain criteria
including, the provision of meals, changing
of linen, the requirement to obey
“House Rules” (
Re Han v Seow)
which govern common areas,
three or less other boarders, a deposit for the key and the provision of
cleaning services.
Consequently, I find the
Residential Tenancies Act
of the Northern
Territory applies to the agreement for the rental of the premises at 1/25
Rossiter Street, Rapid Creek. The agreement
was entered into on 19 November
2013 binding the parties and it was extended to 13 June 2014.
The Applicant seek the return of the security deposit under section 113(1) of
The Respondent did not comply with section 112 of the Act concerning a
landlord’s eligibility to retain a security deposit.
However, section 113
a non-compliance with section 112
] the Commissioner may
permit a landlord to retain an amount of a security deposit for a purpose
specified in section 112(3)(d), (e),
(f) or (g), although the landlord has not
given the tenant a notice under section 112(5) for that purpose, if the
Commissioner is
satisfied that the circumstances of the failure to give the
notice are such that the landlord ought, despite the failure, be permitted
retain such an amount
Sections 112(3)(d), (e), (f) or (g) concern
(d) replace locks altered, removed or added by the tenant without the consent
of the landlord; or
(e) pay for unpaid rent or for unpaid charges for electricity, gas or water
payable by the tenant under section 118; or
(f) pay an amount required to be paid under section 121; or
(g) pay money ordered by the Commissioner or a court to be paid by a tenant
but not paid.
None of those purposes are relevant here.
Under section 122, a landlord may make a claim for loss. The Respondent
seeks to be compensated for the cost of 31 days of the
Power Water
repair of the Roller Sliding Door, replacement of the Clothes Dryer,
reconnection of the Wi-Fi and cleaning.
Electricity etc
Insofar as the claim for the Applicant to pay for the electricity, water and
sewerage bill is concerned, I note that from an Invoice
from Jetstream, the
individual electricity use meters were installed on 21 November 2014, some
five months after the Applicant vacated.
The Respondent claims otherwise and
that they were available for the Applicant to use. This was clearly not the
At the relevant time, the payment of the
bills was left up
to the guests to work out and pay accordingly. The Applicant says that the
Respondent’s requirement for the
guests in the units to work out their
share of the bill is unfair. For instance, they were away for a six week period
at Christmas
but still paid one third of the bill. There is no evidence from
the other guests who were resident at 25 Rossiter Street, Rapid
Creek, in the 31
day period of the relevant bill about their usage in that period or what they
are prepared to pay.
The Applicant can hardly be responsible for the increase in water use if it
arises because of a fault in the pool liner; that is wear
and tear; nor the cost
of replacement of the pool liner six months after they vacated. The claim for
the increase in water usage
(ie part of the electricity bill) is not
I find the onus the Respondent put on guests “to work out” the
bill and to pay their share directly into her bank account was
There is no way now of calculating with any surety how much of the
electricity, sewerage or water usage in the 31 day period of the
10 May to 7
August 2014 bill is the Applicant’s responsibility to pay. I decline to
make an order for compensation in these
circumstances.
Roller Sliding Door
The Applicant cannot be responsible for the failing of ball bearings in a
glass sliding door especially when it is a door to a common
area. The repair to
the Roller Sliding door is a matter of wear and tear, in my view, and not a
valid claim against the security
Clothes Dryer
The cost of the replacement of the Dryer cannot be justified when the
Applicant was not the only person using it. It was located
in an accessible
area and other guests and the cleaners used it. If it needed a repair or
replacement, it is a cost to be borne
by the owner.
The disconnection of the Wi-Fi by the Applicant’s cleaner was
unfortunate. The IT contractor did not charge the Respondent
for plugging it
back in. He did charge her for the “range extender” and the
call-out fee. I find the Wi-Fi call out
service is not a valid claim against
the security deposit.
Insofar as the Wi-Fi monthly expense is concerned, Mr Walsh entered an
agreement to pay monthly for the use of the Wi-Fi. He paid
the first month. It
was not available for the next two months and he made other arrangements. He
did not discontinue the agreement
with the Respondent.
The Applicant vacated the premises on or about Friday, 13 June 2014. The
period of the lease was, therefore, for seven months. I
find the parties had an
oral contract for the period of the agreement for the supply of the Wi-Fi
The first month’s Wi-Fi was paid for and the next two months it was not
available. The Applicant is not responsible for paying
for a service he could
not access.
I find that the Applicant owes the Respondent for four months use of the
Wi-Fi at $69.95 per month, being $279.80.
The cleaning invoice on DBA letterhead claims $410.00 for “Beach Shack
1” (which is the Applicant’s premises), $180.00
for “cleaning
& fixing & replacing & dump run by owner 4 hours x $40 = $160
purchase shower curtain; $230.00 for
VIP cleaners exit clean.
An owner’s personal time for cleaning premises is not usually an
allowable claim under the Act.
Additionally, an invoice by one company (VIP) on another’s letterhead
(DBA) carries no weight when proving a claim for compensation.
The actual VIP invoice for cleaning the premises is dated a month after the
Applicant vacated and the DBA Invoice is dated June 2014.
I find these invoices
unreliable in making a determination of the claim for compensation for
Under section 51(2) of the Act,
It is a term of a tenancy agreement that at the end of the tenancy the tenant
must give the premises and ancillary property back to
the landlord:
(a) in reasonable state of repair; and
(b) in a reasonably clean condition,
allowing for reasonable wear and tear.
I am satisfied on the evidence of both the parties that the premises were
returned in reasonable state of repair and in a reasonably
clean condition.
There is no proof of the state of the premises at the beginning and end of
the tenancy as required by section 112 of the Act (ie no
incoming and outgoing
condition reports) and, therefore, I am unable to make an order for the cost of
either the VIP or the Respondent’s
cleaning because the premises were
returned in reasonable state of repair and in a reasonably clean condition.
Accordingly, I declare that
There is a tenancy agreement between the Applicant and the Respondent for
the premises at 1/25 Rossiter Street, Rapid Creek dated
19 November 2013 for a
period of six months which was extended by agreement to 13 June 2014.
And, I order that:
Respondent is not entitled to retain the whole of the security deposit of
Applicant owes the Respondent $279.80 in compensation pursuant to section 122 of
the Act for four months access to the Wi-Fi.
Respondent is to return to the Applicant the security deposit of $2,080.00 less
$279.80, pursuant to Order 2, in the amount of
$1,800.20 within 21 days of
the date of this Order.
Dated this Friday, 20 March 2015
Gabrielle Martin
Delegate of the
Commissioner of Tenancies
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (176 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter