URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCA/2023/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:17:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rolfe v The Territory Coroner & Ors [2023] NTCA 8 (28 June 2023)
Rolfe v The Territory Coroner & Ors
[2023] NTCA 8
PARTIES: ROLFE, Zachary Brian
THE TERRITORY CORONER
ATTORNEY-GENERAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRRITORY
NORTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINAL JUSTICE AGENCY
NORTHERN TERRITORY POLICE FORCE
WALKER, Alice; LANE, Joseph; ROBERTSON, Rickisha
BAUWENS, Lee
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: AP 1 of 2023 (22300552)
DELIVERED: 28 June 2023
HEARING DATE: 11 April 2023
JUDGMENT OF: Grant CJ, Barr & Brownhill JJ
CATCHWORDS:
EVIDENCE – Privileges – Self-incrimination privilege –
Penalty privilege
Whether common law privilege against exposure to disciplinary and other civil
penalties has operation in coronial proceedings –
Penalty privilege has no
application in coronial proceedings unless found to be imported on proper
construction of legislative provisions
– Penalty privilege did not have
application by express provision or necessary intendment under
Coroners Act
(NT) as originally enacted – Whether
(NT) has abrogated or qualified penalty privilege –
Legislative scheme introduced qualified form of penalty privilege and privilege
against self-incrimination – Whether appellant may be compelled to answer
questions in coronial inquest – Appellant obliged
to answer questions
subject to issue of certificate providing use immunity – Appeal
Coroners Act 1993
Attorney General (NSW) v Borland
[2007] NSWCA 201
Australian Apple
& Pear Marketing Board v Tonking
[1942] HCA 37
(1942) 66 CLR 77
Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
(1990) 170 CLR 321,
Balog v Independent
Commission against Corruption
[1990] HCA 28
(1990) 169 CLR 625
Coco v The Queen
[1994] HCA 15
(1994) 179 CLR 427
Commissioner of Australian Federal Police v Propend
Finance Pty Ltd
(1997) 188 CLR 501,
Decker v State Coroner of New South
[1999] NSWSC 369
(1999) 46 NSWLR 415
Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v Shi
[2021] HCA 22
(2021) 392 ALR 1
Deputy Coroner of
[2020] SASC 59
Domaszewicz v State Coroner
[2004] VSC 528
(2004) 11 VR 237
Grollo v Bates
(1994) 53 FCR 218
Hunter Parker & Co Pty Ltd v Moorehead
[1909] HCA 36
Lamb v Moss
[1983] FCA 254
(1983) 76 FLR 296
Lansley v Knight; Ex parte
(1992) 110 FLR 295
Lee v New South Wales Crime Commission
[2013] HCA 39
(2013) 251 CLR 196
Lee v The Queen
[2014] HCA 20
(2014) 253 CLR 455
Holdings v Stretton
(2001) 178 ALR 218
Mann v Paterson Constructions Pty
[2019] HCA 32
(2019) 267 CLR 560
McKerr v Armagh Coroner
[1990] WLR 649
Migration Agents Registration Authority v Frugniet
[2018] FCAFC 5
(2018) 259 FCR 219
Potter v Minahan
[1908] HCA 63
(1908) 7 CLR 277
Priest v West
[2012] VSCA 327
(2012) 40 VR 521
Public Service Board v Morris
[1985] HCA 9
(1985) 156 CLR 397
Butterfield
[1864] EngR 803
(1864) 122 ER 1038
Pyneboard v Trade Practices
(1983) 152 CLR 328
(1873) LR 8 QB 134
South London Coroner; Ex parte Thompson
[1982] 126 SJ 625,
[1890] UKLawRpPro 60
[1891] P 139
Rich v Australian Securities and Investments
[2004] HCA 42
(2004) 220 CLR 129
Rola Co (Aus) Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
[1944] HCA 17
(1944) 69 CLR 185
Stephens v R
[2022] HCA 31
(2022) 404 ALR 367
The Daniels
Corporation International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543
X7 v Australian Crime Commission
[2013] HCA 29
(2013) 248 CLR 92
, referred to.
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: BJ Doyle KC with L Officer
First Respondent: Submitting appearance
Second Respondent: T Game SC with K Edwards
Third Respondent: E Nekvapil SC with JR Murphy
Fourth Respondent: I Freckelton AO KC with A Burnnard
Fifth Respondent: A Boe with D Fuller and G Boe
Sixth Respondent: No appearance
Solicitors:
Appellant: Tindall Gask Bentley Lawyers
First Respondent: Submitting appearance
Second Respondent: Solicitor for the Northern Territory
Third Respondent: North Australian Aboriginal Justice Agency
Fourth Respondent: Northern Territory Police Fire & Emergency Services
Fifth Respondent: Hearn Legal
Sixth Respondent: No appearance
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 50
IN THE COURT OF APPEAL
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Rolfe v The Territory Coroner & Ors
[2023] NTCA
No. AP 1 of 2023 (22300552)
ZACHARY BRIAN ROLFE
TERRITORY CORONER
First Respondent
ATTORNEY-GENERAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
Second Respondent
NORTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINAL JUSTICE AGENCY
Third Respondent
NORTHERN TERRITORY POLICE FORCE
Fourth Respondent
ALICE WALKER; JOSEPH LANE; RICKISHA ROBERTSON
Fifth Respondent
LEE BAUWENS
Sixth Respondent
CORAM: GRANT CJ, BARR & BROWNHILL JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 28 June 2023)
[1] The questions arising on this appeal are whether there is a common law
privilege against exposure to disciplinary and other civil
penalties which would
ordinarily have application in Northern Territory coronial proceedings; and, if
so, whether
Coroners Act 1993
(NT), together with the
other facilitative powers in that legislation, has abrogated or qualified that
privilege such that the appellant
may be compelled to answer questions in the
course of a coronial inquest currently in train.
Procedural history and relevant legislation
[2] On 5 September 2022, the Territory Coroner (‘the Coroner’)
commenced an inquest into the death of Kumanjayi Walker
on 9 November 2019 at
the Yuendumu Police Station. The deceased died after being shot by the
appellant in the course of an attempted
arrest. The appellant was subsequently
charged with the murder of the deceased. On 11 March 2022, the appellant was
acquitted by
a jury of murder and two alternative charges of manslaughter and
engaging in a violent act causing death.
[3] On 24 October 2022, a police officer who had been called as a witness at
the inquest objected to giving evidence on the basis
that penalty privilege
afforded an immunity from examination in respect of any matter that might tend
to expose him to a disciplinary
penalty under the
Police Administration
(NT). The appellant and the sixth respondent to this appeal
made submissions in support of the objection.
[4] On 25 October 2022, the Coroner dismissed the objection on the basis that
the application of penalty privilege had been modified
Coroners Act
[5] On 8 November 2022, the Coroner provided written reasons for the
determination which concluded that to the extent that penalty
privilege is a
substantive common law right inherently capable of application in an inquest
Coroners Act
, that privilege had been abrogated by
Coroners Act
and replaced by the scheme in that
Coroners Act
made by witnesses
(a) a person summoned to attend at an inquest as a witness declines to answer a
question on the ground that his or her answer will
criminate or tend to
criminate him or her; and
(b) it appears to the coroner expedient for the purposes of justice that the
person be compelled to answer the question;
the coroner may tell the person that, if the person answers the question and
other questions that may be put to him or her, the coroner
will grant the person
a certificate under this section.
(2) A person who has been offered a certificate under subsection (1) is no
longer entitled to refuse to answer questions on the ground
that his or her
answers will criminate or tend to criminate him or her and, when the person has
given evidence, the coroner must
give the person a certificate to the effect
that the person was summoned to attend at an inquest as a witness, the person's
was required for the purposes of justice and the person gave
(3) Where a person is given a certificate under this section in respect of
evidence given at an inquest, a statement by the person
as part of that evidence
in answer to a question is not admissible in evidence in criminal or civil
proceedings, or in proceedings
before a tribunal or person exercising powers and
functions in a judicial manner, against the person other than on a prosecution
for perjury.
[7] In accordance with that ruling, the Coroner offered the police witness a
certificate under
Coroners Act
and ordered that he be
compelled to answer questions in the inquest. It is apparent from the issue of
the certificate, and the reasons
for the ruling that the Coroner concluded that
the reference to ‘criminate’ in the provision extended beyond
liability to answers which might expose a witness to a disciplinary or
other civil penalty.
[8] On 25 October 2022, the sixth respondent to this appeal, who had also
been served with a summons requiring him to appear as a
witness at the inquest,
commenced proceedings in the Supreme Court by originating motion seeking an
injunction restraining the Coroner
from requiring him to give evidence or answer
questions on matters that gave rise to a claim for penalty privilege. The sixth
also sought declarations that penalty privilege had not been
abrogated by
Coroners Act
, and that the Coroner did not
have power to compel a person to answer questions pursuant to
Coroners Act
in breach of penalty privilege. The appellant was
subsequently joined as a plaintiff in those proceedings, and the second, third,
fourth and fifth respondents to this appeal were joined as interveners.
[9] During the course of the proceedings before the Supreme Court, the
second, fourth and fifth respondents adopted essentially the
same position in
relation to the claim for penalty privilege. That position was, in essence,
that: (1) penalty privilege is not
a substantive common law right which
inheres until statutorily abrogated by express words or necessary intendment;
(2) a coronial
inquest is not a proceeding of a kind to which penalty privilege
would ordinarily have application; (3) penalty privilege is in any
excluded by
; and (4) to the extent penalty privilege would otherwise apply,
Coroners Act
confers a privilege coherently and
consistently with the operation of the privilege against self-incrimination,
both of which are
qualified by the Coroner’s power to provide a
certificate and compel answers. That remains the position of the second, fourth
and fifth respondents in this appeal. That position proceeded on the basis that
the term ‘criminate’ in
Coroners Act
to the exposure to a disciplinary or other civil penalty, and operates
beneficially to permit the issue of a protective certificate
circumstances.
[10] The third respondent adopted a somewhat different position in the
proceedings before the Supreme Court. That position is predicated
interpretive considerations said to arise from the nature of penalty privilege
and the legislative history of the
Coroners Act
. On the commencement of
Coroners Act
A person shall not, under this Act, be compelled to answer a question that
may tend to incriminate the person.
[11] The provision was amended to substantially its current form in 2002.
The third respondent’s position was that prior to
the amendment, the
provision had application only to the privilege against self-incrimination and
in its terms had no application
to penalty privilege. That is because penalty
privilege has no operation in coronial inquests because they are not curial
proceedings
which can give rise to penalty. Accordingly, as originally enacted,
Coroners Act
did not purport either to abrogate or to preserve
penalty privilege by either express words or necessary intendment because it was
unnecessary to do so.
[12] In the third respondent’s submission, the mischief to which the
2002 amendment was directed was the impediment which the
privilege against
self-incrimination presented to the Coroner’s ability to ascertain the
truth, and the abrogation and consequent
beneficial use immunity has application
only to that subsisting privilege. On that position, the change from the use of
‘incriminate’ to ‘criminate’ is of no
consequence as the terms are synonymous, and
in its present form does not contemplate either a claim for penalty
privilege or the issue of a protective certificate in respect
of such a claim.
That remains the position of the third respondent in this appeal.
The decision of the Supreme Court
[13] The Supreme Court determined that the construction pressed by the third
respondent was correct. In doing so, the Supreme Court
characterised penalty
privilege as a principle which had its origin in the rules of equity relating to
discovery and interrogatories,
and which was not a fundamental common law right
of the same nature as the privilege against self-incrimination or legal
professional
Supreme Court considered that it was
to follow the reasoning of
the plurality in
The Daniels Corporation International Pty Ltd v Australian
Competition and Consumer
, as expounded by the
Full Federal Court in
Migration Agents Registration Authority v Frugniet
in the following terms:
... The starting point for the privilege against self-incrimination is that
it exists and applies unless abrogated. However, that
is not the starting point
for penalty privilege, which is not, following
substantive rule of law, let alone an important and fundamental common law
immunity having, as it does, a very different origin
and history. In each
setting where penalty privilege is claimed, the opening question is whether that
privilege applies in the first
place, not whether it has been abrogated. ...
[14] Accepting that characterisation and approach, the Supreme Court
determined that, unlike the privilege against self-incrimination,
privilege does not apply as a matter of course unless abrogated by statute.
Rather, the relevant statutory scheme must be
analysed to determine whether, in
context, the legislature intended that there should be an entitlement to penalty
privilege in the
proceedings.
In undertaking that
consideration, the Supreme Court made reference to the decision of the Victorian
Court of Appeal in
for the proposition that a
coroner should not be constrained from doing ‘everything possible to
determine the cause and circumstances
of death’. The Supreme Court
concluded that by conferring the power under
to hold an inquest in a manner which the coroner reasonably thinks fit
(together with the other broad facilitative powers in the
legislation),
‘Parliament has removed all inhibitions on the collection and
consideration of material which may assist in the
The import of that
finding was that common law penalty privilege has no application in coronial
proceedings conducted under the
Coroners Act
[15] The Supreme Court then went on to hold that even if it was wrong in that
conclusion, and that penalty privilege is available
in coronial proceedings, it
had been abrogated by
Coroners Act
, the purpose and
effect of which was to abrogate both the privilege against self-incrimination
and penalty privilege, and to apply
the same claim and certification procedure
That was said to be
One cannot discern a legislative intention to partly abrogate the important
and fundamental privilege and to leave intact the less
important, but related,
penalty privilege. It would be an absurd result. Further, ... it would subvert
the whole purpose of
since, in the case of police officers and other
public officials, almost all criminal acts would also have potential
disciplinary
consequences with the result that the Coroner could almost never
require police officers (and others) to answer such questions on
the provision
of a certificate under
[16] In the result, the plaintiffs’ application for declarations was
Grounds of appeal
[17] The appellant has now brought an appeal from that decision asserting
error on the part of the Supreme Court on three bases.
The first error asserted
is the holding that penalty privilege is not a right of a kind which engages the
principle of legality requiring
express words or necessary intendment for its
abrogation, and the related finding, following
relevant question is whether the legislature intended there should be an
entitlement to claim penalty privilege. The second
error asserted is the
holding that an inquest under the
Coroners Act
is not a curial proceeding
for the purpose of determining the question whether penalty privilege is
available. The third error asserted
is failing to hold that there is no basis
in the text and structure of the
Coroners Act
on which to conclude that
it abrogated penalty privilege by express words or necessary intendment.
[18] Having regard to those grounds and the positions propounded by the
parties, the questions to be determined on this appeal are:
(a) whether common law penalty privilege was available in coronial proceedings
immediately prior to the commencement of the 2002
amendment to
Coroners Act
(b) if the privilege was available prior to the 2002 amendment, whether it
remains available after the amendment or whether
has abrogated the privilege and in what way; and
(c) if the privilege was not available prior to the 2002 amendment, whether
Coroners Act
has now created a statutory form of penalty
privilege qualified by the Coroner’s power to provide a protective
certificate
and compel answers.
The common law privilege against exposure to penalties
[19] Penalty privilege, or the privilege against exposure to penalties, is a
‘rule of the common
under which a person
cannot be compelled to answer a question if the answer would tend to expose him
or her to ‘any kind of
punishment’ or ‘anything in the nature
of a penalty’
privilege had its origin in the rules of equity relating to discovery, but
‘has long been recognised by the common
such that it is no
longer simply a rule of equity. Because the principle was developed in that
context, it was referred to in the
earlier cases in terms of an exemption
adopted and applied in the courts of equity and common
[20] Pyneboard
is the first case in which the High Court gave any
detailed consideration to the question of penalty privilege and its availability
in non-curial proceedings. The question presented was whether a person served
with a notice to produce information under
Trade Practices
(Cth) could refuse to answer questions in reliance on the privilege
against exposure to civil liability to penalties. The plurality
made reference
to the English cases in which the principle had developed and stated at the
outset that:
... the privilege of refusing to answer questions or provide information on
the ground that the answers or the information might tend
to expose the party to
the imposition of a civil penalty is (a) not confined in its application to
discovery and interrogatories;
(b) available at common law as well as in equity;
and (c) distinct from, though often associated in discussion with, the privilege
against exposure to conviction for a crime.
[21] The plurality then went on to consider the question whether penalty
privilege is confined in its application to judicial proceedings
therefore inherently incapable of application in non-judicial proceedings.
Their Honours recognised that there were conflicting
streams of authority on
that issue, and concluded:
In the light of these competing considerations we are not prepared to hold
that the privilege is inherently incapable of application
in non-judicial
proceedings. The issue of its availability in these proceedings therefore falls
to be decided by reference to the
statute itself. In the consideration of that
question it is necessary to bear in mind the general principle that a statute
be construed to take away a common law right unless the legislative
intent to do so clearly emerges, whether by express words or
by necessary
implication: Pearce,
Statutory Interpretation in Australia
(1981) pars. 113-116; cf.
Mitcham v. O'Toole
[1977] HCA 41
(1977) 137 CLR 150.
In deciding whether a statute impliedly excludes the privilege much depends
on the language and character of the provision and the
purpose which it is
designed to achieve. The privilege will be impliedly excluded if the obligation
to answer, provide information
or produce documents is expressed in general
terms and it appears from the character and purpose of the provision that the
was not intended to be subject to any qualification. This is so when
the object of imposing the obligation is to ensure the full
investigation in the
public interest of matters involving the possible commission of offences which
lie peculiarly within the knowledge
of persons who cannot reasonably be expected
to make their knowledge available otherwise than under a statutory obligation.
cases it will be so, notwithstanding that the answers given may be used
in subsequent legal proceedings.
[22] It may be seen that the conclusion that the privilege is not inherently
incapable of application in non-judicial proceedings,
carried with it an
understanding that penalty privilege is a common law right which will not be
abrogated by statute unless there
is a clear legislative intent to do so by
express words or by necessary implication. In the subsequent discussion, the
treated penalty privilege on the same footing as the privilege against
self-incrimination in determining whether there was a discernible
legislative
intention to abrogate the privilege. In the final result, the plurality
determined that
Trade Practices Act
abrogated the
privilege on the following
Sub-section (1) confers a power on the Commission to require the provision of
information, the production of documents or the giving
of evidence relating to
contravention, or possible contravention, of the Act. It is significant that
sub-s. (5) makes it an offence
for a person to refuse or fail to comply with a
notice under sub-s. (1) "to the extent that the person is capable of complying
it" for these words in themselves are quite inconsistent with the existence
of a privilege entitling the recipient of a notice to
refuse to comply, whether
on the ground that compliance might involve self-incrimination or otherwise.
Moreover, it is apparent that
the purpose of conferring the power and imposing
the obligation is to enable the Commission to ascertain whether any
contravention
of the Act has taken place, or is taking place, and to make the
information furnished, the documents produced and the evidence given
in proceedings in respect of contravention of the Act, a purpose which would be
defeated if privilege were available.
[1970] HCA 4
(1970) 122 CLR 493
the comment may be made that the provision is valueless if the obligation to
comply is subject to privilege. Without obtaining information,
documents and
evidence from those who participate in contraventions of the provisions of
of the Act the Commission would find it virtually impossible to establish the
existence of those contraventions. The consequence
would be that the provisions
could not be enforced by successful proceedings for a civil penalty
[23] In coming to that conclusion, the plurality noted that
Trade Practices Act
expressly abrogated the privilege against
self-incrimination, but provided an immunity from the use of any information
provided in
pursuance of a notice in criminal proceedings other than proceedings
under the Act itself. The significance of that provision was
described by the
plurality in the following
Finally, attention should be drawn to the bizarre consequences of the
appellants' construction. The privilege against self-incrimination
excluded, but not the privilege against exposure to a civil penalty. True it is
that the amount of a civil penalty under
is very substantial. Even so, it
is irrational to suppose that Parliament contemplated that a person could be
compelled to admit
commission of a criminal offence yet be excused from
admitting a contravention of the Act sounding in a civil penalty.
[24] Justice Murphy saw no reason for recognising a privilege against
self-exposure to penalties outside judicial proceedings, and
said in addition
that it would be absurd to read
as expressly denying the privilege
against self-incrimination but impliedly allowing the privilege against
self-exposure to penalties.
Justice Brennan drew a distinction between
privilege as a principle applicable to judicial procedure and the area of
investigation
by a law enforcement agency, and concluded that
be rendered ‘relatively valueless’ if a privilege against exposure
to a penalty were allowed as a ground of non-compliance.
The statutory
exclusion of self-incrimination merely confirmed a person’s obligation to
furnish the information or produce
the document, rather than giving rise to an
implication that penalty privilege remained available. Unlike the plurality,
J’s conclusion did not involve an approach by which penalty
privilege may only be abrogated by express words or necessary intendment.
Brennan J’s analysis, a positive legislative intention that penalty
privilege should have application in the proceedings
was required.
[25] The next detailed consideration of penalty privilege by the High Court
was conducted in
. The question in that case was whether two
police officers were properly found by the Police Discipline Board to have
a lawful order in refusing to answer questions during the course of an
inquiry into the performance of their duties. In that case,
Gibbs CJ accepted
that penalty privilege applied to disciplinary penalties under police
legislation, and applied
as authority for the proposition that
penalty privilege is capable of application in non-judicial
proceedings:
There is an obvious distinction between criminal offences and breaches of
discipline and it is necessary to insist upon that distinction
for some purposes
- see, e.g.,
Reg. v. White; Ex parte Byrnes
[1963] HCA 58
(1963) 109 C.L.R. 665
p.670. Nevertheless, although the penalties provided by
are disciplinary
penalties, they are nonetheless penalties, and it is old law, confirmed by
modern authority, that a person cannot
be compelled to answer a question
whenever the answer would tend to expose him to "any kind of punishment" -
"anything in the nature
of a penalty": see Phillipps and Arnold, A Treatise on
the Law of Evidence, 10th ed. (1852), vol.2, p.487; Greenleaf on Evidence,
ed. (1863), vol.1, p.621; Bray on Discovery (1885), p.313;
In re Westinghouse
Uranium Contract
(1978) A.C. 547
, at pp.563-564 (a statement not challenged
on appeal - see at pp.612, 627, 632, and 647) and
Pyneboard Pty. Ltd. v.
Trade Practices Commission
(1983) 57 A.L.J.R. 236
45 A.L.R. 609.
it is now accepted that the privilege is capable of application in non-judicial
proceedings:
Pyneboard Pty. Ltd. v. Trade Practices Commission
(p.617 of A.L.R.),
Sorby v. Commonwealth of Australia
[1983] HCA 10
(1983) 57 A.L.J.R.
, at p.260;
[1983] HCA 10
46 A.L.R. 237
, at p.258.
[26] Having found that the penalty privilege was capable of application in a
police disciplinary investigation, Gibbs CJ then went
on to consider the
question whether the
Police Regulation Act
Regulations
provided ‘either by express words or necessary implication
that the intention of the legislature was that the privilege should
available’. It is clear in posing that question that his Honour
considered penalty privilege to be one of those species
of rights which could
not otherwise be abrogated. His Honour concluded that the legislative provision
requiring police officers
to obey lawful orders indicated ‘both that the
application of the privilege would be inappropriate and that the obligation
obey lawful orders is not intended to be subject to any unexpressed
qualification’.
[27] That conclusion was reinforced by the fact that if privilege was claimed
in the course of a disciplinary investigation, the validity
of the claim would
fall to be determined by an unqualified person unless and until it subsequently
came before a court by way of
prosecution. The position would be different if
the investigation was being conducted before the Police Discipline Board chaired
by a stipendiary magistrate, but in the statutory framework under consideration
the availability of penalty privilege could only
come before the Board for
belated determination on the hearing of a charge for failing to obey a lawful
order on that basis.
[28] Justices Dawson and Wilson agreed with the Chief Justice’s
conclusions that penalty privilege is capable of application
in non-judicial
proceedings, and that the content and subject matter of the statute necessarily
excluded any privilege against answering
questions which might disclose
misconduct or tend to incriminate despite the lack of any express provision to
that effect. Justice
Brennan came to the same conclusions, but with additional
reference to the impairment of discipline in the police force which would
if penalty privilege was available in the circumstances. Justice Murphy adhered
to the approach he had adopted in
that the only operative
privilege was against self-incrimination, which did not extend to breaches of a
disciplinary code.
[29] Some of the reasoning in
cast in doubt by the subsequent decision in
. The latter case
also involved notices to produce information under
Practices Act
, but the claim in question was for legal professional
privilege rather than penalty privilege. Despite the different privilege under
consideration, the plurality made a number of observations in relation to the
decision in
on the issue of penalty privilege. First, although
the plurality in
was not prepared to hold that penalty
privilege is inherently incapable of application in non-judicial proceedings,
that did not
amount to a holding that the privilege is available in non-judicial
proceedings.
Second, the
plurality in
proceeded on the basis that penalty privilege was
a common law right which could only be abrogated expressly or by necessary
implication,
while Brennan J took a different approach which required the
discernment of a legislative intention that penalty privilege should
application in the proceedings.
Third, although the finding in
that penalty privilege had been
abrogated should not be followed for the purpose of determining whether legal
professional privilege
had been abrogated, the implication that
Trade Practices Act
abrogated penalty privilege could be supported by
reference to the absurdity that would result if that privilege could be claimed
and the privilege against self-incrimination could
Fourth, the modern purpose
of penalty privilege is to ensure that those who allege criminality or other
illegal conduct should prove
it. Given that purpose, the plurality in
identified the following further basis on which the finding in
could have been
However, there seems little, if any, reason why that privilege should be
recognised outside judicial proceedings. Certainly, no decision
of this Court
says it should be so recognised, much less that it is a substantive rule of law.
[30] In separate reasons for decision, McHugh J also said relevantly that the
decision in
could be justified on the ground that the express
abrogation of the privilege against self-incrimination gave rise to a necessary
implication that
also abolished any right to claim that production of
required documents might expose a person to civil penalty; but that it had
to say about legal professional privilege.
[31] The High Court had occasion to consider the issue once again in
v Australian Securities and Investments
The question
arising in that case was whether penalty privilege had application in relation
to an order for discovery in proceedings
brought by the Australian Securities
and Investments Commission seeking, amongst other declarations and orders,
orders for disqualification
from managing corporations. There was a provision
in the governing legislation requiring the court to ‘apply the rules of
evidence and procedure for civil matters’ when hearing proceedings for
relief of that type. In the face of that provision,
the Commission did not
argue that penalty privilege had been abrogated. Rather, the Commission argued
that the appellants were not
relevantly exposed to penalties because no
pecuniary penalty order was being sought in the proceedings.
[32] In the course of its reasons for decision, the plurality in
endorsed what had been said by the plurality in
to the effect
that penalty privilege is not a substantive rule of law like legal professional
privilege which had application beyond
proceedings;
although that
question did not arise for determination in the circumstances under
consideration because any exposure to penalty would
arise under the order of a
The plurality also noted that it had been held that exposure
to loss of office is exposure to a penalty or forfeiture, and, by reference
the decision in
, that exposure to dismissal from a police force
was also a form of penalty.
plurality concluded on that basis that exposure to a disqualification order was
exposure to a penalty for the purposes of the
privilege, and that the
application for discovery should have been refused.
[33] Although Kirby J was in dissent in the result in
Honour’s view reflected the observation made by the plurality in
to the effect that penalty privilege is something less than a
substantive rule of law or a fundamental common law right which can
abrogated by a clear legislative
However, the privileges involved in
were those against
self-incrimination and suggested derogations of legal professional privilege.
Those privileges are different from
the penalty privilege invoked in this case.
Compared to the penalty privilege, each of those privileges has a longer history
law. Each is more fundamental to its operation. Each is reflected in
universal principles of human rights. The penalty privilege
is not. The penalty
privilege is of a lower order of priority. It has a more recent and specialised
origin and purpose in our law.
It should not be blown into an importance that
contradicts or diminishes the operation of the Act and the achievement of its
[34] It was against that background that the Full Court of the Federal Court
came to consider the operation of penalty privilege in
question for determination in that case was whether penalty privilege had
application in proceedings before the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal for the
review of a decision of the registration authority cancelling the
respondent’s registration as a migration
agent. The directions subject to
challenge required the respondent to provide a statement of his own evidence and
statements from
any witnesses he proposed to call, all documents on which he
intended to rely, and a statement of facts, issues and contentions.
[35] At intermediate level, a single Judge of the Federal Court had
determined that the
statements in
had not displaced the decisions in
relation to the applicability of penalty privilege outside judicial proceedings.
The Full Court determined at the outset that
the correct approach was to
endeavour to give effect to ‘seriously considered dicta’ uttered by
a majority of the High
Court, and even to comments falling short of that
characterisation, about the meaning of prior decisions of that Court.
[36] The Full Court then conducted a review of the High Court authorities.
In relation to
, the Court observed that the majority was not
prepared to find that penalty privilege was inherently incapable of application
non-judicial proceedings, but ultimately determined that it had no
application in the particular circumstances of that non-curial
setting. On that
analysis, the determination proceeded on an assumption that penalty privilege
did apply for the purpose of determining
whether it would nevertheless be
excluded or inapplicable as a matter of statutory
construction.
[37] The Full Court observed that in
, however, Gibbs CJ took
the statement from
as a positive assertion that penalty
privilege did apply in non-judicial proceedings and assumed a correspondence
between penalty
privilege and the privilege against self-incrimination in that
respect. That assumption was also adopted by Wilson, Dawson and Brennan
The Full Court concluded that the highest the
proposition in
reached was that penalty privilege is capable of applying to a
non-curial process if the terms of the statute in question permit
conclusion.
[38] The Full Court considered that following the treatment in
, all that is left of
in relation to penalty
privilege is the result, predicated on the absurdity that would ensue if a
person was able to claim penalty
privilege but not the privilege against
self-incrimination. The alternative, and ‘more secure’, predicate
for the decision
which was offered in
that penalty privilege does not have application outside judicial
proceedings.
the Full Court considered that the plurality’s reasons confirmed that the
availability of penalty privilege is not determined
by whether there has been a
statutory abrogation of that privilege. Rather, the question is whether the
privilege is engaged in
the first place. That requires a consideration of
whether the proceedings expose the claimant to penalties imposed by a
[39] The Full Court concluded that it was not at liberty to disregard the
observations made in
expressed the clear view that penalty privilege will ordinarily not apply to
non-curial proceedings.
analysis, penalty privilege could never have applied in
the absence of any provision in the legislation for its application in the
disciplinary setting. That result could have
been reached without need to
conclude that the privilege against self-incrimination had also been excluded by
implication.
questions of general principle were concerned, as opposed to the result in the
particular case, the Full Court ultimately
The passage from
set out at [38] above [
that penalty
privilege should not be recognised outside judicial proceedings and is not a
substantive rule of law
] effectively determines the meaning that can be
for the purposes of this case. In
particular, it is not open to regard
as continuing to be
authority, if it ever truly was, for the proposition that the starting point is
that penalty privilege is capable
of applying in a non-curial setting, subject
only to statutory interpretation leading to its non-application or abrogation.
, if penalty privilege is to apply in a non-curial
setting, it must be found to do so from the language of the provisions in
Such a finding must be found in the face of the view of a majority of
the High Court in
doubting that penalty privilege ordinarily
applies in a non-curial setting at all.
must be regarded as a
seminal decision of the High Court, the correctness of which has never been
doubted. Its clear terms are “seriously
considered dicta” which are
therefore binding on this Court. Even if regarded as no more than comments made,
they cannot lightly
be put to one side. This Court must endeavour to give effect
In particular,
makes it reasonably clear that penalty
privilege is not even a substantive rule of law of a kind that must be found not
or be abrogated in a non-curial setting, but, rather, a protection that
must have a foundation for applying in the first place as
a matter of statutory
construction ...
The task of implying that penalty privilege does apply in a non-curial
setting may not face as high a hurdle, derived from the rule
, of concluding that privilege against self-incrimination does not
apply. But there must be some basis to be found in the language
of the statute
for penalty privilege to apply to a non-curial proceeding or setting.
[40] Attention has also been drawn in the course of this appeal to two
decisions of Australian superior courts which deal specifically
application of penalty privilege in coronial proceedings. The first in time is
Attorney General (NSW) v
which was decided
In that matter
a police officer argued that penalty privilege applied in coronial proceedings
despite the fact that the privilege
against self-incrimination had been
expressly abrogated under the New South Wales legislation. In the course of its
reasons, the
Court of Appeal noted the
obiter dicta
to the effect that penalty privilege is not a substantive
However, the Court was
not required to determine at the more general level whether penalty privilege
had application to coronial
proceedings, because
(NSW) expressly conferred a qualified form of that privilege which
rendered witnesses compellable upon the grant of a certificate
conferring direct
use immunity. That conferral was in relation to evidence which may ‘tend
to prove that the witness has committed
an offence or is liable to a civil
[41] The decision in
Deputy Coroner of
is the other
authority dealing specifically with the application of penalty privilege in
coronial proceedings. That case was decided
two years after the decision in
. The plaintiff in that case was a prison officer, and the coronial
inquest was in relation to a death in custody. The Court in
that case was not
required to decide whether penalty privilege was available in disciplinary
proceedings brought by the prison authorities.
The sole question was whether
penalty privilege was available in an inquest under the South Australian
coronial legislation. After
reviewing the authorities, Blue J
There is an obvious tension between the decisions of the High Court in
Pyneboard Pty Ltd v Trade Practices Commission
Sorby v The
Commonwealth
Police Service Board v Morris
on the one hand and
the “seriously considered obiter” remarks by the High Court in
. It is preferable that this tension be resolved by an
authoritative decision of the High Court. As it is not essential for me to
decide the question, I do not do so.
[42] The Court determined the matter on the basis that
Coroners Act 2003
(SA), which provided expressly that a person was not
required to answer a question or produce a document if it ‘would tend
incriminate the person of an offence’ or ‘would result in a breach
of legal professional privilege’, did not
thereby evince a statutory
intention to abrogate penalty privilege. His Honour said in that
Most lawyers, let alone laypersons, would be unable to list the different
common law privileges and immunities that (absent statutory
abrogation) entitle
a person to decline to answer a question or produce a document to a court. It is
a very unlikely intention to
impute to Parliament that it intended by
to abrogate all personal common law privileges and immunities unless Parliament
had first identified all such privileges and immunities
and made a deliberate
policy decision that they should all be abrogated, apart from self-incrimination
and legal professional privilege.
Conversely, if it is imputed that Parliament
was aware of all personal common law privileges and immunities and intended to
all but two, one would expect Parliament to have effected the
abrogation expressly.
Turning to context, there is nothing in the context of
that points
to abrogation of common law privileges apart from two.
create an offence of failing to answer a question or produce a document. Rather,
subsection 23(4)
provides that a person who, amongst other things, fails without
reasonable excuse to comply with a summons issued to produce documents
refuses to obey a lawful direction of the Court commits a contempt of the Court.
The fact that the section adopts the common law
procedure and sanction of
contempt is consistent with a lack of intention on the part of Parliament to
abrogate common law privileges.
Sections 10
create and constitute the Court as a court of record,
which is also a common law concept. The fact that Parliament chose to create
Court as a court, and that courts traditionally recognise common law privileges,
is consistent with a lack of intention on the
part of Parliament to abrogate
common law privileges.
[43] With respect, it is not entirely clear whether the Court considered it
unnecessary to resolve the tension between the decisions
of the High Court
because the coronial inquest was a curial proceeding, or because it was obliged
unless and until they were overruled
by an authoritative decision of the High Court. However, it is clear that the
ultimate conclusion was based on an assumption that penalty
privilege existed and applied in the coronial inquest unless expressly
implicitly abrogated. In the adoption of that approach, the reasons do not
explore the issue whether, having regard to statements
Potter v Minahan
is implicated in determining whether or not
penalty privilege has been abrogated in the context of curial proceedings, or
some less stringent test of legislative intention is sufficient for that
[44] Like the Full Court of the Federal Court in
, we also do
not consider ourselves at liberty to disregard the observations made by the
plurality of the High Court in
, and we feel bound to conclude
that penalty privilege will not apply to non-curial proceedings unless there is
a foundation for applying
it on proper construction of the statute which governs
the conduct of the proceedings.
no doubt state that penalty
privilege is not a substantive rule of law or common law immunity which has
operation outside judicial
proceedings. However, those decisions do not contain
anything which states that, in judicial proceedings, penalty privilege is not
common law right (or rule) which may only be abrogated expressly or by necessary
implication. The characterisation of penalty
privilege as something other than
a substantive rule of law might suggest that it is not a
‘fundamental’ right or immunity
which attracts the operation of the
legality principle, in which case there would be the weaker presumption that a
constructional
choice consonant with that lower order of common law right should
be preferred.
[45] Even if there is no ‘fundamentality’ requirement in order
for the principle of legality to have application to a
common law right, and the
Potter v Minahan
is implicated in that context, the requisite
clarity of the legislative intention will vary according to the nature of the
or immunity in question,
and it is important not to overstate the stringency of the test. As Gageler and
Keane JJ observed of the principle of legality in
Lee v New South Wales Crime
The principle ought not, however, to be extended beyond its rationale: it
exists to protect from inadvertent and collateral alteration
rights, freedoms,
immunities, principles and values that are important within our system of
representative and responsible government
under the rule of law; it does not
exist to shield those rights, freedoms, immunities, principles and values from
being specifically
affected in the pursuit of clearly identified legislative
objects by means within the constitutional competence of the enacting
legislature.
[46] Although many of the authorities speak of the principle of legality
being rebutted by ‘clear and unambiguous language’,
there is no
doubt that the presumption against interference with common law rights may be
rebutted by necessary
implication.
In the application
of that test, necessary intendment may be discerned if the operation of penalty
privilege would contradict or
diminish the operation of the legislation and the
achievement of its purposes.
Penalty privilege and the coronial process
[47] The original role of the coroner was administrative in nature and
involved an investigation and finding of the cause of death
on the verdict of a
jury under the direction of the coroner. In cases of suspected homicide, the
role developed further to allow
the naming of a suspect which operated as a bill
of indictment, but the process remained inquisitorial. The coroner’s
has now evolved to include the conduct of quasi-judicial inquiries into
the circumstances of deaths and disasters with an emphasis
recommendations directed to avoiding like occurrences in the future. In the
performance of that function, coroners exercise
wide investigative powers and
where necessary, conduct inquests to receive evidence before recording findings
and comments. In the
conduct of inquests, the inquisitorial aspect is
maintained by the fact that coroners are generally not bound to observe the
of procedure and evidence which apply in courts of record. However, it is
now well-recognised that coroners must act judicially
in the use made of
evidence of low probative value or of a probative value that cannot be properly
evaluated without applying the
relevant rules of evidence.
[48] Against that historical background, the
Coroners Act
was enacted
in 1993 and commenced on 3 April 1994. It provided that every person who is a
magistrate (now styled ‘Local Court
judge’) shall be a coroner and
that a particular magistrate could be appointed as the Territory
The jurisdiction
conferred was to investigate or to hold an inquest into a death or
A coroner was clothed
with the same protection and immunity as a magistrate in the performance of
their duties.
A coroner was
required to keep a record of findings, evidence and comments in relation to each
investigation into a death or
but the coroner was
not expressly constituted as a court of record as is the position in some other
A coroner may
report to the Attorney-General on a death or disaster, including making
recommendations in relation to public health
and safety or the administration of
justice, and a coroner may report to the Commissioner of Police and the Director
of Public Prosecutions
if the coroner believes that a crime may have been
committed in connection with a death or
[49] As described above,
Coroners Act
as originally
enacted expressly preserved the privilege against self-incrimination.
provided that a coroner holding an inquest was not bound by
the rules of evidence and may be informed, and conduct the inquest, in
the coroner reasonably thinks
The powers at inquest
include the issue of a summons to give evidence or produce documents, and to
order a witness to take an oath
or affirmation or to answer
The failure to
comply with a summons or order of that nature is not punishable in accordance
with the common law procedure for contempt.
Rather, the legislation creates the
offence of failing to obey a summons, order or
The legislation also
creates the offence of contempt by insulting a coroner, interrupting an inquest
or creating a disturbance near
a place where an inquest is being
Those two offence
provisions cover the common law notions of contempt by disobedience and contempt
in the face of the court, and
the implication would seem to be that a coroner
does not have power to punish contempt of court in the coronial process, and
the common law procedure in sanction of contempt has been
[50] Having regard to those provisions and considerations, it falls to
determine whether coronial proceedings under the
Coroners Act
properly characterised as a ‘judicial proceeding’ or a ‘curial
proceeding’ as those terms are comprehended
in cases such as
. Neither is a term of art with a
technical and well-defined meaning, and there are various indicia operating on
either side of the
question of characterisation. That is because, as the
Supreme Court observed, a coroner exercises an ‘anomalous ...
[51] Even where not constituted as a ‘court’ by statute, the
coroner’s function was considered at common law to
be exercised by a court
of record by reason of the requirement to record findings and the nature of the
powers exercised, including
the power to punish for
Persons appointed as
coroners are generally stipendiary magistrates (or, as in the Northern
Territory, the Local Court judge equivalent),
but their jurisdiction in the
coronial context is conferred by
Some legislative
provisions define the term ‘judicial proceeding’ to mean not only
proceedings before a court, but also
proceedings before a statutory body in
which evidence may be taken on
A coroner clearly
satisfies that description, but a statutory definition in different legislation
enacted for a specific purpose
does not necessarily inform the meaning of the
term in other contexts.
[52] On the other side of the argument, although coroners may be bound to act
judicially, that does not preclude the classification
of the function being
exercised as administrative, or at least something other than judicial in
The requirement to act
judicially is only to carry out a decision-making function rationally and
reasonably, rather than
arbitrarily.
The essence of
judicial power, and the conduct of judicial proceedings, involves a process
culminating in a binding and authoritative
determination which imposes liability
or otherwise affects the rights of the parties to those proceedings, and which
may be enforced
by the body making that
determination.
The argument is
that, therefore, coroners do not exercise judicial power, because coronial
investigations and inquests do not involve
a relevant legal or rights dispute
between parties, the coronial function does not involve any final judgment
settling issues on
adjudication, and the prescribed procedure is not that
applicable to judicial
proceedings.
The fact that
coroners hold appointment as stipendiary magistrates does not alter that
characterisation. Committal proceedings
are also conducted by stipendiary
magistrates, but that is a function of an administrative character and does not
involve the exercise
of judicial
[53] Given the manner in which penalty privilege developed and was applied,
we have concluded on balance that ‘curial proceedings’
‘judicial proceedings’ in this context are properly considered to be
references to proceedings in which judicial
power is exercised in accordance
with the ordinary rules of procedure and evidence, including discovery and
interrogation processes.
Coronial inquests are proceedings which by their very
design and purpose eschew the ordinary rules of procedure and evidence in
of a system directed to discovering the causes, both direct and systemic, of a
death or disaster. As Lord Lane observed in
R v South London Coroner; Ex
parte Thompson
Once again it should not be forgotten that an inquest is a fact-finding
exercise and not a method of apportioning guilt. The procedure
and rules of
evidence which are suitable for one are unsuitable for the other. In an inquest
it should never be forgotten that there
are no parties, there is no indictment,
there is no prosecution, there is no defence, there is no trial, simply an
attempt to establish
the facts. It is an inquisitorial process, a process of
investigation quite unlike a trial where the prosecutor accuses and the
defends, the judge holding the balance or the ring, whichever metaphor one
chooses to use.
[54] Similarly, in
Mirror Newspapers Ltd v Waller
The other section of the
Coroners Act
to which I referred in this
context was
, which provides that the coroner is not bound to observe
the rules of procedure and evidence applicable to proceedings before a court
law. The need for such a departure from the rules of procedure is obvious,
because an inquest or an inquiry does not have parties,
and there are no
pleadings, charges or indictments which define the issue to be tried. Although
usually there are legal representatives
for the interested parties, the coroner
must consider the interests not only of those parties but also of other persons
It is often left to the coroner himself to maintain a vigilant eye upon
the relevance of evidence, and objections to the evidence
are not always readily
apparent. The absence of defined issues is of paramount importance in relation
to this question. Their absence
necessarily requires the adoption of different
procedures to those applicable to proceedings before the ordinary courts of
[55] The process remains essentially inquisitorial, and the facility to
proceed other than in accordance with the rules of evidence
and procedure which
apply in curial and judicial proceedings militates against the conclusion that
penalty privilege had application
in proceedings under the
Coroners Act
as originally enacted, subject only to abrogation by clear words or necessary
intendment.
[56] The appropriate starting point is that there must have been something in
the language and provisions of the
Coroners Act
which on proper
construction operated to import penalty privilege into the process. The purpose
of the legislative scheme is to
permit a full investigation into deaths and
disasters, including making reports and recommendations directed to public
safety and the administration of justice. A coroner is given broad
powers for that purpose, including the power to compel the production
materials and answers to questions. Given that the subject matter of coronial
inquests will often involve the conduct of police,
medical practitioners and
other persons subject to vocational disciplinary
the efficacy of that
process and the achievement of the legislative purpose would no doubt be
hampered in some circumstances if penalty
privilege did have application. On
the other hand, there is nothing express or implicit in the legislation which
would demonstrate
a legislative intention that penalty privilege was intended to
have application to coronial proceedings.
[57] Under the legislation as it stood prior to the 2002 amendment, only the
privilege against self-incrimination was expressly preserved.
The express
mention of that privilege does not sustain a relevant and necessary legislative
intention concerning other forms of
privilege or
That there was no
express preservation of legal professional privilege does not lead to the
conclusion that it was intended to be
abrogated, and certainly not having regard
to the decision in
which predated the
enactment of the legislation, and the subsequent characterisation of that
privilege in
. Equally, that there was no express preservation or
abrogation of penalty privilege does not sustain an inference that it was
to be imported into the coronial process. In fact, if it is assumed
that the legislature acted on the basis adopted in
that penalty privilege is of a relevantly similar nature to the
privilege against self-incrimination, the express preservation of
privilege might if anything be seen to sustain the inference of an intention to
abrogate the former. On the other hand,
had the legislature appreciated and
adopted the approach in
it would presumably have made express
provision for penalty privilege had it been intended to have application.
[58] For these reasons, we have concluded that at the time of the enactment
Coroners Act
penalty privilege was not imported into the conduct
of coronial proceedings under that legislation. In coming to that conclusion,
we have not adopted the view that penalty privilege cannot apply to coronial
proceedings because they are incapable of exposing a
witness to penalties and
forfeitures. Although a coroner does not have any jurisdiction or power to
impose penalties generally,
and although the type of penalty apprehended in this
case is one which could only be imposed in the course of police disciplinary
proceedings, it would seem to be accepted that penalty privilege may be claimed
– assuming it has otherwise been found to have
application to the
proceedings – notwithstanding that the penalty could not be imposed in
those proceedings but might be imposed
in different
proceedings.
[59] Even if we are wrong in the conclusion that coronial proceedings are not
curial or judicial in nature, with the consequence that
penalty privilege
therefore had application in proceedings under the
Coroners Act
abrogated expressly or by necessary intendment, for the reasons which follow,
penalty privilege was abrogated by the 2002
amendment to
Coroners Act
Penalty privilege following the 2002 amendment
[60] As already described above, the
Coroners Act
as originally
enacted expressly recognised and preserved the privilege against
self-incrimination in coronial proceedings by reference
to an answer which
‘may tend to incriminate the person’. The 2002 amendment to
Coroners Act
speaks in terms of an answer which
‘will criminate or tend to criminate him or her’. On one argument
propounded in this
appeal, the word ‘criminate’ has a wider meaning
than ‘incriminate’ and extends to include exposure to the
of a civil penalty. On that argument, even if penalty privilege would otherwise
apply, a witness would not be entitled
to refuse to answer questions by
operation of
Coroners Act
. The corollary to that
constructional argument is that the 2002 amendment to
Coroners Act
imported a qualified form of penalty privilege into coronial
proceedings subject to the claim and certification process.
[61] It is apparent that the use of the word ‘criminate’ in the
Northern Territory provision was adopted from
Coroners Act
(WA), on which
Coroners Act
was closely
modelled. Section 47 of the Western Australian Act provided:
made by witness
(1) If a person called as a witness at an inquest declines to answer any
question on the ground that his or her answer will criminate
criminate him or her, the coroner may, if it appears to the coroner expedient
for the ends of justice that the person
be compelled to answer the question,
tell the person that if the person answers the question and other questions that
to him or her, the coroner will grant the person a certificate under
this section.
(2) After a person has been offered a certificate, the person is no longer
entitled to refuse to answer questions on the ground that
his or her answers
will criminate or tend to criminate him or her, and if the person gives evidence
to the satisfaction of the coroner,
the coroner must give the person a
certificate to the effect that the person was called as a witness in the inquest
and that the
person’s evidence was required for the ends of justice and
was given to the coroner’s satisfaction.
(3) Where a person is given a certificate under this section in respect
of any evidence given at an inquest, a statement by the person
as part of that
evidence in answer to a question is not admissible in evidence in criminal
proceedings against the person other than
on a prosecution for perjury committed
in the proceedings.
[62] Quite apart from the textual similarities between the amended form of
Coroners Act
of the Western
Australian legislation, the
provenance of the current Northern Territory
provision is confirmed by the Northern Territory Law Reform Committee report
which dealt
with the privilege against self-incrimination in coronial inquests
and was provided to the Attorney-General in October
Reference was made in
that report to a draft Bill to be presented to the Territory legislature which
was based in its relevant aspects
on the Western Australian legislation. An
appendix to the report comprising a survey of Federal and interstate legislation
Coroners Act 1996
(WA) as a model
provision. However, the report did not draw a distinction between
‘criminate’ and ‘incriminate’,
or suggest or recommend
that the word ‘criminate’ should be used to cure an identified
mischief in the use of the word
‘incriminate’.
[63] An examination of the Western Australian legislative history discloses
that the word ‘criminate’ was not purposefully
used in the
Coroners Act 1996
to denote a privilege which extended in scope beyond
self-incrimination. The
Coroners Act 1996
repealed the
Coroners Act
(WA). That antecedent legislation did not contain any provision
Coroners Act 1996
, did not use the word
‘criminate’, and in fact made no reference to self-incrimination at
all. However, the term ‘criminate’
was used in the
Evidence Act
of which made a person charged with an offence a
competent but not compellable witness, who could not be called ‘except
his own application’
, and further provided in
A person charged and being a witness in pursuance of this section may be
asked any question in cross-examination, notwithstanding
that it would tend to
him as to the offence charged.
(Emphasis added)
[64] The word ‘criminate’ was also used in
Evidence Act 1906
as follows:
(1) Whenever in any proceeding any person called as a witness, or required
to answer any interrogatory, declines to answer any question
or interrogatory on
the ground that his answer will
criminate or tend to criminate
Judge may, if it appears to him expedient for the ends of justice that such
person should be compelled to answer such question
or interrogatory, tell such
person that, if he answers such question or interrogatory, and other questions
or interrogatories that
may be put to him, in a satisfactory manner, he will
grant him the certificate hereinafter mentioned.
(2) Thereupon such person shall no longer be entitled to refuse to answer
any question or interrogatory on the ground that his answer
criminate or
tend to criminate
him; and thereafter if such person shall have given his
evidence to the satisfaction of the Judge, the Judge shall give such person
certificate to the effect that he was called as a witness or interrogated in the
said proceeding, and that his evidence was required
for the ends of justice, and
was given to his satisfaction.
(Emphasis added)
[65] The legal consequences of a certificate issued pursuant to
were set out in
Evidence Act 1906
as follows:
If any person called as a witness or interrogated under sections eleven or
twelve receives the certificate therein mentioned (but
not otherwise) he shall
be freed from all criminal prosecutions and penal actions, and from all
penalties, forfeitures and punishments
to which he was liable for anything done
before that time in respect of the matters touching which he is so examined:
Provided that nothing herein contained shall make such certificate pleadable
in bar of any indictment or information brought against
such person for perjury
committed in such proceeding as aforesaid.
[66] The structure of the first two sub-sections of
Evidence Act 1906
Coroners Act 1996
similarities in drafting, provide a clear indication that
Evidence Act
However, receipt by
the witness of a certificate under
Evidence Act 1906
originally enacted ‘freed’ the witness not only from criminal
prosecutions and penal actions, but also from ‘all
penalties, forfeitures
and punishments’, whereas
Coroners Act 1996
provides only that an incriminating answer would not be admissible in
evidence in criminal proceedings. That is because by the time
was enacted, the
Evidence Amendment Act 1990
had inserted the
following subsection after s 11(2):
(2a) Where in a proceeding a person is given a certificate under subsection
(2) in respect of any evidence, a statement made by him,
as part of that
evidence, in answer to a question or interrogatory is not admissible in evidence
in criminal proceedings against
the person other than on a prosecution for
perjury committed in the proceeding.
Evidence Amendment Act 1990
also made a consequential
amendment to
Evidence Act 1906
by deleting the words
‘called as a witness or interrogated under
sections 11
substituting ‘examined as a witness under
That amendment
reflected the fact that the legal consequences of a
certificate
were now dealt with by the newly inserted
The effect of the
amendments was that the protection afforded by the certificate no longer
extended to ‘all penalties, forfeitures
and punishments’ and was
limited to criminal prosecution.
[68] To the extent that a certificate under the
Evidence Act 1906
originally enacted had application to penalties, that was achieved by the
extension of the protection to ‘all penalties,
forfeitures and
punishments’ rather than by the use of the word ‘criminate’.
The reference to ‘penalties,
forfeitures and punishments’ described
the extent of the immunity rather than the nature of the privilege. So much is
from the fact that, following the 1990 amendments, a certificate has no
operation in relation to civil penalties and forfeitures
notwithstanding the
continued use of the word ‘criminate’. The same conclusion must be
drawn in relation to the operation
Coroners Act 1996
because it was enacted after the 1990 amendments to the
Evidence Act
. A comparison of
Evidence Act 1906
amended, and
Coroners Act 1996
demonstrates that the
latter was very closely modelled on the former.
Evidence Act 1906
amended by No. 47/90
Coroners Act 1996
(1) Whenever in any proceeding any
person called as a witness
required to answer any interrogatory,
declines to answer any question
interrogatory
on the ground that his answer will criminate or tend to
him, the Judge may, if it appears to him
expedient for the ends
of justice that such person should be compelled to answer
such question or
interrogatory, tell such person that,
if he answers such question
interrogatory,
and other questions
or interrogatories
that may be put
, in a satisfactory manner,
he will grant him the certificate
hereinafter mentioned
(2) Thereupon
such person shall no longer be entitled to refuse to
answer any question
or interrogatory
on the ground that his answer will
criminate or tend to criminate him
; and thereafter
if such person shall
have given his evidence to the satisfaction of the Judge
the Judge shall
give such person a certificate to the effect that he was called as a witness
or interrogated in the said proceeding, and
that his evidence was required
for the ends of justice, and was given to his satisfaction
(2a) Where in a proceeding
a person is given a certificate
subsection 2
in respect of any evidence
a statement made by him, as
part of that evidence, in answer to a question
or interrogatory
admissible in evidence in criminal proceedings against the person
on a prosecution for perjury committed in the proceeding.
person called as a witness
at an inquest
declines to
answer any question on the ground that his or her answer will criminate or tend
to criminate
him or her, the coroner may, if it appears to the coroner
expedient for the ends of justice that the person be compelled to answer
the question, tell the person that
if the person answers the question and
other questions that may be put to him
the coroner will grant the
person a certificate under this section
(2) After a person has been offered a certificate,
the person is no
longer entitled to refuse to answer questions on the ground that his or her
answers will criminate or tend to criminate
or her, and
if the person
gives evidence to the satisfaction of the coroner
the coroner must give
the person a certificate to the effect that the person was called as a
in the inquest and
that the person’s evidence was required
for the ends of justice and was given to the coroner’s
satisfaction
a person is given a certificate
in respect of any evidence given at an inquest
statement by the person as part of that evidence in answer to a question
is not admissible in evidence in criminal proceedings against the person
other than on a prosecution for perjury committed in the proceedings.
[69] As already described,
Coroners Act
was modelled
of the Western Australian legislation, including the
adoption of the term ‘criminate’. Given the legislative history
the operation of the Western Australian legislation at the time the 2002
amendments to the
Coroners Act
were being developed, it cannot be
inferred from the use of the term ‘criminate’ that the legislature
Coroners Act
to operate in relation to penalty
privilege as well as the privilege against self-incrimination. That is so even
having regard to
those cases referred to by the Coroner and the Supreme Court
which might be seen to suggest that the term ‘criminate’
historically also used in contemplation of exposure to civil penalties or
forfeitures.
The most that can
be said is that the term is neutral in that respect. If there is a legislative
intention to apply
Coroners Act
to penalty privilege it
must be discerned elsewhere in the text and structure of the legislation.
[70] The second, fourth and fifth respondents say that intention may be
discerned from the text of
Coroners Act
provides that the statements the subject of a certificate are not admissible in
evidence in both criminal and civil proceedings,
including in proceedings before
a tribunal or person exercising powers and functions in a judicial manner. As
the scope of that
protection would extend to proceedings which might have
disciplinary action or the imposition of other civil penalties as a consequence,
it is said that
Coroners Act
must operate in relation to
penalty privilege in the same manner as the privilege against
self-incrimination. That conclusion is
said to be supported by the extrinsic
materials, and in particular the Law Reform Committee report referred to
[71] The report stated that the ‘policy behind the [proposed] amendment
is to get to the truth’, and that, because ‘many
witnesses at
inquests are more concerned about civil liability than criminal charges and
guilt, the policy may be more likely fulfilled
if the certificate were extended
to include “any criminal, civil or other
proceedings”’.
issue was then picked up in the second reading speech on the Bill which
introduced the amendments to
Coroners Act
in 2002. In
that speech, the Attorney-General said:
The objective of the coronial inquest is to find the truth about all
circumstances of the death. In recent cases in the Territory
this objective has
been frustrated by witnesses refusing to answer questions.
The making of sensible recommendations in relation to public health or
safety, or the administration of justice, may also be frustrated
where medical
practitioners refuse to answer questions on the basis of self-incrimination. It
may be that in these cases, the concern
for these witnesses may not be that he
or she may be charged with a criminal offence, but that civil or disciplinary
proceedings
may result from the giving of the evidence. It is important to
emphasise that the effect of the amendment is not to provide an indemnity
prosecution or protection against civil action or disciplinary action. The
witness could still be charged with a criminal offence
following the inquest, or
investigations taken with regard to civil or disciplinary action. It is just
that the actual evidence
given to the coroner cannot be used in subsequent
proceedings.
The policy behind the amendment is to get to the truth.
[72] We accept the submissions made by the third respondent to the effect
that these extracts from the report and the second reading
speech do not suggest
an intention on the part of the legislature to confer a qualified form of
penalty privilege. The reference
to medical practitioners claiming the
privilege against self-incrimination due to a concern about the use of answers
in civil proceedings
did not suggest that the amendment would extend to
incorporate some form of qualified penalty privilege. Answers which might
the witness had committed a criminal offence sufficient to ground a
claim for privilege against self-incrimination might equally
be deployed in
disciplinary proceedings or in civil proceedings claiming damages. Rather, the
reference to that concern explains
why the scope of the use immunity under the
qualified privilege against self-incrimination was extended to both criminal and
proceedings, including disciplinary tribunal
proceedings.
[73] We also respectfully agree with the Supreme Court’s conclusion
that, on proper construction,
Coroners Act
is concerned
only with the qualification of the privilege against self-incrimination, and did
not import a modified form of penalty
privilege into coronial
proceedings.
If it is accepted,
as we have found, that penalty privilege had no application to coronial
proceedings prior to the 2002 amendment,
there is nothing in the text of the
amended provision which confers a right on a witness to the provision of a
certificate granting
use immunity on a claim for penalty privilege on the
apprehension of disciplinary proceedings, as opposed to a claim for the
against self-incrimination. There is certainly no express provision
referring to objection ‘on the ground that the evidence
may tend to prove
that the witness has committed an offence or is liable to a civil
penalty’, as was the case in the legislation
under consideration in
Attorney General (NSW) v
[74] There is also no discernible legislative object or intention to confer
an immunity of that sort. The mischief which led to the
enactment of the 2002
amendment was that coronial proceedings were being stultified by witnesses
claiming the privilege against self-incrimination,
which was expressly preserved
in its original form, and refusing to answer questions on that
basis. The remedy for that was to abrogate that privilege and replace
procedure which gave a coroner the power to require a witness to answer, while
at the same time providing the witness with
the protection of a use immunity.
That remedy was directed only to the subsisting privilege against
self-incrimination. To adopt
Brennan J’s formulation in
the statutory abrogation of self-incrimination merely confirms a person’s
obligation to furnish the information or produce
the document, rather than
giving rise to an implication that penalty privilege is or remains available.
[75] Finally, even if coronial proceedings are properly considered to be
curial or judicial in nature, and penalty privilege therefore
had application in
proceedings under the
Coroners Act
unless abrogated, the 2002 amendment
Coroners Act
operated to abrogate penalty privilege
by necessary intendment. It is common ground that
partially abrogates the privilege against self-incrimination by
permitting a coroner to sustain or overrule a claim of the privilege
offer of a certificate where ‘it appears to the coroner expedient for the
purposes of justice that the person be compelled
to answer the question’.
It would lead to an absurd result if the legislature had abrogated the privilege
against self-incrimination
but left penalty privilege in place. As the
plurality observed in
The implication that the privilege against exposure to penalties was
abrogated by s 155(1) can be supported by reference to the absurdity
would result if that privilege could be claimed and, pursuant to s 155(7),
the privilege against self-incrimination could not.
[76] While it is true that observation is
obiter dicta
directed specifically to the operation of the
Trade Practices Act
reflects the principle underpinning the findings in both
. It is also consistent with McHugh J’s observation in
that the decision in
could be justified on the
ground that the express abrogation of the privilege against self-incrimination
gave rise to a necessary
implication that any right to claim penalty privilege
was also abolished.
[77] As the Full Court said in
, after the treatment in
all that is left of
in relation to penalty
privilege is the result, predicated on the absurdity that would result if the
person was able to claim penalty
privilege but not the privilege against
self-incrimination. That is because it would allow a coroner to compel a
witness exposed
to potential criminal proceedings whilst providing a complete
immunity from questions giving rise to civil or disciplinary consequences,
outcome which was described by the High Court in
‘irrational’ and
Moreover, that result would frustrate the abrogation of the privilege against
self-incrimination because a claim of penalty privilege
would in many instances
also extend to questions, evidence and statements which would also otherwise be
subject to the qualified
privilege against self-incrimination.
[78] At a somewhat higher level of abstraction, the conclusion that the
abrogation of the privilege against self-incrimination impliedly
excludes the
operation of penalty privilege is consistent with the result in
There the exclusion was said to arise from the inconsistency between a provision
requiring officers to obey lawful orders, and
the detrimental impact which the
operation of penalty privilege would have on discipline in the police force.
Just as it was inappropriate
to subject the obligation to obey lawful orders
‘to any unexpressed qualification’, the requirement to answer
in coronial proceedings is directed in large part to the conduct of
public authorities and should be similarly unfettered. The continued
of a penalty privilege after the abrogation of the privilege against
self-incrimination would contradict or diminish the
operation of the coronial
legislation and the achievement of its purposes.
Disposition
[79] The appeal is dismissed.
[80] Consistent with these reasons, the notices of contention filed by the
second respondent and the fourth respondent are dismissed.
[81] We will hear the parties as to costs.
__________________________
Inquest into the death of
Kumanjayi Walker (Ruling No 5)
[2022] NTLC 024.
Sections 39
Coroners Act
respectively provide that: a ‘coroner holding an
inquest is not bound by the rules of evidence and may be informed, and conduct
the inquest, in a manner the coroner reasonably thinks fit’; and a
‘coroner may ... subject to
, order a witness to give evidence on
Bauwens & Anor v The
Territory Coroner
[2022] NTSC 92
In its unanimous decision in
Farah Constructions v Say-Dee Pty Ltd
(2007) 230 CLR 89
at [135], the
High Court stated: 'Intermediate appellate courts and trial judges in Australia
should not depart from decisions in
intermediate appellate courts in another
national legislation
unless they are convinced that the interpretation is
plainly wrong. Since there is a common law of Australia rather than of each
Australian jurisdiction, the same principle applies in relation to non-statutory
law.' An example of the application of the principle
[2009] VSCA 290
; 26 VR 387 at
, per Nettle J: 'Strictly
speaking, Santow and Campell JJA’s remarks in
obiter, but I take them to be ‘seriously considered’ obiter and,
with respect, I am not persuaded that they are
plainly wrong.'
The Daniels Corporation
International Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2002] HCA 49
213 CLR 543
Migration Agents Registration
Authority v Frugniet
[2018] FCAFC 5
259 FCR 219
Bauwens & Anor v The
Territory Coroner
[2022] NTSC 92
Priest v West
[2012] VSCA 327
(2012) 40 VR
Bauwens & Anor v The
Territory Coroner
[2022] NTSC 92
Bauwens & Anor v The
Territory Coroner
[2022] NTSC 92
Bauwens & Anor v The
Territory Coroner
[2022] NTSC 92
Public Service Board v
[1985] HCA 9
(1985) 156 CLR 397
at 402 per Gibbs CJ.
Pyneboard v Trade Practices
(1983) 152 CLR 328
at 336 per Mason ACJ,
Wilson and Dawson JJ;
at [13] per Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, Gummow and
See, for example,
Butterfield
[1864] EngR 803
(1864) 122 ER 1038
Redfern v Redfern
[1890] UKLawRpPro 60
[1891] P 139
(in relation to ecclesiastical courts).
at 341-342.
at [11] and
[16], with reference to
Potter v Minahan
[1908] HCA 63
(1908) 7 CLR 277
v The Queen
[1994] HCA 15
(1994) 179 CLR 427
Commissioner of Australian Federal
Police v Propend Finance Pty Ltd
(1997) 188 CLR 501.
Rich v Australian Securities
and Investments Commission
[2004] HCA 42
220 CLR 129.
Attorney General (NSW) v
[2007] NSWCA 201.
Attorney General (NSW) v
[2007] NSWCA 201
Deputy Coroner of
[2020] SASC 59.
at [177]-[179].
Balog v Independent
Commission against Corruption
[1990] HCA 28
(1990) 169 CLR 625
at 635-636;
Holdings v Stretton
(2001) 178 ALR 218
at 224 per McHugh J;
Fashions Pty Ltd v Comptroller-General of Customs
(1996) 17 WAR 499
Price v McCabe; Ex parte Price
[1985] 2 Qd R 510.
Mann v Paterson
Constructions Pty Ltd
[2019] HCA 32
(2019) 267 CLR 560
, cited with approval in
Stephens v R
[2022] HCA 31
(2022) 404 ALR 367
Deputy Commissioner of
Taxation v Shi
[2021] HCA 22
(2021) 392 ALR 1
Lee v New South Wales Crime
[2013] HCA 39
(2013) 251 CLR 196
See, for example,
[1994] HCA 15
(1994) 179 CLR 427
at 438 (Mason CJ, Brennan, Gaudron and McHugh JJ),
446 (Deane and Dawson JJ);
X7 v Australian Crime Commission
[2013] HCA 29
(French CJ and Crennan J): ‘clear words or necessary
implication’, 603 [119], 604 [125] (Hayne and Bell JJ): ‘by
words or necessary intendment’;
Lee v The Queen
[2014] HCA 20
(2014) 253 CLR 455
(French CJ, Crennan, Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ): ‘clear words
or those of necessary intendment’.
Coroners Act
Coroners Act
Coroners Act
Coroners Act
See, for example,
provides that a coroner shall conduct an inquest in 'open court', that
appears to be a reference to the conditions under which an
inquest is to be
conducted rather than to the character of the proceedings.
Coroners Act
It may be noted that is the
obverse of the position obtaining in the circumstances under consideration in
, in which there was a provision expressly requiring the Court to
apply the rules of evidence and procedure.
Coroners Act
Coroners Act
Coroners Act
The position at common law was
that a coroner constituted an inferior court of record, the powers of which were
relevantly limited
to contempt committed in the face of the court:
(1873) LR 8 QB 134.
Decker v State Coroner of
New South Wales
[1999] NSWSC 369
(1999) 46 NSWLR 415
at [6], citing
Attorney-General (NSW) v Mirror Newspapers Ltd
[1980] 1 NSWLR 374
John Fairfax & Sons Ltd v Gill
(1988) 12 NSWLR 77
Coroners Act
preserves the jurisdiction conferred by the
common law, but that preservation does not add anything to the proper
characterisation
of coronial proceedings as either 'judicial' or
'non-judicial'.
See, for example,
Lamb v Moss
[1983] FCA 254
Australian Broadcasting
Tribunal v Bond
(1990) 170 CLR 321 at 366-367.
Hunter Parker & Co Pty
Ltd v Moorehead
[1909] HCA 36
(1909) 8 CLR 330
Australian Apple & Pear Marketing
Board v Tonking
[1942] HCA 37
(1942) 66 CLR 77
Rola Co (Aus) Pty Ltd v
Commonwealth
[1944] HCA 17
(1944) 69 CLR 185
at 198. It may be noted by way of example
that a coroner is expressly precluded from including in any finding or comment a
that a person is or may be guilty of an offence:
Coroners Act
Domaszewicz v State
[2004] VSC 528
(2004) 11 VR 237
Grollo v Bates
(1994) 53 FCR 218.
Lansley v Knight; Ex parte
(1992) 110 FLR 295.
R v South London Coroner; Ex
parte Thompson
[1982] 126 SJ 625; cited in
McKerr v Armagh Coroner
[1990] WLR 649
Mirror Newspapers Ltd v
(1985) 1 NSWLR 1 at 16.
The conduct of an inquest is
mandatory in relation to deaths occurring where the deceased was held in care or
custody, or during
or as a result of an anaesthetic:
Coroners Act
On the issue of express mention
of one privilege and the omission of another as giving rise to the inference of
an intention to
abolish the privilege in the application of the
principle: see Suzanne McNicol,
Law of Privilege
Lawbook Co, 1992 at 122-123; and
Corporate Affairs Commission (NSW) v
[1991] HCA 28
172 CLR 319
Baker v Campbell
153 CLR 52.
That decision held that the doctrine of legal professional
privilege is not confined to judicial and quasi-judicial proceedings.
that decision, the law was thought to be that a claim of legal professional
privilege was not available in other circumstances.
Refrigerated Express Lines (Australasia) v Australian Meat and
Livestock Corporation
(1979) 42 FLR 204
at 207-208;
Trade Practices
Commission v Abbco Iceworks Pty Limited
[1994] FCA 1279
(1994) 52 FCR 96
at 127-129;
Construction Forestry Mining & Energy Union of Australia v Inspector
[2004] FCAFC 36
(2004) 135 FCR 459
Northern Territory Law Reform
Privilege Against Self-Incrimination
, Report No.23, October
2001, 5-6, 9.
Evidence Act 1906
was taken from the
Protection of Witnesses Act 1875
39 Vict, No.6, s 2. The
Evidence Act 1906
was taken from
Protection of Witnesses Act 1875
(WA), 39 Vict, No.6, s 3. It may be
Evidence Act 1906
(WA) also used the word
‘criminate’: 'Except as hereinbefore provided, nothing in this Act
shall render any person compellable
to answer any question tending to criminate
Evidence Amendment Act
(WA), No. 47 of 1990, s 4.
Evidence Amendment Act
No. 47 of 1990, s 6.
Evidence Amendment Act
was enacted to remedy an identified mischief and anomaly, namely the
circumstances in which one co-accused gave evidence under protest
self-incrimination in the trial of another co-accused claiming sole
responsibility for a crime. The consequence of that evidence
was that the other
co-accused was acquitted, and the witness was entitled to a s 11
certificate precluding him or her from being
tried for the offence: see Second
reading, Evidence Amendment Bill, Hon J M Berinson (Attorney-General), WA
Legislative Council,
26 September 1990.
Short v Mercer
Marton v Treacher
(1886) 16 QBD 507
[1809] EngR 431
(1809) 16 Ves Jun 239
, 240, 241, 243. The use of the term
'criminate' in those speeches might be seen only to reflect the fact that
penalty privilege
and the privilege against self-incrimination are based on the
same general principle.
Northern Territory Law Reform
Privilege Against Self-Incrimination
, Report No.23, October
This construction was also
accepted by the Supreme Court: see
Bauwens & Anor v The Territory
[2022] NTSC 92
, [54]-[55].
Bauwens & Anor v The
Territory Coroner
[2022] NTSC 92
Attorney General (NSW) v
[2007] NSWCA 201.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (450 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter