URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTSC/2025/75.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:22:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Satour-Brown v Cartmill & Anor [2025] NTSC 75 (10 October 2025)
Satour-Brown v Cartmill & Anor
[2025] NTSC 75
PARTIES: SATOUR-BROWN, Kenneth
CARTMILL, Robert
LYONS, Richard Mark
TITLE OF COURT: SUPREME COURT OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NOs: LCA 1 of 2025 (22238177)
LCA 2 of 2025 (22430549)
DELIVERED: 10 October 2025
HEARING DATE: 11 August 2025
JUDGMENT OF: Brownhill J
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: S Arnab
Respondents: T McKinney
Solicitors:
Appellant: North Australian Aboriginal Justice Agency
Respondents: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Judgment category classification: C
Judgment ID Number: Bro2512
Number of pages: 20
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
AT ALICE SPRINGS
Satour-Brown v Cartmill & Anor
[2025] NTSC 75
No. LCA 1 of 2025 (22238177)
of 2025 (22430549)
KENNETH SATOUR-BROWN
ROBERT CARTMILL
First Respondent
RICHARD MARK LYONS
Second Respondent
CORAM: BROWNHILL J
REASONS FOR DECISION
(Delivered 10 October 2025)
sentences the subject of this appeal were imposed on the appellant by the Local
Court, comprising imprisonment for three years
and eight months for: (a) the
offences of recklessly endangering serious harm, aggravated by the use of a
machete and possessing
a controlled weapon (the machete) to be served
concurrently; and (b) a full restoration of a previously suspended sentence of
imprisonment
for stealing and aggravated assault, which restoration was
cumulative as to two months. The issues are whether the sentences were
manifestly excessive or attended by error in a failure to consider the principle
of totality and/or a failure to give sufficient
weight to the appellant’s
early plea of guilty.
The offending and sentence on file
[2] On 9 January
2021, the appellant committed the offences of burglary and aggravated robbery.
On 7 February 2021, he was arrested
and remanded for this offending on file
[3] On 30 June
2022, the appellant was sentenced to a total effective sentence of two years and
seven months, backdated to 7 February
2021. The sentence was suspended with
effect from 1 July 2022 (after just under five months had been served), with
various conditions
including supervision, abstinence from drug use with testing,
and a requirement to notify of any change of address. An operational
two years from release was imposed during which the appellant was not to commit
further offending punishable by imprisonment.
[4] On 3 October
2022, the appellant was found to have breached the suspended sentence by testing
positive to cannabis. The Supreme
Court found the breach proven and took no
further action.
The charges on file 22238177
[5] On 26 and 27
November 2022, the appellant committed the offences of theft and assault. On 13
December 2022, he was arrested and
remanded on file 22238177 after handing
himself in to Police.
Further breach of the suspended sentence on
file 22104712
[6] On 4 May
2023, the appellant was found to have breached the suspended sentence by failing
to engage in supervision and failing
to notify his change of address on 30
November 2022. The Supreme Court found the breaches proven and restored five
months of the
sentence, backdated to 13 December 2022. The restored period of
imprisonment expired on 12 May 2023.
Bail and sentence on file
[7] On 16 June
2023, the appellant was granted bail on file 22238177 on various conditions. He
was thereupon again subject to the
conditions of the suspended sentence on file
22104712. The conditions of bail were varied on 18 September 2023 and 14 March
October 2024, the appellant was sentenced by the Local Court for the offending
on file 22238177. That offending was against
his then domestic partner, on and
off, of six years. They were living together at the time of the offending. The
appellant came home
and demanded money from the victim. She was scared of the
appellant and handed him her bank card following which he withdrew $580
account. That was the offence of stealing. Later that night, the victim went out
drinking, leaving the appellant to care
for the victim’s two year old son.
When she got home in the morning, the appellant yelled angrily at her asking
where she was
and what she had been doing. She felt scared and walked away. The
appellant followed her in a car and told her to get in. The child
was also in
the car. The victim got into the car and the appellant slapped her once to the
face and punched her once to the back
of the head while she was holding the
child and unable to defend herself. Back at home a verbal argument continued. A
witness drove
past and the victim went towards the car. The appellant grabbed
her shirtsleeve and it tore off. She ran towards the car, still holding
child. The appellant drove away. The victim suffered pain and bumps to her head.
She went to the hospital for treatment.
[9] The sentence
imposed was imprisonment for 10 months, backdated to 16 April 2024. The sentence
was suspended immediately (after
having served almost six months), with
conditions and an operational period of 12 months from release during which the
was not to commit further offending punishable by
imprisonment.
The charges on file 22430549
November 2024, the appellant committed the offences of recklessly endangering
serious harm and possessing a controlled weapon.
He was arrested and remanded on
file 22430549.
The restoration of the suspended sentence on file
December 2024, the Supreme Court dealt with the appellant’s breach of the
suspended sentence on file 22104712 by way
of the offending on file 22238177.
The unserved portion of the suspended sentence, comprising 281 days (just over
nine months), was
restored, backdated to 2 November 2024.
sentences on files 22430549 and 22238177
December 2024, the appellant pleaded guilty in the Local Court to the following
offences on file 22430549:
(a) Engaging in conduct that gave rise to a danger of serious harm to CW and was
reckless as to the danger of serious harm arising
from that conduct, contrary to
ss 174D and 174G of the
Criminal Code
(b) Possessing a controlled weapon, namely a machete, in a public place,
contrary to s 7(1) of the
Weapons Control Act
January 2025, the appellant was sentenced to a total effective sentence of
imprisonment for three years and eight months,
backdated to 1 April 2024, with a
non-parole period of one year and 10 months, comprised of:
(a) three years and six months for the offence of endangering serious harm;
(b) six months for the offence of possessing a controlled weapon, to be served
concurrently with the above; and
(c) a full restoration of the unserved portion of the suspended sentence on file
22238177, which was to be cumulative as to two months
with the sentences on file
Grounds of appeal
[14] Pursuant to
s 163 of the
Local Court (Criminal Procedure) Act
appellant appealed against the sentence on the following grounds:
(a) that the sentence was manifestly excessive;
(b) that the Local Court failed to properly consider the principle of totality;
(c) that the Local Court failed to give proper weight to the appellant’s
early guilty plea.
The agreed facts
[15] The facts
agreed on the plea were that the appellant was 39 years old. The victim, CW, was
his 33 year old domestic partner.
They had been in a relationship for around one
year. She was five months pregnant with twins. The appellant and CW lived
in Tennant Creek. They had separated around three days before the
offending, with the appellant moving out of their home.
[16] Between 9pm
and 10.30pm, the victim and a female witness, PB, were socialising with other
people at the home. During this period,
the appellant kept CW under his
surveillance by driving past the home around six times. At around 12.30am, the
appellant went to
the home and had a verbal argument with CW, asking her what
people were doing at her house. He forcefully kicked her to her upper
causing her to feel fear and experience pain. He stepped closer to her and drew
a 40cm machete from behind his back. He held
it above his head in a threatening
manner. He then struck CW once to the top of her head with the machete, causing
immense fear,
pain and apprehension. She suffered a cut to the top of her head
measuring 4-5 cm in length. The appellant walked to an outdoor glass
table in the front yard and struck it once with the machete, causing the glass
to shatter. An unknown person walked past.
In an aggressive tone, the appellant
yelled out: ‘What are you looking at? I’ll come hit you too!’
He then walked
away from the home. PB called 000. CW was taken to the hospital
and received treatment for her injuries. The appellant was later
located and
arrested. He declined to participate in a recorded
Appellant’s circumstances and submissions to the
Local Court
appellant was 39 years old at the time of sentencing. He had a prior criminal
record comprised of:
(a) two convictions for aggravated robbery, the most recent committed in January
2021 (the offending the subject of file 22104712);
(b) 12 convictions for assault or aggravated assault, including by causing harm
to a female, the most recent being the offending
on file 22238177;
(c) one conviction for possessing a controlled weapon at night, committed in
(d) four convictions for breaching a domestic violence order, committed in
November 2009; and
(e) various other convictions for property offences, drug offences, disorderly
conduct offences and traffic offences.
appellant also had some 10 instances of breaching the conditions of bail or a
suspended sentence.
[19] Photographs
of CW’s injuries and the smashed table were received by the Local Court,
as were a number of character references
for the appellant, including from
former employers, and letters of support from the appellant’s counsellor,
indicating he had
participated in numerous counselling sessions, demonstrated a
strong desire for change and recovery from drug addiction and described
childhood trauma involving personal experience of drunken violence at the hands
of his stepfather and a childhood of deprivation
and dysfunction, and had
described symptoms consistent with a complex Post Traumatic Stress Disorder
diagnosis. Compliance reports
were also received from Community Corrections
Court’s sentencing remarks
[20] As regards
the objective seriousness of the offending on file 22430549, the Local Court
referred to the appellant’s ‘clear
headed coherent pursuit’ of
CW over the hours of his surveillance of CW preceding the offending and a
premeditated act in going
to the home armed with the weapon. The
appellant’s conduct was controlling and frightening to CW, including going
to her home
after the people who had been there had left and demanding to know
what she had been doing. The victim would have feared for her
unborn children as
well as herself. The weapon, a machete, was capable of causing serious injury
and instilling extreme fear, the
appellant kicked the victim and struck her to
the head with a machete, causing immense fear, pain and an injury to the victim,
a machete to the head with the blade carries a significant risk of serious
[21] The Local
Court characterised the offending to be at the lower end of the mid-range of
seriousness for such offences.
Nature of the appeal
uncontroversial that an appeal against sentence under
Court (Criminal Procedure) Act 1928
(NT) is an appeal from the exercise of a
judicial discretion governed by the well-established principles set out in
House v The King.
principles are that:
(a) It is not enough that the appeal court considers that, if they had been in
the position of the sentencing Judge, they would have
taken a different
(b) There must be some error in the exercise of the sentencing discretion.
(c) The errors may be acting upon a wrong principle, allowing extraneous or
irrelevant matters to guide or affect the exercise of
the discretion, mistaking
the facts, or not taking into account some material consideration. This is the
nature of the appeal grounds
asserting specific error.
(d) Alternatively, the error may be that the sentence is manifestly excessive or
manifestly inadequate. This is the nature of the
other appeal ground.
Mitchell v Gibson
also noted the following principles applicable to an appeal against sentence
from the then Magistrates Court (now the Local
(a) It is not to be assumed that the failure to mention a sentencing principle
means that it has been
overlooked.
(b) Local Court Judges are working under pressures which mean they are unable to
give the kind of detailed reasons which might be
expected of a court delivering
a reserved judgment, and sentencing remarks delivered in such circumstances
should not be subjected
to the same degree of critical analysis as the words in
a considered reserved judgment.
(c) An appellate court is entitled to assume that a Local Court Judge has
considered all matters which are necessarily implicit in
any conclusions
Ground 1 – Manifest excess
appellant did not challenge the original sentence on file 22238177, nor the
decision to restore the outstanding portion of
the suspended sentence upon the
breach of that suspended sentence by the offending the subject of file
appellant argued that the sentence for the endanger serious harm offence of
three years and six months was manifestly excessive,
as was the sentence for the
possession of a controlled weapon. The appellant argued that the total effective
sentence of three years
and eight months was also manifestly
Applicable principles
principles applicable to an appeal against sentence on the ground of manifest
excess are well-settled and were conveniently
described in
Forrest v The
[2017] NTCCA 5
(at [63]-[64]) and
Edmond v The Queen
(at [4]). Those principles are:
(a) The sentence is not to be disturbed on appeal unless error is shown.
(b) The presumption is that there is no error.
(c) Appellate intervention is not justified simply because the sentence is
markedly different from other sentences imposed in other
(d) Intervention is warranted only where the difference is such that in all the
circumstances the appellate court concludes there
must have been some
misapplication of principle, even though where and how is not apparent from the
(e) Manifest excess does not depend upon attribution of specific error. The
relevant test is whether the sentence was unreasonable
or plainly unjust.
(f) It must be shown that the sentence was clearly, not just arguably,
(g) There is no one single correct sentence. There can be compliance with
appropriate sentencing principles notwithstanding there
may be differences of
judicial opinion concerning the result.
[27] Matters to
be considered in such an appeal are the maximum penalty for the offence, the
place which the criminal conduct occupies
in the scale of seriousness of
offences of the type committed by the appellant, the standards of sentencing
customarily imposed for
the offence and the personal circumstances of the
appellant submitted that there were several key features of the sentence that
ought to be reviewed by this Court ‘to
determine whether the process of
instinctive synthesis has correctly balanced the objective seriousness of the
offending against
the relevant subjective factors’. These matters were the
Local Court’s failure to differentiate between the offences
the subject of
the appellant’s criminal history, including that many were not for
domestic violence offences, the appellant’s
diagnosis of PTSD, its impact
by making his time in custody more onerous and his engagement with treatment,
and the Local Court’s
characterisation of this offending as at the lower
end of the mid-range, with which the appellant did not take issue. The appellant
submitted that, taking into account these matters, the instinctive synthesis
‘would not support a head sentence of three years
and eight months’
imprisonment.
submission did not address the principles applicable to appeals on the ground of
manifest excess. It appeared to simply
invite this Court to undertake the
sentencing process again and arrive at a different conclusion to the Local
Court. That is not
the proper approach to such a ground of appeal. No reference
was made to the range of sentences imposed for this offence, let alone
this sentence was markedly different from other sentences, or how it was that
the difference is such that in all the circumstances
this Court should conclude
that there must have been some misapplication of principle, even though where
and how is not apparent
from the reasons.
[30] The maximum
penalty for the endanger serious harm offence is imprisonment for 10 years.
[31] The Local
Court did not specify the amount of the discount afforded for the
appellant’s guilty plea. However, the Local
Court expressly noted both the
full utility of the plea and the appellant’s remorse as demonstrated by
his desire to express
his apology to CW and his concerns for her welfare and the
impact of his actions on her. This makes it highly likely that a discount
was applied, that being the discount commonly applied for an early plea with
genuine remorse.
[32] On that
basis, the starting point for the sentence on this count was imprisonment for
four years and eight months. Taking into
account the appellant’s personal
circumstances, both positive and negative, the latter of which include his
significant prior
history of violent offences, including domestic violence, and
the fact that this offending was committed only weeks after the appellant
sentenced for the offending on file 22238177 involving domestic violence against
another partner, a starting point of four years
and eight months for an offence
at the lower end of the mid-range of seriousness is not manifestly
[33] As to the
appellant’s complaint of manifest excess in relation to the sentence of
imprisonment for six months for the offence
of possessing a controlled weapon,
the maximum penalty for this offence is imprisonment for one year. Even
accepting the appellant’s
submission that this charge (of possession in a
public place) must relate to the appellant’s possession of the machete as
entered and exited the home of CW, that conduct involved taking the machete,
concealed by the appellant, to the home of the victim,
whom he had been
coercively controlling by watching her across a period of hours, and which
machete he subsequently used against
her in the commission of the other offence.
The appellant had a prior conviction for a similar offence and offences for
involving the use of weapons. Again, the appellant made no reference to
any comparative sentences and appeared to invite this Court
to engage in the
sentencing process itself to arrive at a different sentence. In any event, the
sentence was made wholly concurrent
with the sentence for the endanger serious
harm offence, so any order identifying error in it (if one were established)
no utility whatsoever.
[34] Finally,
the complaint that the additional two months added to the sentence to reflect
the four months outstanding on the suspended
sentence which was fully restored
does not render the total effective sentence manifestly excessive. The
appellant’s arguments
[35] For the
above reasons, this ground is not made out.
Misapplication of the principle of totality
appellant submitted that the starting point of any sentence of imprisonment
‘ought to be concurrent unless otherwise
ordered’, citing
Sentencing Act 1995
Carroll v The Queen
Court of Criminal Appeal observed as follows:
The following
principles are well established. First,
Sentencing Act
creates a prima facie rule that terms of imprisonment are to be served
concurrently unless the court ‘otherwise orders’.
There is no fetter
on the discretion exercised by the Court and the prima facie rule can be
displaced by a positive decision. Secondly,
it is both impractical and
undesirable to attempt to lay down comprehensive principles according to which a
sentencing judge may
determine, in every case, whether the sentences should be
ordered to be served concurrently or cumulatively. Reasonable minds might
as to the need for cumulation. Often there will be no clearly correct answer.
Thirdly, an offender should not be sentenced
simply and indiscriminately for
each crime he is convicted of but for what can be characterised as his criminal
conduct. The sentences
for the individual offences and the total sentence
imposed must be proportionate to the criminality in each case.
However, the overriding concern is that the sentences for the individual
offences and the total sentence imposed be proportionate
to the criminality of
each case. Concurrency may be appropriate because the crimes which gave rise to
the offender’s convictions
are so closely related and interdependent. What
is necessarily required in every case is a sound discretionary judgment as to
there should be cumulation or concurrency.
considerations which operate in the assessment of nexus, interdependency and
sentence were set out by the Court of Criminal
Thomas v The
and need not be repeated
appellant argued that the principle of totality required a greater degree of
concurrency between the sentences for the offending
on file 22430549 and the
restored suspended sentence on file 22104712 because the commission of the
offending was the source of the
breach and was crucial in the decision to fully
restore the sentence. In
Satour-Brown
Reeves J held (at
[21]) that the appellant’s ‘recent re-offending’ (i.e. the
offending on file 22430549: at [15]-[16])
had ‘essentially
destroyed’ the appellant’s laudable initiatives over the previous 18
months to achieve his rehabilitation,
and (at [22]) when those initiatives were
set aside and the other relevant circumstances were considered, including the
on file 22238177 and the recent re-offending, there was no injustice
in restoring the suspended sentence in full.
[40] The Local
Court expressly referred to the principle of totality and held that there would
be concurrency between the two sentences
on file 22430549 to avoid an overly
crushing sentence and there would be some concurrency with the restored
sentence, but not full
concurrency because of the need to reflect that the
appellant made choices and there were different victims.
[41] There were
four months of a 10 month sentence unserved on the suspended sentence. To add
two months of those four months to the
two wholly concurrent sentences imposed
for the offending on file 22430549 demonstrates a sound discretionary judgment
as to whether
there should be cumulation or concurrency.
[42] For the
above reasons, this ground is not made out.
Insufficient weight to the early guilty plea
appellant sought to make out this ground on the basis of a calculation of the
initial head sentence that would, if there
had been a discount of 25%, have
yielded a sentence of three years and eight months. That initial head sentence
would have been four
years, 10 months and 15 days. It was then argued that the
initial head sentence would have been manifestly excessive and, it followed,
that insufficient weight was given to the early plea and the appellant’s
approach is obviously flawed when the total effective sentence included two
months of a restored suspended sentence, to
which any discount for the guilty
plea would not have applied.
[45] It is also
flawed when the initial head sentence for the offending on file 22430549 was not
manifestly excessive, for the reasons
set out above.
[46] The Local
Court expressly referred to both the utilitarian value of the early guilty plea
which meant that CW did not have to
give evidence, and to the appellant’s
remorse for the effects of his offending on her. There is no warrant for an
that the Local Court gave these matters insufficient weight.
[47] This ground
of appeal is not made out.
Disposition
[48] None of the
appellant’s grounds of appeal have been made out.
[49] The appeal
is dismissed.
-----------------------------------
House v The King
at 504-505.
Mitchell v Gibson
Van Toorenburg v
[2011] NTSC 31
Blokland J.
Jambajimba v Dredge
(1985) 33 NTR 19
at 22 per Muirhead ACJ.
Bartusevics v Fisher
(1973) 8 SASR 601.
Edmond v The Queen
per Grant CJ and Hiley J, citing
Phan v Western Australia
[2014] WASCA 144
per Mazza JA (Martin CJ and Buss JA agreeing).
Carroll v The Queen
[2011] NTCCA 6
29 NTLR 106
, [44] per ???? JJ, cited in
Thomas v The Queen
per Grant CJ, Southwood and Riley JJ.
Thomas v The Queen
per Grant CJ, Southwood and Riley JJ.
The King v Satour-Brown
[2024] NTSC 102.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (170 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter