URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTSCFC/2006/67.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:23:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Chaffey v Santos Ltd & Anor [2006] NTSCFC 67; [2006] NTSC 67 (15 September 2006)
Chaffey v Santos Ltd
[2006] NTSC 67
PARTIES: CHAFFEY, CAMERON OWEN
SANTOS LIMITED (ACN 007 550 923)
ATTORNEY–GENERAL FOR THE NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
INTERVENING
TITLE OF COURT: FULL COURT OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
EXERCISING TERRITORY JURISDICTION
FILE NO: NO. 93 OF 2005 (20518847)
DELIVERED: 15 SEPTEMBER 2006
HEARING DATES: 24 & 28 APRIL 2006
JUDGMENT OF: ANGEL, MILDREN & SOUTHWOOD JJ
CATCHWORDS:
Constitutional law – powers of Legislative Assembly – power to
acquire property – injured worker entitled to worker’s
compensation
– retrospective amending Act reducing amount of compensation –
whether an acquisition of property otherwise
than on just terms –
Northern Territory (Self–Government) Act
, s 50 (Cth)
Legislation:
Interpretation Act
s 59, s 62B
Supreme Court Act
(NT) s 21(1)
Work Health Act
(NT) s 49, s 49(1), s 49(1A), s 49
(1B), s 52, s 53, s 64, s 65, s 65(2), s 68,
s 75B, s 80, s 81, s 82, s 83, s 85(2), s 88,
s 91, s 91A, s 93, s 94, s 97,
s 115(1), s 145(1), s 176(1), s 176(2), s 184,
s 185, s 186, s 188, s 189
Work Health Amendment Act
(NT) 2004 s 5, s 194,
Workmen’s Compensation Act
(NT) 1949–1984 s 20
Northern Territory (Self–Government) Act
1978 (Cth) s 50,
Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act
The Australian
Constitution
Australian Tape Manufacturers Association Ltd v Commonwealth
(1993) 176 CLR 480
Clunies–Ross v The Commonwealth
(1984) 155 CLR 193
Commonwealth v WMC Resources Ltd
[1998] HCA 8
(1998) 194 CLR 1
Ha v New South Wales
[1997] HCA 34
(1997) 189 CLR 465
Mutual Pools & Staff Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
[1994] HCA 9
(1994) 179 CLR 155
Nintendo Co Ltd v Centronics Systems Pty Ltd
[1994] HCA 27
(1994) 181 CLR 134
Re Director of Public Prosecutors; Ex parte Lawler
[1994] HCA 10
(1994) 179 CLR
Smith v ANL Ltd
(2000) 204 CLR 493
Theophanous v Commonwealth of Australia
[2006] HCA 18
Australian Capital Territory v Pinter
[2002] FCAFC 186
(2002) 121 FCR 509
John Holland Constructions Pty Ltd v Hall
(1987) 85 FLR 171
Referred to:
AAT King’s Tours PtyLtd v Hughes
(1994) 4 NTLR 185
Commonwealth v Tasmania
[1983] HCA 21
(1983) 158 CLR 1
Georgiadis v Australian & Overseas Telecommunications Corporation
(1994)179 CLR 297
Hastings Deering (Australia) Ltd v Smith
[2004] NTCA 13
Laughton v Griffin
[1894] UKLawRpAC 61
(1895) AC 104
Maddalozzo v Maddick
[1992] NTSC 46
(1992) 108 FLR 159
Newcrest Mining (WA) Ltd v Commonwealth
[1997] HCA 38
(1997) 190 CLR 513
Distinguished
Health Insurance Commission v Peverill
[1994] HCA 8
(1994) 179 CLR 226
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: M Grant & N Christrup
Respondent: P Barr QC
Intervenor: T Pauling QC with S Brownhill
Solicitors:
Applicant: Ward Keller
Respondent: Hunt & Hunt
Intervenor: Solicitor for the Northern Territory
Judgment category classification: A
Judgment ID Number: Ang2006013
Number of pages: 45
IN THE FULL COURT OF THE
SUPREME COURT OF THE
NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Chaffey v Santos Ltd
[2006] NTSC 67
No. 93 of 2005 (20518847)
CAMERON OWEN CHAFFEY
SANTOS LIMITED (ACN 007 550 923)
ATTORNEY–GENERAL FOR THE NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
CORAM: ANGEL, MILDREN & SOUTHWOOD JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 15 September 2006)
[1] The terms of
the case stated for the opinion of the Supreme Court pursuant to
Work Health Act (NT) are set out in the Reasons for Judgment of Mildren J.
[2] The question
is whether the Work Health Amendment Act 2004 which amended the definition of
“normal weekly earnings”
in s 49 Work Health Act (NT) so as to
exclude superannuation contributions from normal weekly earnings and therefore
from the computation
of statutory compensation payable to injured workers
pursuant to s 53 Work Health Act (NT) is a law “with respect to the
acquisition
of property otherwise than on just terms” for the purposes of
s 50(1) Northern Territory (Self–Government) Act 1978 (Cth).
[3] It may be
accepted that the applicant’s statutory right of compensation under the
Work Health Act (NT) is “property”.
It may also be accepted that
the extinguishment of a right which compromises “property” does not
necessarily constitute
an acquisition of property;
Commonwealth v Tasmania
(the Franklin Dam case)
[1983] HCA 21
(1983) 158 CLR 1
Mutual Pools & Staff
Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1994] HCA 9
(1994) 179 CLR 155
at 172–3. It may also
be accepted that the extinguishment of a statutory right having no basis in the
general law can, but
need not necessarily, effect an acquisition of property.
As Brennan CJ said in
The Commonwealth v W M C Resources Ltd
[1998] HCA 8
“If statutory rights were conferred on A and a
reciprocal liability were imposed on B and the rights were proprietary in
a law extinguishing A’s rights
effect an acquisition
of property by B.” (my emphasis)
[4] Does the
exclusion of superannuation from the computation of compensation payable by the
respondent to the applicant effect an
acquisition of property by the respondent?
I have come to the conclusion it does not because the applicant’s right to
compensation
from the respondent is a right subject to alteration and its
alteration does not therefore constitute an acquisition of property.
that the amending Act in excluding the superannuation component from
“normal weekly earnings” works to the
detriment of the applicant and
reciprocally to the benefit of the respondent. As I understand the High Court
authorities, whilst
this may be indicative of an acquisition of property, it is
not necessarily determinative:
W M C Resources Ltd
, ante, at [16], [17]
per Brennan CJ, [78], [79], per Gaudron J.
[5] If, as I
think is the present case, the accrued right of the applicant to be paid
compensation is at a level inherently subject
to change from time to time
– up or down – its occasional modification does not effect an
acquisition, notwithstanding
any reciprocal benefit or detriment the applicant
or respondent receives or suffers from time to time as a consequence. This is
so because the applicant’s accrued right to be compensated and the
respondent’s reciprocal obligation are both subject
to change. Any
diminution of the value of the applicant’s right is simply a quality or
characteristic of that right, not a
loss of right. Were this not so, following
the accrual of a worker’s right to be compensated,
the level of compensation, up or down, would effect an acquisition of property,
sometimes by the worker, sometimes by the
Georgiadis v Australian & Overseas Telecommunications Corporation
[1994] HCA 6
(1994) 179 CLR 297
the majority held that a provision of the Commonwealth
Employees’ Rehabilitation and Compensation Act which purported to
the vested right of an employee to sue the Commonwealth for common
law damages infringed the just terms requirement of the Commonwealth’s
acquisition power. The majority accepted that the acquisition power extends to
a law relating to the compulsory acquisition by persons
other than the
Commonwealth. At p 308 Mason CJ, Deane and Gaudron JJ said
“It may well be that, if s 44 appeared in legislation
establishing a compensation scheme applying to employers and employees
... it would not fairly be characterised as a law for the acquisition of
property for a purpose for which the parliament
has power to make laws. But
when s 44 is viewed in the context of a scheme which applies only to
Commonwealth employees, it may
be fairly characterised as a law for the
acquisition of the causes of action which vested in those employees prior to the
commencement
of the new scheme.”
[7] Likewise
Brennan J, at 312, stressed that the constitutional guarantee protected common
law choses in action which are vested
in individuals. He, too, emphasised that
the Commonwealth’s liability in tort is not a creature of statute.
Commonwealth v W M C Resources Ltd
[1998] HCA 8
(1998) 194 CLR 1
McHugh J noted that the Court’s decision in
Health Insurance Commission
[1994] HCA 8
(1994) 179 CLR 226
and the judgment of Mason CJ, Deane and
Gaudron JJ in
recognise that the Parliament could modify or
revoke a property interest that was created by a Federal statute even though the
modification
or revocation was not made on just terms. A statutory right
comprising “property” is in a different category from a
right arising under the general law. Whether revocation or modification of a
statutory right effects an acquisition of
property depends on the nature of the
[9] In contrast
, the right of the present applicant is to compensation
pursuant to the Work Health Act (NT), ie. a purely statutory right.
property right said to have been acquired in the present case is the
superannuation component in the computation of compensation
payable under
s 53 Work Health Act (NT) which provides:
“Subject to
this Part, where a worker suffers an injury within or outside the Territory and
that injury results in or materially
contributes to his or her –
(b) impairment; or
(c) incapacity,
there is payable by his or her employer to the worker or the worker’s
dependents, in accordance with this Part, such compensation
prescribed.”
[11] In my view
the words “such compensation as is prescribed” connote and mean as
is prescribed from time to time and
indicate that compensation is payable at a
level, which, inherently, is subject to change from time to time.
conclusion is supported by a consideration of the objects and purposes of the
Work Health Act (NT) and of its provisions
generally. The Act abolishes common
law rights of workers. It substitutes therefor a statutory “no
fault” scheme which
manifestly balances the rights of the worker to proper
compensation for work injury irrespective of fault against the employer’s
ability to pay that compensation. It is a compromise between payer and payee,
on the one hand providing an adequate level of compensation
to injured workers,
on the other containing that level to one which is affordable by employers, and,
ultimately, by society at large.
[13] The Act
contains a mechanism whereby the responsible Minister can be informed about
levels of compensation. The adequacy or
otherwise of benefits payable to
injured workers under the Act and the consequences, including costs, of any
change to benefits may
be the subject of an inquiry and report to the Minister
by the Work Health Advisory Council established under Part III of the Act.
1991 s 65 of the Act was amended to increase the compensation for long term
incapacity from 70% to 75% of loss of earning capacity
as a consequence of one
such review; see Work Health Amendment Act No. 2 1992 (NT).
compensation for loss of earning capacity to which an injured worker is entitled
under the Act comprises weekly payments
to ensure the worker’s earnings
from employment total the worker’s “normal weekly earnings”
for a period
of 26 weeks, s 64(1) Work Health Act (NT), and either 75%
of the worker’s “loss of earning capacity” or 150% of
“average weekly earnings”, whichever is the lesser amount, until
retirement age, s 65(1) Work Health Act (NT). Compensation
for permanent
impairment under s 71 Work Health Act (NT) is a fixed sum expressed in
terms of various percentages of compensation
payable with respect to varying
degrees of permanent impairment.
opinion the compensation payable under the Act in respect of both loss of
earning capacity and permanent impairment is,
in the words of Gummow J in
C Resources Ltd
, ante, at 70 [181], in a “form expressed in terms
indicative of subsequent amendment”.
[16] Compensation
payable under the Act in respect of loss of earning capacity involves
on–going payments which may continue
until an injured worker’s
retirement. In the context of continuing payments over lengthy periods
maintaining the scheme could
involve modifying compensation to a level
affordable according to the economy from time to time. The percentage level of
compensation,
like interest rates and one–time goldmining
“booms” in Natal, may well have its “ups and downs”, cf.
Laughton v Griffin
[1894] UKLawRpAC 61
[1895] AC 104
at 106, 107, per Lord Macnaghten. This
factor, in my opinion, also supports the conclusion that the applicant’s
right to compensation is amoeba–like and that there is no
acquisition of property involved in its modification, or “partial
extinguishment” as counsel for the applicant called it, effected by the
Work Health Amendment Act (NT) 2004.
[17] Compensation
is defined as meaning a benefit or an amount paid or payable under the Work
Health Act (NT). In my view, as a matter
of substance, all that has happened
here is the quantum of compensation payable under the Act has been changed. The
amendment is
in substance a law varying the quantum of payable compensation,
albeit that the method adopted to vary the amount payable is specifically
reference to the superannuation component in its calculation. It is not, in my
opinion, a law “with respect to the acquisition
of property” for the
purposes of s 50(1) Northern Territory (Self–Government) Act 1978
(Cth) because it does not effect
an acquisition of property.
[18] Alternatively,
if I am wrong in this and the statutory amendment does constitute an acquisition
of property, in my view the legislative
provision which effects that acquisition
of property is not a law
with respect to
the acquisition of property. In
my opinion it could not fairly be characterised as a law for the acquisition of
property but rather
a law substituting one mode of computing compensation for
another in an overall statutory compensation scheme applicable to employers
employees generally: cf
, ante, at 306–307, 308, per
Mason CJ, Deane & Gaudron JJ;
Mutual Pools & Staff Pty Ltd,
at 171–172, per Mason CJ; 184–186, per Deane and Gaudron JJ;
ante, at 236–237, per Mason CJ, Dean and Gaudron JJ.
[19] To the
question when is a law which effects an acquisition of property a law with
respect to the acquisition of property, I would
answer not when it is a law with
respect to the level of compensation payable to injured workers which is
subject to regulation
in the general interest.
[20] I would
answer each question in the stated case as follows: No.
[21] This is a
special case stated for the opinion of the Supreme Court pursuant to
s 115(1) of the Work Health Act which has been
referred to the Full Court
pursuant to s 21(1) of the Supreme Court Act.
[22] The facts
as stated in the special case stated are as follows:
maintenance operator working at the Mereenie
gasfield approximately 200
kilometres west of Alice Springs in the Northern Territory of Australia
(“the workplace”).
all material times the Worker’s employment with the Employer was pursuant
to a written contract of employment dated 19 February
contract”).
all material times the Worker in his employment with the Employer was a
“worker” within the meaning of the Work Health
all material times the Employer made superannuation contributions on behalf of
the Worker pursuant to the contract at the rate
of 10 per cent of the
Worker’s salary (“the superannuation contributions”).
or about 10 September 2003 the Worker sustained an injury within the
meaning of the Act for which the Employer accepted liability.
passage of the Work Health Amendment Act 2004 the s 49 definition of
“normal weekly earnings” in the Work Health Act
was amended to
exclude the superannuation contributions from the calculation of normal weekly
earnings (“the amendment”).
amendment commenced operation on 26 January 2005.
employer paid compensation to the Worker for incapacity caused by the injury
from the date of the injury to 26 January 2005 and
continuing in accordance
with medical certificates provided by the Worker.
calculation of the compensation paid to the Worker during the period up to and
including 26 January 2005 did not involve the calculation
weekly earnings” by reference to remuneration that included the
superannuation contributions.
was no order made by the Work Health Court or the Supreme Court before
26 January 2005 for the worker’s compensation to
be calculated and
paid by reference to remuneration that included the superannuation
contributions.”
questions for determination are as follows:
(a) Whether for the
period up to 26 January 2005 the amendment constitutes an acquisition of
the Worker’s property inconsistent
with s 50 of the Northern
Territory (Self-Government) Act and as such is invalid to the extent of such
inconsistency.
(b) Whether for the period after 26 January 2005 the amendment
constitutes an acquisition of the worker’s property inconsistent
s 50 of Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act and as such is invalid to
the extent of such inconsistency.
[24] Pursuant to
the provisions of the Work Health Act the Worker’s entitlement to weekly
benefits is calculated by reference
to his or her “normal weekly
earnings”. That term is relevantly defined by s 49(1) of the Act to
mean “remuneration
for the worker’s normal weekly number of hours of
work calculated at his or her ordinary time rate of pay”.
Hastings Deering (Australia) Ltd v Smith
[2004] NTCA 13
(unreported), the
Court of Appeal held that remuneration for those purposes included
superannuation contributions made by an employer
for the benefit of a worker. An
application for leave to appeal to the High Court is still pending.
[26] The Work
Health Amendment Act 2004 commenced with effect on 26 January 2005. By
s 5 of that Act it inserted s 49(1A) and s 49(1B)
into the Act.
Those provisions provide:
(1A) For the purposes of the definition of
“normal weekly earnings” in subsection (1), a worker’s
remuneration does
not include superannuation contributions made by the
(1B) Subsection (1A) is taken to have come into operation on 1 January
[27] The Work
Health Amendment Act 2004 also provided certain transitional provisions relating
to s 49(1A) as follows:
194. Definition
In this Part –
"commencement date" means the commencement date of the
Work Health
Amendment Act 2004
195. Calculation of normal weekly
(1) Section 49(1A) does not affect the following compensation, the
calculation of which involved the calculation of normal weekly
earnings by
reference to remuneration that included a superannuation contribution referred
to in section 49(1A):
(a) compensation paid under section 64 or 65 before the commencement date;
(b) compensation payable under section 64 or 65 in respect of a period
before the commencement date in accordance with an order of
the Court or Supreme
Court made before the commencement date.
(2) Despite anything to the contrary in section 12 of the
Interpretation
or in any other law in force in the Territory, and subject to subsection
(1), section 49(1A) and (1B) applies in relation to the
calculation of
compensation –
(a) paid before the commencement date; or
(b) payable on or after the commencement date, even if the right to claim
compensation arose before the commencement date.
(3) To avoid doubt, section 49(1A) applies in relation to compensation under
section 64 or 65 that is, on the commencement date, the
subject of any of the
(a) a dispute to which Part VIA, Division 1 applies;
(b) proceedings under Part VIA, Division 2;
(c) an appeal, review or special case being considered under Part VIA,
Division 3, 4 or 5;
(d) a commutation under section 74 not yet authorised by the Court.
common ground that the amendments were made to overcome the decision of the
Court of Appeal in the
Hastings Deering
case. It is also common ground
that without accepting the correctness of the decision of the Court in the
Hastings Deering
case, this Court must proceed in determining the special
case on the basis that the decision in
Hastings Deering
is correct.
[29] The right
of the applicant which has been affected by these amendments was the
applicant’s right to compensation for weekly
payments under s 64 and
s 65 of the Act to include a component calculable by reference to the
superannuation contributions made on
his behalf by the respondent.
Northern Territory Legislature has no power to make laws with respect to the
acquisition of property otherwise than on just
Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act 1978
Acquisition
of property to be on just terms
(1) The power of the Legislative Assembly conferred by
in relation to the making of laws does not extend to the making of laws with
respect to the acquisition of property otherwise than
on just terms.
(2) Subject to
, the acquisition of any property in the Territory
which, if the property were in a State, would be an acquisition to which
51(xxxi) of the
Constitution
would apply, shall not be made otherwise
than on just terms.
[31] There is no
saving provision in the Work Health Amendment Act 2004 authorising the Court to
determine such compensation as is
necessary to ensure that the acquisition is on
just terms. Therefore, if that law is found to be one which operates to acquire
otherwise than on just terms, the provision is, subject to s 59 of
the Interpretation Act (NT), invalid. Section 59 of the Interpretation
59. Act to be construed subject to power
Every Act shall be
read and construed subject to the
Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act
of the Commonwealth and any other Act of the Commonwealth relating to
the power of the Legislative Assembly to make laws in respect
of particular
matters, and so as not to exceed the legislative power of the Legislative
Assembly, to the intent that where any Act
would, but for this section, have
been construed as being in excess of that power it shall nevertheless be a valid
Act to the extent
to which it is not in excess of that power.
restriction on the legislative power of the Territory Legislature is in terms
similar to the acquisitions power contained
Constitution
. It is common ground that authorities relating to the
interpretation to be given to
Constitution
apply equally
to the interpretation to be given to
Northern Territory
(Self-Government) Act
Clunies-Ross v The Commonwealth
(1984) 155 CLR 193
at 201-202, the Court
in a joint judgment said that the grant of legislative power contained in
“has assumed the status of a constitutional guarantee of
just terms (
Minister of State for the Army v Dalziel
) and is to be given
the liberal construction appropriate to such a constitutional provision: see
Attorney-General (Cth) v Schmidt
” (footnotes omitted).
conceded by the respondent and by the intervener, properly in my view, that the
applicant’s relevant entitlement
was “property” within the
Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act
[35] The next
question then is whether the applicant’s property has been acquired within
the meaning of s 50(1) of the Act.
A second question is whether,
notwithstanding that the amendments effect an acquisition of property, the
amendments are or amount
with respect to
the acquisition
of property”. It is the contention of the respondent and of the intervener
that the amending legislation does
not effect an acquisition within the meaning
Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act
and even if it
does, it is not “a law with respect to the acquisition of
Statutory background
[36] The Work
Health Act 1986, for the most part, came into force on 1 January 1987. The
Act repealed the previous Workmen’s
Compensation Act 1949-1984 (“the
former Act”): see s 188. However that repeal did not affect causes of
action in respect
of an injury to or death of a worker arising out of or in the
course of his or her employment before the commencement date including
or claim at common law and those claims were able to be continued under the
provisions of the former Act: see s 189.
purposes of the Work Health Act 1986, as set out in the preamble to the Act,
“... to promote occupational health and safety in the
Territory to prevent workplace injuries and diseases, to protect the health
safety of the public in relation to work activities, to promote the
rehabilitation and maximum recovery from incapacity of injured
workers, to
provide financial compensation to workers incapacitated from workplace injuries
or diseases and to the dependents of
workers who die as the results of such
injuries or diseases, to establish certain bodies and a fund for the proper
administration
of the Act, and for related purposes.”
Maddalozzo v Maddick
[1992] NTSC 46
(1992) 108 FLR 159
at 167, I referred to the shift
of emphasis of the Work Health Act, when compared with the former Act in that
the former Act provided
solely for compensation for injured workers and for a
compulsory insurance scheme to make sure that compensation would be paid,
the focus of the Work Health Act 1986 covered a wide range in that the
Act dealt not only with compensation but with occupational
health and safety,
the rehabilitation of injured workers and the obligations of an employer to
provide suitable employment to an
injured worker or to find suitable work with
another employer for him and to participate in efforts to retrain an injured
[39] There are
quite a number of differences between the two Acts to which reference was not
Maddalozzo v Maddick
. Under the former Act a worker could recover
both compensation and common law damages although there were provisions
preventing double
recovery in that the former Act required the successful worker
in a common law action to repay the compensation paid to the worker’s
employer: see s 22(1). Under the Work Health Act 1986 actions at common law
brought by a worker or a dependent of a worker against
an employer or co-worker
have been abolished (see s 52). However, common law actions against
strangers other than the employer or
co-workers are still possible even in cases
where compensation is payable, although the worker is liable to repay the
compensation
from any damages recovered: see s 176(1) and
[40] Under the
former Act the Minister may determine the maximum premium rates for
employer’s liability insurance: see s 20.
The present Act does not
provide for the regulation of premium rates although it does provide for a
Scheme Monitoring Committee whose
functions include the monitoring of premium
rates offered for workers compensation in the Territory and the monitoring and
of data on overall underwriting results as well as the monitoring of
“the viability and performance of the workers compensation
see s 145(1).
essential argument of the respondent and of the intervener is that the
applicant’s rights to compensation have no existence
apart from statute
and that those rights were by their very nature susceptible of modification or
extinguishment such that there
was no acquisition of property involved in the
modification or extinguishment of the right: see
Georgiadis v Australian and
Overseas Telecommunications Corporation
[1994] HCA 6
(1994) 179 CLR 297
at 305-306;
Health Insurance Commission v Peverill
[1994] HCA 8
(1994) 179 CLR 226
Extrinsic materials
[42] In support
counsel for the Attorney-General for the Northern Territory relied upon the
second reading speech of the responsible
Minister when the Work Health Bill was
first introduced into the Legislative Assembly, who said:
government is acutely aware that there is a balancing act to be performed with
every workers’ compensation scheme.
We need to balance the rights of the
worker to proper compensation for industrial injury against the employer’s
pay for that compensation.” (Hansard, Legislative Assembly, 19
June 1986, p 208)
[43] Further the
Minister said (ibid, p 212):
“Cost containment is a
prerequisite to the continuation of a proper system of workers’
compensation benefits. This bill
sets in place the mechanisms for cost
containment. I believe we all share the common aim of remedying the problems
with the current
system. I believe we all share the fundamental philosophy of
this bill: safety is the first priority in preventing injury and disease
as possible; where injury and disease occur, the rehabilitation of the injured
worker must be the major aim; and there must
be a system to compensate injured
workers with justice and support them with dignity during their period of
incapacity.”
[44] Further
reliance was placed upon a statement by the Minister at the time when the
substituted Work Health Bill was introduced
into and debated in the Legislative
Assembly, that the philosophy of the proposed legislation was reflected in the
words of Professor
Ronald Sackville, then Chairman of the NSW Law Reform
Commission, as follows (Hansard, Legislative Assembly Debates, 26 November
“In the final analysis, everybody pays for
benefits provided to anyone for anything. Whether the benefits are wages and
supporting benefits, old age pensions or the dole, the community pays
for them through prices or taxes. Workers’ compensation
benefits are no
exception. Consequently, the community as a whole has the right and the
responsibility to determine how much it can
afford to pay and the decision is
one for employees, employers and governments according to the economy of the
[45] Thus it was
put that it was clear from the objects, purposes and intention of the Act that
the statutory scheme which replaced
non-vested common law rights with statutory
entitlements to compensation sought, at the time of the enactment, a compromise
the rights of workers, employers and insurers with the ultimate aim of a
fair, workable and sustainable compensation scheme. This
submission, so it was
submitted, was confirmed by the second reading speech to the Work Health Act
Amendment Act 2004 by the responsible
Minister (Hansard, Legislative Assembly,
14 October 2004):
“Workers’ compensation benefits
represent a balance between what is fair for the injured worker and what is
to the community. It follows that benefit structures under statutory
workers’ compensation schemes are not intended to provide
full indemnity
for an injured worker’s financial loss but, rather, are intended to meet
what is considered by the community
to be fair but affordable
compensation.”
[46] Thus it was
put that it was not unreasonable to expect that the Assembly reserved to itself
the ability to modify the level of
compensation payable under the scheme in
order to ensure its continuing fairness, workability and sustainability.
[47] We were
also referred by counsel to the second reading speech of the responsible
Minister on the introduction of the Work Health
Amendment Bill (Hansard,
Legislative Assembly Debates, 14 October 2004) where the responsible Minister
“Recent court decisions threaten the balance of the
Northern Territory’s Workers’ Compensation Scheme and consequently
its financial viability. In this regard, the courts have interpreted the
definition of “normal weekly earnings” under
the Work Health Act to
include employer-funded superannuation contributions made on behalf of workers,
and the value to the worker
of free board and lodgings and any other non-cash
remuneration that could be seen as a benefit to the worker. It is, therefore,
open to interpretation that employer-funded allowances such as annual leave
loading, airfares and private use of motor vehicles could
also be included in
normal weekly earnings. While the court decisions can be seen to have a positive
effect for injured workers,
because benefits payable will, in many cases, more
closely match a worker’s total remuneration, they will have an adverse
on the costs of the Workers’ Compensation Scheme.
In this regard, if the definition of “normal weekly earnings”
under the Work Health Act as determined by the court is
not addressed, then
superannuation alone would increase future private sector scheme costs by around
4% per annum. In percentage
terms, the government sector costs are likely to be
higher at around 7% per annum because superannuation contributions made by
are generally higher than in the private sector. Actual costs will be
considerably higher when taking into account other employer
funded remuneration,
such as rental assistance, electricity subsidies, vehicles, leave loading,
airfares, etc.
Further, these court decisions are retrospective in their effect, and
benefits owing for past periods for superannuation alone are
conservatively
estimated at $15m for the private sector and $8m for the government sector.
These will be unfunded liabilities. These
figures do not take into account
interest on late payments that, if claimed, could apply to payments owing for up
to 17 years. Once
again, non-cash benefits are very difficult to estimate, but
would add considerably to the retrospective unfunded liability. ...The
lies in legislative amendment with retrospective effect from the commencement of
the Work Health Act in 1987. In this regard,
the bill provides that the
definition of “normal weekly earnings” under the Work Health Act
does not include employer-funded
superannuation contributions and non-cash forms
of remuneration. This provision will restore the status quo by confirming what
considered to be the intention of workers’ compensation legislation
prior to the recent court decisions. It is not proposed
that this retrospective
amendment should apply to payments that may have been made before the
commencement of the amendment; that
is, the retrospective amendment will not
enable recovery by the employer of superannuation or non-cash benefit that may
have already
been paid as part of the worker’s incapacity benefit.
Further, the retrospective amendment will not affect compensation payable
order of the court made prior to commencement of the amendment.”
[48] I note that
the Work Health Amendment Act 2004 did not affect non-cash benefits other than
employer contributions of superannuation.
During the course of argument, I
expressed considerable doubt as to whether this Court is able to have regard to
second reading speeches
in deciding whether or not there has been an acquisition
of property otherwise than on just terms. Section 62B of the Interpretation
enables this Court to use extrinsic material in the interpretation of a
provision of an Act, but the question which we have to
determine does not fall
within that provision.
[49] Reference
was made to the fact that in
Health Insurance Commission v Peverill
High Court did consider the Minister’s second reading speech as well as
the explanatory memorandum when considering the
amending Act which was the
subject of that decision: see
Health Insurance Commission v Peverill
(supra) at 233-235. I note also that regard was also had to the second reading
speech by the High Court in
Nintendo Co Ltd v Centronics Systems Pty Ltd
[1994] HCA 27
(1993-1994) 181 CLR 134
at 142. It was submitted that regard could be had of
this material to establish the purpose of the legislation and the context in
which the amendment came about. I accept that submission. However, the
Minister’s second reading speech or other extrinsic
materials cannot be
determinative of the question of whether or not the provision is invalid as
otherwise the question would become
a political one dependent upon the
Minister’s speech rather than a legal one. It is the text of the
legislation itself as well
as its legislative history which primarily needs to
be considered in order to arrive at the proper answer to this question. I note
that that was the approach of Black CJ in
Australian Capital Territory v
[2002] FCAFC 186
(2002) 121 FCR 509
, where his Honour said (at518-519
“[38] Kirby J observed (at 91-92 [237], point 5)
, and other cases where it was accepted that the statutory
rights were "property" (his Honour referred to
Commonwealth v Mewett
(1997) 191 CLR 471 at 551-552), illustrate that "it is necessary, in every case,
to examine the legislation in question so as to
determine whether the nature of
the interests involved are 'inherently defeasible' or, however 'innominate or
anomalous' so partake
of the quality of 'property' that the guarantee in
s51(xxxi) is attracted." Later in his reasons, his Honour repeated the
observation
that the mere fact that a property right is created by legislation
cannot put it beyond the protection of s 51(xxxi): at 99 [253].
[39] While the question may still be regarded as an open one (see
at 514 [53] per Gaudron and Gummow JJ), I take the reasons in
WMC Resources
to suggest that a critical question where statutory rights
and interests are concerned is whether those rights are inherently defeasible.
The question is not merely whether the right is defeasible, because in a real
sense all statutory rights are inherently susceptible
of variation since,
s51(xxxxi) aside, the Parliament is able to uncreate what it has created. But
the mere circumstance that a right
or interest is created by statute does not
mean the right or interest is inherently defeasible; one must look for something
This will involve a careful analysis of the objects and terms of the
legislation in question: compare
Smith v ANL
at 520-521 [76] per Kirby
The nature of the right acquired
[50] So far as
the right to compensation is concerned the right which the applicant had was a
right, if necessary by taking action
in the Work Health Court to enforce an
entitlement to weekly compensation calculated in accordance with the Act. By
reducing that
right, retrospectively, the legislature has reduced the
applicant’s right and conferred a benefit on employers, insurers,
self-insurers
and, to the extent that the Northern Territory is a self-insurer,
the Northern Territory. Moreover, I do not think that workers’
entitlements can be characterised as social security benefits. They are not paid
out of consolidated revenue, but are in the first
instance required to be met by
employers. A worker’s right to receive workers compensation may be seen as
an incident of the
relationship of master and servant. In return for giving up
his rights to sue at common law an employee, when he enters into a contract
employment, obtains the benefit of a no fault scheme of workers compensation
benefits. I observe also that in
Hastings Deering (Australia) Ltd v Smith
(supra) Martin CJ said in relation to the
Superannuation Guarantee
(Administration) Act 1992
(Cth) at [22]:
“The intention of the
guarantee legislation is that employees will be rewarded for their efforts as
employees by payments emanating
from the employer being credited to a fund
established for the future benefit of the employee. In the ordinary sense of the
and as a matter of fact, those payments are “earned” by an
employee as a reward for the services rendered by the employee
Was the result of the Court of Appeal’s decision relevantly
unexpected?
[51] It may be
that insurers have set premiums for workers compensation cover in the past
without having regard to the potential for
employer funded superannuation
benefits to be treated as part of employees’ remuneration. If that was a
mistake by some or
even all of the insurers, it is a mistake I think which we
cannot take any cognisance of. The insurance industry was perfectly capable
getting legal advice on what is and what is not remuneration. It is to be noted
that the learned Magistrate and four Judges of
this Court have unanimously held
that employer funded superannuation benefits are part of remuneration so that at
the very least
insurers ought to have been aware of the possibility that such
might be the true meaning of that term. It is not uncommon for courts
interpret statutory provisions which may give to those provisions a broader
meaning than the insurance industry might hope to
expect. But in my opinion that
does not alter the character of the payments to which the employee is entitled
and nor does it follow
that the statutory benefits are by their nature
susceptible of modification or extinguishment.
applicant’s statutory rights inherently susceptible to change?
assignment of a worker’s rights to compensation payable under the Act is
void as against the employer or insurer: see
s 186 of the Act. However,
s 186 does not provide that such an assignment is void for all purposes and
it may be that as between
the worker and the assignee the assignment is still
valid. There is no specific provision in the Act preventing compensation
from being attached. Section 184 of the Act provides that claims to
compensation survive after a claimant’s death and may be
brought by the
claimant’s personal representative. Section 185 of the Act provides that
unpaid compensation forms part of a
deceased worker’s estate. Section 186
contains provisions designed to prevent the contracting out of the provisions of
Act. These provisions are consistent with the concession that the
applicant’s rights are property rights. Moreover, they tell
against the
argument that the rights are
susceptible to change. Rights
which are inherently susceptible to change are presumably also susceptible to
being not merely altered,
but revoked altogether. In my opinion, s 184 and
s 185 in particular indicate that it was not contemplated that such rights
be revoked. Further, in my opinion, given that the rights to compensation
under the Act replaced entirely a worker’s rights
to common law damages
for personal injuries against his employer and co-workers for negligence or
breach of contract, a statutory
right of this nature is far removed from mere
“statutory entitlements to receive payments from consolidated revenue not
on antecedent propriety rights recognised by the general law”:
Mason CJ, Deane and Gaudron JJ in
It was submitted that statutory rights which replaced common law rights were
inherently defeasible but I am unable to follow
the logic of this argument. It
was submitted that in
(supra) each of the Justices in the majority
thought that the fact that the statutory rights did not replace common law
important to this question. Although in that case the statutory
scheme did not replace common law rights and was seen as reforming
provide a more effective remedy so that the statutory rights and common law
rights “walked hand in hand” (to
adopt Black CJ’s
expression at 524), I do not see why a scheme which replaces common law rights
cannot similarly be characterised
as one which is not inherently susceptible to
change, particularly when the rights under the Act are based upon the
relationship
between master and servant.
[53] It is to be
noted also, that the right to receive payments under the Act is not
discretionary but a right capable of enforcement
if necessary by bringing a
claim in the Work Health Court. A judgment of the Work Health Court is capable
of being enforced as a
judgment of the Local Court: see s 97. It is
difficult to see how such a right is inherently defeasible.
[54] Counsel for
the Northern Territory acknowledges that the applicant had his property taken
and acknowledged that there was “some
identifiable and measurable
countervailing benefit or advantage accruing” to the employer (or its
insurer) and that it was
not necessary that the benefit or advantage accrue to
the acquiring Crown: see
Mutual Pools & Staff Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
[1994] HCA 9
(1993-1994) 179 CLR 155
at 185 per Deane and Gaudron JJ;
Commonwealth v
[1983] HCA 21
(1983) 158 CLR 1
at 145 per Mason J; cited with approval in
Australian Tape Manufacturers Association Ltd v Commonwealth
at 499-500 per Mason CJ, Brennan, Deane and Gaudron JJ. It is
difficult to see how in those circumstances there has not been an acquisition
the applicant’s property.
Is it a law with respect to the
acquisition of property?
[55] It was
submitted by counsel for the Northern Territory that there are two bases upon
which a law which effects an acquisition
of property may escape characterisation
as a law with respect to the acquisition of property. First there are those
cases which,
Constitution
, fell within a head of power to which the
condition in
does not attach. In
Re Director of Public
Prosecutors; Ex parte Lawler
[1994] HCA 10
(1994) 179 CLR 270
at 285, in a passage cited
with approval by Gummow, Kirby, Hayne, Heydon and Crennan JJ in
Theophanous v Commonwealth of Australia
[2006] HCA 18
, Deane and
Gaudron JJ said:
"[T]he power conferred by
one with respect to 'acquisition of property on just terms'. That phrase must be
read in its entirety and, when so read, it indicates
applies only to acquisitions of a kind that permit of just terms. It is not
concerned with laws in connexion with which 'just terms'
is an inconsistent or
incongruous notion. Thus, it is not concerned with a law imposing a fine or
penalty, including by way of forfeiture,
or a law effecting or authorizing
seizure of the property of enemy aliens or the condemnation of prize. Laws of
that kind do not
involve acquisitions that permit of just terms and, thus, they
are not laws with respect to 'acquisition of property', as that expression
s 51(xxxi)."
categories of matter which falls within the first exception is not closed and
includes taxes, civil penalties, confiscation
of property connected with crime,
forfeiture, enforcement of statutory liens, loss of superannuation benefits
following convictions
for corruption and abuse of power and property acquired as
the result of insolvency laws. It is, in my opinion, clear that the amendments
to the Work Health Act do not fall within this category. It was not suggested by
the Northern Territory or by the respondent otherwise.
[57] The second
basis upon which a law might escape characterisation as a law with respect to
the acquisition of property occurs where
the law can be characterised as one for
“the adjustment of competing rights and interests as part of the general
of some subject matter or area of law”: per Deane and
Gaudron JJ in
Mutual Pools
(supra) at 189-190; and see
(supra) per Black CJ at 530 [94] and cases there cited. It was upon this
basis that the Northern Territory and the respondent submitted
that the amending
Act did not amount to a law with respect to an acquisition of property. In
essence, the argument which was put
was that the amending Act was a law
“which operates retrospectively to adjust competing claims or to overcome
distortion, anomaly
or unintended consequences in the working of the...
scheme... In such a case, what is involved is a variation of a right which is
inherently susceptible of variation and the mere fact that a particular
variation involves a reduction in entitlement and is retrospective
convert it into an acquisition of property. More importantly, any incidental
diminution in an individual’s entitlement
to property in such a case does
not suffice to invest the law adjusting entitlements under the relevant
statutory scheme with the
distinct character of a law with respect to the
acquisition of property for the purposes of
Constitution
(supra) per Mason CJ, Deane and
Gaudron JJ at 237).
[58] Thus it was
put that the amending Act was in direct response to an unforeseen development in
the law and was passed with the
express intention of restoring the status quo
because the decisions ‘threatened the financial viability of the
Territory’s
workers’ compensation scheme’. Reference was made
by analogy to the following passage in
(supra) at 236, that the
amendment was passed to bring about:
“... a genuine
legislative adjustment of the competing claims made by patients, pathologists
including Dr Peverill, the Commission
and taxpayers. Clearly enough, the
underlying perception was that it was in the common interest that these
competing interests be
adjusted so as to preserve the integrity of the health
care system and ensure that the funds allocated to it are deployed to maximum
advantage and not wasted in ‘windfall’ payments.”
[59] I have
already pointed out that there are a number of features which distinguish this
: (1) the fact that in
the scheme was
for the provision of welfare payments from public funds; (2) in
the Court characterised the adjustment as one intended to preserve the integrity
of the scheme, whereas there is nothing in the
present amending legislation
(besides the Minister’s statements reported in Hansard) which would lead
to that conclusion; and
(3) the fact that in my opinion there was nothing really
unexpected in the Court of Appeal’s decision which was based upon
of reasoning stemming from decisions which go back to the early twentieth
century and which, at the very least, must have
been anticipated as a distinct
possibility by the insurance industry. In addition, it would be wrong to
describe the additional payments
as “windfall payments”. I doubt if
injured workers who lose their employers’ superannuation contributions as
result of an injury at work would see it that way.
[60] Further
assistance is to be gained by a consideration of
Nintendo Co Ltd v Centronics
Systems Pty Ltd
(supra). In that case Nintendo instituted proceedings
against Centronics and others claiming infringement of a variety of intellectual
property rights, including its rights under the
Circuit Layouts Act 1989
(the Circuits Act). The Nintendo layout was a plan showing the location of
components of a complex electronic circuit, which,
when incorporated in a Read
Only Memory Chip, was used in video game machines manufactured by Nintendo. The
Circuits Act came into
force in 1990 and replaced the protection, apparently
seen as uncertain and inappropriate, previously available in respect of circuit
layouts under the general provisions of the
(Cth) and the
Designs Act 1906
(Cth). The Circuits Act protected “original circuit
layouts” (called “eligible layouts”). It was not disputed
Nintendo had been the owner of the original circuit layout. Under s 17(c)
of the Circuits Act, Nintendo had the exclusive right
to exploit the layout
commercially in Australia. After the commencement of the Circuits Act,
Centronics sold in Australia video game
machines known as Spica Entertainment
Units which employed a circuit which was made in accordance with the whole or a
substantial
part of the Nintendo layout. The Spica Entertainment Units had been
imported into Australia from Taiwan 10 months before the commencement
relevant part of the Circuits Act and were owned by Centronics. Presumably,
Nintendo’s layout was not then protected
by the existing intellectual
property legislation. It was submitted that, to the extent that the Circuits Act
operated to confer
on Nintendo the exclusive right of commercial exploitation of
the Spica Entertainment Units already owned by Centronics as at the
commencement
of the Act, the Act purported to effect an acquisition of property otherwise
than on just terms. In response to that
submission the Court said, in the joint
judgment of Mason CJ, Brennan, Deane, Toohey, Gaudron and McHugh JJ,
“The cases also establish that a law which is not
directed towards the acquisition of property as such but which is concerned
the adjustment of the competing rights, claims or obligations of persons in a
particular relationship or area of activity is
unlikely to be susceptible of
legitimate characterization as a law with respect to the acquisition of property
for the purposes of
Constitution
. The Act is a law of that
nature. It cannot properly, either in whole or in part, be characterized as a
law with respect to the
acquisition of property for the purposes of that
section. Its relevant character is that of a law for the adjustment and
of the competing claims, rights and liabilities of the designers or
first makers of original circuit layouts and those who take advantage
benefit from, their work. Consequently, it is beyond the reach of
s 51(xxxi)’s guarantee of just terms.”
opinion, the relevant provisions of the Work Health Amendment Act are directed
towards the acquisition of property as such.
So much is evident from the precise
terms of the amendments inserting s 49(1B) and the transitional provisions
and also, with respect,
from the Minister’s second reading speech. In
Commonwealth v WMC Resources Ltd
[1998] HCA 8
(1998) 194 CLR 1
, Gaudron J said at
“The argument that the Consequential Provisions Act is,
in essence, a law for the adjustment of competing rights and interests
the fact that a law may have more than one character. In my view, a law which
effects an acquisition of property will only
escape characterisation as a law
with respect to the acquisition of property if it adjusts competing claims or
interests as part
of the general regulation of some subject-matter or area of
the law or if it is "an incident of, or a means for enforcing, some general
regulation of the conduct, rights and obligations of citizens in relationships
or areas which need to be regulated in the common
interest." The Consequential
Provisions Act is highly specific in its operation and is in no sense a law
effecting the general regulation
of a subject-matter or area of the law or
incidental to the general regulation of conduct, rights or
obligations.”
opinion this is not a law of the character so described by her Honour. It is
plainly specifically directed towards reversing,
retrospectively, the result of
the decision of the Court of Appeal in the
Hastings Deering
case, in so
far as it purported to affect rights not yet enforced by Court order.
[63] I would
therefore answer the first question “Yes”.
Holland Constructions Pty Ltd v Hall
(1987) 85 FLR 171
, Kearney J
considered whether or not an amendment made to a provision of the former Act
relating to the amount of weekly compensation
payable applied to a case where
incapacity was caused by injuries which occurred before the amendment came into
force. At 179-180,
his Honour referred to the judgment of Fullagar J in
Fisher v Hebburn Ltd
[1960] HCA 80
(1960) 105 CLR 188
at 194, i.e. that in general an
amending enactment is prima facie to be construed as having a prospective
operation only, in the
sense that “... it is prima facie to be construed
as not attaching new legal consequences to facts or events which occurred
its commencement”. At 184 after considering a number of other authorities,
his Honour concluded that the appellant’s
liability to pay weekly
compensation crystallised when the respondent was incapacitated by injury, an
“event” which occurred
in 1981 before the amend Act was passed in
1985. Importantly, for the purposes of this case, his Honour
“The incapacitating injury of 1981 and not the passage
of each week of incapacity was the “fact” or “event”
which legal consequences under the Act attached, and they attached at the time
of that injury.”
[65] It may be
open to argument as to whether or not the fact or event is the incapacitating
injury, or the date upon which notice
of injury is given or the date upon which
incapacity arises as a result of the injury giving rise to a claim for
compensation. In
this case, the date is the same and we do not have to determine
that question. What is important is his Honour’s conclusion
that it is not
the passage of each week of incapacity that is the relevant “fact”
or “event”. In my opinion
his Honour was correct on this issue and
it follows from this that the applicant’s property right was fixed before
the passage
of the amending Act and extended beyond the date it came into force.
No argument was put to the contrary. In those circumstances
I would answer the
second question “Yes”.
SOUTHWOOD J:
[66] This is a
special case stated for the opinion of the Supreme Court pursuant to s 115(1) of
the Work Health Act. The questions
for determination are as follows:
the period up to 26 January 2005, did the amendment to the Work Health Act
constitute an acquisition of the worker’s property
inconsistent with s 50
of the Northern Territory (Self Government) Act and as such is the amendment
invalid to the extent of such
inconsistency?
the period after 26 January 2005, did the amendment to the Work Health Act
constitute an acquisition of the worker’s property
inconsistent with s 50
of the Northern Territory (Self Government) Act and as such is the amendment
invalid to the extent of such
inconsistency?
relevant amendments to the Work Health Act are those made by s 5, s 194 and
s 195 of the Work Health Amendment Act 2004.
The amending legislation amended s
49 of the Work Health Act by excluding superannuation contributions paid by an
employer on behalf
of a worker as a component in the calculation of a
worker’s normal weekly earnings. The applicant is an injured worker whose
claim for workers compensation was accepted by the respondent before the
amending legislation came into force. The amendment has
the effect of
retrospectively decreasing the amount of weekly payments of compensation that
the applicant was entitled to receive
under the Work Health Act.
opinion both questions should be answered yes. The amendment constitutes an
acquisition of the worker’s property
inconsistent with s 50 of the
Northern Territory (Self Government) Act and is invalid to the extent of such
inconsistency. I have
had the advantage of reading Mildren J’s Reasons
for Decision. I agree with his Honour’s reasons for decision. I would
add the following comments in relation to the two principle issues in the
proceeding namely, whether the amending legislation effects
an acquisition of
property and, if so, whether the amending legislation is properly characterised
as a law with respect to the acquisition
of property. In so doing I adopt
Mildren J’s exposition of the case stated and of the amending legislation.
The nature of the right to claim workers compensation
[69] It is now
well established that property rights may be created by statute:
Commonwealth
v WMC Resources Ltd
[1998] HCA 8
(1998) 194 CLR 1
Newcrest Mining (WA) Ltd v
Commonwealth
[1997] HCA 38
(1997) 190 CLR 513
Australian Tape Manufacturers
Association Ltd v Commonwealth
(1993) 176 CLR 480
Australian Capital
Territory v Pinter
[2002] FCAFC 186
(2002) 121 FCR 509.
Further, not all statutory rights
are inherently defeasible:
Commonwealth v WMC Resources Ltd
[1998] HCA 8
[70] Workers in
Australia have had the right to claim workers compensation under various
statutes for over 100 years. In the Northern
Territory workers have had a
statutory right to claim workers compensation since 1920. Prior to that time
the South Australian Employers’
Liability Act 1884 applied in the Northern
Territory. The historical position of the scheme of workers compensation
provided by
the Work Health Act suggests permanence on the legal landscape:
Australian Capital Territory v Pinter
(supra) per Black CJ at [62]. The
right to claim workers compensation pursuant to the Work Health Act was granted
in substitution
for workers’ common law rights to sue their employers for
damages for personal injury in negligence or for breach of contract.
legislation was intended to be in the nature of a permanent reform of the law
and thus the rights given under it are not inherently
defeasible:
Capital Territory v Pinter
(supra) per Black CJ at [62]. The statutory
right to claim and be paid workers compensation is granted in the context of an
established
legal relationship of employer and worker. It is not a gratuitous
right but is an incident of the relationship of employer and worker.
the payments of weekly compensation voluntary. The predominant concern arising
from the provisions of Part V of the Work
Health Act is entitlement not need.
Compensation is to be paid by the employer who is required to be either insured
or a self insurer.
An employer has a right to dispute liability under the Act.
The right to claim workers compensation under Part V of the Work Health
not ephemeral or inherently subject to modification. It is stable and
established in character. The right is of real value
to the applicant.
[71] The rights
granted to workers under the Work Health Act need to be considered in light of
its terms and objectives at the time
of its enactment not retrospectively in
light of what later may be seen to be a better or more affordable policy:
Australian Capital Territory v Pinter
(supra) per Black CJ at [63]. Under
Part V of the Work Health Act a worker is granted an exclusive right to claim
and be paid prescribed
amounts of compensation if the worker suffers an injury
arising out of or during the course of his or her employment that results
worker’s impairment or incapacity for work: s 3 (definition of injury), s
53, s 80, s 81, s 82 and s 83 Work Health
Act. If an employer accepts a
worker’s claim for compensation the employer must start making the
prescribed weekly payments
of compensation within three days of the acceptance
of the claim: s 85(2) Work Health Act. If a claim for workers compensation is
not accepted by the employer the worker has a right to enforce his or her claim
for compensation in the Work Health Court: s 104
Work Health Act. The Work
Health Court is a court of record which has the power to hear and determine
claims for compensation and
all matters incidental to or arising out of such
claims: s 93 and s 94 Work Health Act.
[72] Subject to
an employer and a worker making an agreement as to when weekly payments of
compensation should be made, the Work Health
Act provides a maximum monetary
penalty of $15,000 in the case of a corporation and $3000 in the case of an
individual if a weekly
payment of compensation is not made before the expiration
of seven days after the end of the week in respect of which it is payable
before the expiry of seven days after the end of the period in respect of which
the worker is normally paid: s 88 Work Health
Act. Further, a worker is
entitled to an additional payment in the nature of interest if an employer fails
to make a weekly payment
of compensation on or before the due date: s 89 Work
Health Act.
[73] The stable
and established nature of the right to claim and be paid workers compensation is
not altered by the fact that the
Work Health Act has multiple objectives which
include occupational health and safety and the rehabilitation of an injured
The other objectives of the Work Health Act are consistent with the
stable and established nature of a worker’s right to claim
compensation as
I have described it above.
[74] During the
second reading speech Mr Hatton, who was the Minister responsible for the Work
Health Act, stated relevantly to the
compensation provisions of the Work Health
“[T]he basic philosophy of the [Work Health Bill]
was ‘To promote occupational health and safety in the Territory to prevent
workplace injuries and diseases, to protect the health and safety of the public
in relation to work activities, to promote the rehabilitation
and maximum
recovery from incapacity of injured workers,
to provide financial
compensation to workers incapacitated from workplace injuries or diseases and to
the dependants of workers who
die as the results of such injuries or
emphasis added
Fundamental to the benefit structure set out in the bill are the following
three considerations:
the seriously and long-term incapacitated must have
benefits which last for the duration of the incapacity
; there must be every incentive and no disincentive to rehabilitation;
employers must not be faced with ever-increasing costs. These
are among the
reasons why the government has not altered its commitment to abolishing common
law actions between employers and workers.
Our reasons were set out in detail
in March, when the draft bill was tabled, and I do not propose to repeat them at
The 3 fundamental considerations listed above are reasons why the
benefit structure in this bill, as in the March draft bill, makes
less use of
lump sums than does the current one, provides a somewhat wider range of benefits
for rehabilitation purposes, sets out
clearly the obligation of the worker to
participate in reasonable rehabilitation programs, and enables reviews of
periodic benefits
if this cooperation is not forthcoming.
Compensation for injured workers financial losses will be primarily in the
form of weekly benefits. Benefits for the first 26 weeks
of total incapacity
will be equivalent to the worker’s normal weekly earnings;
It is vital to the success of this scheme that long term benefits be
administered firmly, consistently and in a humane fashion
[75] Consistent
with the second reading speech the balancing of the rights of employers and
workers under the Work Health Act is achieved
by requiring workers to provide
medical certificates in relation to their incapacity for work as a result of an
injury: s 91A Work
Health Act; to be periodically medically assessed: s 91 Work
Health Act; to undergo rehabilitation: s 75B Work Health Act; and, to
employment once they have regained a capacity for work: s 65(2) and s 68 of the
Work Health Act. It is not achieved by
varying the amounts of compensation to
be paid under the Act.
[76] Nor is the
stable and established nature of the right to claim and be paid workers
compensation changed by the principle of income
maintenance which is an aspect
of the Work Health Act. The principle of income maintenance is simply intended
to overcome the problems
created by the once and for all approach to the
assessment of common law damages. An employer is prohibited from ceasing weekly
payments of compensation unless a notice under s 69(1) of the Work Health Act is
provided to the worker or one of the criteria in
s 69(2) of the Work Health Act
are satisfied. A worker may appeal to the Work Health Court against a notice
cancelling payments
and the employer bears the onus of proving that the employer
was entitled to stop making payments of weekly compensation:
Tours Pty Ltd v Hughes
(1994) 4 NTLR 185. The formulas for determining
weekly payments of compensation that are established by s 49, s 64 and s 65 of
Work Health Act are permanent in character. That is, of course, not to say
that Parliament cannot amend or repeal Part V of the
Work Health
The effect of the amending legislation and its
characterisation
[77] Upon the
respondent accepting the applicant’s claim for compensation the applicant
had an entitlement to be paid weekly
payments of compensation in accordance with
s 64 and s 65 of the Work Health Act based on a calculation of his normal weekly
inclusive of a component equivalent to the applicant’s
superannuation contributions that were paid by the respondent:
Deering (Australia) Ltd v Smith
[2004] NTCA 13
(unreported). Immediately
prior to the amending legislation coming into force the applicant had an
entitlement to receive the shortfall
in his payments of weekly compensation that
were the result of the respondent’s failure to include a component for the
applicant’s
superannuation contributions paid by the respondent in the
calculation of the applicant’s normal weekly earnings. If the shortfall
in his payments of weekly compensation was not paid by the respondent the
applicant had a right to commence a proceeding in the Work
Health Court for the
recovery of such payments. The applicant also had the right to receive ongoing
payments of weekly compensation
during his incapacity for work based on a proper
calculation of his normal weekly earnings and to obtain a ruling from the Work
Court as to the proper calculation of his normal weekly earnings. The
effect of the amending legislation is to extinguish the applicant’s
entitlement to be paid the shortfall in his weekly payments of compensation and
his entitlement to be paid ongoing weekly payments
of compensation based on a
calculation of his normal weekly earnings inclusive of superannuation
contributions and the respondent
employer’s reciprocal liability to make
such payments. By so doing the amending legislation effected an acquisition of
applicant’s property:
Smith v ANL Ltd
(2000) 204 CLR 493
Commonwealth v WMC Resources Ltd
(supra) per Brennan CJ at [16] –
[17]; Toohey J [53]; Gaudron J [78] – [79].
[78] It was
contended by the respondent and the intervener that even if the amending
legislation did effect an acquisition of property
it was nevertheless not a law
with respect to the acquisition of property within the meaning of s 50 Northern
Territory (Self Government)
Act. There are commonly two bases on which a law
that effects the acquisition of property might escape characterisation as a law
with respect to that acquisition:
Australian Capital Territory v Pinter
(supra) per Black CJ at [93]. First, the law is of a nature or kind to which
the provisions of s 50 of the Northern Territory (Self
Government) Act cannot
attach. For example, a taxation law or a law about the forfeiture of the
proceeds of crime are laws to which
s 50 of the Northern Territory (Self
Government) Act cannot attach. The amending legislation in question in the
present case presents
no such special features.
[79] Secondly,
if the law is a law for the adjustment of competing rights and interests as part
of a general regulation of some subject
matter or area of law it may escape
characterisation as a law with respect to the acquisition of property. In order
to characterise
the amending legislation it is necessary to look at the
substance and effect of the legislation:
Ha v New South Wales
[1997] HCA 34
per Brennan CJ, McHugh, Gummow and Kirby JJ at 498. As their Honours
stated, “When a constitutional limitation or restriction
on power is
relied on to invalidate a law, the effect of the law in and upon the facts and
circumstances to which it relates –
its practical operation – must
be examined as well as its terms in order to ensure that the limitation or
restriction is not
circumvented by mere drafting devices”.
amending legislation is highly specific in its operation. The substance and
effect of s 5, s 194 and s 195 of the Work Health
Amendment Act 2004 is to
retrospectively reduce the applicant’s vested entitlement to payments of
weekly compensation by reducing
his normal weekly earnings by excluding
superannuation contributions made by the respondent on behalf of the applicant
as a component
of the applicant’s remuneration and to extinguish the
respondent’s reciprocal liability to make such payments of weekly
compensation. There is a direct financial gain to the respondent measured by
the reduction in the amount of payments of weekly compensation.
It is in no
sense a law affecting the general regulation of a subject matter or area. The
acquisition of property, which the amending
legislation effects, is not merely
incidental to some other object.
[81] I do not
accept the submissions made on behalf of the respondent and the intervener that
because it is said that the purpose
of the amendments was to save the scheme of
workers compensation established by the Work Health Act the amendments cannot be
characterised
as a law with respect to the acquisition of property. There are
no facts or evidence before the court that establish that the viability
scheme of workers compensation provided by the Work Health Act was threatened by
assessing normal weekly earnings in the manner
provided by the Work Health Act
and including a component for superannuation payments paid by an employer on
behalf of a worker in
the calculation of a worker’s normal weekly
earnings. There are no facts or evidence before the court, for example, that
that the Northern Territory of Australia could not meet its liability
to pay compensation under the Work Health Act prior to the
Work Health Amendment
Act 2004 coming into force or that the Territory Insurance Office would have
difficulty indemnifying employers
that it had insured to pay workers
compensation under the Work Health Act if the amendments were not made to the
Work Health Act.
[82] This case
is different to the case of
Health Insurance Commission v Peverill
[1994] HCA 8
(1993-1994) 179 CLR 226.
The provisions of the
Health Insurance Act 1973
are radically different to the Work Health Act. The
Health Insurance Act 1973
established a statutory scheme for the gratuitous payment of medical benefits
from the consolidated revenue of the Commonwealth for
a variety of medical
services including pathology services. The benefits were set out in schedules
Health Insurance Act 1973
Health Insurance Act
(Cth) expressly provided that the pathology services table may be varied by
varying or inserting an item in the table or by omitting
an item from the table
or by substituting another amount for an amount set out in an item in the table.
The Minister was authorised
to refer to the Pathology Services Advisory
Committee, for its consideration and recommendation, the question whether the
services table should be varied:
; and, in addition, the
functions of the Medicare Benefits Advisory Committee included recommending, in
pursuance of a reference by
the Minister, the extent to which a particular
treatment or combination of treatments should be specified in an item or items
the appropriate fee or fees that should be specified for that item. The
Health Insurance (Pathology Services) Amendment Act 1991
(Cth) was introduced to
overcome a problem that had been created by the fact that the Minister had not
taken the necessary steps
to give effect to the recommendations of the Medicare
Benefits Advisory Committee that the classification and thereby the fee for
various pathology items should be varied:
Health Insurance Commission v
(supra) per Mason CJ, Deane and Gaudron JJ at 234.
amending legislation reducing the applicant’s entitlements to payments of
weekly compensation was not an element in
a regulatory scheme for the provision
of welfare benefits from public funds. Even if a purpose of the amendments to
the Work Health
Act was to save the scheme of workers compensation in the
Northern Territory it would not change the substance and effect of the
legislation. The terms of s 145 of the Work Health Act do not amount to an
express or implied reservation that payments of weekly
compensation may be
altered or extinguished at any time prior to payment without compensation for
the rights and interests arising
under Part V of the Work Health Act. The
amendments are properly characterised as a law with respect to the acquisition
of property.
Section 50 of the Northern Territory (Self Government) Act
prevents the expropriation of the property of individual citizens, without
adequate compensation, even where such expropriation may be intended to serve a
wider public interest:
Smith v ANL Ltd
(supra) per Gleeson CJ at [9].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (228 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter