URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTWHC/2022/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:24:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Yao v Northern Territory of Australia [2022] NTWHC 4 (29 June 2022)
Yao v Northern Territory of Australia
[2022] NTWHC004
PARTIES: LIE YAO
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
TITLE OF COURT: WORK HEALTH
NO: 2020-02719-LC
DELIVERED ON: 29 June 2022
HEARING DATES: 4 - 8 October 2021
OF: Acting Judge Neill
CATCHWORDS:
WORK HEALTH
– existence of mental injury; incapacity; arising out of or in the course
of employment; perception of hostile working
environment; reasonable management
action - onus of proof; reasonable management action.
Work Legislation Amendment Act 2015 s 5
3A(1) and (2), 4(5), (6A) and (8)
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Regulations regulation14
Jones v Dunkel (1959) 101
Currie v Dempsey (1967) 69 S.R. (NSW) 11
Wyong Shire
Council v Shirt
[1980] HCA 12
(1980) 146 CLR 40
Wiegand v Comcare Australia
Commissioner of Police v Minahan
[2003] NSWCA
Swanson v NT of A
[2006] NTSC 88
Barnett v NT of A
[2010] NTMC 70
McGee v Comcare
[2010] AATA 386
Millar v ABC
Marketing and Sales Pty Ltd [2012] 21
Corbett v NT of A
[2015] NTSC
Andreassen v ABT (NT) Pty Ltd
[2015] NTMC 026
Harris v NT
[2019] NTLC 3
Kozarov v State of Victoria
Kaefer Integrated Service Pty Ltd v Spohn & Ors
[2022] NTSC
REPRESENTATION
Worker: Mr Ben O’Loughlin
Employer: Mr Duncan McConnel SC
Solicitors:
Worker: Halfpennys
Employer: Hunt & Hunt
Judgment category
classification: A
Judgment ID Number: [2022] NTWHC004
of Paragraphs: 221
IN THE WORK HEALTH COURT
DARWIN IN THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
Claim No: 2020-02719-LC
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
REASONS FOR DECISION
(Delivered 29 June 2022)
ACTING JUDGE
Lie Yao ("the Worker") was born on 14 June 1970 and he is currently 52 years of
all material times the Worker was a permanent employee of the Employer
performing clerical duties in the Northern Territory Public
Service ("the
employment").
is common ground that the Worker at all material times was a worker within the
meaning of the
("the Act"), and I so find.
Worker took an extended period of recreation leave and long service leave from
the employment of around 17 months' duration from
early October 2017, returning
to the employment on 4 March 2019.
4 March 2019 and 3 June 2019 the Worker did not occupy a specific job position
in the employment and performed duties as instructed
from time to
3 June 2019 the Worker was offered and he accepted an A04 position as a records
officer within the Department of Treasury and Finance.
Worker ceased work on or around 10 February 2020 and made a claim under the Act
that he had suffered a mental injury (“the
injury”). He claimed
that the injury was an injury within the meaning of subsection 3A(1) of the Act
and that it arose out
of or in the course of the employment.
Employer disputed the Worker's claim, leading the Worker to commence these
proceedings.
matter proceeded before me by way of hearing for five days from Monday 4 October
2021 to and including Friday 8 October 2021.
All evidence was received over
those five days. In addition to live evidence, I received with the consent of
the parties five volumes
of Trial Books and some additional documents. The five
Trial Books are respectively exhibits E 1 to E 5 in the proceeding. An email
dated 22 July 2021 from Cathy Spurr of Halfpennys for the Worker to Chris
Osborne of Hunt & Hunt for the Employer and a letter
dated 9 September 2021
in response from Chris Osborne to Cathy Spurr are together received as exhibit E
6. These exhibits total some
1,820 pages.
of this large volume of material, because of the desire of both parties to
receive and consider the transcript of the hearing
and because of the time of
year and the busy schedules of all the lawyers involved, a timetable was allowed
for the filing of written
submissions and then written responses to those
written submissions, all by 28 January 2022. This has unfortunately but
unavoidably
delayed the preparation of these Reasons for Decision. The written
submissions received are as follows:
Closing dated and filed 9 December prepared by Ben O’Loughlin counsel for
the Worker;
Closing Submissions undated but filed 24 December 2021 prepared by Duncan
McConnel SC counsel for the Employer;
Submissions in Reply dated and filed 28 January 2022; and
Reply Submissions undated but filed 28 January 2022.
the evidence before me and as set out later in these Reasons I have found that
the Worker did suffer a mental injury, that this
injury arose out of and in the
course of his employment with the Employer, and that he has been totally
incapacitated for work to
the present time and continuing as a consequence of
this injury. The more complex and difficult issues in this matter are raised
the Employer’s reliance on the defence arising from the notion of
management action taken on reasonable grounds and in a
reasonable manner, as
provided for in the Act.
THE PLEADINGS
Worker's statement of his claim is found in his Amended Statement of Claim dated
18 June 2021. The Employer's defence is found
in its Notice of Defence to
Amended Statement of Claim dated 22 June 2021. The Worker has filed an Amended
Reply dated 16 July 2021.
Worker particularises the injury as being an Adjustment Disorder with mixed
anxiety and depressed mood and/or a Major Depressive
Disorder. He pleads that
the injury was sustained in the course of the employment – paragraph 3 of
the Amended Statement of
Employer denies that the Worker suffered an injury arising out of or in the
course of the employment. The Employer pleads in
the alternative that if the
Worker did suffer an injury arising out of or in the course of the employment
then it is not compensable
pursuant to the Act because any such injury was
caused wholly or primarily by “management actions contemplated by s 3A of
Act” - paragraph 3 of the Notice of Defence. Although this pleading
inadequately identifies subsection 3A(2) of the Act and
does not specify whether
the Employer relies on subsection 3A(2)(a), (b) or (c) or some combination of
these, this is clarified in
particular c. to paragraph 3. where the Employer
specifically says that if there was any injury then “...the injury was
wholly or primarily by management action taken on reasonable grounds and
in a reasonable manner by the Employer ” (“reasonable
action”), which establishes the Employer’s reliance on subsection
3A(2)(a) of the Act.
Employer does not deny that the Worker suffered any injury at all in its
pleading in paragraph 3 but it does purport to deny this
in particular a. to
paragraph 3. I am satisfied that nothing turns on this pleading inconsistency.
The matter proceeded before me
at hearing without objection on the basis that
the Employer denied the Worker had sustained any injury at all.
paragraph 4. of his Amended Statement of Claim the Worker identifies and pleads
in subparagraphs 4.b. to 4.p. some 17 separate
actions and/or failures on the
part of the Employer and/or circumstances in the workplace which in whole and/or
in part resulted
in the injury. In subparagraphs 4.ia. ka., la.,na. and q., the
Worker pleads how he was adversely affected by this.
Worker pleads each of the subparagraphs to paragraph 4. as pleadings in their
own right, not as particulars.
paragraph 3. of its Notice of Defence the Employer goes on to particularise its
pleading that the injury was caused wholly or primarily
by reasonable management
action. The Employer sets out particulars a., b. and c. and sub particulars i.
to xxxiv. to particular
c., in relation to this issue.
paragraph 4. of its Notice of Defence the Employer responds to the
Worker’s pleadings in paragraph 4. of his Statement of
Claim. The Employer
here refers to the Worker’s said pleadings as “particulars”,
which does not appear to be correct.
I am satisfied that nothing turns on this.
The Employer has responded by way of sub paragraphs 4.a. to 4.p. in which it
does not admit, denies and responds to each of the Worker’s
relevant pleadings. The Employer has not pleaded to paragraph
Worker’s pleading, namely that the Worker felt unfairly targeted by the
Employer’s actions pleaded by the
Worker in paragraph 4p. However, the
Employer has pleaded its denial of the actions pleaded in 4p. and I am satisfied
nothing turns
on the Employer’s failure to plead to 4q.
Worker pleads that he has been totally and/or partially incapacitated for
employment as a result of the injury, from 10 February
2020 to the current date
and continuing – paragraph 9 of the Amended Statement of
Employer denies that the Worker has been or is incapacitated for work, either
because of any work-related injury or any injury
at all - paragraph 9 of the
Notice of Defence.
his Amended Reply the Worker denies that the injury was caused wholly or
primarily by reasonable management action – paragraph
paragraph 3. of his Amended Reply the Worker pleads a detailed response to the
Employer’s pleading in paragraph 3 particular
c. of its Notice Of Defence.
By way of pleading and not by way of particulars, in subparagraphs 3.a. to k.
the Worker here identifies
and pleads actions and/or failures on the part of the
Employer and/or circumstances in the workplace which he says resulted in the
Worker concludes the Amended Reply by pleading that the Employer in its dealings
with him failed to afford him natural justice
specifically, and more generally,
that the dealings did not amount to management action taken on reasonable
grounds and/or in a reasonable
manner within the meaning of subsection 3A(2)(a)
of the Act - paragraphs 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the Amended
THE ONUS GENERALLY
the Worker's claim was disputed at the outset, the Worker bears the onus of
proving his claim. Both parties agree this is
the correct position, and the
at the hearing.
specifically, the Worker bears the onus of proving:
he has suffered the injury at all;
if he has suffered the injury, it has caused him incapacity for the employment;
if he has suffered the injury, it arose out of or in the course of the
employment.
THE MEDICAL EVIDENCE
medical evidence before the Court consisted first of the notes and records of
the Worker’s treating General Practitioners
at the Top End Medical Centre
at Stuart Park in Darwin (“the GPs’ records”). These covered
the period from 9 April
2012 to 9 January 2021.
GPs’ records show that the Worker first presented for mental health
reasons on 18 February 2013 complaining of “
Poor sleep. No early
morning wakening. Low self esteem. Normal mood. Anxious. Stress at
. There are then five further entries recording symptoms of
psychological stress reported by the Worker as being work-related in 2013,
25 February 2013, 4 March 2013, 5 March 2013, 6 March 2013 and 11 October 2013,
a total of six such entries in that year.
GPs’ records then show a gap after 11 October 2013 until the
Worker’s next presentation for symptoms of psychological
stress said to be
work-related nearly 2 years later, on 21 September 2015. This was followed by
entries recording this history on
5 October 2015 and 15 October 2015, a total of
three such entries in 2015.
GPs’ records then show a gap after 15 October 2015 until the
Worker’s next presentation for symptoms of psychological
stress said to be
work-related nearly 9 months later, on 5 July 2016. There are then two further
entries recording this history,
on 30 August 2016 and 14 November 2016, a total
of three such entries in 2016.
GPs’ records then show a gap after 14 November 2016 until the
Worker’s next presentation for symptoms of psychological
stress said to be
work-related nearly 4 months later, on 2 March 2017. This was followed by
entries recording this history on 18
April 2017, 19 September 2017 and 1 October
2017, a total of four such entries in 2017.
GPs’ records then show no record of the Worker’s attending on any
General Practitioner at the Top End Medical Centre
for any reason after 1
October 2017 until 3 October 2019, a gap of two full years. On 3 October 2019
the record shows that the Worker
presented and gave a history of “
much stress... working for NT government ...Work problems”.
Worker had taken extended recreation and long service leave for a period of 17
months, returning to work with the Employer on
4 March 2019. Arithmetically, 17
months before 4 March 2019 would take us to around early October 2017,
coinciding with the last
relevant entry in the GPs’ records on 1 October
2017, before the gap of two full years when the Worker did not attend the Top
End Medical Centre for any medical reasons at all. However by 3 October 2019,
seven months after he returned to work on 4 March
2019 and 24 months after he
went off work for long leave in early October 2017, he was once again consulting
his GPs and complaining
of symptoms of psychological stress which he reported
were work-related.
3 October 2019, the Worker presented at the Top End Medical Centre complaining
of symptoms of psychological stress said to be
work-related on eight further
occasions before he finally ceased work on 10 February 2020, a total of nine
such presentations between
his return to work on 4 March 2019 and his ceasing
work on 10 February 2020, the last such attendance being on 29 January
10 February 2020 and the last entry in the GPs’ records in evidence before
the Court being 9 January 2021, the Worker
presented at the Top End Medical
Centre complaining of symptoms of psychological stress said to be work-related
Workers comp
”, on 20 separate occasions.
medical evidence before the Court included medical certificates from the Top End
Medical Centre certifying that the Worker
was unfit from time to time for his
employment with the Employer between September 2019 and February 2020. These
certificates were
in an unhelpful format stating merely that the Worker had
“a medical condition” without identifying that medical condition
its relationship, if any, with the employment. However, nine of these medical
certificates coincide with the records of the Worker’s
presentations from 3 October 2019 to 29 January 2020 for symptoms of
psychological stress said to be work-related.
were also 19 additional medical certificates before the Court in the more
7 April 2020 to 26 October
2021, to the effect that the Worker was suffering a work-related Major
Depressive Disorder and was totally
unfit for work over this period. These
certificates took us to shortly after the conclusion of the hearing in this
were three letters of attendance from psychologist Ms Kim Groves stating that
the Worker had attended for psychological counselling
on each of 15 April, 31
May and 26 July 2021, but without identifying any condition relevant to that
counselling, or any relationship
with the employment. The Worker appears never
to have consulted a treating psychiatrist.
reports were tendered in evidence from any of the Worker’s treating
General Practitioners or from the psychologist Kim Groves,
and there was no live
evidence from any of these.
Court heard live evidence from psychiatrist Dr Ash Takyar who was retained by
the Worker’s legal representatives to examine
him as a medico-legal
specialist. The Court received medical reports from Dr Takyar dated 20 January
2021 and 13 July 2021. Additionally,
the Court received notes of a telephone
conference on 1 October 2021 between Dr Takyar and the Worker’s counsel Mr
Ben O’Loughlin.
Court received a medical report dated 6 May 2021 from psychiatrist Dr James
Hundertmark who was retained by the Employer’s
legal representatives to
examine the Worker as a medico-legal specialist. Additionally, the Court
received notes of a telephone
conference on 28 September 2021 between Dr
Hundertmark and the Employer’s counsel Mr Duncan McConnel
parties agreed to tender the report and the telephone conference notes of Dr
Hundertmark without adducing any live evidence from
him and therefore without
his being subject to cross-examination. I am satisfied that no
issue arises, as these documents were received in evidence by consent
on this basis.
Hundertmark examined the Worker on two separate occasions, on 20 April 2021 and
21 April 2021 respectively. He diagnosed the Worker
as suffering from a Major
Depressive Disorder. In Dr Hundertmark’s opinion, the Worker then had no
fitness for work due to
the high levels of his depression which was effectively
untreated. He expressed the view that the Worker might make a gradual return
work over the course of 3 to 6 months if he was treated and if he made a
standard response to that treatment. He noted that the
Worker’s high
levels of anger towards his workplace might delay that recovery. Dr Hundertmark
recommended that the Worker
undergo 12 to 18 sessions of treatment with an
experienced psychologist and also have a small number of sessions with a
psychiatrist to review the overall package of treatment including
medication, psychotherapy and engagement with a rehabilitation
Hundertmark was cautious in his report dated 6 May 2021 in identifying the cause
or causes of the Worker’s Major Depressive
Disorder. At page 7.4 he
responded to a request to identify the cause of the injury as follows:
Mr Yao states that performance management in the workplace has caused
his injury. He also states feeling
abused and spied upon in the
”. Later in that report at page 7.7 Dr Hundertmark said
Mr Yao believes that his performance management has caused
his illness. There certainly are symptoms of a major depressive disorder
have developed from early in 2020”.
the telephone conference notes of 28 September 2021 Dr Hundertmark was prepared
to be more specific in identifying and attributing
the cause of the
Worker’s Major Depressive Disorder. He said in numbered paragraphs 2. to
In the first examination
I formed the view that the
Worker appeared significantly depressed to the extent that he may have been
verging on having paranoid
“3.The presentation was of what is referred to as ‘overvalued
ideas’ of a paranoid nature, which is not delusional
but bordering on
delusional.”
“4. After the first session, I requested that further background
file material be provided to me so that I could compare the
presentation with
the documented actions and try to make an assessment of whether the Worker was
expressing paranoid overvalued ideas.
I then arranged to re-examine the Worker
so that I could check his presentation against the other records. Mr Yao did
have a surprisingly
poor command of English making another assessment session
“5. I disagree with the assessment by Dr Takyar that the
Worker’s condition was not caused by performance management.
appears to have accepted the Worker’s presentation at face value and
assumed the correctness of the history given
without considering whether the
presentation (history) is in fact a manifestation of the
It was apparent to me that the Worker’s response to a
process of performance management led him to become depressed with paranoid
(my emphasis)
Dr Hundertmark was expressing a different opinion from that expressed by Dr
Takyar at page 3.5 of his report dated 13 July 2021,
namely that the
Worker’s psychiatric illness had been caused by the micromanagement of the
Worker and bullying and harassment
of him by individuals in the workplace,
rather than by a process of formal performance management. However, in his
cross-examination
on 6 October 2021 at transcript page 218.6 for that day Dr
Takyar conceded as follows:
“Lots of things can lead to changes in mental state. So a quality
management process could, just as if there were behaviours
in the workplace by
other people. Many factors can lead to changes in mental
Takyar initially diagnosed the Worker as suffering from “
adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood (chronic) with
symptoms of a
moderate to severe grade
” – report dated 20
January 2021 at page 6.3. However, after considering Dr Hundertmark’s
report dated 6 May 2021,
Dr Takyar agreed that Dr Hundertmark’s diagnosis
of Major Depressive Disorder was “
appropriate
report dated 13 July 2021 at page 2.3.
Takyar also agreed with Dr Hundertmark in his opinion that the Worker was
currently totally incapacitated for work by his mental
injury. Dr Takyar said
the Worker would require referral for treatment by a psychiatrist as well as up
to 20 sessions of structured
consultations with a clinical psychologist. He
said in his answers to questions 3., 5. and 6. on page 6 of his report dated 20
2021 that the Worker’s condition was not yet
THE EXISTENCE OF ANY MENTAL INJURY
previously noted, the Employer disputes that the Worker has suffered or is
suffering from any mental injury at all, whether work-related
or not. There is
a substantial medical history before me as identified above that the Worker over
many years had consistently reported
symptoms of psychological stress, and that
he continued to do so after he returned to work after a symptom-free period of
24 months. There is expert opinion from two psychiatrists based on the
Worker’s current reports of symptoms of psychological
stress. There is no
medical evidence or opinion to the contrary. The Worker’s evidence that he
in fact suffered from such symptoms
was not seriously challenged in cross
examination.
am satisfied on the basis of the GPs’ records over the period from 3
October 2019 to 29 January 2021, the GPs’ medical
certificates from 3
October 2019 to 26 October 2021 and from the Worker’s live evidence, that
the Worker suffered symptoms
of disturbed sleep, fatigue, anxiety, feeling
depressed, feeling less enjoyment in life, headache, ruminating about his work,
feeling stressed generally by his work, from around June 2019 to the date of
the hearing. These are generally the symptoms recorded
by each of Dr Takyar and
Dr Hundertmark in their reports as having been provided to them by the Worker,
and relied on by each of
them in arriving at their respective
accept the Worker’s evidence of the symptoms. I am satisfied on all the
evidence including the expert opinions of both psychiatrists
and I find that the
Worker has suffered from the injury, from at least 3 October 2019 when symptoms
were first recorded, to the date
of the hearing in October 2021, and continuing.
I find that the injury is a Major Depressive
CAPACITY FOR EMPLOYMENT
opinions of each of Dr Takyar and Dr Hundertmark that the Worker was presently
incapacitated for any work as a consequence of
a Major Depressive Disorder were
not traversed in cross examination. On the basis of the live evidence of the
Worker and of the
GPs’ records and their medical certificates and on the
basis of the expert opinions of both Dr Takyar and Dr Hundertmark in
reports and telephone conference notes, and of Dr Takyar’s live evidence,
and in the absence of any evidence to the contrary,
I am satisfied and I find
that the Worker has been totally incapacitated for any work from at least 10
February 2020 to date and
continuing as a consequence of the
ARISING OUT OF OR IN THE COURSE OF THE
The Prior Medical History
GPs’ records show that before the Worker stopped work on the basis of the
claimed mental injury on 10 February 2020 he had
attended on his treating GPs on
25 separate occasions over a period of seven years for symptoms of psychological
stress which he
consistently reported were work-related. The first such report
was recorded on 18 February 2013 and the last such report before he
ceased work
was recorded on 29 January 2020.
Worker took extended leave from the employment for 17 months from early October
2017 to 3 March 2019, returning to work on 4 March
2019. The GPs’ records
show that over this period of 17 months the Worker did not attend upon his GPs
at the Top End Medical
Centre on any occasion for symptoms of psychological
stress, or at all. There is no evidence before me and no suggestion has been
made that the Worker attended on any different health service provider over this
Worker’s pleaded case is limited to events and circumstances which arose
after his return to work on 4 March 2019. Paragraph
4 of his Amended Statement
of Claim dated 18 June 2021 pleads specifically that the injury arose as a
result of listed events and
circumstances a. to q., all of which occurred on and
after early June 2019. The history of the Worker’s psychological symptoms
prior to his return to work on 4 March 2019 generally and prior to early June
2019 specifically is nevertheless still relevant.
GPs’ records establish that the Worker had sought medical treatment for
psychological symptoms which he consistently reported
were work-related, over a
period of four years and seven and a half months from 18 February 2013 to 1
October 2017. These records
show that the Worker did not seek medical treatment
for psychological symptoms or for any other health-related purpose for the 17
months he was on leave and away from the workplace, from shortly after 1 October
2017 to 3 March 2019. These records show that seven
months after the Worker
returned to work on 4 March 2019 he began once again on and after 3 October 2019
to seek medical treatment
for psychological symptoms which he again told his GPs
were work-related.
McConnel SC for the Employer submits at paragraph 5. in his Employer’s
Closing Submissions received 24/12/21 that the Worker’s
resort to medical absences was
just an attempt to frustrate
that process of performance management”
– here Mr McConnel was
referring to a process of performance management which I find later in these
Reasons was an unusual process.
The Worker’s prior medical history does
not support Mr McConnel’s submission. That history shows that before the
went on extended leave in about October 2017 his psychological symptoms
reported up to then had been connected with the employment,
even in the absence
of any unusual process of performance management. The abrupt cessation of any
recorded history of psychological
symptoms during the 17 months the Worker was
on leave and away from the employment from early October 2017 to 3 March 2019
supports this connection. The history the Worker contemporaneously
provided to his treating GPs of psychological symptoms resuming
by 3 October
2019, seven months after he returned to the employment on 4 March 2019, and
continuing thereafter until he ceased work
on 10 February 2020, and his live
evidence on this issue, need to be assessed in the light of this earlier
the lengthy, contemporaneously recorded earlier history of psychological
symptoms diminishes any likelihood that the Worker’s
evidence of his
subsequent very similar symptoms which he had then attributed to the employment,
and of his subsequent perception
and attribution of their cause, was recently
invented purely to frustrate the process of an unusual performance management in
and 2020. The earlier history is to be taken into account in assessing the
credibility and reliability of the Worker’s evidence
of events he found
distressing and their impact on him, after his return to work on 4 March 2019.
The earlier history in that way
is relevant in determining whether the injury
arose out of or in the course of the employment.
if the Employer knew before 4 March 2019 of the Worker’s medical history
of stress-related symptoms then that knowledge
would potentially be relevant to
the assessment of the reasonableness of the Employer’s subsequent
management actions. In
McGee v Comcare
[2010] AATA 386
Administrative Appeals Tribunal said:
“Reasonableness must be assessed against what is known at the time
without the benefit of hindsight, taking into account the
attributes and
circumstances
, including the emotional state of the employee concerned
(my emphasis)
McConnel SC for the Employer has conceded that the Worker’s supervisor
Janet Cleveland knew of his prior mental health medical
history – that
concession appears in paragraphs 18 and 19 of the Employer’s Closing
Submissions received 24/12/21. Additionally,
there is evidence before me of
such knowledge on the part of the Employer in the form of the medical
certificate dated 1 October
2017 which is located on page 108 in Trial Book 1.
That certificate provides as follows:
Certificate
This Is To Certify That
Mr Lie Yao is going through a lot of stress and will benefit from stress
leave from work from 01/10/17 to 22/10/17 inclusive.
GPs’ records show that the Worker had been given medical certificates to
excuse him from work at nine of the 15 separate
visits before 1
October 2017 identified earlier in these Reasons when he made complaints of
work-related stress. However, no certificates
prior to 1 October 2017 were
included in the documents tendered at this hearing. On the basis of these
recorded complaints and of
the content of the medical certificate dated 1
October 2017 I infer that these nine earlier certificates similarly identified
as the medical reason for the Worker’s absences from work.
Worker was in the employ of the Employer at all times covered by these nine
certificates from 2013 to 2017. I further infer that
each of these nine
certificates, and the 10
certificate dated 1 October 2017, were
provided by the Worker to the Employer shortly after each relevant date. That is
purpose of a medical certificate.
the basis of this evidence and these inferences and of Mr McConnel’s
concession, I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities
and I find that the
Employer was aware prior to March 2019 that the Worker had a medical history of
stress-related presentations
to GPs and related absences from
The Worker’s Perception
Worker’s case is that following his return from leave on 4 March 2019 he
was subjected to two categories of stressors.
He alleges he was micromanaged
and bullied by more senior personnel in the workplace, and additionally, that he
was subjected to
an unusual formal performance management process allegedly to
improve his performance but in reality deliberately targeting him for
purpose of dismissing him from the employment (“the alleged
mismanagement”). His case is that the alleged mismanagement
materially contributed to his suffering the injury.
Hundertmark considered that the Worker “
was verging on
paranoid symptoms
”, that he presented with “
overvalued ideas
of a paranoid
nature, which is not delusional but bordering on
” and that he had become “
depressed with
” – paragraph 45. above. This could
have led the Worker to perceive the workplace as being hostile to
[2015] NTSC 45
Justice Barr in paragraph [20]
cited and followed the approach to the question of such a perception taken by
von Doussa J in
Wiegand v Comcare Australia
[2002] FCA 1464
Justice Barr set out the relevant law in this situation as
The authorities establish that, if the worker perceives
conduct on the part of others in the workplace as creating an offensive or
hostile working environment, and as a result of that perception suffers a mental
injury, causation under workers compensation law
is made out. There is an
“eggshell psyche” principle in the law of workers compensation,
analogous to the “eggshell
skull” principle at common law. However
there is one significant qualification: the relevant perception held by the
must be a perception about an incident which actually happened or an
actual state of affairs.”
am required to consider the evidence and make findings as to what happened to
and/or concerning the Worker in the workplace after
his return to work on 4
March 2019. I am required to consider whether the Worker did harbour a
perception of micromanagement and
of bullying and of being negatively targeted
by an unusual formal performance management process in the workplace, against
the background
of those findings. I am not required to determine whether any
such perception or perceptions were justified or reasonable. Then,
required to consider and make a finding whether those perceptions caused or
materially contributed to the injury.
Micromanagement and
Worker gave his evidence in chief on 4 October 2021. At transcript pages 29.4,
30.3 and 33.2 he gave evidence that in 2017 he
had worked under his manager
Janet Cleveland and that “...
Janet Cleveland, in 2016/17.
And she has been, from the beginning, has been spy on me and deliberate
”. He gave evidence that he took the 17 months long
leave because of a health issue, namely “
work-related
Worker gave evidence that when he returned to work in the employment on and
after 4 March 2019 his health had recovered. There
was initially no position for
him and he was encouraged to look for a position outside the Department of the
Chief Minister (“DCM”)
and the Department of Treasury and Finance
(“DTF”). He did not find any such position and he was allocated
tasks on an
basis. Then on 3 June 2019 he was allocated an AO4
position in the Records Management section in DTF.
chain of command in that section started with Cassandra Spiers as Head of the
section, next below her was Janet Cleveland, then
two steps down was Lulu Ng,
then came the Worker at the AO4 level and then Cassie Hendrick and Natalie Stott
at the AO2 level. With
the exception of Cassandra Spiers, all these personnel
including the Worker worked in the same open plan office.
Worker gave evidence that he felt he had not been adequately trained to carry
out the work in his AO4 position. He said that
the data set in DTF when he came
data set involving
physical paper which had been used by the DCM where he had
worked before he went off work in October 2017. He said that he did not
any experience with the DTF dataset and he said that the procedures were
different – “
Later I discover it’s a big difference between
the previous – so before I left and in 2017 and the 2019”.
Worker was asked how he was trained in respect of these differences and he
So at that time my manager Janet is directing me to
self-learning, and she pointing some procedure to me, and she also asked Lulu
give me some training. Later I was discovered that this training are very short,
sharp, and I missing steps in this training,
and that’s cause
confused” -
transcript 4 October 2021 page 37.1.
Worker was asked why and how the DTF dataset was different from the DCM dataset.
He replied: “
Later it’s – after I worked there I believe
it’s – they had a business unit, the structure is different than
DCM. They building, like, a financial group; and each group, they have unique,
the project, like a revenue office; and they sitting
underneath they have all
the people sitting (inaudible), these people are allowed to reading some
document. Another documentation
reading by another. It’s a slightly
different than DCM set up. DCM set up, when we set up we mainly using for
– 17 mainly using the physical file. So we create physical
file. If we have electronic copy, we still save on electronic. If
no electronic
copy, they can go through the hard copy physical file”.
Worker was asked whether people in Records Management gave access to different
files to different people, and whether that was
part of his job. He replied that
it was. He was asked whether he received any formal training from outside the
section and he replied:
No, no formal training send outside, just
learning, asking question, and if they got time to help you; if not get time,
you practise;
and eventually when I practise I was getting the email immediately
from Lulu, ‘That’s your mistake’
. Counsel for the Worker
clarified this by asking: “
And you are saying that was your training;
you are left by yourself; you’re to study the – I’m talking
the dataset
here, the DTF dataset; and if
you get something wrong, she
will send you an email?”
The Worker replied:
at transcript page 38.9 through to page 39.5 the Worker gave evidence that his
manager Janet Cleveland asked him about his
toilet habits. He said this first
occurred some time in September 2019. He said that Janet came to his desk and
stood on his left-hand
side and asked him: “
What are you doing in the
?” The Worker believed that Lulu Ng was also present in the
open plan office when this question was asked. The Worker said
that Janet asked
him how long he had been in the toilet and then asked him the reason why he
appeared to be in the toilet every morning.
The Worker said he replied to her
that he had diarrhoea, and that Janet Cleveland went on to say: “
have diarrhoea for long time. You have diarrhoea for long time”.
Worker said that Janet Cleveland spoke in a normal “
that two female co-workers were present in the work area at this time. The
Worker was asked how he felt at that point
and he replied: “
shame. I feel embarrassed, in particular for me as a male when female ask me
transcript page 39.7 to page 40.2 the Worker gave evidence that towards the end
of September 2019 his supervisor Janet Cleveland
spoke to him in the presence of
other co-workers and accused him of not having any Records Management knowledge.
The Worker was asked
how this had made him feel and he said: “
terrible for me. I feel very, very low. I feel I just been hit by
page 40 of the transcript on 4 October 2021 the Worker gave evidence that he was
instructed by Lulu Ng: “
If you have any training issues, escalate
please just contact with record system, DCIS record system to resolve these
”. However, the Worker said he found that he was not permitted
to contact or receive information from the DCIS records system.
After she instruct me do so, and she assigned the job asked me do so,
I ring them up, they say ‘Lie, I’m sorry, you are
list’. But they say, ‘I’m your friend, but I can’t help
you. You are not on the list.’ I
asked the people there, I think the
person is Marvin, and he say, ‘I’m sorry, it’s only two person
in your team
allowed to contact, which is Janet and Lulu’ ”.
The Worker went on to say: “
I couldn’t complete my task. And
obviously I will getting another email from Lulu one day later, say I
didn’t do right
transcript page 40.10 to 41.5 the Worker gave evidence that Janet Cleveland told
You has been – we don’t like you using the mobile
phone too often
in the office, your private phone call
Worker protested in response that he did not use his mobile phone at work. He
said at first that he took his mobile phone
to work for emergencies but he did
not take phone calls and he did not make phone calls from his mobile at work. He
then conceded
that perhaps he made one or two calls from his mobile phone during
work hours each week.
transcript page 41.6 to 45.10 the Worker gave evidence that Janet Cleveland
instructed him in relation to emails. She instructed
him to reply to her emails
on the same day he received them. Janet Cleveland further instructed the Worker
to reply to emails from
his immediate superior Lulu Ng also on the same day he
received them.
transcript page 42.1 the Worker gave evidence that Janet Cleveland instructed
him to record everything he did in the office each
day. He was also to record
each time he left his desk and the reason he left his desk and how long he would
be absent from his desk.
He was required to report to Janet Cleveland in person
every time he wished to leave his desk and if Janet Cleveland wasn’t
available, he was to report to Lulu Ng. The Worker said in his
Okay. She’s ask me – she create an Excel spreadsheet to
ask me record every things I did in the office, everything. Like
for example in
the morning you come in, what time you log on the computer, what time you make a
phone call, and between the time,
and she want to see how much time I answer the
query. And if I want to go left office, I have to let her know, reporting to
so I have to tell her, “I need to go toilet,” and how long it
asked the Worker how it made him feel and the Worker replied: “
”. Counsel sought to clarify: “
you are being targeted
?” And the Worker replied:
transcript page 42.5 to 43.8 the Worker gave evidence about difficulty he had
experienced in carrying out a security review. This
involved identifying staff
changes and ensuring that staff who had moved on no longer had security access
and new staff were granted
security access. The Worker said he felt the need to
ask another staff member Cassie Hendrick questions about how to carry out this
review but Janet Cleveland intervened and stopped him.
Worker reported that Janet said: “
Lie, you should know it. That’s
the procedure. We made the procedure for you to perform this
go through the procedure if you have anything
”. The Worker said that
he had to ask Cassie
– “Because I no familiar with that.
I’m not familiar the working group because of their using – they
call the division like (inaudible) aboriginal/indigenous policy,
like major project at DCM. They are called financial group, financial
group, and revenue – revenue something group, and budget – different
groups, different boss, different managers.
Need to ask some who I going to
send, because if I sent to the wrong
person, for example for me
–“. Counsel asked: “
It’s just a query about: are
these people
still here – who has left
?” And the Worker
Yes, yes, yes. And I would get a plan for
asked the Worker how he felt when Janet told him to stop seeking this assistance
from Cassie and the Worker replied: “
I feel being – being honest
to you, I feel be bullied
Worker gave evidence of what he described as a “confrontation”
between Janet Cleveland and him, which took place in
December 2019. He said
that he had received a phone call at work from an individual he knew as Rangga.
Rangga told the Worker that
he had lost access to some Treasury data, and he
needed to recover that access so he could finish his job. The Worker said he
that he and Rangga worked on the same floor in the same building. The
Worker had been directed by his immediate supervisor Lulu Ng
Rangga’s access to the system because Rangga had moved on to a different
job in a different department, so the Worker
had done this. The Worker went on
to explain that he reactivated Rangga’s access to the system once he
satisfied himself that
Rangga had a legitimate purpose in having that access, to
finish some work before he moved on to his new job - transcript page 45.2
45.8, 4 October 2021.
Worker gave evidence that he received an email later the same day from Janet
Cleveland stating that he had breached the security
access process by giving
access to an unauthorised person. The Worker gave evidence that he had a meeting
with Janet Cleveland in
which he suggested his immediate supervisor Lulu Ng had
made a procedural error and that if he, the Worker, had made such an error
would have been reprimanded for it. The Worker said that Janet Cleveland told
him that was not his business and the Worker responded
that everybody should be
bound by the same procedure, whether a team member or a manager. At the
conclusion of this apparently intense
discussion, the Worker felt unwell and
went home early – transcript pages 45.9 to 47.5, 4 October
Worker gave evidence of another workplace confrontation, this one occurring in
February 2020. This is found at transcript 47.5
to 48.9, 4 October 2021. The
Worker had previously contacted his Union for assistance on another work issue,
and he received a phone
call at work from an Industrial Officer of the Union to
discuss that. The Worker said that Janet Cleveland approached him the following
day and asked him whether he had taken a private phone call the day before. The
Worker replied that he had taken a call during his
lunch hour. The Worker gave
evidence that in the course of this same discussion, Janet Cleveland then
changed topics and commented
that the Worker was still taking a lot of toilet
breaks. The Worker said that other people were in the vicinity because it was an
open plan office, and while he could not be certain that other people overheard
this discussion, he was concerned by the possibility.
Worker gave evidence that this discussion about his telephone calls and about
his toilet habits, taking place at the workplace
in the open plan office, was
distressing to him. Specifically, he said when asked how this had made him
“Worker: Yes, no good. No good. He feel very, very low. I feel
worry. I feel unhappy. And also particular – particular
in the Records
Management team, can I say something? Records Management – it’s only
one male in the Records Management.
All other officer in my team is a female.
All the – even all the boss are female. Just only me at that time. When
me something to that, I was feel bad.
Toileting, toileting, yes.
“Counsel: Was there ever a
conversation about a vibrating mobile phone?
“Worker: Oh, yes. That’s – I also note here, since she
told me, ‘Do not using your personal phone call at
the work time’,
okay ‘If you want to make a’ – and I notice, every –
because in my office, everyone
using vibrate, their phone switched to
“Counsel: The phones are switched to silent,
“Worker: All my colleagues are switch to silent. And when they
going to – I don’t know. And they help other client
other client at another desk. Sometimes the girls are put that phone on the
table – on the desk. And from time
to time, they all vibrating. Because my
phone gets put in the bag. I switch off because when Janet told me, ‘Do
limitation using my mobile phone, I switch off completely. And
she approached me. She say, ‘Is your phone?’ She says.
I was so bad.
I say, ‘No, look. That’s Cassie Hendrick’s
phone’...’ That’s Natalie Stott’s
That’s not only for once. Because vibrate the desk is shaking, her desk
and feel it because where big long desk
altogether. She coming there. She
sometimes has a watch. ‘Did you call?’ ‘No, I
didn’t’. I believe
she just tried to find any whatever
“Counsel: Did you ever see her criticise other staff
“Worker: Not in front with
“Counsel: Did you ever see her talk to other staff
“Worker: No, no”.
Cleveland gave evidence in cross examination about her querying the Worker about
his toilet habits. She was asked about the
tone of her voice when she spoke to
the Worker on this subject, in the following exchange:
“Counsel: Sorry, my question might not have been clear. When you say
you lost it, could you say what you mean by losing...?
“Cleveland: Lost it, oh. I probably – my tone probably changed
a little bit. I mean, I wasn’t yelling, but I was
probably showing that I
was frustrated and so my tone might have been raised a little bit. But there was
no way that I would be yelling
in the office, so.
“Counsel: To your recollection, was anybody else there?
“Cleveland: No. On that day – well, as the – Cassie had
mentioned, she was not in that day. And Natalie Stott, who
was the other person
that sat there, was also on sick leave that day.
“Counsel: Alright. Who else in the unit...?
“Cleveland: Lulu would be there, but she was at the far end, on the
other side of the desk.
“Counsel: And you said that the conversation then moved on from
discussion about that – the specifics around that work.
Where did the
conversation move to?
“Cleveland: Sort of went down the path of why he is often away from
his desk for extended periods of time, taking his phone
with him and he said
that he is in the toilet for a long time in the mornings because he has
diarrhoea. And I said,’ Well,
you’ve had it for months then, because
this happens every day.”
Worker went on to give evidence about how his various interactions with more
senior staff at work had affected him. Starting at
transcript page 48.9 to two
page 49.2, 4 October 2021, the Worker gave the following
“Counsel: So by February 2020, how were you feeling after all of
“Worker: Sorry, I was complete – my brain doesn’t work
functional very much. I have a heavy diarrhoea. I was so
feeling so low. I have
a night sleep disturbance. Sometimes I wake up, couldn’t get back asleep
for two, three hour. And I
feel terrible. I feel my – I cannot concentrate
at doing a lot of things. I was loss of concentration. I feel a loss energy.
feel nervous, unhappiness.”
“Counsel: And you saw your GP, did you?”
“Worker: Yes”
summary, the Worker gave evidence in chief that he believed he was the subject
of excessive and at times intrusive scrutiny by
his immediate supervisors in his
performance of his work duties. He gave evidence that he perceived this to be
micromanagement and,
sometimes, to amount to bullying behaviour.
cross examination, Mr McConnel SC of counsel for the Employer asked and the
Worker answered a great many questions about the nature
and extent of the
training processes provided on behalf of the Employer to the Worker following
his return to work on 4 March 2019.
The Worker had given some evidence about
this in his examination in chief, but the cross examination examined this
subject in much
greater detail. On the basis of the Worker’s evidence on
this subject in chief and in cross examination I am satisfied and
I find that on
balance, the Worker’s evidence does not objectively support his pleaded
case that he was not provided with adequate
training or training opportunities
following his return to work on and after 4 March 2019. However, I am satisfied
and I find that
the Worker had formed the belief that this was the
McConnel SC cross examined the Worker, also at great length, about errors the
Worker was said to have made in the course of carrying
out his work tasks in the
employment from June 2019. Overall, the Worker conceded the specific errors
raised in this cross examination,
although he did attribute some of them to
inadequate training.
Worker’s immediate supervisor Janet Cleveland admitted in cross
examination at transcript page 279.2 that she didn’t
think the Worker was
a good A04 before he went on extended leave in 2017. She said that she did not
want the Worker back if he returned
in 2019 with the same attitude he had
displayed in 2017. She said that “
it would have made my life
” if the Worker went to another agency on his return to the
workplace in 2017 – transcript page 282.3.
transcript page 288.8 Janet Cleveland said in cross examination that she had
discussed the Worker with Regina Bolton who was the
Managing Director of Human
Resources Shared Services to the Department of the Chief Minister and also to
the Department of Treasury
and Finance. Janet Cleveland said that she told
Regina Bolton that the Worker had “
a long history of being a
non-performer
transcript page 298 Janet Cleveland in cross examination admitted that she had
told Lulu Ng that the Worker was to be subject to
greater scrutiny, as
“Counsel: And that greater scrutiny was discussed by you and Cassie
“Cleveland: Yes.”
“Counsel: And Lulu Ng?”
“Cleveland: Yes, as the second in charge when I’m not there,
yes, and to help manage the team across the board.”
“Counsel: And greater scrutiny includes documenting everything,
every task, and certainly every occasion when he failed to perform
timely or properly?”
“Cleveland: Yes.”
transcript page 300.1 Janet Cleveland admitted that she “
” told C Hendrick , somebody junior to the Worker in the same
office, that he was to be subject to closer scrutiny and that
all observations
of his performance were to be recorded.
transcript page 298.5 Janet Cleveland agreed with counsel for the Worker that
at no stage from on or about 3 June 2019 did you tell Mr Yao that he
was going to be subject to greater scrutiny”.
am satisfied on the basis of the Worker’s evidence set out above and on
the evidence of Janet Cleveland set out in the foregoing
paragraphs, and I find,
that the Worker was the subject of closer than usual supervision and scrutiny
engaged in by his immediate
supervisors of his work performance, from around
June 2019 and continuing until he ceased work on 10 February
am satisfied and I find that this closer than usual supervision and scrutiny by
the Employer of the Worker’s work performance
over this period, and in the
light of Janet Cleveland’s admitted attitude to his performance, and in
the light of the awareness
of this attitude on the part of at least two of the
Worker’s co-workers, including Lulu Ng, provides the factual basis from
which the Worker could have developed a perception of a hostile working
environment generally, and specifically that he was being
micromanaged by his
supervisors and, at times, that he was being bullied by Janet Cleveland and/or
Lulu Ng in the workplace.
am satisfied on the basis of the preceding finding and further on the basis of
the expert psychiatric opinion of Dr Hundertmark
set out earlier in these
Reasons that the Worker had presented with “
overvalued ideas of a
paranoid nature, which is not delusional but
bordering on
”, and that he had become “
depressed with
paranoid features
”, and I find, that the Worker did in fact develop
the perception over the relevant period from around June 2019 until he ceased
work on 10 February 2020, that he was being micromanaged and bullied by his
supervisors in the workplace.
am satisfied on the basis of the expert psychiatric opinions of each of Dr
Hundertmark and more specifically of Dr Takyar set out
earlier in these Reasons,
and I find, that the Worker’s perception set out in the preceding
paragraph contributed to the injury.
The Performance
Management Process
Worker returned to work in the employment on 4 March 2019 after
been on extended leave for 17 months. For the first two months until 3 June
2019 he was unattached and did not have a specific
position in the Department of
the Chief Minister (“DCM”) and carried out duties as directed on an
basis. He was invited by Jodie Wheeler of the HR branch of DCM to
apply for positions with other NT government Departments and he
did make some
such applications – email 12 March 2019 page 191 Volume
some point between 4 March 2019 and 4 April 2019 the Worker was asked to submit
a “MyPlan form” and he did so. By
email dated 4 April 2019 Cassie
Spiers of DCM informed the Worker of a meeting with her to discuss the MyPlan
form he had submitted
– page 195 of Volume 1.
Court heard evidence from Ms Kay Densley who was NT Secretary of the Community
and Public Sector Union. Ms Densley provided a
report dated 10 August 2021
which appears from page 185 of Trial Book 1. The parties accepted and I find
that Ms Densley is an expert
in Public Service management matters generally. I
further find she is an expert in the area of Public Service performance
processes specifically.
Densley gave evidence that a MyPlan form is one identifying the tasks that
should be achieved by a Public Service employee in a
specific position. Such a
document is part of a normal Public Service performance management process and
it is expected to be prepared
by all employees. It is usual for employees to
meet with their supervisor every six months to discuss their performance in the
of their MyPlan form. Ms Desley stated in paragraph 11. of her
Conversations should occur in between these more formal discussions
so there would be no ‘surprises’ at these meetings.
Bad performance
or issues with standards of work should be discussed at an informal level
when/if they occur.”
Densley contrasted the MyPlan performance management process with an entirely
different process called a Personal Improvement Plan
(“PIP”). She
stated in paragraphs 12. to 15. inclusive of her report as
12. A Personal Improvement Plan (PIP) is far more serious form of
performance management and should concern any employee.”
PIPs are applied to or imposed on only a very small fraction
of employees and are regarded as a last-ditch effort to manage the performance
of an employee. Actually, they are often regarded as a euphemism for the last
stage prior to termination
(my emphasis)
serious black mark against the employee as any employee who manages to continue
to be an employee after a PIP will have
a very hard time achieving a promotion
or a transfer. On paper a PIP will look similar to a MyPlan in that it has
columns recording
targets and achievements with comments.”
“14. PIPs usually run for a shorter period of weeks and involve
meetings between the employee, the manager, and support people,
every week or
“15. All public sector managers should be aware of the MyPlan form
of performance managers
(sic – I presume this should be
‘management’)
but because PIPs are so rare
, many managers would not be aware of the process of imposing a PIP
and I am not aware of any formal or transparent process document
conduct these processes.”
Worker gave evidence in chief that he first became aware of a PIP process
affecting him when he received an email from Janet Cleveland
in August 2019
mentioning that process. He said at that time he did not know what a PIP was
– transcript page 43.9, 4 October
Worker gave evidence that he asked Janet Cleveland about this, as
“I think I have a quick verbal ask when she walk around, I said,
‘What do you mean for performance – what this mean?’
‘This is just improving your skill and
improving your Records
Management, all your knowledge’
(my emphasis)” - transcript
page 44.4, 4 October 2021.
evidence establishes that the Employer went through the actual process of
developing the formal PIP documentation from 9 August
2019 until 1 October 2019.
Worker went on to give evidence that he was provided with a hard copy of the
formal PIP documentation in early October 2019.
I think the early October or early October, and Janet send me email
and gave me hard copy, put on my desk. I was sitting there, he
just walking
past, pop under that. I haven’t looked at this form, which is like made up
by the word of (inaudible) of the big
documentation, maybe five, 10 pages. And I
ask her, ‘What’s this?’ He said, ‘This is’ - and
say, ‘DCIS only have this for performance
management.”
DCIS only have this...?’ ‘Only has this form. I said,
‘What’s this form for?’ I was asking about the
performance
improvement plan, the form. I said, ‘What’s this for?’ He say,
‘This one?’ Then I didn’t
say any words, I just say, asking
her one more time, I say, ‘Can you able email to me, electronic, as word
of (inaudible, I
can change, I can make some comments for if I want to make some
change.’ And she said to me, ‘You just need to write
that.’ She doesn’t give me the – at that time he doesn’t
give me the electronic copy, saying –
yeah, sorry. Too much.”
was noted by counsel and by me that the Worker tended to use third person
singular pronouns interchangeably, confusing the gender
of the person referred
to. It was agreed that in the foregoing exchange the Worker was talking about
Janet Cleveland - transcript
page 44.8, 4 October 2021.
Cleveland met with the Worker on 2 October 2019 to inform him about the PIP
process and provide him with a copy of that document.
She invited his
Worker consulted his GP the following day, 3 October 2019, complaining of
work-related stress.
at transcript page 135.5 on 5 October 2021, Mr McConnel SC cross examined the
Worker on his being subjected to a PIP. The
Worker agreed that he had been
presented with a formal PIP document on 2 October 2019 and that he was to have a
meeting with Janet
Cleveland about that the following day, 3 October 2019.
However, he instead attended on his GP on 3 October 2019 and reported
work-related
symptoms of stress, and was then absent from work for a number of
Worker specifically denied Mr McConnel’s suggestion that the
Worker’s symptoms of stress described to his GP on 3
October 2019 were
solely a reaction to his receiving the PIP. The Worker said rather that his
stress levels had been building up
since he commenced his new job on 3 June
2019, in the context of the micromanagement and bullying he had been subjected
new job, and that was the background to his consulting his GP on that
date - transcript pages 137.9 to 138.2, 5 October 2021.
Worker agreed in cross examination that he did not attend a meeting to discuss
the PIP over the following days after 3 October
2019 because he had again
attended his GP and had again been certified unfit for work because of stress
related symptoms. When on
18 October 2019 the Worker eventually did attend a
meeting to discuss the PIP, he arranged to take a support person with
Worker had included the PIP performance management as part of his history of
work-related stressors which he provided to psychiatrist
Dr Takyar - his report
of 20 January 2021 at page 2.8. He also included this history of the PIP
performance management as part of
his history of work-related stressors to
psychiatrist Dr Hundertmark - his report of 6 May 2021 at page 3.2 and 3.6.
noted earlier in these Reasons, the Worker consulted his GP on 3 October 2019
for work-stress for the first time since he had returned
to work on 4 March
2019. He then consulted his GPs on eight further occasions for work-stress,
before ceasing work on 10 February
2020. This is a total work period of just
over four months, reduced by the number of public holidays over the
Christmas/New Year
period. An analysis of the relevant eight medical
certificates issued at the consultations when the Worker complained of
work-stress
reveals that he was certified unfit for work over this period, for a
total of 17 days.
find that the Worker first became aware of the existence of a formal PIP process
affecting him only on 9 August 2019 when he received
the email from Janet
Cleveland, and that this was really brought home to him when the formal PIP
document was given to him by Janet
Cleveland on 2 October 2019.
accept the Worker’s evidence and I find that the Worker began to
experience symptoms of stress attributable to the PIP process
at least from 3
October 2019 when he consulted his GP complaining of work-related
am satisfied and I find that the symptoms of stress experienced by the Worker
attributable to the PIP process were in addition to
the symptoms of stress he
was already experiencing by 2 October 2019 as a consequence of his perception
that he was being micromanaged
and bullied in the workplace.
am satisfied and I find that the notification by email on 9 August 2019 and the
subsequent delivery of the PIP documentation to
the Worker on 2 October 2019,
and the meeting with Janet Cleveland on 18 October 2019 to discuss the mechanics
of the PIP process,
all happening against the background of a closer than usual
supervision and scrutiny of the Worker’s performance in the workplace,
provided the factual basis for the Worker further to develop a perception of a
hostile working environment, and specifically that
he was being negatively
targeted by the formal PIP process.
am satisfied on the basis of the preceding findings and further on the basis of
the expert psychiatric opinion of Dr Hundertmark
set out earlier in these
Reasons in relation to the Worker’s “
overvalued ideas of a
paranoid nature, which is not delusional but
bordering on
” and that the Worker had become “
depressed with
”, and I find, that the Worker did in fact
develop the perception that he was being deliberately and negatively targeted by
a formal performance management process in the workplace, namely the PIP
am satisfied on the basis of the expert psychiatric opinions of each of Dr
Hundertmark and Dr Takyar set out earlier in these Reasons,
and I find, that the
Worker’s perception set out in the preceding paragraph contributed to the
Cause of or Material Contribution to the
Worker’s case as understood by the Employer and confirmed on behalf of the
Worker at the hearing was that on his return
to work on 4 March 2019 the Worker
was in good mental health – see transcript page 31.5 on 4 October 2021.
The Worker provided
a history to psychiatrist Dr Takyar on 15 January 2021 as
When I returned in March 2019, I was fresh and happy, I
don’t think I have any anxiety and I am also sleeping very well, eating
well, healthy, I have a good energy, return to work”
of Dr Takyar’s report of 20 January 2021
On the basis of this
history and of the Worker’s GPs’ records and the other medical
evidence before the Court identified
and discussed earlier in these Reasons, I
am satisfied and I find that the Worker was not suffering from the injury
specifically
when he returned to work on 4 March 2019 after having been on leave
for the previous 17 months before that date. Additionally, I
note that there is
no evidence before me that the Worker was suffering from any other mental injury
when he returned to the employment
on that date.
is defined in subsection 3(1) of the Act to include
“... a physical or
mental ailment, disorder, defect or morbid condition, whether of sudden or
gradual development and whether
contracted before or after the commencement of
am satisfied that the injury did not develop suddenly. The injury manifested
over a period first recorded when the Worker presented
to his GP on 3 October
2019 complaining of symptoms of work-related stress. The Worker thereafter
continued in the employment but
continued to present to his GPs from time to
time complaining of symptoms of work-related stress. This happened on eight
occasions after 3 October 2019 until he finally ceased work because of
the injury four months later, on 10 February 2020. I find
that the injury was
one of gradual development.
4(5) of the Act provides:
“(5) An injury shall be deemed to arise out of or in the course of a
worker’s employment where it occurred by way of a
gradual process over a
period of time and the employment in which he or she was employed at any time
during that period materially
contributed to the injury.”
4(6A) of the Act provides:
“(6A) Subject to this section, a disease shall be taken not to have
been contracted by a worker or to have not been aggravated,
accelerated or
exacerbated in the course of the worker’s employment unless the employment
in which the worker is or was employed
materially contributed to the
worker’s contraction of the disease or to its aggravation, acceleration or
exacerbation.”
4(8) of the Act provides:
“(8) For the purposes of this section, the employment of a worker is
not to be taken to have materially contributed to:
(a) an injury or disease; or
(b) an aggravation, acceleration or exacerbation of a disease,
unless the employment was the real, proximate or effective cause of the
injury, disease, aggravation, acceleration or exacerbation
foregoing require that in order to be satisfied that the injury arose out of or
in the course of the employment I must be satisfied
on the balance of
probabilities that the employment materially contributed to the injury. To be
satisfied as to that, I must first
be satisfied that the employment was
the real, proximate or effective cause...”
is no evidence before me of any cause or causes of, or contribution or
contributions to, the injury other than the employment.
It is of course the
Worker who bears the onus of positively establishing on the balance of
probabilities that the injury is work-related.
am satisfied that the Worker has established this. On the basis of the evidence
identified earlier in these Reasons, namely from
the Worker, the work
documentation, the GPs’ records and the evidence of the two psychiatrists,
and on the basis of my findings
as to the impact on the Worker of his perception
of micromanagement and bullying in the workplace, and the impact on him of the
performance management process, I am satisfied and I find that the
employment was the real, proximate and effective cause of the
injury. I find
that the employment materially contributed to the injury.
find that the injury arose out of and in the course of the
employment.
MANAGEMENT ACTION
have found that the Worker is totally incapacitated for work on the basis of the
injury, namely a Major Depressive Disorder, and
I have found that the injury
arose out of and in the course of the employment. The Worker has therefore
established his entitlement
to be paid compensation under the Act, unless I find
that the injury was caused wholly or primarily by management action taken on
reasonable grounds and in a reasonable manner by the Employer, within the
meaning of subsection 3A(2)(a) of the Act.
” is defined in subsection 3(1) of the Act as
management action
, in relation to a worker, means any action
taken by the employer in the management of the worker’s employment or
at the workplace, including one or more of the following:
(a) appraisal of the worker’s performance;
(b) counselling of the worker;
(c) stand down of the worker, or suspension of the worker’s
employment;
(d) disciplinary action taken in respect of the worker’s
employment;
(e) transfer of the worker’s employment;
(f) demotion, redeployment or retrenchment of the worker;
(g) dismissal of the worker;
(h) promotion of the worker;
(i) reclassification of the worker’s employment position;
(j) provision to the worker of a leave of absence;
(k) provision to the worker of a benefit connected with the worker’s
employment;
(l) training a worker in respect of the worker’s employment;
(m) investigation by the worker’s employer of any alleged
misconduct:
(i) of the worker; or
(ii) of any other person relating to the employer’s workforce in
which the worker was involved or to which the worker was a
(n) communication in connection with an action mentioned in paragraphs (a)
am satisfied and I find that the actions of the Employer considered above in
subjecting the Worker to closer than usual supervision
and scrutiny of his
performance in the workplace, and in deciding to subject him to the PIP process,
come within this definition
management action
Specifically, they come within sub definitions (a), (b), (l) and
The Email of 23 May 2019
Thursday 23 May 2019 a meeting was held involving senior HR personnel of DCM.
It was attended among others by Ms Regina Bolton
who was the Managing Director
of Human Resources Shared Services to the DCM and also to the Department of
Treasury and Finance. The
Worker and his position with DCM was discussed at this
meeting. An email was sent that day following the meeting as
“From: Rosalie Lamour
Sent: Thursday, 23 May 2019 1237 PM
To: Nathalie Cooke; Joanne Quayle
Cc: DCMSharedServices Human Resources
Subject: CONFIDENTIAL – Matter from CS Directors meeting
Hi Nathalie and Jo
I am just passing on some notes from the CS Directors meeting this morning
(I stood in for Jodie W).
It was regarding Lie Yao in Records. Regina advised that with Mel Smith
leaving this Friday, she wants to move Lie back into the ongoing
AO4 position
and commence formal performance management asap
(my emphasis)
Please discuss with Cassie Spiers as
she would like to collate any/all
prior performance
documentation on Lie
(my emphasis)
discuss providing coaching in the process to Janet
Kind Regards,
Rosalie Lamour
Assistant Director
Human Resources Shared Services Department of the Chief
interpretation of this email is important in this matter.
Worker’s case is that the email’s reference to “
performance management asap
” meant a PIP rather than the MyPlan
process. The Worker says that the true purpose of the PIP proposed at that very
stage, only two months and three weeks after the Worker had returned to
work performing
duties following a 17 month absence, was to
achieve the termination of the Worker’s employment with the Employer.
Worker says further that the email’s reference to “
Please discuss
with Cassie Spiers as she
would like to
collate any/all prior
performance
documentation on Lie”
was intended to encompass all
prior performance material on the Worker, including from before he took his 17
months’ leave
in October 2017, and this was to assist the Employer to
achieve that purpose of terminating the Worker’s employment.
Employer disputes this interpretation of the email. Its case is set out in
paragraph 47 of the Employer’s Closing Submissions
received 24 December
2021 as follows:
47. There was no mention of a PIP until 9 August 2019. Prior to
that date, the Worker was simply being performance managed within
bounds of employee performance management by his supervisor and manager. The
documents in the Court Book demonstrate the
multitude of performance related
issues that Lulu Ng and Janet Cleveland dealt with in the period from March to
author of the email was Rosalie Lamour, Assistant Director, Human Resources
Shared Services, Department of the Chief Minister.
The email was passing on some
information and instructions arising from a meeting held on the same date, 23
May 2019, attended by
Regina Bolton who was the Executive Director, Human
Resources Shared Services, Department of the Chief Minister and also Department
of Treasury and Finance, and therefore senior to Rosalie Lamour.
email dated 9 August 2019 Janet Cleveland informed the Worker as
“Yes I agree and it’s time to escalate these ongoing
Regina and Lulu will be meeting with you to discuss a Performance
Improvement Plan
Cleveland gave evidence that Executive Director Regina Bolton was standing
beside her desk when Janet Cleveland was about to
send the email of 9 August
2019 to the Worker. Janet Cleveland gave the following evidence at transcript
page 300.7 on 7 October
“Mr O’Loughlin: And you didn’t say that he will be
placed on a PIP, you just said that there will be a meeting to
“Janet Cleveland: Yes, because at the time this email conversation
had obviously started earlier in the day or the day before,
and Regina Bolton
was at my desk, and she had seen this email, and I was discussing ongoing
issues, and it was a directive from her,
just going, ‘Right, you can now
tell him that this is happening’.”
“Mr O’Loughlin: We can now tell him that this is
happening?”
“Janet Cleveland: Yes, so it was a directive from my Executive
“Mr O’Loughlin: Are they the words she used, or did she say,
‘You can now tell him that a PIP will happen?”
“Janet Cleveland: Yes.”
“Mr O’Loughlin: And was that your plan, that a PIP would
happen at some stage, but we will go through MyPlan first?”
“Janet Cleveland: Yes. Well,
the MyPlan happens anyway
(my emphasis)
, but the training plan and everything that was put in
place to up re-skill or up-skill him was the approach that I took
cross examination at transcript page 289.1 Janet Cleveland was taken to the
email of 23 May 2019. It was put to her that the email’s
reference to
performance management asap
” was not a
reference to the MyPlan process, and she agreed with this. It was further put
to her that this reference was something
more serious, along the lines of a PIP,
to which she replied “
That’s right
email of 23 May 2019 was marked “
CONFIDENTIA
L”. The sole
subject matter of the email was the Worker. Specifically, the email discussed
moving the Worker into an ongoing
A04 position being vacated by another staff
member, commencing formal performance management of the Worker
” which meant “as soon as possible”, and
requesting that these matters be discussed with the Worker’s supervisor
Cassie Spiers to arrange to collate prior performance documentation on the
Worker, and requesting that coaching in the formal performance
process referred to earlier in the email be discussed with “Janet”.
It is not in dispute and I find that
this was a reference to Janet
Cleveland agreed in cross examination at transcript page 284 that in May 2019
she would not have needed coaching or training
for a MyPlan process for the
the time of this meeting and this email on 23 May 2019, the Worker had been back
at work since 4 March 2019, a period of two months
and 20 days. The Worker had
returned to work on 4 March 2019 after a lengthy absence of 17 months when he
had been on leave. Following
his return to work on 4 March 2019 and up until 3
June 2019, the Worker was not provided with a specific job in a specific
and he carried out work on an
basis, as directed
essentially from day to day.
Rosalie Lamour nor Regina Bolton was called to give evidence in this proceeding.
They were the two people who could have given
the best evidence as to the
meaning and purpose of the discussions and decisions concerning the Worker at
the Corporate Services
Directors’ meeting held on 23 May 2019, and
therefore as to the meaning and purpose of the email. Regina Bolton was also
best person to give evidence as to the timing of the implementation of the
formal PIP affecting the Worker, and as to why she personally
as an Executive
Director had taken such a hands-on interest in the performance management of an
AO4 clerk. I would have expected
the evidence of both these persons to be led
before the Court.
Cleveland gave evidence at transcript page 304.8 that she believed Regina Bolton
was now living in Perth. There was no other
evidence before the Court as to the
whereabouts of Regina Bolton or as to why she had not been called, whether by
video link or otherwise,
to give evidence before the Court. There was no
evidence before the Court as to why Rosalie Lamour was not called to give
the basis of the principle in
Jones v Dunkel
, I conclude that the
evidence of Regina Bolton and Rosalie Lamour, or either one of them, would not
have assisted the Employer’s
Employer called no evidence from any person who had attended the meeting on 23
May 2019 or who was a named recipient of the email
of that date. No explanation
was provided for this absence of plainly relevant evidence.
Court was left without any evidence by way of explanation from the Employer as
to why senior personnel in the relevant Departments
had held a confidential
meeting to discuss an A04 staff member, and why that meeting decided at that
time to put that staff member
under formal performance management as soon as
possible, rather than at some later time, and why any/all prior performance
documentation
was to be collated for that purpose.
the basis of the foregoing matters, I am satisfied and I find that the
discussions and decisions concerning the Worker at the meeting
on 23 May 2019
and referred to in the email of 23 May 2019 did not relate solely to the
standard of his performance of his
duties in the short period
between 4 March 2019 and 23 May 2019.
the same basis I am satisfied that the reference in the email to collating
” of the Worker’s prior performance
documentation must have included all or part of the Worker’s performance
in the employment before his return to work on 4 March 2019 - that is,
before he went on 17 months’ leave in early October
find that the discussions and decisions concerning the Worker at the meeting on
23 May 2019 and which led to the email of that date
included the Worker’s
performance over all or at least a great part of the period of his earlier
employment with the Employer
up until he went off work in early October 2017 and
took 17 months’ leave.
the basis of the description and explanation of the MyPlan process provided by
expert witness Kay Densley set out earlier in these
Reasons, on the basis of the
evidence of Janet Cleveland in the passages set out in paragraphs 144. and 146.
above, and on the basis
of the email dated 4 April 2019 from Cassie Spiers to
the Worker informing him of a meeting to discuss the MyPlan form he had already
submitted to her at least one month and three weeks before the meeting and email
of 23 May 2019, I am satisfied and I find that the
formal performance
management asap
” referred to in the email of 23 May 2019 was not a
reference to the MyPlan process.
is no evidence before me of the existence of any formal performance management
processes other than the MyPlan process and the
PIP process. There may well be
any number of informal performance management processes which might be
considered and utilised in
the management of public service employees but I
heard no evidence of these, and in interpreting the email of 23 May 2019 I am
by its very words to a formal performance management process.
am satisfied on the balance of probabilities and I find that the reference to
commencing a “
formal performance management asap
email of 23 May 2019 was a reference to a PIP.
Kaye Densley in her report of 10 August 2021, referred to in paragraph 104.
Above, offered her expert opinion that:
PIPS are applied to or imposed on only a very small fraction of
employees and are regarded as a last-ditch effort to manage the performance
an employee.
they are often regarded as a euphemism
for the last stage prior to termination
(my emphasis).”
Densley said further concerning a PIP in examination in chief as
“As I said above, this is a black mark that an employee would want
to avoid at all costs
and it is also a sign that termination of employment is
not far off
(my emphasis)
am satisfied and I find that the discussions at and the decisions taken
concerning the Worker at the meeting on 23 May 2019, as
evidenced by the email
of that date, had the purpose of commencing a process likely to lead to the
termination of the Worker’s
employment with the Employer.
find that the decision of the Employer on 23 May 2019 to commence this process
likely to lead to the termination of the Worker’s
employment was a
management action, coming within sub definition (g) of the definition in the
The Onus – Subsection 3A(2)
parties disagree which of them bears the onus of proving or disproving whether
the injury was caused wholly or primarily by reasonable
management action within
the meaning of subsection 3A(2)(a) of the Act.
3A(1) of the Act defines the concept of “
purposes of the Act. The whole of section 3A was introduced into the Act on 1
October 2015 by section 5 of the
Previously, “
” had been defined along
with other words in subsection 3(1) which is the general definition section of
previous definition of “
” in subsection 3(1) of the Act
was in the following terms:
, in relation to a worker, means a physical or mental
injury arising before or after the commencement of the relevant provision of
this Act out of or in the course of his or her employment and includes:
(a) a disease, and
(b) the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation, recurrence or
deterioration of a pre-existing injury or disease,
but does not include an injury or disease suffered by a worker as a result
of reasonable disciplinary action taken against the worker
or failure by the
worker to obtain a promotion, transfer or benefit in connection with the
worker’s employment or as a result
of reasonable administrative action
taken in connection with the worker’s employment.”
current definition of “
” is set out in section 3A as
“3A(1) An injury, in relation to a worker, is a physical or mental
injury arising out of or in the course of the worker’s
employment and
(a) a disease; and
(b) the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation, recurrence or
deterioration of a pre-existing injury or disease.
“(2) Despite any other provision of this Act, a mental injury is not
considered to be an injury for this Act if it is caused
wholly or primarily by
one or more of the following:
(a) management action taken on reasonable grounds and in a reasonable
manner by or on behalf of the worker’s employer;
(b) a decision of the worker’s employer, on reasonable grounds, to
take, or not to take, any management action;
(c) any expectation by the worker that any management action would, or
would not, be taken or any decision made to take, or not to
take, any management
the previous and the current definitions of “
Act exclude a mental injury from the definition of injury, and therefore from
being compensable, in the circumstances of certain
categories of work-related
action or failure to take action by an employer or of a failure by a worker to
obtain an expected work
benefit (“the exclusion”). Subsection 3A(2)
however limits the exclusion to a mental injury whereas the previous definition
in subsection 3(1) made its exclusion applicable to any injury, physical or
McConnel SC for the Employer argues from first principles that the Worker bears
the onus of disproving reasonable management action
– that is, that the
Worker must prove a negative. He does not cite any authority for this
proposition. In his undated
Employer’s Closing Submissions
24 December 2021 Mr McConnel submits in paragraph 13 as
The Employer contends that the legal onus remains on the
Worker, as a matter of construction and logic. The entitlement to compensation
depends on the Worker proving an injury. To prove an injury, the Worker must
satisfy the definition of injury within the Act. Subsection
(2) of s.3A is part
of the definition of injur
In order, therefore, for the Worker to prove
that he comes within the definition of injury for the purposes of the Act, he
must positively
identify that the events that caused the injury were “out
of” the employment
and he must positively identify that those events
were not reasonable management action
(my emphasis).”
McConnel’s argument from first principles and analysis is equally
applicable to the definition of “
” in subsection 3(1)
of the Act as it previously stood. However, the case law relevant to the
definition of “
” in subsection 3(1) at that time did
not support this analysis.
is authority relevant to the question of onus under that previous definition.
The question of which party bore the onus in respect
of the exclusion in the
definition of “
” in the previous definition in
subsection 3(1) of the Act arose in a number of Decisions of Northern Territory
courts over
a number of years.
of these was a Decision of Chief Justice Brian Martin (BR) of the NT Supreme
Swanson v Northern Territory of Australia
[2006] NTSC 88
) where he said at paragraph [86] as
In the light of the evidence to which I have referred, the
Magistrate was required to determine whether the respondent
had proved that the injury was suffered by the appellant
“as a result of” reasonable administrative action taken in
connection with the appellant’s employment. The respondent
was required to prove that the injury “was the result
Honour did not provide any analysis leading to this conclusion as to onus. I
was a matter where the worker’s claim had been
disputed at first instance, as with the present proceeding.
approach in
to this question of onus was followed by Magistrate
Dr John Lowndes (as he then was) in the Work Health Court in
Northern Territory
[2010] NTMC 70
at paragraph
where he cited
and said as follows:
11. It is clear from the exclusionary elements of the definition of
“injury” that if a work-related injury is the result
of reasonable
administrative or disciplinary action taken against a worker or the result of a
failure by a worker to obtain a promotion
transfer or benefit, then the injury
is not compensable. As the employer has pleaded and relies upon the exclusionary
elements of
the definition of “injury”, it bears the onus of proving
that any injury suffered by the worker was result of reasonable
disciplinary or
administrative action or a failure to obtain a promotion, transfer or
(above) at paragraphs [4], [5] and [8] Justice Barr applied this
onus. He was not required by the parties to provide any analysis
question. He said as follows:
“[4] The parties agree that the employer (respondent) had the onus
of establishing the reasonable administrative action exclusion.
The parties
conducted their respective cases in the Work Health Court on the basis that the
employer had to prove that the worker’s
injury was “
as a result
of reasonable administrative action taken in connection with the worker’s
“[5] Where the reasonable administrative action exclusion is relied
on by an employer, the employer must prove that the relevant
administrative action was the sole cause of the worker’s
“[8] ...The employer had the onus of proving that there was no
operative cause of the injury other than the identified reasonable
administrative action.”
Decisions were considered and their position on the onus question was followed
by Magistrate Armitage (as she then was) in the
Work Health Court in
Andreasen v ABT (NT) Pty Ltd
[2015] NTMC 026
in paragraphs 27 to 33
inclusive. Her Honour concluded in paragraph 33:
I am persuaded that there is a line of binding authority on this
issue in the Northern Territory. The employer bears the onus of proof
question of reasonable administrative action
Decisions were not limited to a failure to obtain a promotion or benefit –
they covered all of the elements of the exclusion
as it previously existed in
the definition of “
” in section 3 of the
have found only one specific consideration by any Court of section 3A generally
and of subsection 3A(2) specifically since their
introduction on 1 October 2015.
That is the Decision of Judge Armitage in the Work Health Court in
[2019] NTLC 3
”). In paragraph 7. of
Judge Armitage said as follows:
Accordingly, s 3A creates a defence to a claim for mental injuries
caused solely or primarily by reasonable management action. In
other words,
where the worker establishes that a mental injury has arisen out of or in the
course of the employment (which in this
case is accepted), the entitlement to
compensation will be defeated
employer establishes
that the mental injury was wholly or primarily caused by reasonable
management action. Accordingly,
the Employer must satisfy the Court that
(my emphasis)
(i) the conduct of actions complained of by the worker constitute
management action as defined in section 3; and
(ii) the management action was taken on reasonable grounds; and
(iii) the management action was taken in a reasonable manner; and
(iv) the reasonable management action wholly or primarily caused the
mental injury
Armitage in
provided no analysis of the question of which party
bore the onus, and the passage I have quoted in the preceding paragraph suggests
that the question had not been argued before her and that she proceeded on the
uncontested basis in that case that the employer bore
underlying issue has been considered by superior courts. In
Millar v ABC
Marketing and Sales Pty Ltd
[2012] NTSC 21
Mildren J of the NT Supreme Court discussed from first principles the onus of
proof in what have been termed “avoidance”
cases. He said the
general rule is “
he who asserts must prove
” and this usually
involves an evidential as well as a legal onus on the same party. He cited with
Currie v Dempsey
(1967) 69 S.R. (NSW) 11 where Walsh JA said at
The burden of proof in establishing a case lies on a plaintiff if
the fact alleged (whether affirmative or negative in form) is an
element of his cause of action, for example if its existence is a condition
precedent to his right to maintain the action.
The onus is on the Defendant, if
the allegation is not a denial of an essential ingredient in the cause of
action, but is one which,
if established, will constitute a good defence, that
is, an “avoidance” of the claims, which
prima facie
plaintiff has
the present case I consider that the essential elements to be established to
meet the definition of “injury” and thus
of the Worker’s cause
of action are as set out in subsection 3A(1) of the Act, namely that he
sustained a physical or mental
injury and that it arose out of or in the course
of his employment. There are no other elements to be proved identified in
3A(1). The question of reasonable management action is identified as
a separate issue set out in a separate subsection. Subsection
3A(2) is not part
of the initial definition of “injury” set out in subsection 3A(1).
Rather, it calls for consideration
of a further state of affairs after the
definition of “injury” has been met, and then only in respect of a
mental injury,
which, if established, would constitute a good defence - that is,
an “avoidance” of the Worker’s claim.
3A(2) as it now appears in the Act has made some changes to the exclusion
question in the definition of “injury”
from the previous definition.
However, I can see nothing in these changes or in the overall language or scheme
of section 3A of the
Act as a whole or in subsection 3A(2) specifically which
might require a change to the previous approach by NT courts to the question
onus. Because subsection 3A(2) presents a somewhat different version of the
exclusion previously contained in subsection 3(1)
of the Act, the superior court
Decisions of
are not strictly binding on this
Court in considering the new subsection. Even so, I consider the Decisions of
the Northern Territory
Supreme Court and of the Work Health Court identified
above continue to represent the correct approach in the Northern Territory
“avoidance” cases, including the onus arising by virtue of
subsection 3A(2) of the Act.
rule that where an employer seeks to rely on subsection 3A(2) of the Act to
exclude a claimed mental injury then that employer bears
both the legal and
evidential onus of proving the exclusion.
rule that discharging that onus requires the employer to prove each of the four
elements identified by Judge Armitage in paragraph
have set out in paragraph 179 above. I rule that the Employer bears that onus in
this proceeding.
REASONABLE GROUNDS/REASONABLE
now turn to the question of whether the management actions I have identified
were taken on reasonable grounds, and/or whether they
were taken in a reasonable
manner, by or on behalf of the Worker’s Employer.
employer plainly has the right to manage the performance of its employees,
including taking action to terminate the employment
of an employee who is
consistently unable or unwilling to perform the duties of the employment in a
satisfactory manner. This right
is subject however to a range of restrictions,
including those imposed by statute and regulation, duties of care owed by an
to an employee pursuant to a contract of employment or tort, the
principles of natural justice, common law interpretation of all
fairness generally. This right is further subject to any specific terms of the
applicable contract of employment.
an employer is found to have taken any such management action contrary to one or
more such restrictions, the employer must prove
on the balance of probabilities
that such action was nevertheless reasonable and/or carried out in a reasonable
manner, in those
circumstances.
Natural Justice/Procedural
Fairness/Fairness
Kaefer Integrated Services Pty Ltd v Spohn & Ors
[2022] NTSC 45
Justice Brownhill recently reiterated some well-known principles
of procedural fairness as follows:
“[45] It is trite that the particular content to be given to the
requirement to accord procedural fairness will depend upon
the facts and
circumstances of the particular case, and the statutory framework within which a
decision maker exercises the statutory
power; procedural fairness is essentially
practical in that the concern of the law is to avoid practical injustice; that
an opportunity to be heard before a decision is made are generally
regarded as fundamental; and that the purpose of notice is to
participation in whatever manner is appropriate in the particular circumstances
of the case.”
am satisfied and I find that in this matter the Employer gave the Worker neither
notice nor the opportunity to be heard in respect
of the management decision
made on 23 May 2019.
evidence before the Court at Trial Book 5 at pages 1770A and 1770B was NT Public
Service Employment Instruction Number 3, issued
by the Commissioner for Public
Employment. This Instruction is in the following terms:
2. Natural Justice
“2.1. A person who may be adversely affected by an impending
decision must be afforded natural justice before a final decision
is made. This
means that:
a) the person must be informed of any adverse information and other
relevant information that may be taken into account by the decision
b) the person must be given a reasonable opportunity to respond to the
information including providing any evidence he or she wishes
to include in the
c) the decision maker must impartially consider the employee’s
submissions, prior to making a decision; and
d) a decision maker must not have a personal interest in the outcome of a
decision, and he or she must make the decision in a fair
and considered manner,
based on a consideration of all of the relevant information.”
am satisfied and I find that as at 23 May 2019 the Worker was a person who might
be adversely affected by the impending decision
of the Employer which was made
on that date, within the meaning of Public Service Employment Instruction Number
am satisfied and I find that the Employer did not inform the Worker in advance
of 23 May 2019 or at all, of any adverse information
and other relevant
information that was to be taken into account by the decision maker at the
meeting on that date.
am satisfied and I find that the Employer did not give the Worker a reasonable
opportunity to respond to the information that was
taken into account at the
meeting on 23 May 2019 in arriving at its decision on that
am satisfied and I find that the Employer did not invite and did not receive any
submissions by or on behalf of the Worker prior
to arriving at the decision made
on 23 May 2019, and therefore did not impartially consider any such
submissions.
Commissioner of Police v Minahan
[2003] NSWCA 239
the New South Wales
Court of Appeal considered the reasonableness of an employer’s action
under the equivalent New South Wales
workers’ compensation legislation. It
said as follows:
The question of reasonableness is one of fact, weighing all the
relevant factors. The test is less demanding than the test of necessity,
more demanding than a test of convenience. The test of
‘reasonableness’ is objective, and must weigh the rights of
employees against the objective of the employer.
Whether an action is
reasonable should be attended, in all the circumstances, by the question of
(my emphasis).”
have earlier in these Reasons found that the Worker was first informed of the
decision to subject him to the PIP process only on
9 August 2019, some 2.5
months after that decision was taken on 23 May 2019. This was by email without
any detail of the process.
He was first provided with the PIP documentation
only on 2 October 2019, some 4.25 months after the decision was taken. Expert
witness Kay Densley gave the following evidence in chief before the Court in
relation to the Worker’s lack of knowledge of
the decision to commence the
PIP process:
“You can’t have a PIP or any form of performance management
for that matter, with only one side of the table knowing that
having one. Any employee would jump to attention at the mention of a PIP even as
a possibility. As I said above, this
is a black mark that an employee would want
to avoid at all costs and it is also a sign that termination of employment is
off. It would be unreasonable for an employee to plan a PIP but not
inform the employee until months afterwards.”
am satisfied and I find that the Employer did not comply with Public Service
Employment Instruction Number 3 specifically, and further,
that it did not
afford the Worker natural justice/procedural fairness or fairness generally, in
arriving at its decision on 23 May
2019 to commence the PIP process likely to
lead to the termination of the Worker’s employment with the Employer, and
decision to delay informing the Worker of that PIP
these reasons I am satisfied and I find that both the decisions of the Employer
referred to in the preceding paragraph were management
actions within the
meaning of the Act which were not taken in a reasonable manner by the Employer.
Additionally,
the onus is on the Employer to establish that either or both of these management
actions were taken on reasonable grounds.
The Court has not been made aware of
the grounds for the decision of 23 May 2019. The Employer has not provided any
adequate documentation
or explanation for this decision or its basis as at that
date. It has failed to discharge this onus.
this reason I cannot be satisfied that the management action of 23 May 2019 was
taken on reasonable grounds.
initial management action of the Employer in arriving at the decision on 23 May
2019 to commence the PIP process in respect of
the Worker as soon as possible,
including instructing relevant staff to compile the Worker’s performance
records over all or
much of his employment with the Employer including prior to
his return to work on 4 March 2019 for use in that process, cannot in
absence of explanation be separated from the subsequent management action
whereby the Worker was only belatedly informed that
he was to be subject to the
PIP process. This subsequent management action must be considered in the light
of the Employer’s
having already made up its mind in the initial
management action to commence the process to terminate the Worker’s
employment.
This had the effect that all subsequent day-to-day management of
the Worker in the employment up to and including the subsequent
action must be seen in that light. I am not satisfied it was taken on
reasonable grounds
” within the meaning of subsection
3A(2)(a) of the Act.
Employer’s Knowledge of the Worker’s Mental Health
have found earlier in these Reasons that the Employer was aware when the Worker
took 17 months’ leave from early October 2017
to 4 March 2019 that he had
a medical history of stress-related presentations to GPs and related absences
from the employment over
a number of years, culminating in that long leave from
the employment (“the mental health issues”) – paragraph
have cited in paragraph 59. of these Reasons the observation by the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal in
McGee v Comcare
Reasonableness must be assessed against what is known at the time
without the benefit of hindsight, taking into account the attributes
circumstances, including the emotional state of the employee
concerned.”
mental health issues were part of such “
attributes and circumstances,
including the emotional state of the employee”
of the Worker as known
to the Employer.
the Employer was entitled to expect that the Worker was medically fit to return
to work when he did so on 4 March 2019, it could
not simply on that basis ignore
the mental health issues known to it in its subsequent dealings with him. The
Employer owed the
Worker a duty of care to avoid a foreseeable risk of harm to
him, provided that the risk was not far-fetched or fanciful –
Shire Council v Shirt
[1980] HCA 12
(1980) 146 CLR 40
at 47- 48, recently cited in
Kozarov v State of Victoria
[2022] HCA 12
at paragraph 67, per Gordon and
Steward JJ.
find that the prior history of the mental health issues meant that the risk to
the Worker of once again developing a mental injury
associated with the
employment was neither far-fetched nor fanciful.
rule that the Employer therefore owed the Worker a duty of care in the
employment specifically to avoid the foreseeable risk of
mental injury. It owed
the Worker a duty to provide him with a safe system of work in these
circumstances. In its subsequent dealings
with the Worker the Employer should
have taken the mental health issues appropriately into account.
Employer should have taken the mental health issues into account when it decided
on and implemented the management action of subjecting
the Worker to closer than
usual supervision and scrutiny in the employment from about 4 June 2019. I am
satisfied and I find that
it was reasonably foreseeable by the Employer that
subjecting the Worker with his history of the mental health issues to this
action would expose him to the risk of further mental
Employer has not discharged its onus to prove that it took the mental health
issues into account, appropriately or at all, when
deciding on and implementing
this management action.
find that the management action of the Employer in subjecting the Worker to
closer than usual supervision and scrutiny was not taken
in a reasonable
the same way, I am satisfied and I find that it was reasonably foreseeable by
the Employer that subjecting the Worker with his
history of the mental health
issues to the management action of only belatedly informing him of the PIP
process and then commencing
to implement that process, on 9 August and 2 October
2019 respectively, would expose him to the risk of further mental injury when
coupled with the foreseeable effects of the prior management process of
subjecting him to closer than usual scrutiny and supervision
employment.
Employer has not discharged its onus to show that it took the mental health
issues into account, appropriately or at all, when
deciding on and/or informing
the Worker of and/or implementing the management action of informing the Worker
of the PIP process in
these circumstances.
find that the management action of the Employer in subjecting the Worker to the
PIP process without initially affording him procedural
fairness and subsequently
without taking the mental health issues into account in informing him of and
implementing that process,
was not taken in a reasonable
CONCLUSIONS
have found earlier in these Reasons that the Employer’s management actions
of subjecting the Worker to closer than usual supervision
and scrutiny, and the
notification and manner of notification to him of the PIP process, individually
and together provided the factual
bases for the Worker to develop a perception
of a hostile working environment. I have found that each of these management
contributed to the injury. I have found that the injury arose out of
and in the course of the employment.
have found that on his return to work on 4 March 2019 the Worker’s health
had recovered and he was not then suffering from
any mental injury –
paragraph 123.
is no evidence before me of any other contribution to the
have found that the Employer has failed to discharge its onus to prove that the
management action of subjecting the Worker to closer
than usual scrutiny and
supervision was taken in a reasonable manner.
have found that the Employer has failed to discharge its onus to prove that its
decision on 23 May 2019 to subject the Worker to
the PIP process was taken on
reasonable grounds or that it was taken in a reasonable manner.
have found that the Employer has failed to discharge its onus to prove that its
subsequent management actions in belatedly informing
the Worker of and then
implementing the PIP process in these circumstances were taken in a reasonable
Accordingly,
the Employer’s reliance on the defence in subsection 3A(2)(a) of the Act
is not made out.
Employer has been wholly unsuccessful in these proceedings. Costs will follow
Employer pay the Worker arrears of weekly benefits in accordance with the Act
from and including 10 February 2020 to the date
Employer pay the Worker weekly benefits from the day after the date of these
Reasons and continuing in accordance with the Act.
Employer pay the Worker interest pursuant to section 89 of the Act in accordance
with regulation 14 of the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
Regulations
calculated from and including 17 February 2020 to the date of
the Worker’s receipt of payment of the arrears of weekly
Employer pay to or on behalf of the Worker medical and like expenses pursuant to
section 73 of the Act which have been incurred
as a consequence of the injury
between 10 February 2020 and the date of these Reasons and which have not yet
Employer pay to or on behalf of the Worker medical and like expenses pursuant to
section 73 of the Act which are incurred as a
consequence of the injury from the
day after the date of these Reasons and continuing, in accordance with the
Employer pay the Worker’s costs of and incidental to these proceedings,
including the costs of and incidental to the mediation
process before litigation
was commenced, to be taxed in default of agreement at 100% of the Supreme Court
scale, certified fit for
senior junior counsel including their attendance at all
Directions Hearings and interlocutory applications after the proceedings
listed for hearing.
Dated this 29th day of June
.......................................................................
Acting Work Health Court Judge
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.12 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter