URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTRTCmr/2015/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:22:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Buckley & Smith -v- Liddy [2015] NTRTCmr 11 (29 April 2015)
REASONS FOR THE ORDER OF THE COMMISSIONER OF TENANCIES
INQUIRY - Wednesday, 18 March 2015
JENNIFER BUCKLEY AND STEPHEN SMITH (“Landlord
CYRUS LIDDY (‘Tenant’)
RT1415-0453
This is a determination of an application by the Landlord dated 15 January
2015 in respect of premises being the granny flat at the
rear of 23 Lindsay
Avenue, East Side, Alice Springs in the Northern Territory of Australia
(‘the premises’), seeking
an order for compensation pursuant to
section 122 of the
Residential Tenancies Act
A Notice of Inquiry dated 19 February 2015 was posted to the parties. The
Inquiry was conducted on Wednesday, 18 March 2015. Ms
Jennifer Buckley, who is
one of the Landlords, appeared at the Inquiry.
There was no appearance at the Inquiry of the Tenant, Cyrus Liddy. However,
I am satisfied that the provisions concerning notice
of the Inquiry as required
by section 130 of the Act have been met.
Ms Buckley made submissions at the Inquiry and provided further documents,
six photographs of the premises, taken shortly after it
was abandoned, and
the Statutory Declaration dated 4 July 2014.
The evidence before the Inquiry consisted of the documents submitted by Ms
Buckley in support of the application and kept on the Commissioner
of Tenancies
file numbered RT1415-0453.
No documents were received from the Tenant.
A tenancy agreement, pursuant to section 4 “Definitions” of the
Act means an agreement under which a person grants to
another person for
valuable consideration a right (which may be, but need not be, an exclusive
right) to occupy premises for the
purpose of residency.
Although it is clear from the evidence that a tenancy agreement existed
between the parties, I find the document, titled “
Avenue Tenancy Agreement
” purporting to be a written tenancy agreement
under the Act, (“the purported agreement”) fails to include required
information as set out in section 19(1) of the Act, namely:
(a) contain the name of the tenants and the name and address for service of
the landlord's agent, if any;
(b) contain the full name and address for service of the landlord;
(c) clearly identify the premises to which the agreement relates;
(d) contain each term, or a term to the same effect as each term, that is
specified by or under this Act to be a term of a tenancy
(e) include terms as to the amount of rent payable and how the rent is to be
payable; and
(f) if the agreement is for a fixed term tenancy – specify the duration
of the agreement.
(section 19(1))
A written tenancy agreement must be signed by both parties and a signed copy
given to the tenant (s.19(2)). I note that the purported
agreement was signed
and dated by both parties.
On the basis of the documentary evidence and the oral evidence of Ms Buckley,
the key details of the purported agreement are as follows:
Duration: periodical from 3 October 2012
Rent: $ 290.00 per week payable fortnightly in advance
Security Deposit $ 580.00
Relevantly, section 19(4) provides:
If a tenancy agreement is not in accordance with subsection (1) or is not
signed by all parties to the agreement, a tenancy agreement,
if any, prescribed
for the purposes of this section is to be taken to be the agreement between the
parties for the purposes of this
Regulation 10 provides that the tenancy agreement in the
in Schedule 2. In other words, Schedule 2 is the agreement
between the parties when the written agreement is not in accordance with
Act. Schedule 2 is set out at the end of these Reasons.
Therefore, I find there is a written tenancy agreement between the parties
pursuant to Schedule 2 of the Regulations.
The Tenant signed the purported agreement to rent the granny flat at the rear
of the Landlords’ residence on 6 October 2012.
The weekly rent of $290.00
was to be paid fortnightly in advance. The Tenant had to pay two weeks rent as
the security bond, and
two weeks rent in advance at the commencement of the
tenancy agreement.
There was no Incoming Condition Report (“ICR”) completed by Ms
Buckley at the commencement of the tenancy.
On 3 October 2012, the Tenant paid $870.00 being for the security bond of
$580 plus one week’s rent. The Tenant missed paying
rent on 10 October
and was, therefore $290.00 in arrears from 10 October 2012 to 19 March 2014 when
he fell even further into arrears.
Only two more rents of $580.00 were received
in the period from 19 March 2014 to when Ms Buckley found the premises had
been abandoned on 28 June 2014. The total amount of rent paid by the
Tenant is $23,490.00
Ms Buckley entered the premises on the evening on 28 June 2014 because the
rent was eight weeks in arrears and she had not seen the
Tenant for some time.
She had noticed there was a car in the driveway that did not belong to the
Ms Buckley said in evidence that the interior of the premises were
“disgusting” and “disgraceful”. The photographs
video supplied by Ms Buckley support this view.
In brief, the bed legs were broken, the lounge room couch was destroyed,
there was filth on every surface, the kitchen sink was full
of dirty crockery,
cutlery and knives, there was stale food in the fridge and empty food
containers, dirty plates, cups and glasses
spread around the place. It took
her and her partner two days to get everything out so that the cleaner could
come in and clean
the interior of the premises.
Having assessed the state of the premises, Ms Buckley formed the view that
the premises had been abandoned by the Tenant and took
possession.
Ms Buckley completed an Outgoing Condition Report (“OCR”) and a
Notice to Retain the Security Deposit (RT08). There was
no Unattested
Declaration as to the service of the RT08 and the Statutory Declaration on the
Tenant. Ms Buckley said she sent the
RTO8 and the Statutory Declaration to the
Tenant but without the required invoices and receipts proving the costs.
The security deposit is intact. Ms Buckley did not incur any loss in securing
new tenants for the premises (ie “advertising
Ms Buckley put the Tenant’s belongings in numerous plastic bags to
store them for thirty days and placed an advertisement in
the NT News to that
effect, as required by the Act.
The premises were re-let from 5 July 2014.
The costs claimed in Ms Buckley’s written submissions to the
Commissioner are:
Unpaid rent $2,610.00
Loss of rent $ 207.00
Locks $ 235.00
Replace bed $ 690.00
Replace couch $1,299.00
Saucepan replacement $ 50.50
Professional Cleaning $1,155.00
Curtain, blind and
Carpet cleaning
NT News Adv ert $ 231.10
Car valuation $ 19.95
Invoices/receipts provided in support of the Ms Buckley’s claims are
the following:
Lee Jays Cleaning Services $655.00
Locks by Mark’s Maintenance $235.00
Carla Furnishers P/L $690.00
Bed frame $280
Mattress $380
Q/S package $20.00
Sheet Set $10.00
Carla Furnishers P/L $1,290.00
NT News Advert $ 231.00
Kmart $ 50.50
Kmart $ 5.70
Car Valuation $ 19.25
Determination
Insofar as the ICR and the OCR are concerned, section 112(4) and (5) are
prescriptive:
(4) The landlord is not entitled to retain some or all of the amount of a
security deposit for a purpose referred to in subsection
112 (3)(a) (
good damage
replace ancillary property lost or destroyed by the
clean the premises
)(*) unless:
(a) a condition report in relation to the premises was accepted by the tenant
under Part 5; and
(b) if the tenant has given up vacant possession of the premises or has, in
the opinion of the landlord, apparently abandoned the
premises – a
condition report has been given to the tenant under section 110.
(*) words in
are my addition to the section.
(5) Subject to section 113(2), the landlord is not entitled to retain, or
to continue to hold under subsection (6), part or all
of a security deposit
unless, within 7 business days after the Tenant gave up vacant possession of the
premises or has, in the opinion
of the landlord, apparently abandoned the
premises, the landlord has:
(a) given written notice in the prescribed form, if any, of his or her
intention to retain or continue holding so much of the security
deposit as is
specified in the notice for the purpose specified in the notice; and
(b) attached a copy of a statutory declaration in the prescribed form, if
any, attesting to the truth of the claim that the retention
or continued
holding of the security deposit is required for the purpose specified in the
notice; and
(c) attached a copy of a statutory declaration attesting that the receipts,
invoices or other documents attached to the declaration
(i) the matters in respect of which part or all of the security deposit is
being withheld from the Tenant; or
(ii) the amount of unpaid rent owing under the agreement or money owing under
section 121; and
(d) in the case of damage or unreasonably dirty premises or ancillary
property – attached copies of receipts, invoices or other
including orders of the Commissioner or a court, specifying the amount required
to make good the damage or clean the premises
or ancillary property; and
(e) returned to the Tenant the proportion of security not claimed by the
landlord or not to be held under subsection (6).
(6) If, in the opinion of the landlord, the Tenant has abandoned the
premises, the landlord may continue to hold on trust for the
Tenant as much of
the security deposit as is necessary to ensure that the deposit will be
available for payment to the landlord in
accordance with section 122 as
compensation for:
(a) loss of the rent that the Tenant would have been liable to pay under the
agreement if he or she had not abandoned the premises;
(b) loss caused to the landlord in securing new Tenants for the premises.
Consequently, if, in the circumstances of an abandoned premises, the ICR is
not completed in accordance with the Act, a landlord is
not entitled to retain
the security deposit because there is no “evidence” or deeming of
the state of the premises at
the beginning of the tenancy agreement to compare
to the state in which it was left by the tenant to determine compensation for
and damage.
This is supported by section 51(5) of the Act which provides:
(5) If a condition report (ie
an incoming condition report *) was
accepted by the landlord and the tenant in relation to the premises or ancillary
property under Part 5:
(a) the tenant is to be taken to have complied with the term of the agreement
specified in subsection (1) (ie
has maintained the premises in accordance
with the Act
(b) if the tenancy agreement has terminated or the tenant has, in the opinion
of the landlord, apparently abandoned the premises –
the premises or
ancillary property are to be taken to have been at the time when the tenant took
possession of the premises under
the tenancy agreement, in the condition they
are at the end of the tenancy agreement.
(*) words in
are my addition to the section
The application of section 51(5)(b) to the circumstances of Ms Buckley is
that the state in which the premises were found on 28 June
2014, are taken to be
the same state at the time when the Tenant took possession of the premises under
the tenancy agreement. I
am aware that, given the extremely unkempt and filthy
condition the premises were in on 28 June 2014, this is a bizarre finding.
Unfortunately, the Act does not provide for the circumstances Ms Buckley
found herself in nor a power to make an appropriate order
to compensate her for
making good damage, replacing lost or destroyed property and cleaning of the
premises as provided in section
112(3) subsection (3)(a), (b) or (c)
respectively.
I do note, however, that, pursuant to section 122(4) of the Act, if the
Tenant was found guilty of an offence against this Act by
a court, that court or
another court may, on the application of Ms Buckley, order the Tenant to pay to
her compensation for any loss
or damage she has suffered because of the
commission of the offence.
Section 113(2) of the Act provides for circumstances where section 112(5) has
not been complied with by a landlord but only if I am
satisfied that the
circumstances of the failure “are such that the landlord ought to, despite
the failure, be permitted to
retain such an amount”. If I make that
finding then I may make an order for purposes such as replacement of locks
and/or unpaid
rent (section 112(3) (d) and (e)).
Ms Buckley claims compensation for unpaid rent in the amount of $2,610.00 and
for locks in the amount of $235.00.
Ms Buckley’s failure for not complying with section 112 of the Act is
that she was not fully aware of her obligations under
the Act. In addition, she
has suffered considerable expense, time and effort in returning the premises to
a standard where they
were able to be re-let because of the failure by the
Tenant to, at the end of the tenancy, return the premises in a reasonable state
of repair; and in a reasonably clean condition, allowing for reasonable wear and
tear as provided by clause 11 in the Schedule 2
tenancy agreement.
I am also satisfied that, in the making of the claim, Ms Buckley has taken
all reasonable steps to comply with her obligations under
the Act and the
tenancy agreement. The Tenant has obviously not complied with his obligation to
pay rent or to return the premises
to the Landlord in accordance with the terms
of the agreement or the Act. Ms Buckley has not recovered any money from the
deposit. There is no evidence to show that Ms Buckley had offered
the Tenant a reduction or refund of rent. As soon as Ms Buckley
became aware of
the Tenant abandoning the premises, she took action to mitigate her loss by
returning the premises to a state where
she could re-let the premises at the
earliest possible time. The Tenant has offered no tender of compensation nor
made any offer
to repair damage to the premises.
I am also satisfied that circumstances of the failure to meet the
requirements of section 112 of the Act are such that Ms Buckley
ought, despite
the failure, be permitted to retain some or all of the security deposit.
Secondly, where premises are abandoned by a Tenant, I may make an order for
compensation for the loss of rent and “advertising
costs” (section
112 (6)). But such an application must be made within three months of the
Tenant apparently abandoning the
premises (section 112(8)). The application was
made out-of-time.
The amount of unpaid rent owed by the Tenant is calculated on the total rent
due less the total amount paid for the period of the
tenancy up until the date
of termination.
The Act provides that a tenancy is terminated when:
if the premises are abandoned before the end of the agreement –
on and from the date on which rent was due and payable in relation
premises or the date specified in a declaration under section 108 as the date on
which the premises were abandoned, whichever
The Tenant was found to have abandoned the premises on 28 June 2014.
Therefore, I find the tenancy was terminated on that date and
he is responsible
for the rent up to and including 28 June 2014.
The total amount of rent due up until the date of abandonment of the premises
is $26,265.71. The total rent paid by the Tenant was
$23,490.00.
The total rent outstanding of $26,265.71 less the rent paid of $23,490.00
leaves the amount of $2,775.71 in unpaid rent.
The premises were abandoned on 28 June 2014 and the application was lodged on
15 January 2015, more than the three months provided
for in section 112(8) of
the Act. The application insofar as compensating Ms Buckley for loss of rent
is concerned, fails.
On the evidence before me, I may only make orders to compensate Ms Buckley
for unpaid rent and the replacement of locks.
I declare that:
premises were abandoned by the Respondent/Tenant on 28 June 2014 pursuant to
section 138(f) of the Act; and
declare that the periodical tenancy was terminated as at 28 June 2014 pursuant
to section 82(1)(c) of the Act;
Accordingly, I order that:
Applicant/Landlord is entitled to retain the whole of the security deposit in
the amount of $870.00 in part payment of the unpaid
rent pursuant to section
112(5) of the Act.
Respondent/Tenant shall pay the Applicant/Landlord compensation in pursuance of
section 122 of the Act in the amount of $1,905.71
being for the remainder
of the unpaid rent pursuant to section 122 of the Act..
Respondent/Tenant shall pay the Applicant/Landlord compensation in pursuance of
section 122 of the Act in the amount of $235.00
being for the replacement
of locks; and
total amount of Orders 1 and 2 being $2,140.71 is to be paid within 3 weeks of
the date of these Orders.
Dated this Wednesday 29 April 2015
Gabrielle Martin
Delegate of the
Commissioner of Tenancies
2 Residential tenancy agreement
Regulation 10
1. Compliance with Act
The landlord and the tenant must comply with the
provisions of the
2. Period of tenancy and payment of rent
(1) Subject to the Act, the
tenancy to which this agreement relates is:
(a) if the landlord and the tenant agreed to a tenancy for a fixed
term – a tenancy for the term agreed to; or
(b) if the landlord and the tenant intended that the tenancy be other than
for a fixed term – a periodic tenancy.
(2) The tenant must pay,
before each rental payment period in respect of the premises to which this
agreement relates, the amount
of rent, if any, agreed at the beginning of the
tenancy between the landlord and the tenant to be payable in respect of the
payment period.
(3) The tenant must pay the rent, if any, in the
manner, and at the place, agreed between the landlord and the tenant.
3. Vacant possession etc.
(1) The tenant is entitled to vacant possession
of the premises on and from the day the tenancy begins.
(2) Subclause (1)
does not apply in relation to a part of the premises in respect of which a right
to exclusive possession is not
given under this agreement.
(3) There is no
legal impediment to the tenant's occupation of the premises as a place of
residence for the period of the tenancy
that the landlord knew of, or ought to
have known of, when entering this agreement.
4. Quiet enjoyment
(1) The tenant is entitled to quiet enjoyment of the
premises without interruption by the landlord or a person claiming under the
landlord or with superior title to the landlord's title.
(2) The landlord
will not cause an interference with the reasonable peace or privacy of the
tenant in the tenant's use of the premises.
5. Entry only permitted in accordance with Act
The landlord may only enter
the premises or ancillary property in accordance with the provisions of the
6. Landlord's duties in relation to condition of premises
The landlord
must ensure that the premises and ancillary property:
(a) are habitable;
(b) meet all health and safety requirements specified under an Act that apply
to residential premises of the ancillary property; and
(c) are reasonably clean when the tenant enters into occupation of the
7. Tenant's duties in relation to condition of premises
(1) The tenant
will not maintain the premises and ancillary property in an unreasonably dirty
condition, allowing for reasonable
wear and tear.
(2) The tenant must notify
the landlord of any damage or apparent potential damage to the premises or
ancillary property, other than
damage of a negligible kind.
(3) The tenant
must not intentionally or negligently cause or permit damage to the premises or
ancillary property.
(4) If the premises are a unit within the meaning of the
Unit Titles Act
Unit Title Schemes Act
, the tenant
not intentionally or negligently cause or permit damage to the common property
within the meaning of that Act.
8. Alteration of premises or ancillary property
(1) The tenant must not,
without the landlord's written consent or otherwise than in accordance with the
Act, make an alteration
or addition to the premises or ancillary
(2) The tenant may remove a fixture affixed to the premises by the
tenant unless its removal would cause damage to the premises or
(3) If the tenant causes damage to the premises or ancillary
property by removing or installing a fixture, the tenant must:
(a) notify the landlord; and
(b) at the option of the landlord, have the damage repaired or compensate the
landlord for the reasonable cost of repairing the damage.
9. Landlord's obligation to repair
(1) Subject to the provisions of Part
7 of the Act
the landlord must ensure that the premises and ancillary
property are in a reasonable state of repair when the tenant enters into
occupation of the premises.
(2) Subject to the provisions of Part 7 of the
Act, the landlord must maintain the premises and ancillary property in a
state of repair, having regard to their age, character and
prospective life.
10. Tenant to notify landlord if repairs required
(1) Subject to the
provisions of Part 7 of the Act, if the premises or ancillary property require
repair or maintenance, other than
repair or maintenance of a negligible kind,
the tenant is, as soon as reasonably practicable after becoming aware of the
the repairs or maintenance, to notify the landlord orally or in writing
of the requirement.
(2) For the purposes of subclause (1), "ancillary
property" includes gardening or watering equipment or other chattels provided in
relation to a garden but does not include vegetation, other than a tree that
poses a risk to a person's safety.
11. Tenant's responsibilities at end of tenancy
At the end of the
tenancy, the tenant must give the premises and ancillary property back to the
(a) in a reasonable state of repair; and
(b) in a reasonably clean condition,
allowing for reasonable wear and
12. Landlord's duties in relation to security of premises
landlord will take reasonable steps to provide and maintain the locks and other
security devices that are necessary to ensure
the premises and ancillary
property are reasonably secure.
(2) The landlord must not:
(a) alter or remove a lock or security device on the premises or ancillary
property; or
(b) add a lock or security device to the premises or ancillary
without the consent of the tenant.
(3) If the landlord:
(a) alters a lock or security device on the premises or ancillary property;
(b) adds a lock or security device to the premises or ancillary
without the consent of the tenant, the landlord will provide to the
tenant a key to the lock or security device as soon as practicable
alteration or the addition, unless the tenant consents to the landlord doing
13. Tenant's duties in relation to security of premises
(1) The tenant
will not, without reasonable excuse:
(a) alter or remove a lock or security device on the premises or ancillary
property; or
(b) add a lock or security device to the premises or ancillary property,
without the consent of the landlord.
(2) If the tenant:
(a) alters a lock or security device on the premises or ancillary property;
(b) adds a lock or security device to the premises or ancillary
without the consent of the landlord, the tenant will provide a key
to the lock or security device as soon as practicable after the
alteration or
the addition, unless the landlord consents to the tenant doing otherwise.
14. Tenant to notify if premises to be vacant for more than 30 days
tenant must notify the landlord before the premises are left unoccupied for more
than 30 days.
15. Use of premises and ancillary property
(1) The tenant must not use
the premises or ancillary property, or cause the premises or ancillary property
to be used, for an illegal
(2) The tenant must not cause or permit
a nuisance on the premises, ancillary property or on land adjacent to or
opposite the premises.
(3) The tenant must not cause or permit ongoing or
repeated interference with the reasonable peace or privacy of another person in
the other person's use of premises or land in the immediate vicinity of the
16. Assignment or subletting of premises
(1) Subject to the provisions
of Part 7 of the Act, the tenant may assign the tenant's interest in this
agreement or sublet the premises
to a person with the oral or written consent of
the person.
(2) The tenant must not assign the tenant's interest in this
agreement or sublet the premises unless:
(a) the landlord gives his or her written consent; or
(b) the landlord is to be taken under section 79 of the Act to have consented
to the assignment
(3) This clause does not apply to a tenancy under the
Housing Act.
17. Vicarious liability of tenant
If a person (other than a co-tenant)
who, while on the premises with the consent of the tenant, performs or omits to
perform an act
that, if it had been an act or omission of the tenant, would have
been a breach of this agreement, the tenant is responsible under
this agreement
for the act or omission for the purposes of the Act.
18. Tenant not to give false information
The tenant must not give the
(a) information about the tenant's identity that is material to the
landlord's decision to enter into this agreement and that is,
to the knowledge
of the tenant, false; or
(b) any other information, required by or under the
Act to be given in
relation to this agreement, that is, to the knowledge of the tenant, false.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (150 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter