URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTSCFC/2008/35.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:23:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Ober [2008] NTSCFC 35; [2008] NTSC 35 (11 September 2008)
The Queen v Ober
[2008] NTSCFC 35
PARTIES: THE QUEEN
OBER, Thomas Benjamin
TITLE OF COURT: FULL COURT OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
EXERCISING TERRITORY JURISDICTION
FILE NO: 20804134
DELIVERED: 11 September 2008
HEARING DATES: 11 September 2008
JUDGMENT OF: MARTIN (BR) CJ, RILEY AND SOUTHWOOD JJ
CATCHWORDS:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW
Reference of question of law - operation of maxim
delegatus non potest
- valid exercise of regulation making power.
CRIMINAL LAW – PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
Vulnerable witness evidence – authorised person.
Care and Protection of Children Act 2007
Child Welfare Act
Community Welfare Act 1983
Criminal Code Act
s125, s132 (2), s188 (1) (2) (b) (c) & (k);
Evidence Act 1939
Evidence Regulations 1991
Evidence of Children Amendment Act 2007
Evidence Amendment Act
(No 2) 1994
Evidence Amendment Act (Authorised Persons) 2007
(NT), reg 4;
Evidence Reform (Children and sexual Offences) Act 2004
Supreme Court Act 1979
REPRESENTATION:
Plaintiff: M Grant QC and S Brownhill
Defendant: R Wild QC and S Barlow
Solicitors:
Plaintiff: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Defendant: Northern Australian Aboriginal Justice Agency
Judgment category classification: A
Judgment ID Number: Mar0807
Number of pages: 10
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA AT DARWIN
The Queen v Ober
[2008] NTSC 35
No. 20804134
IN THE MATTER of a reference of part of proceeding No 20804134 to the Full
Court pursuant to
Supreme Court Act
THOMAS BENJAMIN OBER
CORAM: MARTIN (BR) CJ, RILEY AND SOUTHWOOD JJ
EX TEMPORE REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 11 September 2008)
Introduction
[1] Pursuant to
Supreme Court Act
, a Judge has referred a question for determination
by this Court. The agreed facts and question are as
“A. Agreed Statement of Facts
Benjamin Ober (‘the accused’) is charged with the following offences
alleged to have occurred between 26 December
2007 and 29 January
(a) One count of possess child abuse material contrary to
section 125B(1) of the
Criminal Code
(b) Two counts of indecent dealing with a child under the age of 16 years
(‘the alleged victim’) contrary to section 132(2)(a)
Criminal Code
(c) One count of indecent assault contrary to section 188(1)(2)(b)(c) &
Criminal Code
alleged victim was born on 16 December 1994.
alleged victim is a ‘vulnerable witness’ within the meaning of
Evidence Act
5 February 2008, the alleged victim was interviewed by Detective Senior
Constable Karen Sanderson and Constable David Hamlyn (‘the
officers’).
for the question as to whether the police officers are ‘authorised
persons’ within subs 21A(1) of the
Evidence Act
, this interview is
a ‘recorded statement’ within the meaning of
Evidence Act
is the intention of the Crown to lead this recorded statement as part of the
alleged victim’s evidence-in-chief in the prosecution
of the accused.
purported exercise of the power conferred by reg 4 of the Evidence
Regulations:
(a) the Commissioner of Police has signed an instrument
approving all police officers of or above the rank of constable; and
(b) the Chief Executive Officer of the Department of Housing and Community
Services (as the Agency administering the
Community Welfare Act
signed an instrument approving:
(i) all employees appointed as ‘authorised persons’ under the
Child Welfare Act
(ii) if that Act is repealed, all employees appointed as ‘authorised
officers’ under the
Care and Protection of Children Act
As ‘authorised persons’ for the purposes of
Evidence Act
accused asserts that the alleged victim’s evidence-in-chief may not be
adduced in part by way of the recorded statement
on the basis that reg 4 of the
Evidence Regulations is invalid and the police officers are not
‘authorised persons’ for
the purposes of
B. Question of Law
Reg 4 of the Evidence Regulations a valid exercise of the regulation making
power under ss 21(1) and
[2] In issue is
the operation of provisions in the
Evidence Act
(“the Act”)
governing procedures to be adopted when a “vulnerable witness” gives
evidence in proceedings
involving a “sexual offence” or a
“serious violence offence” and the validity of a regulation made by
Administrator for the purposes of those provisions. In order to understand
the context in which the relevant provisions and regulation
operate, it is
appropriate to consider briefly the history of the statutory
Statutory Scheme
[3] During the
last twenty years all Australian jurisdictions have made special provision for
the giving of evidence by alleged victims
(“complainants”) in trials
for sexual offences. Speaking generally, statutory recognition has been given
to the particular
difficulties confronting complainants when giving evidence
[4] The Northern
Territory Parliament first enacted protective provisions for vulnerable
witnesses in 1984 through the Evidence Amendment
Act (No 2) 1994. In 2004
significant additional protective measures were introduced in connection with
the evidence of children
under the age of 18 years and witnesses suffering from
an intellectual disability by the Evidence Reform (Children and Sexual Offences)
[5] In 2007 the
current scheme for the giving of evidence by vulnerable witnesses was enacted by
Evidence of Children Amendment Act 2007
. This current scheme applies to
“vulnerable witnesses” who are witnesses in the following
categories:
under the age of
suffering from
an intellectual disability
alleged victims
of a sexual offence
under a special
disability because of the circumstances of the case or of the witness.
[6] The scheme
applies when vulnerable witnesses give evidence in cases concerned with sexual
offences or “serious violence”
offences. For present purposes, the
essence of the scheme found in ss 21A – 21D of the Act is as follows:
A court may
admit a “recorded statement” as the evidence-in-chief or part of the
evidence-in-chief of the witness.
“recorded statement” is an interview, recorded by audio visual
means, in which an “authorised person” elicits
from the witness
“statements of fact which, if true, would be of relevance to legal
proceedings”.
“authorised person” who may conduct the interview, to be admitted as
a recorded statement of the evidence-in-chief,
is defined in s 21A(1) in the
following terms:
“‘authorised person’
(a) a legal practitioner; or
(b) a person of a class declared by regulation to be a class of authorised
persons for the purposes of this definition;”
empowered to hold a special sitting, without a jury, for the purposes of taking
the evidence of the witness, at which sitting
the evidence-in-chief or part of
the evidence-in-chief may be given by the recorded statement. The witness may
also give oral evidence
in examination and must be available for
cross-examination. Such oral evidence may be given from a place remote from the
transmitted to the courtroom by closed circuit television or from
within the court with the witness shielded from the accused by
The proceedings
at the special sitting are recorded by audio-visual means.
At the trial
before the jury, the evidence of the witness in the “recorded
statement” is played to the jury and is followed
by the playing of the
audio visual recording of the oral evidence given at the special sitting.
Authorised Person
[7] In order to
achieve the underlying purpose of enabling a recorded interview with a
vulnerable witness to be admitted as the evidence-in-chief
of the witness, the
interview with the witness must be conducted by an “authorised
person”. Such a person may be a legal
practitioner or “a person of
a class declared by regulation to be a class of authorised persons” for
the purposes of
the definition of “authorised person: s 21A(1)”.
[8] The power to
make regulations for the purposes of the Act is conferred upon the Administrator
by s 65 of the Act:
“The Administrator may make regulations,
not inconsistent with this Act, prescribing matters –
(a) required or permitted by this Act to be prescribed; or
(b) necessary or convenient to be prescribed for carrying out or giving
effect to this Act”
October 2007 the Administrator declared classes of authorised persons by reg 4
Evidence Amendment (Authorised Persons) Regulations 2007
in the following
Declared class of authorised persons
(1) For the purposes of the definition of
authorised person
section 21A(1) of the Act, the following are declared to be classes of
authorised persons:
(a) all police officers approved by the Commissioner of Police as suitable to
be an authorised person for the purposes of Part IIA
of the Act;
(b) all employees of the relevant Agency approved by the Chief Executive
Officer of that Agency as suitable to be an authorised person
for the purposes
of Part IIA of the Act.
(2) In this Regulation:
relevant Agency
means the Agency administering:
Community Welfare Act
(b) if that Act is repealed – the
Care and Protection of Children
question for determination by this Court is whether reg 4 is a valid exercise of
the regulation making power. In particular,
this Court has been asked to
consider whether the regulation is invalid because it purports to delegate a
discretionary power conferred
on the Administrator by the Act in the absence of
statutory authority to make such a delegation. The principle in issue is
in the maxim
delegatus non potest delegare
(a delegate may not
delegate the power).
[11] In reg 4,
the Administrator did not declare all police officers or all employees of a
particular agency to be a class of authorised
persons for the purposes of the
definition of “authorised person”. Rather, the regulation declared
that only such police
officers approved by the Commissioner of Police to be
suitable to be an authorised person, or employees of a relevant agency approved
by the Chief Executive Officer of that agency as suitable, are “classes of
authorised persons” for these purposes. In
this process, therefore, a
discretion was conferred upon the Commissioner of Police and Chief Executive
Officer of a relevant agency
to identify persons suitable to be an authorised
person and, therefore, to qualify as a class of authorised person.
discretionary power conferred upon the Administrator was a power to declare a
class of persons to be a class of authorised
persons for the purposes of the
Act. Regulation 4 makes such a declaration. The Administrator did not purport
to delegate to another
person the power to make a declaration as to what class
of persons was a class of authorised persons for the purposes of the Act.
Administrator exercised the regulation making power conferred by the Act and
declared a particular category of persons to be
classes of authorised persons.
Notwithstanding that the individual persons who will comprise the class are not
named in the regulation
and cannot be identified without the exercise of an
administrative discretion by the Commissioner of Police or Chief Executive
of a relevant agency, in my view the Administrator did not delegate the
power to make the decision as to what class of persons will
be a class of
“authorised persons”.
underlying purpose of the statutory scheme is to protect vulnerable witnesses by
enabling the evidence-in-chief to be obtained
in circumstances
[14] less formal
than court proceedings, provided that the recorded statement is taken by persons
considered to be appropriate for
this purpose. It is not surprising that the
legislature would recognise that it is impractical to expect the Administrator
to identify
particular individuals suitable for such purpose. Sensibly, the
administrative task of identifying the individuals appropriately
qualified to
comprise the class of authorised person is left to those who are in a better
position to make that identification.
opinion the answer to the question of law referred to this Court is
additional issue arises on the agreed facts as to whether the Commissioner of
Police has validly exercised his power. Determination
of this question would
involve evidence touching a number of issues. As such evidence is not before
this Court and the validity
of the exercise of the power by the Commissioner was
not the subject of a referral to this Court, in my view it is inappropriate
determine this issue.
[17] I agree
with the Chief Justice that the answer to the question of law referred to the
Court should be yes, and I do so for the
reasons he has expressed. I also agree
that we should not determine the second issue that has been
identified.
Southwood J.
[18] I agree
with the reasons of the decision of his Honour the Chief Justice. I also agree
with the determination that the question
of the exercise of the validity of the
power by the Commissioner of Police is not appropriate to be dealt with in this
-------------------------------------------
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (120 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter