URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCCA/2025/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:18:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The King v Singar [2025] NTCCA 1 (20 March 2025)
The King v Singar
[2025] NTCCA 1
PARTIES: THE KING
SINGAR, Michael
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: CA 12 of 2024 (22332647)
DELIVERED: 20 March 2025
HEARING DATE: 24 February 2025
JUDGMENT OF: Grant CJ, Kelly & Blokland JJ
CATCHWORDS:
CRIME – Appeals – Appeal against sentence – By Crown
against inadequacy
Aggravated unlawful entry, three counts of sexual intercourse without consent
and deprivation of liberty – Whether sentence
manifestly inadequate
– Whether failure to take into account objective seriousness of each
individual rape offence –
Whether sentence manifestly inadequate –
Appeal allowed and respondent resentenced.
Criminal Code 1983
(NT) ss 5D, 68A, 414(1A)
Azzopardi v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 372
(2011) 35 VR 43
Carroll v The Queen
[2011] NTCCA 6
(2011) 29 NTLR 106
CMB v Attorney General for NSW
(2015) 256 CLR
Craft v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 66
Bugmy v The Queen
249 CLR 571;
Dinsdale v The Queen
[2000] HCA 54
(2000) 202 CLR 321
DPP v Kazarisis
(2010) 31 VR 636
Everitt v The Queen
[1994] HCA 49
(1994) 181 CLR 295
v The Queen
[2017] NTCCA 5
(2017) 267 A Crim R 494
Gillian v The Queen
[2007] NTCCA
Green v The Queen; Quinn v The Queen
[2011] HCA 49
(2011) 244 CLR 462
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Kentwell v The Queen
(2014) 252 CLR 601;
[2023] NSWCCA 116
; Lacey v Attorney General of Queensland
[2011] HCA 10
(2001) 242 CLR 573
; McKay v The Queen
Pearce v The Queen
[1998] HCA 57
(1998) 194 CLR 610
[2001] NSWCCA 167
R v Bloomfield
[1999] NTCCA 137
[2010] NSWCCA 244
R v Goodwin
[2003] NTCCA 9
R v Hernando
[2002] NSWCCA 489
[2010] NSWCCA 57
[2004] NSWCCA 436
and Johnston
[1983] 3 NSWLR 245
(1985) 2 NSWLR 194
[2010] NSWCCA 49
(2010) 77 NSWLR 7
[2002] NSWCCA 490
[2014] NSWCCA 53
[2004] NSWCCA 186
[2014] NSWCCA 154
[2006] NTCCA 10
(2002) 161 A Crim R 414
[2023] NSWCCA 219
[2024] NTCCA 14
[2002] NSWCCA 191
R v Woodland
[2007] NSWCCA 29
The King v Benning
[2022] NTCCA 15
The King v CH
[2024] NTCCA 10
The King v Hunt
[2024] NTCCA 9
The Queen v Kahu
[2022] NTCCA 4
The Queen v Mossman
(2017) 40 NTLR 144
Queen v Nabageyo
(2014) NTLR 154
Thomas v The Queen
[2017] NTCCA 4
[2018] NSWCCA 52
, referred to.
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: PK Williams with LJ Auld
Respondent: A Abayasekara with B Durkin
Applicant: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Respondent: Northern Territory Legal Aid Commission
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 44
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
The King v Singar
[2025] NTCCA 1
CA 12 of 2024 (22332647)
MICHAEL SINGAR
CORAM: GRANT CJ, KELLY & BLOKLAND JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 20 March 2025)
[1] This is an
appeal by the Crown against sentence on grounds of manifest inadequacy and an
asserted failure on the part of the sentencing
judge to assess the objective
seriousness of each individual offence.
September 2024, the respondent was sentenced for five offences to which he had
pleaded guilty. Count 1 charged the offence
of unlawful entry with the intention
of committing an indictable offence, which attracted a maximum penalty of
imprisonment for 14
years. Count 2 charged the offence of penile-oral
intercourse without consent, which attracted a maximum penalty of life
imprisonment.
Count 3 charged the offence of digital-vaginal and digital-anal
intercourse without consent, which also attracted a maximum penalty
imprisonment. Count 4 charged the offence of penile-vaginal intercourse without
consent, which again attracted a maximum
penalty of life imprisonment. Count 5
charged the offence of deprivation of personal liberty, which attracted a
maximum penalty of
imprisonment for seven years.
sentencing judge imposed a sentence of four years’ imprisonment for each
of the rape offences, with the sentences imposed
for counts 3 and 4 each
cumulated as to one year on the previous sentence. That constituted a sentence
to imprisonment for six years
for the rape offences. The sentencing judge
imposed a sentence of 18 months’ imprisonment for each of the offences in
1 and 5, with each of those sentences cumulated as to six months on the
previous sentence. The total sentence for the offences charged
by indictment was
imprisonment for seven years.
offences were committed on 6 October 2023. At the time the respondent committed
those offences he was already serving a
suspended sentence which had been
imposed three months earlier on 6 July 2023 for the offence of recklessly
endangering serious harm
with circumstances of aggravation. The respondent had
been sentenced to imprisonment for 18 months for that earlier offence, which
partly suspended subject to conditions. At the time of this further offending,
14 months and 12 days’ imprisonment was
held in suspense under the terms
of the order suspending sentence. The sentencing judge restored the whole of the
period held in
suspense but ordered that it be served wholly concurrently with
the sentences which had been imposed for the further offending. Accordingly,
total effective sentence was imprisonment for seven years. A single non-parole
period of five years was fixed.
Grounds of appeal
[5] The notice
of appeal as amended asserts that the individual sentences imposed for each of
the rape offences are manifestly inadequate,
and that the total effective
sentence and non-parole period are also inadequate as a result of those
individual inadequacies and/or
inadequate accumulation, both as between the
individual sentences for the rape offences and with the period of imprisonment
was restored.
hearing of the appeal, the applicant also sought and was granted leave to amend
the notice of appeal to include a further
ground which asserts that the
sentencing judge erred in failing to undertake a proper assessment of the
seriousness of each offence
in accordance with
Pearce v The
Application for an extension of time
[7] The sentence
was imposed on 11 September 2024. The 28 day appeal period expired on 9 October
2024. On 28 October 2024, the applicant
filed a proposed notice of appeal
together with an application for an extension of time within which to bring the
appeal. That application
is opposed by the respondent.
[8] The notice
of appeal in this case was filed 19 days out of time. The reasons given for that
delay are set out in an affidavit
made on 28 October 2024 and filed on
behalf of the applicant. They are, in essence, that following sentence the
prosecutor with carriage
of the matter requested his legal assistant to order
the transcript of the sentencing proceedings to allow consideration to be given
to whether a Crown appeal against sentence should be instituted. The day that
request was made is not specified in the affidavit.
On 4 October 2024, the legal
assistant in question had a serious medical episode and has been on medical
leave since that time. As
it transpired, and for reasons which would appear to
be unknown, the legal assistant did not order the transcript.
October 2024, which was nine days after the expiration of the appeal period, the
Assistant Director of Public Prosecutions
sought an update in relation to the
matter. The prosecutor with carriage of the matter advised that transcript had
been ordered but
not yet received. It would appear that up until that point in
time the prosecutor had been relying on the receipt of the transcript
attention to the matter. On 22 October 2024, the transcription service advised
that no order for transcript had been made.
An order was placed, and the
transcript was then received on 24 October 2024. The transcript was reviewed,
and the Crown appeal was
instituted four days later.
principles which govern applications by the Crown for an extension of time
within which to bring an appeal against sentence
are set out in some detail in
the respondent’s submissions. Those principles may be summarised as
(a) the statutory time limit is intended to secure finality in litigation and
compliance is required in the ordinary case. However,
the principle of finality
does not provide a discrete reason for refusing to exercise the power to extend
the time limit where the
sentence is still being
(b) whether to extend time is a matter for the discretion of the appellate court
and the applicant bears both the evidentiary and
persuasive onus in such an
application;
(c) there needs to both a
satisfactory explanation for the
failure to lodge the appeal within time and good reason to extend time;
(d) the longer the delay the more exceptional the circumstances will need to be
in order to warrant an extension of time; and
(e) a court will not grant any
considerable
extension of time unless
satisfied that the merits of the proposed appeal are such that it would probably
principle underlying these conditions and strictures is that an extension of
time for the Crown to bring an appeal against
sentence involves a degree of
oppression to the offender. That oppression derives from the fact that a Crown
appeal against sentence
gives rise to a form of double jeopardy where the
offender understands that the sentence is subject only to the right of the Crown
to appeal within the period of 28 days. It may be accepted that although
s 414(1A) of the
Criminal Code
provides that this Court must not
take into account any element of double jeopardy in exercising its discretion to
allow the appeal
and impose another sentence, that prohibition does not operate
on the exercise of the discretion to extend the time within which
an appeal may
be brought.
respondent submits that the Crown has not advanced any satisfactory explanation
for the delay. That is said on the basis
that a copy of the transcript was
unnecessary to form any view in relation to the adequacy of the sentence. That
may well be so in
some cases, but it cannot be characterised as unreasonable to
defer any decision in relation to a Crown appeal until transcripts
received. That is particularly so in circumstances where the Director must make
that determination having regard to the
evidence adduced and the submissions
made during the course of sentencing proceedings, and where the grounds of
appeal potentially
extend beyond manifest inadequacy to specific error.
respondent also draws attention to the fact that the failure to receive the
transcript did not come to attention within the
offices of the Crown until nine
days after the appeal period had expired. Although that oversight was both
regrettable and in error,
it may be explained by the fact that the prosecutor
with carriage of the matter was, perhaps unwisely, relying on receipt of the
transcript to prompt his attention to the matter. So far as the initial failure
to order the transcript is concerned, that was due
to default on the part of the
legal assistant to make the order in accordance with the direction she had been
given, whether or not
that default was in any way related to the subsequent
medical episode.
acknowledging the due force of the respondent’s submissions, this is a
matter in which an extension of time is properly
granted. First, the delay and
the extension consequently required is only 19 days, and the Crown moved
promptly once the default
was discovered. That is not properly characterised as
a “considerable” extension. Second, the merits of the proposed
appeal are relevant on such an application. As is the usual practice in this
and the proposed
substantive appeal have been heard together. For the reasons which follow, we
have concluded not only that the appeal
has prospects of success, but that it
would succeed subject only to the requirement for an extension of time. The
rigour which the
Court properly exercises in ensuring that the Crown institutes
appeals against sentences within the time prescribed by statute in
the principle of finality must be balanced against the countervailing duty to
correct manifest inadequacies or inconsistencies
in sentencing standards which
constitute error in point of principle. Third, there is nothing to suggest that
the respondent in this
case has been subjected to any actual oppression by
reason of the late filing of the notice of appeal. In fact, there is nothing
before the Court which would suggest he had any knowledge or comprehension of
either the right of Crown appeal or the 28 day limitation
on commencement.
Although evidence of that nature may not be necessary in circumstances where
oppression may be inferred or assumed
from the nature or duration of the delay,
there is no basis on which to conclude that the respondent in this matter has
in any actual or subjective sense. It may also be noted in this respect
that the respondent had not been released in the interim
period and nor was his
release imminent. Under the terms of the sentence imposed by the sentencing
judge, the non-parole period does
not expire until 8 October 2028.
Objective circumstances of the offending
objective circumstances of the offending were as follows. The respondent was a
19-year-old male. The victim was a 37-year-old
female. The respondent and the
victim were unknown to each other. On the night in question the victim was
sitting alone on the veranda
of her unit. It was dark. The respondent approached
the unit. The victim said that she did not know him and told him to go away.
then got up and went into her unit. The respondent followed her, grabbed her
from behind, pushed her inside the unit and threw
her forcibly to a mattress on
the floor of the living room. The respondent’s obvious intention at the
time was to rape the
victim. That conduct, together with the further time the
respondent remained in the unit with that intention, constituted the offence
charged in count 1.
respondent then demanded to have sex with the victim and threatened to kill her
if she did not comply. The respondent manoeuvred
himself so that he placed the
victim in a headlock with his legs and forced his erect penis into her mouth
despite her struggles
in protest. At a later point the respondent followed the
victim into the bathroom and forced his erect penis into her mouth as she
the toilet. At a later point still, after the respondent had dragged the victim
into her bedroom, he forced his erect penis
into the victim’s mouth and
down her throat causing her to vomit and lose consciousness. That conduct in its
totality constituted
the offence of penile-oral intercourse without consent
charged in count 2.
[17] Immediately
following the first act of forced oral intercourse, the respondent lifted the
victim’s legs up, spat on her
anus and inserted his fingers into her anus
and vagina at the same time. On the basis of observations subsequently made by
the victim,
which are recorded in the agreed facts, it would appear that this
caused bleeding from one or other of those orifices. After the
respondent had
dragged the victim into her bedroom, he continued to use his fingers to
interfere with her vagina and anus. In the
victim’s description, it felt
like he was trying to “rip her apart”. That conduct caused the
victim so much pain
she started screaming and attempted to wrestle herself away
from the respondent. The respondent punched the victim to the head with
fist in order to stop her physical resistance. Although the matter is somewhat
confused by the order in which the relevant
events are described in the agreed
facts, that conduct in its totality constituted the offence of digital-vaginal
and digital-anal
intercourse without consent charged in count 3.
respondent then had non-consensual penile-vaginal intercourse with the victim.
As this was happening the victim pleaded with
him to stop. The period over which
this took place is not described in the agreed facts. After some time, the
respondent stopped
what he was doing and left the unit. It is not explicit in
the agreed facts whether the respondent ejaculated during the course of
conduct, but a swab subsequently taken from the victim’s vagina confirmed
the presence of the respondent’s sperm.
That conduct constituted the
offence of penile-vaginal intercourse without consent charged in count 4.
[19] Once the
respondent had left the premises, the victim dressed and called police from the
but were unable to locate the respondent at
that time. Three days later the victim saw the respondent entering a nearby unit
she reported to police. Police matched the sperm found in the vulval swab
to the respondent and he was arrested on that same
Respondent’s subjective circumstances
respondent was 20 years of age at the time of sentencing and will very shortly
turn 21 years of age. In addition to the conviction
for recklessly endangering
serious harm for which the respondent was serving a suspended sentence at the
time of this subsequent
offending, he also had three convictions for breaching
bail. So far as his other personal circumstances are concerned, the respondent
was born in Darwin and spent the first eight years of his life living in a
public housing estate with his mother. She had problems
with alcohol abuse, and
he was often unsupervised during those years. When the respondent was nine years
old he was given to the
care of his uncle and auntie in Peppimenarti, who had
three children of similar age. From that point in time, he reportedly had a
upbringing in a close-knit family environment which was free from alcohol abuse,
drug use or violence.
respondent returned to Darwin to undertake his secondary schooling as a boarder
at Kormilda College. He has not been employed
since leaving school. His first
when he was warned
for receiving stolen property. He received a further warning
at 17 years of age for disorderly behaviour in a public place. He was
at age 18 for the reckless endangerment offence and spent three and a half
months in prison before being sentenced and released
on the order suspending
sentence. He has a history of persistent non-compliance with bail conditions and
the conditions of the suspended
respondent started drinking alcohol when he was 18 years of age and started
smoking cannabis at 19 years of age. Prior to
this offending he consumed alcohol
and cannabis daily while in Darwin but did not drink or smoke when on community.
At the time the
pre-sentence report was prepared, the respondent’s social
media presence was described by the author as depicting a “pro-criminal
persona”, with postings of weapons, anti-police slogans and a purported
affiliation with a gang in the Daly River region. The
pre-sentence report
contained the assessment that the respondent had limited insight into the
seriousness of his crimes, their impact
on his victim or the contribution
excessive drinking made to his offending conduct. For that combination of
reasons, the respondent
was assessed as presenting a high risk of recidivism. He
has not undertaken any form of residential rehabilitation as he has been
assessed as unsuitable given the sexual nature of his offending. The respondent
otherwise has no physical or mental ailments or
conditions.
Principles relating to Crown appeals against
principles which govern Crown appeals against sentence are well established.
Such appeals should be brought only to establish
some matter of principle and to
afford the Court of Criminal Appeal an opportunity to lay down principles for
the guidance of courts
in sentencing
The reference to a
“matter of principle” encompasses what is necessary to avoid the
kind of manifest inadequacy or inconsistency
in sentencing standards which
constitutes an error in point of
[24] A Crown
appeal against sentence is governed by the principles enunciated in
In the event that
some error has been made in the exercise of the discretion, such as acting on a
wrong principle, taking irrelevant
matters into account, acting on a mistaken
understanding of the facts or failing to take into account some material
consideration,
the appellate court may exercise its own discretion in
substitution. In circumstances where no specific error is evident, but the
sentence imposed is unreasonable or plainly unjust, the appellate court may
infer that the sentencing discretion has miscarried even
in the absence of
discernible error. However, in such a case it must be shown that the sentence
was clearly and obviously inadequate,
and not just arguably inadequate.
Appellate intervention on the ground that the sentence is manifestly inadequate
is not justified
simply because the result arrived at is markedly different from
other sentences that have been imposed in other cases. It must be
shown that the
sentence is so disproportionate to the seriousness of the offending as to
demonstrate error in principle.
assessment of the adequacy of sentence requires consideration of all the matters
that are relevant to fixing the sentence, including
the circumstances of the
offending and the personal circumstances of the offender. The benchmark for
manifest inadequacy is a “stringent
one, difficult to make good” and
an appellate court will “be astute to enforce the stringency of these
That is because of
the need to preserve the broad discretion of sentencing judges in recognition of
the difficulty of having to balance
“incommensurable factors bearing on
the exercise of the sentencing discretion, [with] those factors ... pulling in
conflicting and contradictory
directions”.
the respondent submits, in an inadequacy appeal against sentence the Crown is
required to surmount two hurdles. The Crown must
first identify an error of the
House v The King
. Even where manifest inadequacy is
found, the appellate court retains a residual discretion as to whether the
appeal should be allowed,
and the respondent resentenced. The Crown must also
negate any reason why the residual discretion not to interfere should be
Although the Court must
not take into account any element of double jeopardy in making the decision
whether to allow the appeal or
impose another
that provision
does not displace or abrogate the residual discretion. As the High Court
observed in relation to the analogous New
South Wales provision (citations
The effect of s 68A was discussed in
[2010] NSWCCA 49
77 NSWLR 7]
in which the Court of Criminal Appeal sat as a bench of five
judges. Spigelman CJ, with whom the other members of the Court relevantly
agreed, concluded that the section removed from consideration by the Court of
Criminal Appeal the distress and anxiety to which respondents
to a Crown appeal
are presumed to be subject if they have to undergo sentencing for a second time.
It prevents an appellate court
from basing on such distress and anxiety a
decision not to intervene or to impose a sentence less than that which it
otherwise believes
to be appropriate. Moreover the Court cannot, it was said,
have regard to the frequency of Crown appeals as a sentencing principle.
view, s 68A is relevant to the exercise and scope of the residual
discretion, in s 5D of the
Criminal Appeal Act
, to dismiss a Crown
appeal against sentence notwithstanding that the sentence is shown to have been
erroneous. It is not necessary
for this Court to review the correctness of the
construction of s 68A in
. On any view of its operation it does
not extinguish the residual discretion. The Crown, in this appeal, did not take
that proposition.
[27] Although
the Northern Territory provision is not in precisely the same terms as its New
South Wales counterpart, there is no
material distinction for this purpose.
Accordingly, while the appellate court cannot exercise its discretion not to
intervene on
the basis of the distress and anxiety which a respondent suffers
from being exposed to the possibility of a more severe sentence,
or for that
reason reduce the sentence which it otherwise believes to be appropriate, it is
still required to consider the other
factors which potentially inform the
exercise of the residual discretion. Those other factors are discussed later in
these reasons.
[28] Counsel for
the respondent in the present matter also submitted that Crown appeals should be
a rarity, and that this principle
operated as some form of limiting purpose in
the exercise of the discretion. It is now broadly accepted that insofar as
considerations
of “rarity” were intended to guide courts of criminal
appeal, that reflected the operation of the double jeopardy principle.
in the exercise of the
appellate discretion. The frequency with which Crown appeals are brought is a
matter for the prosecuting
to properly assess seriousness of offending
additional ground of appeal asserts that the sentencing judge committed specific
error in failing to undertake a proper assessment
of the seriousness of each
offence. The substance of this ground is that in the sentencing judge failed to
consider and fix appropriate
sentences for each individual offence before going
onto consider questions of cumulation, concurrence and totality. It is said that
approach masked the full seriousness of the offending and resulted in the orders
for cumulation and concurrence being made on an
erroneous foundation.
[30] It may be
accepted that a bare recitation of the facts constituting the offences and a
reference to the objective features of
the offending does not satisfy the
requirements of sentencing. A sentencing judge must assess the objective gravity
of the offences.
One of the reasons for that requirement is to ensure that the
offender is adequately punished for each
However, in undertaking
that task it is unnecessary for a sentencing judge to attach a specific label to
the objective seriousness
of each offence in terms of where it might sit on a
range of the scale.
sentencing judge’s remarks in this case included that the offending was
serious, that the victim had tried to resist
the respondent, that the victim had
pleaded with the respondent to stop on a number of occasions, and that the
respondent had persisted
in his sexual assaults upon the victim despite her
protestations and physical resistance. The sentencing remarks make express
to the deliberate nature of the respondent’s conduct, his
actions in forcing his way into the victim’s unit and violently
her, and the threats which he made against her. The sentencing judge observed
that the conduct represented an invasion
of the victim’s security and
safety, and that the various acts of penetration were degrading, demeaning and
caused significant
harm. The sentencing judge observed further that the sexual
assaults were accompanied by brutal physical abuse and the attack was
and violent. Having regard to those incidents of the offending, the sentencing
judge stated that considerable weight was
required to be given to both general
and specific deterrence and denunciation.
[32] Although no
individual attention or gradation of seriousness was allocated to each separate
act of penetration, those observations
and findings were sufficient to satisfy
that requirement that the sentencing judge undertake a proper assessment of the
seriousness
of the offending. This ground of appeal resolves ultimately to the
contention that a proper assessment of the objective seriousness
individual offence would have required longer sentences in respect of each of
the rape offences, and possibly some differentiation
in the sentences imposed in
respect of each of those offences. The bases of intervention described in
House v The King
are not engaged by an assertion that the sentencing
judge erred by failing to properly determine the objective seriousness of the
offence, or the seriousness of each offence individually when there is more than
An assertion of that type
is a particular of the ground that the sentence was manifestly inadequate, and
is properly dealt with in
that context.
sentence imposed for each offence of sexual intercourse without consent was
imprisonment for four years, reduced from a starting
point of imprisonment for
five years with the application of the discount for the plea of guilty. That
level of discount reflects
the fact that although the respondent had entered
pleas of guilty, there was a lack of insight and genuine remorse.
comprehensive survey of the comparative sentences for the offence of rape was
conducted by this Court in the matter of
Gilligan v The
While first
acknowledging that the survey was conducted almost 18 years ago, it concluded
that a starting point of nine years' imprisonment
before any discount for a
guilty plea is within the range of sentences imposed for offences against
s 192(3) of the
Criminal Code
in circumstances where the assault is
accompanied by violence and degradation beyond the minimum which might be
expected in the commission
of that offence. Approximately a decade after that
review, in 2017, this Court conducted a further review of comparative sentences
for rape in the matter of
Forrest v The
That review disclosed
that since the survey had been conducted in
in 2007, the average
head sentence imposed for an offence against s 192(3) of the
involving an adult offender and an adult victim, after excluding the
most serious cases, had been six years and five months. That
is broadly consistent with the observation made in the 2014 case of
effect that most of the comparative sentences referred to the court on that
occasion involved a starting point of six years
or higher for the offence
the more recent decision in
, this court
considered a Crown appeal against sentence on the ground of manifest inadequacy.
The respondent was charged with two
counts of sexual intercourse without consent
(counts 1 and 3), property damage (count 2), aggravated assault (count 4) and a
charge of breaching a domestic violence order. The maximum penalties for
those offences were, respectively, life imprisonment (counts
imprisonment for 14 years (count 2), imprisonment for five years (count 4), and
imprisonment for two years (breaching a
domestic violence order).
[36] On the
first day of the trial, the respondent pleaded guilty to counts 2 and 4, and
entered pleas of not guilty to counts 1 and
3. The trial proceeded before a
jury which returned guilty verdicts on both counts. The trial judge sentenced
the respondent to
a total effective sentence of imprisonment for nine years and
two months, with a non-parole period of six years and five months,
backdated to
take account of the respondent's time in custody. For each of counts 1 and 3,
the trial judge imposed sentences of imprisonment
for eight years and ordered
that the sentences be served cumulatively to the extent of one year. The Crown
appealed against the sentence
on the grounds that both the individual sentences
imposed for the offences of sexual intercourse without consent charged in counts
1 and 3, and the total effective sentence, were manifestly inadequate.
background to those offences was that the offender was the victim’s former
domestic partner. They were in an “on-again,
off-again” relationship
for about six years. That relationship was marred by violence, sexual assault
and coercive control.
The main object of the offender’s violent and
controlling behaviour towards the victim was his own sexual gratification.
offender would regularly make threats to harm the victim and her family. The
victim lived in constant fear for her life due
to the ongoing threats made by
the offender. Throughout their relationship the offender regularly threatened to
inflict violence
on the victim, and did in fact regularly inflict physical
violence on her. The victim was aware that the offender had previously
convicted of the manslaughter of his former domestic partner by beating her to
death with a digeridoo after she said she did
not want to have sex with him. The
offender had been sentenced to five years and 10 months’
imprisonment for that manslaughter,
and the offender made repeated threats to
the victim that she would end up like his former partner if she did not do what
the offender
[39] In summary,
the facts on counts 1 were as follows. The victim was staying at a women’s
shelter. She received text messages
and telephone calls from the offender
promising to repay her $150 he had withdrawn from her bank account. The offender
told her to
catch a taxi and go to a house at Ilparpa Camp, and he would give
her the $150. The victim said that she did not want to do that,
but the offender
told her she would not receive her money unless she did. When she arrived at the
house, the offender paid the driver,
made the victim get out of the taxi and
forced the victim to follow him into a house at Ilparpa. She did as he said
because she was
scared of him.
[40] Once inside
the house, the offender produced a syringe filled with crystal methamphetamine.
He told the victim to take the methamphetamine
to “take the pain
away”, but she refused. The offender then forcibly injected the drug into
her arm. After that, the
offender forced the victim to suck his penis and then
had forcible penile‑vaginal sexual intercourse with her. The victim
repeatedly told the offender that she did not want to have sex with him. The
offender became angry and told her that if she did not
have sex with him, she
would end up like his ex‑partner. When the victim said, “No,”
the offender punched her in
the head and told her to be quiet. He did not wear a
condom and he ejaculated inside her vagina.
[41] The facts
on count 3 related to a later occasion and were as follows. The offender and the
victim were in a house in Alice Springs.
At about 6 am on that day,
the offender woke the victim in order to have sexual intercourse with her. She
did not want to do that
and told the offender that she was too tired. The
offender then took off his clothes and told the victim to take off her panties
or he would rip them. He also threatened to hit her with a steel fan and to hurt
her if she did not acquiesce, and threatened to
kill her. She said,
“Please don’t,” and the offender became angry. The victim was
scared and took off her clothes.
The offender forced his penis into her mouth,
and then had penile‑vaginal sexual intercourse with her without her
The offender did not wear a condom and ejaculated inside her
[42] The Crown
facts also recited the facts of a number of uncharged acts which involved the
offender assaulting the victim and having
sexual intercourse with her without
her consent on occasions between the incidents charged in counts 1 and 3. On one
of those occasions,
the offender had smashed the victim’s phone to prevent
her from communicating with a police officer who was trying to help
victim impact statement made it plain that the offending had had lasting
psychological effects on the victim, including
that she sometimes felt
offender showed no remorse and had no insight into the seriousness of his
offending and its impact on the victim. The sentencing
judge did not allow a
discount for the two guilty pleas on the basis that they were of
“negligible” utilitarian value
as they were entered on the first day
of the trial and did not spare the victim the stress of giving evidence at the
trial of counts
[44] The Court
of Criminal Appeal allowed the Crown appeal against sentence on the ground of
manifest inadequacy. The offender was
resentenced to a term of imprisonment for
12 years on count 1 and imprisonment for 12 years on count 3, with four years of
the sentence
for count 3 be served cumulatively on the sentence for count 1. The
total effective sentence was imprisonment for 16 years with a
non-parole period
of 11 years and three months. In coming to this conclusion and resentence, this
Court referred to
and the other serious cases of sexual
intercourse without consent reviewed by the Court of Criminal Appeal in
The starting points adopted in those serious cases before any
reduction for guilty pleas or remorse were 13 ²/
Massilas Ganambarr aka Rogers
11 ½ years (
ZP, Jonex Finlay & Hyuntae Kim
Preston Andy
) and eight years and nine months (
ordering that degree of cumulation between the sentences, the Court of Criminal
Appeal referred to its earlier judgment in
McKay v The
In that case
the appellant was found guilty following a trial by jury and sentenced to an
aggregate sentence of 14 years with a non-parole
period of 10 years for two
offences of sexual intercourse without consent. The appellant contended,
, that the sentence was manifestly excessive and that the
sentencing judge had erred in imposing an aggregate sentence contrary to
s 52 of the
Sentencing Act
offending consisted of one act of vaginal intercourse without consent and one
act of anal intercourse without consent committed
after the applicant had locked
the victim in a bedroom and continued despite her screaming and physical
resistance. During the commission
of the second offence, the offender had had
placed a pillow over the victim’s head when she screamed and then knocked
unconscious. The victim suffered severe pain and significant long
term psychological consequences. The sentencing judge described
the two offences
as “very serious offences, albeit not at the top of the range”.
[47] The Court
of Criminal Appeal in
found that the sentence of 14 years with
a non-parole period of 10 years was not manifestly excessive but allowed the
appeal on the
ground that the sentencing judge had erred in imposing an
aggregate sentence. The appellant was re-sentenced to imprisonment for
eight years on the first count and 10 years on the second count. The
Court of Criminal Appeal ordered that six years of the sentence
on the second
count be served cumulatively on the sentence on the first count, bringing the
total effective sentence to the same
as that ordered by the sentencing judge,
which had been imprisonment for 14 years with a non-parole period of 10
[48] Of course,
there is a limited utility in comparing the relative seriousness of individual
cases involving violent rapes committed
by strangers in the course of a home
invasion with individual cases involving rapes committed in a setting of
controlling and abusive
domestic violence sometimes extending over many years.
What is ultimately disclosed in those reviews is that there is no fixed
range for the offence of sexual intercourse without consent. It is an
offence which is very fact‑sensitive in terms of both
the objective
seriousness of the offending and the subjective circumstances of the offender.
Although the sentences imposed for the
rape offences in this case fell well
below the average and usual dispositions identified in those reviews, and even
further below
the sentences ordinarily imposed in cases involving a significant
degree of violence and degradation, the determination of inadequacy
will always turn on the circumstances of the individual case.
[49] However,
given the egregious nature of this offending – particularly the offences
of sexual intercourse without consent
– and the need to protect the
community from such offending, both the individual sentences imposed for the
rape offences and
the total sentence imposed on the respondent were plainly and
obviously inadequate even after full and appropriate accommodation
for the respondent’s relative youth and relatively modest criminal
[50] The rapes
were committed during what was effectively a home invasion that occurred at
night-time while the dwelling was occupied
by a woman who was alone and
vulnerable for those reasons. Although the sentencing judge found that that the
offending was spontaneous
in nature, it was premeditated to at least some degree
in the sense that the respondent approached the woman and followed her into
dwelling with the intention of raping her. At the time he did so, he was
enjoying the privilege of conditional liberty for earlier
characterised by a reckless disregard for the welfare of other people in the
[51] Once the
respondent had entered the dwelling house with that intention, he then raped the
victim in a manner which involved a
high degree of violence and degradation. The
rape was persistent and involved three separate categories of penetration, all
were highly invasive and committed with flagrant disregard for the
victim’s vulnerability and right to personal autonomy. The
threatened to kill the victim. The respondent placed the victim in a headlock
using his legs. The respondent forced his
erect penis into the victim’s
mouth and down her throat on multiple occasions, the last of which caused the
victim to vomit
and lose consciousness. The acts of digital penetration were
such as to cause the victim excruciating pain. When the victim attempted
wrestle herself away from the respondent, he punched her to the head with a
closed fist to subdue her resistance. The rapes involved
a degree of deprivation
of the victim’s liberty. As is apparent from the victim impact statement,
the psychological consequences
for the victim have been significant and
long-standing. Having regard to these features, the individual sentences imposed
rape offences were so disproportionate to the objective seriousness of
the offending as to demonstrate error in point of principle.
for the respondent submitted that those features notwithstanding, the sentences
imposed for the rape offences were proportionate
and within range having regard
to the significance of rehabilitation and the call for moderation when
sentencing a relatively young
offender. That submission was made with reference
to the well-understood principles that youthful offending is often a product of
immaturity, that young offenders are typically still at a stage of mental and
emotional development which renders them more susceptible
to positive change,
and that incarceration is harsher and more detrimental for young
Those principles may
be accepted as general propositions, but they are subject to some necessary
qualifications.
Rehabilitation
will ordinarily carry less weight in respect of a young offender who has
previously been afforded opportunity to modify
his behaviours but has failed to
do so and gone on to commit a very serious criminal offence. As the seriousness
of the criminality
increases, there will be “a corresponding reduction in
the mitigating effects of the offender’s
These were crimes
of considerable gravity. Given the sexual motivation for and content of the
crimes, and the high level of violence
and degradation inflicted upon the
victim, they cannot be characterised as “childlike” in some manner
which might reduce
the respondent’s criminal culpability. As this Court
observed in
R v Goodwin
It is well established that if a
young offender commits a criminal offence like an adult then that justifies
sentencing him or her
in a fashion more akin to an adult. Where crimes of
considerable gravity are committed the protective function of the criminal Court
would cease to operate unless denunciation, general deterrence and retribution
are significant sentencing considerations even in
respect of juveniles.
[54] In our
assessment, the most serious of the three rapes was the digital penetration
charged in count 3. Having regard to the objective
circumstances and incidents
of the offending, and the survey of sentences conducted above, the appropriate
starting point for this
particular rape is imprisonment for 10 years. The
appropriate starting point for each of the rapes charged in counts 2 and 4 is
imprisonment
for nine years. No complaint is made in relation to the discount of
20 percent adopted by the sentencing judge and we would not depart
rate of discount. In the application of that discount, the sentence properly
imposed in respect of count 3 is imprisonment
for eight years, and the sentence
properly imposed for each of the offences in counts 2 and 4 is imprisonment for
seven years and
two months.
addressing the orders for cumulation made by the sentencing judge, it may be
accepted that the different acts of criminality should
be reflected in an
accumulation between the sentences imposed for the individual offences. As this
Court observed in
The King v Benning
, although the offences in that case
were committed during the course of what might be described as a single episode
of offending,
the unlawful entry at night with the intent to steal should not
have been made wholly concurrent with the sentences for sexual offending
they were separate and differently
The sentencing judge
clearly afforded that principle some operation, because 12 months’
accumulation was ordered between each
of the rape offences and six months’
accumulation was ordered in relation to each of the sentences imposed for the
of burglary and deprivation of liberty.
degree to which individual sentences are made concurrent is part of the
sentencing discretion, and reasonable minds may differ
as to the appropriate
degree of cumulation. There will often be no clearly correct answer. What is
necessarily required in every
case is a sound discretionary judgment as to what
extent there should be cumulation or
concurrency.
The sentencing
judge in this case ordered cumulation between the sentences because of the
different types of criminality involved.
It is certainly arguable in this case
that having regard to the total sentence, inadequate cumulation was allowed
between the sentences
imposed for the rape offences. While it is true that
multiple acts of sexual violence in one episode of offending may call for a
greater degree of
the countervailing consideration is that a greater degree of concurrency will
ordinarily be warranted where an offender has engaged
in a course of conduct
over a relatively short period of time involving the commission of offences of
the same general type
[57] Although
the level of cumulation allowed by the sentencing judge conformed generally with
that latter approach, and did not give
rise to inadequacy in and of itself, it
might be inferred that the sentencing judge adopted artificially low head
sentences for the
rape offences in order to avoid a total sentence which the
sentencing judge considered would be disproportionate to the totality
respondent’s offending conduct. For the reasons we have given, that
resulted in a disproportionately low total sentence.
The increased sentences we
have indicated give rise to different considerations concerning the degree of
cumulation properly allowed.
Given the increase to the individual sentences
imposed for the rape offences which we will be ordering, the total head sentence
be increased to the point where a lesser cumulation between the sentences
imposed for the rape offences is warranted.
[58] That leaves
the applicant’s challenge to the degree of cumulation allowed between the
sentences imposed for the offending
committed on 6 October 2023 and the
restoration of the sentence imposed on 6 July 2023 which was held in suspense at
the time of
the subsequent offending. The sentencing judge ordered full
concurrency between the sentence to imprisonment which was restored and
sentences imposed for the subsequent offending. The respondent says that order
is not susceptible to challenge in the context
of the present appeal, because it
has been brought in relation to, and is therefore restricted to, the sentence
imposed on file 22332647,
while the restoration operated exclusively in the
context of the sentence imposed in file 22228407. It is unnecessary to decide
issue. As a general proposition, the integrity of sentencing orders made by
the Supreme Court must be protected by appropriate cumulation
between a sentence
which is newly imposed and the restoration of any sentence previously imposed
which remains in suspense at the
time of the subsequent offending. However, that
imperative will always be subject to totality considerations. In the present
circumstances,
the total head sentence will be increased to the point where full
concurrency between the fresh sentence and the restored sentence
appropriate.
The residual discretion
already described in the discussion concerning the principles which govern Crown
appeals, even where manifest inadequacy is found
the appellate court retains a
residual discretion as to whether the appeal should be allowed and the
respondent resentenced. The
Crown bears the onus of negating any reason why the
residual discretion not to interfere should be
Although the Court
must not take into account any element of double jeopardy in making the decision
whether to allow the appeal or
impose another sentence
that provision
does not displace or abrogate the residual
discretion.
However, the
abolition of the double jeopardy principle means that the extent to which Crown
appeals should be a “rarity”
is a matter for the prosecuting
authority rather than a relevant consideration in the exercise of the appellate
discretion.
We have also
addressed the limiting purpose of Crown appeals to lay down sentencing
principles, which extends to correcting sentences
so disproportionate to the
seriousness of the offending as to constitute an error in point of
[60] Counsel for
the respondent submits that some recent decisions of this Court have approached
the exercise of the residual discretion
in a manner inconsistent with those
principles, in that they have effectively reversed the onus to require the
respondent to demonstrate
why they should not be resentenced. A number of
observations may be made in relation to that submission.
[61] First, it
is founded in part on the assertion that this Court has elsewhere
“described the non-exercise of the discretion
‘exceptional’.” That assertion is made with reference to the
decision of this Court in the
, and proceeds from a
misunderstanding of the relevant passage. What the Court relevantly stated in
was that the exercise of the residual discretion had to be
considered carefully to determine “whether this is one of those
exceptional cases in which the Crown appeal should be allowed and the respondent
resentenced”. As the accompanying footnote
makes plain, that was in turn a
reference to the principles governing Crown appeals which had been described in
, concerning the
need to establish inadequacy of such a degree as to constitute error in
principle. The reference to “exceptionality”
was directed to that
limitation, in recognition of the fact that cases in which a sentencing judge is
found to have imposed a disposition
so far outside the permissible range as to
bespeak error will indeed be an exception. The reference to
“exceptionality”
was not to condition the exercise of the residual
discretion. That is an inquiry which falls to be conducted after the threshold
requirement of error in principle has been established. The factors properly
balanced in that determination do not resolve to the
reductive proposition that
the residual discretion not to interfere should be exercised in all but
“exceptional” circumstances.
[62] Second, the
respondent’s submission takes issue with the proposition that “[i]t
is important that inadequate sentences
are not permitted to stand that may
undermine confidence in the administration of justice, unless there is some
compelling reason
to do so arising from such matters as delay, parity, the
totality principle, rehabilitation and fault on the part of the
That is not to
reverse the onus or suggest that it is not incumbent on the Crown to negate any
reason why the residual discretion
not to interfere should be exercised. It is
only to say that where a sentence is so inadequate as to constitute error in
principle, there must be some significant factor or factors warranting
the exercise of the discretion. In that event, the Crown will
fail to discharge
the onus. That does not mean that the exercise of the discretion is, or should
be, the default position.
[63] It must
also be recognised that there is a distinction between the legal and evidential
onus. The legal onus of negating any
reason why the discretion should be
exercised will remain always on the Crown. In some cases, the facts and
circumstances relevant
to that issue will be evident from the material already
before the appellate court. In other cases, the Crown will have an attendant
burden of adducing the evidence necessary to negate any reason for the exercise
of the discretion. In some cases, the respondent
to such an appeal may,
depending upon the preponderance of the evidence, also carry an evidential onus
of adducing or pointing to
evidence which demonstrates that the discretion
should be exercised in his or her favour.
[64] Third, the
respondent’s submission asserts that the authorities from this Court to
which attention is drawn suggest that
a “sense of injustice”
occasioned by an inadequate sentence will, in itself, justify the non-exercise
of the residual
discretion. The submission continues that the exercise of the
discretion only falls for consideration in circumstances where a finding
manifest inadequacy has been made, such that the discretion could and would
never be exercised if a “sense of injustice”
or the maintenance of
public confidence were to be adopted as the determining criterion. Again, this
submission misunderstands or
misstates the result in those cases. In
, for example, this
Court prefaced its determination with a consideration of whether the finding
that the sentence was manifestly
inadequate was sufficient in itself for the
purpose of providing guidance to sentencing courts in relation to the offence in
without need to proceed to resentence. In addition to that matter,
this Court also had regard to the fact that the respondent in
that case had
already been released from prison, which gave rise to a concern that returning
the respondent to prison would give
rise to unfairness and impact adversely on
his rehabilitation.
[65] Ranged
against those considerations, this Court referred to the decision of the New
South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal in
R v O’Connor
, in which that
Court stated:
Although the principal purpose of the determination of
a Crown appeal is to give guidance to sentencing judges, the sentence actually
imposed on the respondent is still of considerable importance. The need for
specific deterrence in the present case would not be
served by an exercise of
the residual discretion.
Nor indeed would the need for general deterrence be fulfilled were the
residual discretion to be exercised. The general deterrence
of a sentence is not
to be measured solely by reference to its effect on putative respondents. One of
the purposes of incorporating
an element of general deterrence in a sentence is
to ensure that sentences accord with legitimate community expectations and that
public confidence in the administration of justice is maintained:
Markarian v
(2005) 228 CLR 357 at [82] per
[66] Again, that
statement does not seek to reverse the onus and nor does it advance the
proposition that the discretion will not
be exercised in cases of manifest
inadequacy. It reflects the orthodox proposition that the question whether the
discretion should
be exercised involves balancing the need to satisfy the
requirements of the sentencing exercise in the individual case at hand against
any unfairness to the respondent arising from such matters as delay, parity, the
totality principle, rehabilitation and fault on
the part of the Crown. That
necessitates a highly subjective assessment of the circumstances of the case at
In the conduct of that
assessment, the Court in
determined that the need for
specific deterrence in the circumstances of that case would not be served by the
exercise of the residual
discretion. That is not to say that an inadequate
sentence will, in itself, justify a refusal to exercise the residual discretion.
[67] We turn
then to consider the exercise of the discretion in the present case. That
consideration involves two questions. The first
is whether this Court should
decline to allow the appeal even though the sentences imposed for the rape
offences are erroneously
inadequate. If this Court determines to allow the
appeal, the second question is to what extent the sentence should be varied. In
determining whether to exercise the residual discretion, it is open for the
appellate court to look at the facts available as at
the time of the hearing of
the appeal, including events that have occurred after the original
sentencing.
The sentencing
exercise in this case took place only six months ago, and there has been no
material change or development in that
time which would bear on the sentencing
exercise. Neither party has sought to adduce further evidence of any matter
arising since
the original sentencing exercise.
[68] Although
the category of factors that bear upon the residual discretion are not closed,
rarity, the frequency of Crown appeals
and the distress and anxiety which the
respondent might suffer from being exposed to the possibility of a more severe
sentence are
no longer relevant considerations following the abolition of double
jeopardy. The factors which remain well-recognised as relevant
considerations
(a) delay by the Crown in lodging the
(b) where the Crown has conducted the case on appeal on a different basis from
that pursued at first instance, and particularly where
the Crown requests the
appellate court to set aside the sentence on a ground conceded in the court
(c) delay in the resolution of the
(d) the fact a non-custodial sentence was imposed on the offender at first
(e) the fact the non-parole period imposed at first instance has already
expired, or the respondent’s release on parole is
(f) the fact the offender has made substantial progress towards rehabilitation
and/or any identifiable deleterious effect of resentencing
on progress towards
the respondent’s
rehabilitation;
(g) where resentencing would create disparity with a
co-offender;
(h) the deteriorating health of the respondent since
(i) where any increase to the sentence would be so slight as to constitute
“tinkering”;
(j) where the guidance provided to sentencing judges will be limited, for
example, because the proceedings are subject to non-publication
orders, and the
re-sentence will result in
(k) where the general circumstances of the case or the category of offence is
unlikely to arise again.
[69] We have
already dealt with the delay in lodging the appeal in the context of the
Crown’s application for an extension of
time for that purpose. For broadly
the same reasons for which we have granted the extension of time, the delay in
this case is not
such as to give rise to injustice. While it may be accepted
that the respondent is a relatively youthful offender, there is nothing
suggest that allowing the appeal and resentencing the respondent would somehow
disrupt any progress he has made towards rehabilitation
to this point in time.
To say that a longer period of incarceration may have an adverse effect on a
youthful offender’s ultimate
rehabilitation simply raises the same issues
which inform the determination of what length of sentence should be imposed in
application of sentencing principles and standards. Any resentence
will provide the same finality, framework and structure as are
provided under
the original sentence. Finally, there is no substance to the respondent’s
contention that the Crown somehow
failed in its duty of assisting the sentencing
judge to avoid error in the level of cumulation allowed. There is otherwise no
calling for the exercise of the residual discretion in the present case
which would militate against the quashing of plainly inadequate
sentences and
the imposition of sentences which properly reflect the high level of seriousness
involved in the offending, and which
adequately serve the sentencing purposes of
punishment, denunciation and deterrence.
[70] We make the
following orders.
time within which to bring the appeal against sentence is extended by 19 days to
28 October 2024.
appeal is allowed, the sentence imposed by the sentencing judge on 11 September
2024 is set aside and the respondent is resentenced
as follows.
the offence in count 3, the respondent is sentenced to imprisonment for eight
years commencing on 9 October 2023.
the offence in count 2, the respondent is sentenced to imprisonment for seven
years and two months, six months of which is to
be served cumulatively on the
first sentence.
the offence in count 4, the respondent is sentenced to imprisonment for seven
years and two months, six months of which is to
be served cumulatively on the
sentence imposed for count 2.
the offence in count 1, the respondent is sentenced to imprisonment for 18
months, six months of which is to be served cumulatively
on the sentence imposed
for count 4.
the offence in count 5, the respondent is sentenced to imprisonment for 18
months, six months of which is to be served cumulatively
on the sentence imposed
for count 1.
whole of the sentence held in suspense in file number 22228407 is restored and
is to be served concurrently with the sentences
imposed in file number
total period of imprisonment is 10 years commencing on 9 October 2023.
non-parole period of six years and four months is
________________________
Pearce v The Queen
[1998] HCA 57
194 CLR 610.
Kentwell v The Queen
252 CLR 601 at [32].
The Queen v Mossman
40 NTLR 144
The Queen v Roe
[2017] NTCCA 7
(2017) 40 NTLR 187
Griffiths v The Queen
(1977) 137 CLR 293 at 310.
Lacey v Attorney General of
[2011] HCA 10
(2011) 242 CLR 573
Everett v The Queen
[1994] HCA 49
Dinsdale v The Queen
[2000] HCA 54
(2000) 202 CLR 321
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499.
The Queen v Kahu-Leedie
[2022] NTCCA 4
v Kazarisis
(2010) 31 VR 636
at [127]-[128].
v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 66
v Attorney General for NSW
(2015) 256 CLR 346
at [54] citing
[1994] HCA 49
(1994) 181 CLR 295
at 299–300 and
R v Hernando
Criminal Code
, s 414(1A).
Green v The Queen; Quinn v
[2011] HCA 49
(2011) 244 CLR 462
[2010] NSWCCA 49
(2010) 77 NSWLR 7
, [129], [141].
[2018] NSWCCA
and the cases cited there.
[2023] NSWCCA
and the cases cited there;
[2023] NSWCCA 219
Bugmy v The
(2013) 249 CLR 571 at [22], [53];
[2015] NSWCCA 8
v The Queen
[2007] NTCCA 8.
v The Queen
[2017] NTCCA 5
(2017) 267 A Crim R 494.
Queen v Nabegeyo
(2014) 34 NTLR 154.
[2024] NTCCA 14.
v The Queen
(2001) NTLR 14.
Azzopardi v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 372
(2011) 35 VR 43
Fox & Freiberg,
Sentencing: State and Federal Law in Victoria
Edition), Law Book Company, 2014, p 355. See also
R v Bloomfield
[1999] NTCCA 137
R v Goodwin
[2003] NTCCA 9
[2003] NTCCA 9
King v Benning
[2022] NTCCA 15
v The Queen
[2011] NTCCA 6
(2011) 29 NTLR 106
v The Queen
[2011] NTCCA 6
(2011) 29 NTLR 106
v The Queen
[2017] NTCCA 4
Flynn v The Queen
, [130], where it was observed that the close temporal
proximity of acts giving rise to multiple charges of sexual offending may
a substantial degree of concurrency, and that in some cases it may be
necessary to order little or no cumulation.
v Attorney General for NSW
(2015) 256 CLR 346
at [54] citing
[1994] HCA 49
(1994) 181 CLR 295
at 299–300 and
R v Hernando
Green v The Queen; Quinn v The Queen
[2011] HCA 49
(2011) 244 CLR 462
[2010] NSWCCA 49
(2010) 77 NSWLR 7
, [129], [141].
Lacey v Attorney General of
[2011] HCA 10
(2011) 242 CLR 573
Everett v The Queen
[1994] HCA 49
Dinsdale v The Queen
[2000] HCA 54
(2000) 202 CLR 321
The Queen v Kahu-Leedie
[2022] NTCCA 4
King v Hunt
[2024] NTCCA
[2006] NTCCA 10
(2002) 161 A
The King v CH
King v Hunt
[2024] NTCCA
R v O’Connor
[2014] NSWCCA 53
R v Holder and Johnston
[1983] 3 NSWLR 245
[2007] NSWCCA 216
Judicial Commission of New
South Wales,
Sentencing Bench Book,
para [70-100].
R v Hernando
R v Bugmy (No 2)
[2014] NSWCCA
[2010] NSWCCA 49
(2010) 77 NSWLR 7
CMB v Attorney General for NSW
(2015) 256 CLR 346
at [38], [64],
(1985) 2 NSWLR 194
[2004] NSWCCA
[2010] NSWCCA 244
[2010] NSWCCA 57
[2002] NSWCCA 191
R v Tortell
[2007] NSWCCA 313
R v Hernando
Green v The Queen; Quinn v The Queen
[2011] HCA 49
(2011) 244 CLR
CMB v Attorney General for
(2015) 256 CLR 346
Green v The Queen; Quinn v The Queen
[2011] HCA 49
(2011) 244 CLR 462
[2001] NSWCCA
[2002] NSWCCA 490
[2003] NSWCCA 273
Green v The Queen; Quinn v The Queen
[2011] HCA 49
244 CLR 462
[2002] NSWCCA
[2004] NSWCCA 436
Dinsdale v The Queen
[2000] HCA 54
(2000) 202 CLR 321
R v Woodland
[2007] NSWCCA 29
CMB v Attorney General for
(2015) 256 CLR 346
Green v The Queen; Quinn v The Queen
[2011] HCA 49
(2011) 244 CLR 462
CMB v Attorney General for
(2015) 256 CLR 346
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (327 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter