URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCCA/2024/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:18:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The King v Wilson [2024] NTCCA 14 (18 December 2024)
The King v Wilson
[2024] NTCCA 14
PARTIES: THE KING
WILSON, Alphonse
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: CA 4 of 2024 (22202876)
DELIVERED: 18 December 2024
HEARING DATE: 21 August 2024
JUDGMENT OF: Kelly, Huntingford and Burns JJ
CATCHWORDS:
CRIMINAL LAW – Appeal – Crown appeal against sentence –
sexual intercourse without consent – notice of contention
sentencing judge impermissibly took into account findings in relation to
uncharged acts – whether sentence
manifestly inadequate – whether
sentencing judge failed to have proper regard to the maximum sentence –
sentence so disproportionate
to objective seriousness as to shock public
conscience – error in principle – insufficient accumulation made
manifestly inadequate – appeal allowed – resentenced
Criminal Code 1983
(NT), s 414(1)(c), Schedule 1
Sentencing Act 1995
Arnott v Blitner
[2020] NTSC 63
Edmonds v The Queen
Everett v The Queen
[1994] HCA 49
181 CLR 295
Forrest v The
[2017] NTCCA 5
Gahani v The Queen
[2022] NTCCA 13
Griffiths v The Queen
[1977] HCA 44
; 137 CLR 293;
House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
JB v Northern Territory
[2019] NTCA 1
(2019) 343 FLR 41
Lawrence v The Queen
[2007] ACTCA 10
(2007) 1 ACTLR 158
McKay v The Queen
Mostert v Durban Roodepoort Deep Ltd
[2004] WASCA 309
Multicon Engineering Pty Ltd v Federal Airports Corporation
Nguyen v The Queen
[2016] HCA 17
(2016) 256 CLR 656
(1985) 121 LSJS 181
[2000] NSWCCA 60
112 A Crim R 1
(1981) 147 CLR 383
R v Huchison
[1972] 1 WLR 398
(1982) 30 SASR 212
R v Syrch & Burns
[2006] NTCCA 20
R v Teremoana
(1990) 54 SASR 30
The Queen v Kahu-Leedie
The Queen v Mossman
[2017] NTCCA 6
The Queen v Nabegeyo
[2014] NTCCA 4
34 NTLR 154
The Queen v Roe
[2017] NTCCA 7
Queen v Simpson
[2020] NTCCA 9
University of Wollongong v Metwally (No
(1985) 59 ALJR 481;
Weininger v The Queen
(2003) 212 CLR 629
Whitlock v The Queen
[2018] NTCCA 7
, referred to.
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: L Babb SC with J Moore
Respondent: A Abayasekara with D Gorry
Solicitors:
Appellant: Office of the Director of Public Prosecution
Respondent: Northern Territory Legal Aid Commission
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 34
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
The King v Wilson
[2024] NTCCA 14
No. CA 4 of 2024 (22202876)
ALPHONSE WILSON
CORAM: KELLY, HUNTINGFORD and BURNS JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 18 December 2024)
[1] This is a
Crown appeal against sentence. Mr Alphonse Wilson (“the
respondent”) was charged with five offences committed
during the period
17 to 21 January 2022. The indictable offences were sexual intercourse
without consent (counts 1 and 3), property
damage (count 2), and aggravated
assault (count 4). There was also a summary charge of breaching a domestic
violence order. The
maximum penalties for those offences were life imprisonment
(counts 1 and 3), imprisonment for 14 years (count 2), imprisonment for
years (count 4), and imprisonment for two years (breach domestic violence
[2] On 15 May
2023, the first day of the trial, the respondent pleaded guilty to counts 2 and
4, and entered pleas of not guilty to
counts 1 and 3. The trial proceeded
before a jury and on 19 May 2023, the jury returned guilty verdicts on both
counts 1 and 3.
February 2024, the trial judge sentenced the respondent to a total effective
sentence of imprisonment for nine years and
two months, with a non-parole period
of six years and five months, backdated to commence on 27 January 2022 to
account for the respondent's
time in custody. For each of counts 1 and 3, the
Court imposed sentences of imprisonment for eight years, and ordered that the
be served cumulatively to the extent of one year.
[4] By notice of
appeal filed 19 March 2024, pursuant to s 414(1)(c) of the
Criminal Code Act
(NT), Schedule 1 (“the
Criminal Code
appellant appeals against the sentence on two grounds:
(a) Ground 1: The individual sentences imposed for counts 1 and 3 are manifestly
inadequate in all the circumstances.
(b) Ground 2: The total effective sentence and non-parole period imposed are
manifestly inadequate in all the circumstances. (The
Crown does not quarrel
with the fact that the non-parole period is 70% of the sentence. The non-parole
period is said to be inadequate
only as a consequence of the inadequacy of the
total effective sentence.)
The sentencing remarks
sentencing judge set out the agreed facts and then made findings as to contested
facts that he found to have been established
beyond reasonable doubt.
[6] The facts,
as found by the sentencing judge were as follows. The respondent was the
victim’s former domestic partner.
They were in an on‑and‑off
relationship for about six years. That relationship was marred by domestic
violence, sexual
violence and coercive control. The main object of the
respondent’s violent, controlling behaviour towards the victim was his
sexual gratification.
respondent would regularly make threats to harm the victim and her family. The
victim lived in constant fear for her life
due to the ongoing threats made by
the respondent. Throughout their relationship the respondent regularly
threatened to inflict
violence on the victim, and regularly inflicted physical
violence on her. The victim was aware of a domestic violence incident involving
the respondent and his former domestic partner that occurred in 2008 and the
respondent made threats to the victim that she would
end up like that former
partner if she did not do what the respondent said. (In 2008 the respondent was
convicted of manslaughter
of his former domestic partner by beating her to death
with a digeridoo after she said she did not want to have sex with him and
sentenced to 5 years and 10 months’ imprisonment.)
21 December 2021, an interim full non‑contact domestic violence order
was granted in the Alice Springs Local Court.
It was served on the
respondent on 5 January 2022. Between 5 January 2022 and
13 January 2022, the respondent committed multiple
breaches of that
domestic violence order. Those breaches were predominantly characterised by
repeated abusive text messages and
phone calls in which the respondent regularly
called the victim a “dog”, a “fucken dog”, a
and “a cunt”. He also told her to take steps to
remove the domestic violence order and made threats to her that she
harmed if she did not do what he said.
[9] The victim
was staying at a women’s shelter in Alice Springs because she wanted
to be safe and protected from the respondent.
She was being assisted by the
Central Australian Women’s Legal Service in her capacity as a protected
person under the domestic
violence order.
[10] Late in the
evening of 15 January 2022, (two days before the respondent committed
count 1 on 17 January), the respondent was
outside the women’s
shelter. He contacted the victim on her mobile phone and told her to get into
his car and she did so out
of fear. He took the victim to a house at
Ilparpa Camp and once they arrived at that house, he told her she could not go
the house. He forced her to stay there. She spent the night at that
house against her will and, during the night, he had sexual
intercourse with the
victim without her consent. She told the respondent that she did not want to
have sex with him on that occasion,
however she felt that she had no choice but
to do so because, if she resisted, the respondent would get angry and would
start throwing
and smashing things. During this encounter, he threw a bottle of
mustard at the wall when she said she did not want to have sex
[11] The facts
on count 1, sexual intercourse without consent on 17 January 2022 were
as follows. On 17 January 2022, the victim was
staying at the women’s
shelter. She received some text messages and calls from the respondent about
reimbursing her $150 that
he had earlier withdrawn from her bank account. The
respondent told her to catch a taxi and go to a house at Ilparpa Camp, and
would repay her the $150. The victim said that she did not want to do that,
but the respondent told her she would not receive her
money unless she did.
Because she was afraid of the respondent, the victim said she would stay in the
taxi when she arrived at the
house, get the money from the respondent and then
[12] However,
when she arrived at the house, the respondent paid the driver and told the
victim to get out of the taxi. The respondent
forced the victim to follow him
into a house at Ilparpa Camp after he paid the taxi and she complied with his
demands because she
was scared of him.
[13] Once inside
the house, he produced a syringe filled with crystal methamphetamine
(“ice”). He told the victim to
take the ice, but she refused,
repeatedly saying, “No.” The respondent told the victim that the
drug would “take
the pain away”. Ignoring her protests, he forcibly
injected the drug into her arm. After that, the victim said she felt
respondent forced the victim to suck his penis and then had forcible
penile‑vaginal sexual intercourse with her. While
that was happening, the
victim repeatedly told the respondent that she did not want to have sex with
him, and she was crying.
[15] When the
victim said she did not want to have sex with the respondent, he had an angry
look on his face and he told her that
if she did not have sex with him, she
would end up like his ex‑partner.
[16] Despite her
protests, the respondent continued to have sex with the victim. When she said,
“No,” he punched her
in the head and told her to be quiet. He knew
that the victim did not consent to having sexual intercourse with him. He did
wear a condom and he ejaculated inside her vagina.
[17] The facts
on count 2, damaging the victim’s property, namely her mobile phone,
are as follows. Throughout the period between
Monday, 17 January 2022 and
Friday, 21 January 2022 the victim was at the house at Ilparpa Camp with
the respondent. During that
time she was trying to contact Detective Senior
Constable Christopher Ship by mobile phone because she was frightened.
Senior Constable Ship had played a central role in obtaining the
domestic violence order against the respondent and helping her to
women’s shelter.) The respondent kept taking the victim’s mobile
phone over this period and did not let her
make or answer calls. In one
particular instance on about 19 January 2022, the respondent saw from the
victim’s mobile phone
that Detective Senior Constable Ship was calling
her. He was angry that Detective Senior Constable Ship and the victim had
trying to get in contact with each other. He was aware of Detective Senior
Constable Ship’s role in the investigation and
the fact that he was
responsible for the imposition of the domestic violence order.
[18] Detective
Senior Constable Ship returned the victim’s calls a number of times but he
could not reach her. It was in this
context that on or about 19 January
2022 the respondent smashed the victim’s mobile phone, cracking its screen
and rendering
it unusable.
committing the offence in count 1 on 17 January 2022, the respondent left
Ilparpa Camp. He took the victim in a taxi to
a house in Erumba Street,
Braitling in Alice Springs. At that house, he went upstairs with the victim and
again had sexual intercourse
with her without her consent. Any acquiescence on
the victim’s part to that sexual intercourse was due to the ongoing
of violence and her fear of the respondent harming her if she did not
[20] Between
Monday 17 January 2022, when he committed count 1, and Friday 21 January 2022,
when he committed count 3, while staying
at another address in Madigan Street,
Braitling, the respondent again forced the victim to have sexual intercourse
with him, without
her free and voluntary consent, on a number of occasions and,
again, to the extent that there was acquiescence or compliance on her
was out of fear, stemming from the threatened and actual violence that the
respondent inflicted on her during that period.
There was an axe in the bedroom
at Madigan Street, and the victim was scared that the respondent was planning to
do something to
her with it, particularly in light of his threats that she would
end up like the respondent’s ex-partner. Between 15 and 21
January 2022
the respondent was having sexual intercourse with the victim without her
consent, in her words, “all the time”.
On each occasion the
respondent had actual knowledge of lack of consent because the victim told him
that she did not want to have
sex with him.
count 3, sexual intercourse without consent on 21 January 2022, the
facts were as follows. On 21 January 2022, the respondent
and the victim
were in a house in Alice Springs. At about 6 am on that day, the
respondent woke the victim in order to have sexual
intercourse with her. She
did not want to do that and told the respondent that she was too tired.
respondent then took off his clothes and told the victim to take off her
panties. He threatened to rip them if she did not
comply. He also threatened
to hit her with a steel fan and to hurt her if she did not acquiesce; and he
threatened to kill her.
She said, “Please don’t,” and the
respondent became angry. She was scared and took off her clothes. The
forced his penis into her mouth, and then had penile‑vaginal
sexual intercourse with her without her consent. He knew that
she did not
consent; he did not wear a condom and he ejaculated inside her vagina.
[23] Later on
the same day of the incident the subject of count 3, on 21 January 2022 the
respondent again had sexual intercourse
with the victim without her
count 4, aggravated assault on 21 January 2022, the facts are as
follows. During the afternoon of 21 January 2022, the respondent
victim were in the back bedroom of the house in Alice Springs. The respondent
forced the victim to smoke some marijuana
that he had with him and, while she
did not want to, she complied out of fear because the respondent was angry.
respondent tried to hit the victim. In an attempt to escape, she ran out of the
bedroom into the lounge room and the respondent
threw a lighter and a pair of
scissors at her. The lighter hit her, causing her bruising to her back. The
respondent then chased
her into the lounge room. The respondent had a bottle of
Jim Beam which he put to the victim’s mouth and forced her to drink
and then deliberately poured some alcohol from the bottle of Jim Beam over
her. He then wrestled the victim to the ground and started
stomping on her.
The victim rolled around on the floor trying to defend herself, and she grabbed
the respondent’s testicles.
In response, the respondent held her ankles
and forcibly slammed them into the ground a number of times with so much force
she felt he was trying to break her legs and arms.
[26] Following
the offending, someone who was present at the house during the aggravated
assault ran across the road to a neighbour’s
and they called the police.
When the respondent was told that the police had been called, he left the house
and went to another
house. The victim followed him because she believed that he
had her mobile phone and SIM card.
[27] When police
arrived at the second house, the victim was hysterical. She made an immediate
complaint about the respondent, and
she was taken to the Alice Springs
Police Station to participate in a recorded interview. In the meantime, the
respondent had left
the second house and police could not find him.
23 January 2022 the respondent went to the women’s shelter with
another woman. He coerced the other woman into entering
the shelter and
persuading the victim to come outside. When she did, the respondent told her to
get into the car and she complied
with his demands out of fear. The respondent
then drove to Ilparpa Camp. However, when the respondent arrived at Ilparpa
saw a number of police officers and vehicles, so he drove away.
27 January 2022, the respondent presented himself to the Alice Springs
Police Station front counter and was placed under arrest.
He declined to
participate in a recorded interview.
sentencing the respondent, the sentencing judge said:
I will not be
punishing you for acts for which you have not been found guilty by the jury or
to which you have not pleaded guilty.
That includes acts such as forcing [the
victim] to suck your penis prior to committing the offences in counts 1 and
3 and your various
acts of sexual intercourse with [the victim] without her
consent between 15 January and 21 January 2022.
Instead, I will have regard to those facts that I have found to be
established beyond reasonable doubt for these limited purposes.
First, for the limited purpose of placing your offending in context to rebut
any suggestion that it was out of character or involved
an isolated act or acts.
This includes the acts I have just mentioned insofar as the offences described
in counts 1 and 3 are concerned.
With respect to the offences described in counts 2 and 4, it also
variously includes the constant threats of violence you directed
victim], the actual physical and sexual violence you inflicted on her and your
controlling, coercive behaviour with respect
Secondly, I will have regard to those facts for the limited purpose of
assessing the gravity of your offending and your moral culpability
for it. This
includes your sexually and physically violent and controlling relationship with
[the victim] and your resultant knowledge
that her consent to sexual relations
with you was coerced.
[31] His Honour
re-iterated twice during the sentencing remarks the limited purpose for which he
was taking the uncharged acts into
sentencing judge referred to the victim impact statement made by the victim
quoting her as saying, among other things:
I still feel very sad
every day because of what Alphonse did to me. I feel emptiness. I feel like I
cannot trust anyone because
of Alphonse. I cannot even trust my female friends
or other male friends that are trying [sic] help me. I sometimes feel
because of what Alphonse did to me. Sometimes I cry myself to
sleep, and that helps a little bit. I try and block everyone out
when they are
trying to help me, because it feels like Alphonse is haunting me.
I am worried that when Alphonse gets out of gaol, he might do what he did
to me to other women, because other women may not know what
he did to me.
I don’t want him to hurt anyone else and I don’t want any other
women to feel like this because of what
Alphonse has done. I don’t want
Alphonse around me ever again. I want Alphonse to stay in gaol for a long time
what he did to
[33] His Honour
It is worth adding that the mental or psychological effects
of your reign of terror on [the victim] that she describes in this statement
entirely consistent with the extreme state of hysteria that she displayed in
Senior Constable Ship’s body‑worn camera
taken immediately
after the 21 January 2022 incident that was played during your
sentencing judge went on to assess the objective seriousness of the offending on
counts 1 and 3 in the following terms.
On these two counts, the
prosecutor pointed to several factors to contend that your offending fell into
the high range of seriousness
for offences of this kind. They were as
First, that they occurred in a relationship of longstanding domestic
violence, which created a significant power disparity between
you and [the
victim]. In addition, they were both occasioned by actual and threatened
violence, which placed [the victim] in a heightened
state of fear and
compliance. Consequently, the control you had over [the victim] created a
situation where you were able to pursue
your sexual offending without fear of
detection by the authorities.
As well, your moral culpability for these offences was high, because you were
well‑aware from the circumstances that [the victim]
did not consent to
having sexual intercourse with you on either occasion.
Further, both offending events were relatively prolonged and, as I have
already mentioned, occurred in the context of your serious
threats of violence,
for example, threatening to kill her like you had your former partner, and by
actual acts of violence, for example,
forcing her to suck your penis and
punching her.
Further still, prior to the offence you committed on 17 January 2022,
you used the $150 that you owed her as a pretext to lure her
to the Ilparpa
Camp, and you administered a drug to [the victim] to facilitate that offending.
And prior to the offence you committed
on 21 January, you forced [the
victim] to stay overnight with you in that Ilparpa Camp.
Finally, on both occasions, you did not wear a condom and you ejaculated
inside [the victim], thus exposing her to the risks of disease
On the other hand, while your lawyer conceded the threats and the violence
involved and also that you had administered a drug to [the
victim] on the first
occasion, she contended that your offending was not the most serious example of
this type of offending. I do
In my view, the facts of this offending, that I reviewed earlier, and the
factors to which the prosecutor adverted, firmly place your
offending on both of
these offences in the higher range for offences of this kind. In reaching this
conclusion, I have had particular
regard to the longstanding violent domestic
context in which both offences took place, to your heightened moral culpability
and to the significant psychological injuries that [the victim]
suffered and is likely to continue suffering as a consequence, as
demonstrated
by the content of her victim impact statement that I read
sentencing judge noted that the respondent had an extensive criminal history in
both Western Australia and the Northern Territory
dating back approximately 38
years having committed more than 90 offences in Western Australia and
approximately 80 in the Northern
Territory. The offending in Western Australia
ranged from traffic offences and other summary offences to several quite serious
including seven convictions for crimes of violence: assaulting a
police officer in January 1997 and again in August 2002, common
assault in June
2007, common assault and also threatening to injure, endanger or harm a person
in January 2008, and manslaughter
of his then domestic partner in December 2008
which resulted in his being imprisoned for 5 years and 10 months. He also had
convictions for damaging property, and two convictions for breaching a
domestic violence order, one in July 2008 and the second in
December 2009.
[36] In the
Northern Territory also, the respondent had convictions for driving and various
summary offences as well as for more serious
offences including stealing,
escaping custody and property damage. Notably, he also had several convictions
for crimes of violence:
assaulting a female in February 1989; two aggravated
assaults with a weapon in November 1995; assaulting a police officer in January
1996; two aggravated assaults on a female with a weapon in June 2002; and
assaulting a police officer in August 2015.
sentencing judge outlined the respondent’s subjective circumstances in the
following terms.
You were born in April 1975, so you were
47 years of age at the time of your offending, and you are presently
48 years of age. You
are a Miriwoong/Pitjantjatjara man. You grew up in
Kununurra in Western Australia, where you were primarily raised by your
grandmother.
While you knew your parents, they did not have any meaningful involvement in
your life; both of them were drinkers, and when you did
see them, you often
witnessed your father assaulting your mother. As a result, you did not have any
adult male role models as a
child, and your grandmother was unable to control
You had two brothers and three sisters, one of whom died from suicide at a
young age. You attended school until year 4 or 5. You
did not embark on
any high school education. You spent the majority of your childhood in the
juvenile justice system. As I have
already mentioned, your first court
appearance occurred when you were 9 years of age.
You learnt to read and write when you were detained at the Riverbank
Detention Centre in Western Australia. You commenced drinking
alcohol and
smoking cannabis at the age of 11 years. You moved to Darwin in 1988 and
continued your juvenile criminal activities.
That resulted in you being placed
in custody at the Don Dale Detention Centre.
You have seven children, all of whom are now adults. You also have seven
grandchildren.
You have held two significant jobs in your lifetime, one as a house parent at
the Nyangatjatjara College at Yulara and one in the
construction industry,
working for the Tangentyere Council, painting houses. Both of those in
Alice Springs.
At the age of 40, after you commenced your relationship with [the victim],
you began recreational use of the drug ice. You are keen
to return to your
country upon your release from
sentencing judge assessed the respondent’s prospects of rehabilitation as
very poor and found that he was likely to
reoffend. His Honour noted that, at
48 years of age, the respondent was a mature adult and not entitled to any
leniency on the grounds
of youth; that he had previously been convicted of
offences that were the same or similar to the instant offences indicating that
he had not learnt from the punishments that had been imposed on him in the past;
and that he had previously breached suspended sentences,
court bonds and bail,
and breached the terms of a domestic violence order.
[39] His Honour
found that the respondent showed no remorse and had no insight into his
offending. He did not allow any discount
for the pleas of guilty on counts 2
and 4 because those pleas of guilty held “negligible” utilitarian
value: they were
entered on the first day of the trial and the victim was
subjected to the stress of giving evidence at the trial concerning the events
January 2022, to which all of the counts in the indictment related, in the
course of the trial on counts 1 and 3.
[40] His Honour
then convicted the respondent and imposed the following sentences:
Count 1 (sexual
intercourse without consent on 17 January) – imprisonment for 8
(property damage to mobile phone) – imprisonment for 3 months, to be
served be served concurrently with the sentence
for count 1.
Count 3 (sexual
intercourse without consent on 21 January) – imprisonment for 8 years, to
be served concurrently with the sentence
for count 1 as to 7 years;
(aggravated assault) – imprisonment for 9 months to be served concurrently
with the sentence for count 1; and
Breaching the
DVO – imprisonment for 2 months to be served cumulatively on the other
[41] His Honour
stated that having regard to the principle of totality and concurrency, he
considered the just and appropriate sentence
for the respondent’s
offending would be 9 years and 2 months’ imprisonment, backdated
to 27 January 2022, and fixed a
non‑parole period of 6 years which
was 70 percent of the head
[42] The Crown
has appealed against this sentence contending that the sentences imposed for
each of counts 1 and 3 were manifestly
inadequate and that there was
insufficient accumulation of the sentences for those two counts resulting in a
total effective sentence
that was manifestly inadequate. No complaint is made
respondent has filed a notice of contention in which he claims that the
sentencing judge impermissibly made factual findings
in relation to uncharged
acts and impermissibly took those findings into account in assessing the
objective seriousness of the offending.
Defence counsel fairly and properly
conceded that if this contention succeeded, but the Court nevertheless concluded
that even without
taking those matters into account the sentence was manifestly
inadequate, the appeal must be allowed.
The notice of
appropriate to deal first with the issues raised in the notice of contention.
The respondent contends that the trial judge
should not have made factual
findings in relation to and taken into account on sentencing:
(a) the alleged administration of methamphetamine without the victim’s
consent before the conduct the subject of count 1; and
(b) each of the three alleged acts of sexual intercourse without consent on
15 January, 17 January and 21 January 2022 that were
not the subject of any
Relevant principles
respondent relies on the following principles.
respondent acknowledges the principle that a sentence imposed on an offender
should take into account all of the circumstances
of the offence and that in the
Northern Territory a sentencing court is required by statute to consider a
number of matters including
the nature and seriousness of the
the moral culpability of
the offender
and any aggravating or
mitigating factor of an offender
and in order to impose a sentence may receive such information as it sees
The latter provision
indicates that there is a wide discretion to consider relevant matters but one
that, nevertheless, must be
exercised judicially and is subject to legal
[47] There are
restrictions on the use of available factual circumstances when
sentencing.
, a majority of the High Court held that the Court of Criminal Appeal
of Western Australia was right to conclude that a judge, when
sentencing an
offender, could not have regard to a circumstance of aggravation that could have
been but had not been charged on the
indictment and by reason of it inflict a
penalty more severe than he otherwise would have imposed. The respondent
contends that
this principle applies notwithstanding that it may be found by a
judge that such a circumstance did exist and even when such a finding
upon an unchallenged statement of facts made by the prosecutor after an offender
has pleaded guilty.
respondent contends further that what has come to be described as the
principle is simply one aspect of the fundamental principle that no
one should be punished for an offence of which the person has
Gibbs CJ (with whom Mason and Murphy J agreed) expressed the resolution
of competing principles in sentencing in the following
However, the
general principle that the sentence imposed on an offender should take account
all of the circumstances of the offence
is subject to a more fundamental and
important principle, that no one should be punished for an offence of which he
has not been
[49] In his
judgment in
in which the
Court of Criminal Appeal of England and Wales held that it was not right for the
judge, in imposing sentence on a charge
of incest, to take into account other
related acts of incest with which the defendant had not been charged, since to
do so would
in effect, deprive the defendant of his right to trial by jury in
respect of those alleged offences. The respondent contends that
that principle
applies in the Northern Territory, where an accused person faced with a charge
on indictment has a right to be tried
[50] Brennan J,
took a narrower view than the majority in
, drawing a
distinction between the approach in cases in which the uncharged acts were
admitted on a plea of guilty (as was the case
) and where
they were contested, but affirmed the principle in
is a rule of sentencing practice that an allegation made but not admitted or
otherwise proved against an offender cannot be taken
into account in passing
sentence upon him. Ordinarily, a contest upon an issue of fact is resolved by
the sentencing judge after
hearing evidence relating to that fact if the fact
has not been determined by a jury verdict and if the fact is of sufficient
to justify a hearing. But where statute provides that a particular
issue is susceptible of resolution by the verdict of a jury, a
sentencing judge
cannot deny an offender his right to a jury trial of that issue, and himself
assume the function of finding the facts.
Where there is a contest as to a
circumstance of aggravation which might have been alleged in an indictment and
submitted to a jury’s
determination, but which was not so determined, the
judge cannot impose sentence on the footing that the circumstance of aggravation
has been established. The Court of Criminal Appeal so held when it reduced the
sentence in
R. v. Bright
. Darling J., delivering the Court’s
judgment, said that a judge “must not attribute to the prisoner that he is
of an offence with which he has not been charged—nor must he assume
that the prisoner is guilty of some statutory aggravation
of the offence which
might, and should, have been charged in the indictment if it had been intended
that the prisoner was to be dealt
with on the footing that he had been guilty of
that statutory aggravation”.
Where there is a contested issue of fact
affecting the sentence which ought to be imposed it would be wrong to deny an
offender the
right to have a jury’s verdict upon the contested issue, and
to sentence him as though the issue had been resolved adversely
to him. But
where adverse facts are admitted and no resolution of a contested issue is
required the offender is denied no right and
loses no safeguard if the agreed
facts are taken into account in passing sentence upon him.
respondent concedes that, in certain circumstances a sentencing judge may draw
inferences from the admission of uncharged
acts to show that the subject charges
were not isolated instances, to place the offending in its proper context and as
matters going
to character,
submits that that does not endorse the use of criminal acts that have not been
admitted and could have been the subject of charges
but were not left to the
jury to determine.
respondent also concedes that similar considerations apply when an offender is
sentenced on representative counts, but this
can only occur with the consent of
the accused. This is not such a case.
principle does not always dictate that conduct of an accused which
could have been the subject of a separate charge may not be taken
into account
for any purpose on sentencing; it is a question of fairness and a matter of
R v Syrch &
considered the
principle in the context of post-offending
conduct on admitted facts on a plea of guilty to manslaughter. At first
instance, the
sentencing judge had declined to consider the post-offending
conduct of Burns in dismembering and disposing of the deceased’s
— which could have amounted to a charge of misconduct with regard to a
corpse carrying 2 years’ imprisonment —
and the post-offending
conduct of Syrch in making false statements about the deceased — which
could have amounted to a charge
of accessory after the fact to murder carrying
14 years’ imprisonment. This Court determined that fairness and the
administration of justice dictated that both sets of conduct should
not be separately charged but should be taken into account as
part of the
surrounding circumstances for sentencing
, Martin (BR) CJ (Southwood J and Martin AJ agreeing) referred to
the ratio on
In the matter under
consideration, there is no question of taking into account aggravating
circumstances which would have warranted
a conviction for a more serious offence
or an offence carrying a greater maximum penalty. The
Criminal Code
not specify any circumstances which are capable of aggravating the offence of
manslaughter. There is a single maximum penalty
of life imprisonment.
appellant contends that similar considerations apply in the present case. There
are no specified aggravating circumstances
for an offence against s 192(3)
which attract a greater maximum penalty; there is a single maximum penalty of
life imprisonment.
[56] Similarly,
R v Teremoana
However, it is certainly not a universal rule that the judge,
when sentencing for the offence specifically charged in the information,
never have regard to relevant actions of the defendant that, strictly speaking,
constituted separate offences. If they were offences
of lesser gravity than the
offence of which the defendant has been convicted, then it will be a matter of
degree and fairness whether
they may properly be taken into account as a part of
the circumstances surrounding the offence charged. If a burglar is disturbed
the course of ransacking a house, and seriously assaults the victim, the assault
should be separately charged and not regarded
as a mere matter of aggravation of
the burglary.
R v Parse/I
(1980) 28 SASR 369.
On the other hand,
relatively minor indecencies that are directly associated with an act of rape,
though serious enough in themselves,
are often not separately charged but are
nevertheless taken into account by the sentencing judge as circumstances of
aggravation.
In R v Sharp
[1983] 36 SASR 215
the defendant was convicted
of misprision of felony. He helped to remove the body of a murder victim from
the house where the murder
had been committed and to bury it in a lonely spot
many kilometres away. It was held that the defendant could not be sentenced on
the footing that he was an accessory after the fact to murder — a more
serious offence than the passive crime of misprision
— but it was not
suggested that his participation in the removal and burial was not a relevant
circumstance of aggravation,
and I do not think that the position would have
been any different had it transpired, say, that burying a person on a roadside
contrary to some health regulation.
As the Chief Justice said in
it is a matter of degree.
[57] The Court
found it necessary to identify the principle applicable to the
sentencing exercise when the primary offence is accompanied by a circumstance
aggravation that could have been charged as a separate offence and agreed with
the following observations of King CJ (with whom
Zelling and Bollen JJ agreed)
true that in imposing sentence for a crime, a judge should take into account not
only the conduct which actually constitutes
the crime, but also such of the
surrounding circumstances as are directly related to that crime and are properly
to be regarded as
circumstances of aggravation or circumstances of mitigation.
Just what surrounding circumstances are properly to be taken into account in
a particular case is a matter of degree
. The courts have to be particularly
cautious when the circumstances relied upon themselves may constitute crimes.
Often the circumstances
amount to crimes of a similar character to that charged
and can more readily be taken into account as circumstances of aggravation.
Likewise where the criminality of the aggravating circumstances is clearly
subsidiary to as well as related to the criminality involved
in the conduct
constituting the crime charged. Special care, however, is required when the
circumstances relied upon as circumstances
of aggravation themselves constitute
crimes or may constitute crimes of a different character or crimes against
different victims.
If a person is to be punished for conduct which is said to be criminal,
generally speaking justice requires that he be charged with
it and have the
opportunity of defending himself. If he is not charged with it, generally
speaking it should not be relied upon as
a circumstance of aggravation of some
other crime.
This, of course, is not a hard and fast rule; everything must
depend upon the particular circumstances and, as I have said, it is
very much a
matter of degree
[58] Applying
these principles in
Martin (BR) CJ determined that the conduct of
the offenders in disposing of and cleaning up the body was sufficiently linked
murder that it formed part of the surrounding circumstances bearing on
its objective seriousness. In so finding, his Honour said:
the duty of the sentencing judge to take into account all relevant circumstances
surrounding the commission of the crimes.
This duty applies to circumstances
that both aggravate and mitigate the seriousness of the offending. It follows
from these reasons
that, in my opinion, the sentencing process was attended by
error. His Honour erred in approaching sentence on the basis that the
disposal of the body was “not directly relevant to the offending”
and that the respondents were “not
to be punished” for their conduct
after the commission of the crime because that conduct “would constitute a
and serious crime” with which the respondents had not been
charged. His Honour erred in restricting the use of the conduct
assessment of remorse and prospects of rehabilitation.
The conduct should
have been taken into account as part of the surrounding circumstances of each
crime bearing upon the objective
seriousness of the crimes committed by the
respondents and upon their moral culpability.
[59] In my view,
there was no error in the sentencing judge’s approach. The sentencing
judge did not impermissibly take into
account conduct that amounted to a
separate offence which would have carried a higher maximum penalty. The maximum
penalty for each
of counts 1 and 3 was imprisonment for life. Nor can it be
inferred that the sentencing judge took the uncharged acts into account
a way as to punish the respondent for those uncharged acts. His Honour
specifically said, several times that he was not
punishing the respondent for
those matters but was taking them into account for specific, very limited
purposes, as explained at
[30] and [31] above. Essentially, the sentencing
judge took those uncharged acts into account as part of the evidence
establishing
the nature of the physically and sexually violent and controlling
relationship.
[60] It should
be noted that counsel for the respondent conceded that there was evidence on
which the sentencing judge could have
found that the relationship had been
sexually and physically violent and controlling without taking into account the
three acts of
sexual intercourse without consent which the respondent says
should have been separately charged or left out of account.
[61] It is also
noteworthy that the forcible injection of the victim with methamphetamine for
the purpose of facilitating the commission
of count 1, which the respondent
contends could have been the subject of a separate charge under s 176 of
Criminal Code
, was conceded by the respondent in written submissions
on sentencing to be an aggravating
Paragraph 23 of the
respondent’s written submissions on sentence, appearing under the heading
“Objective Seriousness”
It is conceded that the
threats, hit to the head and administering of the drug are aggravating features
of this count
[ie count 1]
[62] There was
some confusion as to whether this amounted to an admission that the respondent
had in fact forcibly injected the victim
with methamphetamine, or simply a
concession that, if the sentencing judge found that he had done so, that would
be an aggravating
factor. For present purposes, it doesn’t matter. The
sentencing judge did find beyond reasonable doubt that the conduct had
and there was a concession that that was an aggravating factor. No
submissions were made at the sentencing hearing. A party is
generally bound by the conduct of the case in the court below. Only
exceptional circumstances will a party be permitted to raise a new argument on
appeal which could have been run in the court
JB v Northern
Southwood J and
Graham AJ (with whom Riley AJ agreed) said:
appellant’s submission should also be rejected on the basis that it is
elementary that a party is bound by the conduct
of his or her case. Except in
the most exceptional circumstances, it would be contrary to all principle to
allow a party, after a
case has been decided against him or her, to raise a new
argument which, whether deliberately or by inadvertence, he or she failed
during the hearing when there was an opportunity to do so.
principle also applies in criminal cases. A court of criminal appeal will
intervene if it is shown that there has been
a miscarriage of
but a miscarriage of
justice has not here been demonstrated.
[64] In any
event, we consider that forcibly injecting the victim with ice was so directly
related to that crime, occurring immediately
beforehand, as to form part of the
surrounding circumstances and was properly taken into account as such.
Crown appeal – relevant principles
principles governing Crown appeals against sentence are not in
(a) Crown appeals against sentence should be a rarity brought only to establish
some matter of principle.
(b) Manifest inadequacy in a sentence amounts to such an error of principle
which the Crown is entitled to have the appeal court
(c) The presumption is that there is no error. It is incumbent upon the
appellant to show that the sentence was clearly and obviously,
and not just
arguably, inadequate; that is to say it must be shown that the sentence is so
disproportionate to the seriousness of
the offending as to shock the public
conscience and demonstrate error in
(d) The principles in
House v The
remain applicable to
the determination of manifest inadequacy:
It is not enough that the judges composing the appellate court consider that,
if they had been in the position of the primary judge,
they would have taken a
different course. It must appear that some error has been made in exercising
the discretion. If the judge
acts upon a wrong principle, if he allows
extraneous or irrelevant matters to guide or affect him, if he mistakes the
facts, if he
does not take into account some material consideration, then his
determination should be reviewed and the appellate court may exercise
discretion in substitution for his, if it has the materials for doing so.
may not appear how the primary judge has reached the result embodied in his
order, but, if upon the facts it is unreasonable or
plainly unjust, the
appellate court may infer that in some way there has been a failure properly to
exercise the discretion which
the law reposes in the court of first instance.
In such a case, although the nature of the error may not be discoverable, the
of the discretion is reviewed on the ground that a substantial wrong
has in fact occurred.
(e) The principle expressed by King CJ in
R v Osenkowski
remains applicable:
It is important that prosecution appeals should not be allowed to
circumscribe unduly the sentencing discretion of judges. There
must always be a
place for the exercise of mercy where the judge’s sympathies are
reasonably excited by the circumstances of
the case. There must always be a
place for leniency which has been traditionally extended even to offenders with
bad records when
the judge forms the view, almost intuitively in the case of
experienced judges, that leniency at that particular stage of an
life might lead to reform. The proper role for prosecution
appeals, in my view, is to enable the courts to establish and maintain
standards of punishment for crime, to enable idiosyncratic views of individual
judges as to particular crimes or types of
crime to be corrected, and
occasionally to correct a sentence which is so disproportionate to the
seriousness of the crime as to
shock the public conscience.
(f) Even where manifest inadequacy is found, this Court retains a residual
discretion as to whether the respondent should be
re-sentenced.
(g) However, in exercising its discretion on an appeal against sentence with
respect to an indictable offence, the Court must not
take into account any
element of double jeopardy when deciding whether to allow the appeal or impose
another sentence.
Individual sentences for counts 1 and 3 manifestly inadequate
[66] The Crown
referred to
Forrest v The
and the other
serious cases of sexual intercourse without consent reviewed by the Court of
Criminal Appeal in
the starting points, before
any reduction for guilty pleas or remorse were 11 ½ years
Massilas Ganambarr aka Rogers),
(Lloyd Ashley),
(ZP, Jonex Finlay & Hyuntae
8 years and 9 months
(Clancy Ryan),
and 10 years
[67] Counsel for
the respondent pointed out that the cases referred to in
a different kind to the present case. They mostly involved strangers and the
objective seriousness consisted of the infliction
of additional violence and
significant injury.
appellant acknowledged that the cases referred to in
different from the present case, but contended that they nevertheless were
examples of objectively serious offences of sexual
intercourse without consent.
The Court in
observed, citing
The Queen v
that, although
there is no tariff for crimes of sexual assault given the wide range of
circumstances and offenders, sentencing standards
or practices for this type of
offence might still be
appellant contended that the sentencing judge had correctly held that this was
an example of the
serious type of offence. The respondent
characterised the sentencing judge’s assessment of the objective
seriousness of the
offending as in the
range. In assessing the objective seriousness of the two offences of sexual
intercourse without consent, the sentencing judge made
the following comments
(set out in full at [34] above):
.... while your lawyer conceded the
threats and the violence involved and also that you had administered a drug to
[the victim] on
the first occasion, she contended that your offending was not
the most serious example of this type of offending. I do not agree.
In my view, the facts of this offending, that I reviewed earlier, and the
factors to which the prosecutor adverted, firmly place your
offending on both of
these offences in the higher range for offences of this kind.
appellant relies on the fact that the sentencing judge said he did not agree
with Defence counsel’s contention that
the offending “was not
most serious example
of this type of offending”. The respondent
relies on his Honour’s statement in the following
In my view, the facts of this offending, that I reviewed
earlier, and the factors to which the prosecutor adverted, firmly place your
offending on both of these offences in
the higher range
for offences of
[71] We do not
think it matters whether the sentencing judge assessed the offending as an
the most serious
higher range
. It was, in our view, clearly very serious offending and the
sentencing judge rightly characterised it as such for the reasons outlined
the sentencing remarks. We would place the offending as in the higher range
– towards the most serious.
appellant contends that the first error made by the sentencing judge was not to
have proper regard to the maximum sentence
of life imprisonment when determining
the individual sentences. We agree. Given the objective seriousness of the
offences at the
higher end of the range, the maximum penalty of life
imprisonment, the lack of any mitigating circumstances, and the
respondent’s
age and prior criminal history, a sentence of 8 years each
for counts 1 and 3 is so disproportionate to the seriousness of the offending
to shock the public conscience and demonstrate error in
Inadequate accumulation of sentences for counts 1 and
appellant contends that an accumulation of only one year of the sentences for
counts 1 and 3 fails to reflect the separate
criminality involved in the two
offences which occurred four days apart at different places and in different
circumstances. The
appellant referred to the judgment of the Court of Criminal
McKay v The
In that case
the appellant was sentenced to an aggregate sentence of 14 years with a
non-parole period of 10 years for two offences
of sexual intercourse without
consent, having been found guilty following a trial by jury. The appellant
contended, inter alia,
that the sentence was manifestly excessive and that the
sentencing judge erred in imposing an aggregate sentence, which was not
Sentencing Act
offending consisted of one act of vaginal intercourse without consent and one
act of anal intercourse without consent committed
after the applicant had locked
the victim in a bedroom and continued despite her screaming and physical
resistance. The offender
knocked the victim unconscious before the second
offence and when she screamed, placed a pillow over her head to prevent her
so. The victim suffered severe pain and devastating long term
consequences. The Court described the two offences as “very
offences, albeit not at the top of the range”.
[75] The Court
of Criminal Appeal held that the sentence of 14 years with a non-parole period
of 10 years was not manifestly excessive
but allowed the appeal in part on the
ground that the sentencing judge had erred in imposing an aggregate sentence.
The appellant
was re-sentenced to imprisonment for 8 years on the first
count and 10 years on the second count and the court ordered that 6 years
sentence on the second count be served cumulatively with the sentence on the
first count bringing the total effective sentence
to the same as that ordered by
the sentencing judge, imprisonment for 14 years with a non-parole period of 10
appellant pointed out that the two offences in
were much more
closely interconnected than the offences in the present case and could more
appropriately be characterised as a continuing
course of conduct, yet the Court
of Criminal Appeal considered an accumulation of 6 years to be appropriate.
[77] We agree
that in the circumstances of the present case, where there were two separate
decisions to engage in criminal conduct
on two separate days, at different
locations, albeit that there had been acts of physical and sexual violence and
threats of violence
in between, an accumulation of only one year between the two
sentences failed to reflect the total criminality of the respondent’s
conduct and resulted in a total effective sentence that was manifestly
inadequate.
re-sentence the respondent to a term of imprisonment for 12 years on count 1 and
imprisonment for 12 years on count 3 and
direct that 4 years of the sentence for
count 3 be served cumulatively with the sentence for count 1, bringing the total
sentence to imprisonment for 16 years. We fix a non-parole period of
11 years and 3 months. The sentences for counts 2 and 4 were
not appealed; nor
was the sentence of two months’ imprisonment for breach of the DVO. We
confirm the sentences of imprisonment
for 3 months on Count 2 (property damage
to mobile phone) and imprisonment for 9 months on count 4 (aggravated assault),
be served concurrently with the sentence for count 1. We confirm
the sentence of 2 months imprisonment for the breach of the DVO
and direct that
it be served concurrently with the sentence for counts 1 and
Sentencing Remarks Reeves J, 20
February 2024, pages 12 and 13
Sentencing Remarks Reeves J, 20
February 2024, page 13
Sentencing Remarks Reeves J, 20
February 2024, page 13
Sentencing Remarks Reeves J, 20
February 2024, page 14
Sentencing Remarks Reeves J, 20
February 2024, pages 17 and 18
At the time of imposition of the
sentence the minimum non-parole period was 70% of the sentences for offences
against s 192 (Counts
) and not less than 50% of the total sentence.
That would have been 6 years and 3.6 months (6 years 4 months to the nearest
Sentencing Act 1995
Sentencing Act
R v De Simoni
(“De Simoni”)
Nguyen v The Queen
[2016] HCA 17
(2016) 256 CLR 656
per Bell and Keane JJ
Supra at 390
[1972] 1 WLR 398
(“Huchison”)
Criminal Code
at 406-407 per
Weininger v The Queen
(2003) 212 CLR 629
at 640 [32];
Lawrence v The Queen
[2007] ACTCA 10
(2007) 1 ACTLR
Edmonds v The Queen
(2019) NTCCA 1
[2006] NTCCA 20
Ibid, p 144-145 at
(1990) 54 SASR 30
(1985) 121 LSJS 181
Gahani v The Queen
[2022] NTCCA 13
[2019] NTCA 1
(2019) 343 FLR 41
of Wollongong v Metwally (No 2) (1985) 59 ALJR 481 at 483
v Durban Roodepoort Deep Ltd
[2004] WASCA 309
Engineering Pty Ltd v Federal Airports Corporation (1997) 47 NSWLR 631 at
Gahani v The Queen
[2022] NTCCA 13
The Queen v Kahu-Leedie
[2022] NTCCA 4
The Queen v Mossman
[2017] NTCCA 6
. The following summary is taken verbatim from
Arnott v Blitner
[2020] NTSC 63
The Queen v Roe
Griffiths v The Queen
[1977] HCA 44
Everett v The
[1994] HCA 49
181 CLR 295
Whitlock v The Queen
[2018] NTCCA 7
The Queen v Simpson
[2020] NTCCA 9
[1936] HCA 40
(1982) 30 SASR 212
112 A Crim R 1
Criminal Code
[2017] NTCCA 5
[2014] NTCCA 4
34 NTLR 154
(2001) NTLR 14
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (341 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter