URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTRTCmr/2015/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:21:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Wilson & Hooper -v- McInnes [2015] NTRTCmr 12 (6 May 2015)
REASONS FOR THE ORDER OF THE COMMISSIONER OF TENANCIES
INQUIRY - Wednesday, 18 March 2015
NATHAN WILSON, MAREE WILSON AND ALLISON HOOPER
KIRSTY MCINNES (‘Landlord)
RT1415-0400
is a determination of:
i. an application by the Tenants dated 6
January 2015 in respect of premises being 4/38 Philip Street, Fannie Bay in the
Territory of Australia (‘the premises’), seeking the
determination of a security deposit dispute; and
ii. a cross application by the Landlord dated 28 March 2015 seeking
compensation orders under s.122 for compensation for unpaid
rent and damages to
the premises.
Notice of Inquiry dated 19 February 2015 was posted to the parties. The Inquiry
was conducted on Wednesday, 18 March 2015. The
following appeared at the
Inquiry and made submissions:
(a) Ms Kirsty Mcinnes the Landlord.
She was assisted by her partner Mr Ewan Hall.
(b) Ms Alison Hooper, one of the Tenants.
Nathan Wilson and Mrs Marie Wilson, the other Tenants appeared by
the Inquiry it was apparent that the Landlord would be seeking to lodge a
compensation application under section122 of the
Residential Tenancies
Act (‘the Act’). The parties agreed that it would be desirable for
all matters associated with the tenancy dispute to
be resolved in one
proceeding. Accordingly it was agreed that the Inquiry would be adjourned to
provide the Landlord with an opportunity
to lodge her compensation application
and for the Tenants to be given an opportunity to respond.
adjourning the Inquiry I noted that the materials submitted by the parties were
clear and well organised. I queried the parties
as to whether they would like to
re-appear or whether I should proceed with determining the applications based on
the written submissions
and supporting evidence supplied by the parties. The
parties agreed that I should proceed in that way.
note that section 124 of the Act provides that the Commissioner of Tenancies is
not to hear and determine an application for a monetary
claim if the amount
claimed exceeds $10,000, unless the parties to the proceedings consent to the
application being heard by the
Commissioner. I note that the Tenants provided
written consent on 13 April 2015 for the Commissioner of Tenancies to determine
section 122 compensation application made by the Landlord which was over the
$10,000 statutory ceiling.
evidence before the Inquiry consisted of the following materials:
documents submitted by the tenants in support of their application and also in
response to the landlords application. These
documents are kept under a tab
called ‘Tenants Materials’ on the Commissioner of Tenancies file
numbered RT1415-0400
(‘the file’);
documents submitted by the landlord in support of her application and in
response to the tenants application. These documents
are kept in the
‘Landlord’s Materials’ tab on the file.
(c) the oral
evidence of the landlord and the tenants.
the basis of the above evidence I find there is a tenancy agreement between the
landlord and the tenant in respect of the premises
within the meaning of and
subject to the provisions of the Act. The key details of the tenancy agreement
are as follows:
(a) Duration:
Fixed term from 27 February 2013 to 28 February 2014. The issue as to whether
there was a fixed term tenancy or periodic
tenancy in effect from 1 March 2014
is considered in these reasons;
(b) Rent: $680
per week payable fortnightly in advance (then $710 after 28 February 2014);
(c) Security
Deposit: $2,720
Was the fixed tenancy agreement
renewed or a new fixed term tenancy agreement entered into?
main area of dispute between the landlord and tenants regarding the retention of
the security deposit as well as the landlord’s
claim for compensation is
in relation to unpaid rent. As it is both logical and convenient, I will deal
with the question of whether
a new fixed term tenancy agreement was entered
into by the parties.
to the tenants, discussions were held with the landlord regarding the
‘renewal’ of the tenancy agreement, however
no new agreement was
prepared or signed. I assume that ‘renewal’ means entering into a
new fixed term tenancy agreement
as there is no right or option to renew the
tenancy agreement contained in the original tenancy agreement signed by the
tenants submitted that once the fixed term of the tenancy agreement had expired,
they held over on the basis of a periodic tenancy.
Both parties agreed that when
the fixed term tenancy expired, a new written tenancy agreement was not
executed. There was a difference
in views in the landlord’s and
tenants’ submissions as to whether the landlord had drawn up a new written
tenancy agreement
which was then delivered to the tenants by the
landlord’s partner. The tenants submitted that if it was the intention of
landlord to provide them with a new agreement why weren’t subsequent
attempts to provide it made?
The landlord submitted that the tenants entered into a new fixed term tenancy
agreement for the following reasons:
(a) there was
an e-mail acceptance of the landlord’s offer of renewal by one of the
tenants namely Ms Alison Hooper dated
17 February 2014. The sequence of e-mail
communications regarding the purported renewal of the tenancy was as
11 February
2014. E-mail from landlord to Allison Hooper stating, “
As discussed a
couple of weeks ago, we will be increasing the rent at the end of the month in
line with the end of the contract.
I’m yet to hear if you and/or your
house mates are staying
Can you please advise so that I can put
processes in place to renew lease or readvertise
17 February
2014. E-mail from Allison Hooper to landlord (with cc to Nathan and Maree
Wilson) stating, “
Nathan, Maree and I would like to renew the lease
please on 4/38 Philip Street
17 February
2014. E-mail from landlord to Allison Hooper (with cc to Nathan and Maree
Wilson) stating, “
Just confirming you are ALL staying for 12 months.
Ok I’ll draw up the papers for a 12 month lease at $710 per week.
happy for the bond to stay as is if you are all
existing tenancy agreement would have been terminated and a new agreement would
not have been drawn up;
premises would have been advertised for lease and the tenants should have
vacated the premises; and
(d) there would
have been no acceptance of the change in rent by the tenants ie. from $680 to
$710. The increased rent was paid by
the tenants from 5 March 2014 to 15
October 2014.
landlord further submitted that the e-mail of 17 February 2014 renewed the
tenancy agreement and as no agreement was signed, section
9(4) of the Act
applied so that the prescribed agreement (set out in Schedule 2 of the
Residential Tenancies Regulations)
was taken to be the agreement between
the parties.
tenants submitted that the landlord’s email of 17 February 2014,
is an invitation to enter into a 12 month agreement, and makes an
assumption that we ‘agreed’ to 12 months. We did not
respond to this
email, instead preferring to wait until a new agreement was provided to us so
that we could review the terms and
terms of the discussions between the parties prior to the above
landlord submitted that, “...
.discussions were had with Miss Allison
Hooper and Mr Nathan Wilson on the phone over the term of the new agreement. Mr
Nathan Wilson
had requested the new agreement be for only 6 months we had
advised that due to the difficult nature of trying to fill a tenancy
wet season we would be looking for a 12 month tenancy
(b) the tenants
submitted that, “
Discussions were held with the landlord regarding new
lease arrangements, however nothing was ever confirmed. Discussions over the
phone were only ever with Mr Nathan Wilson
tenants provided a copy of an email dated 10 October 2014 from Alison Hooper to
the landlord, attaching ‘a notice to terminate
the periodic lease at 4/38
Philip Street, Fannie Bay on 28 October 2014.’ The tenants submitted that
this termination was based
on the terms and conditions of the previously signed
tenancy agreement (ie. dated 27 February 2013), specifically clause 52.
parties agreed that the landlord accepted vacant possession on 28 October 2014.
The tenants provided a copy of a handwritten receipt
signed by the
landlord’s partner, ‘Ewan Hall’, which confirms receipt of 3
sets of house keys, 3 gate remotes and
1 mail box key for the premises.
landlord then gave the tenants a breach notice dated 4 November 2014 for failure
to pay 2 weeks rent. Further breach notices were
given to the tenants on 24
November 2014 for failure to pay 4 weeks rent and then 13 January 2015 for the
failure to pay 11 weeks
I note the position taken by the Landlord in the email correspondence between
the parties was that the tenants were required to continue
paying rent until a
tenant could be found. As stated by the landlord in an e-mail to Allison Hooper
dated 11 October 2014, “
You have a lease agreement in place until March
next year. You cannot just terminate the lease. You will have to continue to pay
lease until another tenant can be found in accordance with the
legislation.
51 to 53 of the Tenancy Agreement entered into by the parties provide as
51. The Owner is required to give no less than 2
weeks’ notice in writing in accordance with the law to the tenant prior
the tenancy expiry date that the tenancy is terminated as at the expiry date
and that consent is not given for the tenant to remain
as a periodic tenant and
the tenant is required to vacate the property at the expiry date of the
52. If the tenant remains in occupation of the property after the
expiration of the term hereby granted, the parties are deemed to
have entered
into a periodical tenancy in accordance with the law on the terms and
conditions (other than the clause relating to
the term of the tenancy) of this
53. If the tenant wishes to vacate the property at any time on or after
the expiration of the term hereby granted, the tenant must
first give to the
owner not less than two weeks’ notice in writing in accordance with the
law of his intention to do so, and
if the tenant fails to give the owner the
requisite two weeks’ notice of his intention to vacate the property, the
will pay the owner rent until the owner is able to re- let the property,
but the tenants shall not be liable to pay any more than
83 of the Act provides that a fixed tenancy agreement continues to apply to the
premises on the same terms on which it applied
immediately before the day the
term ends, but as a periodic tenancy, if:
(a) the tenancy
agreement does not provide for the continuance of the tenancy after the day the
(b) a notice of
termination has not been given under this Act in relation to the premises; and
(c) the tenant
remains in occupation of the premises after the day the term
For the purposes of clause 52 and 53 of the Tenancy Agreement and section 83 of
the Act, there was no evidence submitted that either
the landlord or the tenant
had served a termination notice no less than 2 weeks prior to the fixed term
tenancy agreement expiry
date on 28 February 2014.
the tenants continued in occupation of the premises it initially appears that a
periodic tenancy on the same terms as the fixed
term tenancy is in place due to
the effect of clauses 51 and 52 of the tenancy agreement and section 83 of the
Act. However, consideration
must be given to whether a new tenancy agreement has
been entered into.
agreements are governed by the law of contract and the Act. For a tenancy
agreement to exist the Act requires a person to
grant to another person for
valuable consideration a right (which may be, but not be, an exclusive right) to
occupy premises for
the purpose of residency. Clearly there must be an
agreement. The parties must explicitly or implicitly agree on the terms of the
contract. In other words there must be an actual meeting of minds.
In order for an agreement to be reached between the parties, each party must
have agreed on the essential terms of the residential
tenancy agreement. The
essential terms of a tenancy agreement at common law
(a) the parties
to the agreement (
Stockell v Niven
(1889) 61 LT 18 (CA)
Sale v Lambert
(1874) LR 18 Eq 1
Di Biase v Rezek
[1971] 1 NSWLR 735 (CA))
premises in question:
Lancastre v deTrafford
(1862) 31 LJ Ch 554
duration of the tenancy (
Whitlock v Brew
(1968) 80 WN (NSW) 1520)
(d) the rent
(or a mechanism for determining the rent) (
Whitlock v Brew
[1968] HCA 71
(1968) 118 CLR 445
Lang’s Commercial
Leasing in Australia
(CCH Australia, 2005), [1-210];
(e) the dates
of formation and commencement of the agreement:
Pirie v Saunders
104 CLR 149.
this matter the parties agree that there were some discussions about a new
tenancy agreement however the landlord wanted a 12 month
fixed term and the
tenants apparently wanted a 6 month term. I am not satisfied that that an
agreement on the term of the new tenancy
was concluded. The 11 February 2014
e-mail from the landlord to Ms Hooper makes it clear that no agreement had been
reached as she
I’m yet to hear if you and/or your house
mates are staying
Can you please advise so that I can put processes in
place to renew lease or readvertise
the tenants then communicated to the landlord that they wish to renew the lease
by e-mail on 17 February 2014, there is no
agreement on one of the essential
terms, which is the duration of the tenancy. It also appears from the
terminology utilised in the
landlord’s responding e-mail also on 17
February 2014 that the agreement hadn’t been fully concluded because she
....I’ll draw up the papers for a 12 month lease at
$710 per week. I’m happy for the bond to stay as is if you are all
.” That agreement, whether delivered to the tenants or not, was
never executed.
is somewhat puzzling why the tenants did not at this point advise the landlord
that the 12 month term was not agreed to. This simple
communication may have
avoided this dispute. In any event I note that the tenants’ submission
that they chose to wait until
a new agreement was provided to them to review the
terms and conditions. It appears to be common ground between the parties that
the tenants did not communicate an acceptance of the 12 month tenancy term after
receiving that e-mail from the landlord.
is also common ground that the tenants remained in possession of the premises
until they vacated on 28 October 2014 and that they
paid rent at the increased
rate. By paying the increased rent, which they had notice of in the
landlord’s 11 February 2014
e-mail, the tenants have by their conduct
implicitly agreed to that term. It cannot be said then, that there is a
continuation of
the existing tenancy agreement, with the same terms and
conditions as contemplated by section 83 of the Act and clauses 51 and 52
Tenancy Agreement, because one of the essential terms, the rent, changed.
I find that the parties have entered into a new tenancy agreement from 1 March
2014. As there is no evidence of a concluded agreement
being reached as to the
duration of the tenancy, I find that the tenancy was intended to be other than
for a fixed term and is therefore
a periodic tenancy.
19(4) of the Act applies to this tenancy as no written tenancy agreement has
been executed and therefore the prescribed agreement
set out in Schedule 2 of
Residential Tenancies Regulations
is taken to be the agreement
between the parties commencing on 1 March 2014.
note that that tenants have applied for the reimbursement of overpaid rent for
the period 1 March 2014 to 28 October 2014. They
have made this application on
the basis of there being no new agreement and the landlord’s failure to
comply with section 41(2)
of the Act. As I have found that a new tenancy
agreement has been entered into, this application must fail.
Termination of the Tenancy Agreement and the Effect on the
Security Deposit Dispute and Landlord’s Compensation Application
As I have found that from 1 March 2014 a new periodic tenancy agreement was
entered into by the parties, the next issues to be considered
the tenants validly terminate the periodic
ii. What is the effect of the termination on the
landlord’s retention of the security bond and compensation claim for
The evidence supplied by the parties reveals the following sequence of events at
the end of the tenants’ possession of the
premises on 28 October
tenants sent by mail and e-mail an RT06 ‘Notice to Terminate Tenancy
Agreement’ to the landlord dated 10 October 2014.
The notice provided that
vacant possession would be delivered up to the landlord on 29 October 2014;
landlord accepted vacant possession on 28 October 2014 as evidenced by a receipt
for keys and remotes provided by the landlord’s
partner and dated 28
October 2014;
outgoing condition report dated 29 October 2014 was provided as evidence by the
landlord (and signed only by the landlord but
not the tenants). The tenants
claimed that they did not receive a copy of the outgoing condition report until
13 March 2015 when
it was provided by NTCAT in the copies of the
landlord’s materials submitted with her response to the tenants’
deposit dispute application and then a few days later from the
landlord. I note that in the landlord’s submissions dated 31
she stated as follows at paragraph 8, “
Outgoing condition report was
provided as part of form 12 March 2015, once all costs could be
consolidated
landlord gave to the tenants, by mail and e-mail dated 4 November 2014, a breach
notice also dated 4 November 2014 for failure
to pay 2 weeks rent. A further
breach notice was given to the tenants on 24 November 2014 for failure to pay 4
weeks rent. Another
breach notice was given to the tenants by the landlord on 13
January 2015 for failure to pay eleven weeks rent;
landlord gave an RT08 Notice of Landlords Intention to Retain Security Deposit
to the tenants by mail dated 12 March 2015 claiming
the following amounts were
to be retained from the security deposit:
making good
damage to the property - $965;
ancillary property destroyed – $350
premises or ancillary property left in an unreasonably dirty condition - $100;
paying unpaid
rent - $12,100.
tenants submitted that they followed the correct termination procedure for a
periodic tenancy and further that the landlord’s
security deposit
retention notice is defective for being out of time.
94 of the Act provides that a tenant may terminate a periodic tenancy without
specifying a ground for termination by 14
days’ notice to the landlord in
accordance with section 101.
101 of the Act provides as follows:
“(1) A notice of
termination under this Act by a landlord is to be signed by the landlord and
is to specify:
(a) the address of the premises subject to the tenancy; and
(b) the date on which the tenant is required to give up vacant
possession of the premises to the landlord; and
(c) the prescribed information, if any; and
(d) the ground of termination, if any.
(2) A notice of termination under this Act by a tenant is to be signed by
the tenant or, if there is more than one tenant, by
each of them and is to
(a) the address of the premises subject to the tenancy; and
(b) the date on which the tenant is to give up vacant possession of the
premises to the landlord; and
(c) the prescribed information, if any; and
(d) the ground of termination, if any.
(3) A notice of termination that does not comply with this section is of
no effect.”
tenants appear to have provided the landlord with 14 days’ notice as
required by section 94. However, the termination notice
does not comply with
section 101(2) because all of the tenants have not signed the notice. It is
signed only by Ms Allison Hooper.
Section 101(3) makes it very clear that
strict compliance is required with the requirements of that section. Therefore
of termination is of no effect.
tenant has consequently abandoned the property and the tenancy is terminated
pursuant to section 82(1)(c) of the Act. Section
82(1)(c) of the Act provides
that if the premises are abandoned before the end of the agreement, the tenancy
is terminated on and
from the date on which rent was due and payable following
the date the tenant vacated the premises.
was paid up until 28 October 2014. It is common ground that despite the
defective notice, the landlord took vacant possession
of the premises from 28
October 2014. Therefore in accordance with section 82(1)(c) of the Act, the
tenancy is terminated on and
from the date on which rent was due and payable
which is 29 October 2014.
the tenancy is terminated from 29 October 2014, the failure to provide lawful
notice means that landlord has suffered a loss
being rent foregone for the 2
weeks’ notice required to terminate the periodic tenancy. I therefore
find that the landlord
is entitled to compensation of 2 weeks rent in the
amount of $1,420.
than this amount, the landlord is unable to claim any further compensation for
loss of rental profit or rent foregone from
12 November 2014 up to and
including 26 February 2015 because the tenancy is periodic and not a new fixed
term tenancy.
Compliance with the Security Deposit Procedure and
the Compensation Application for Loss of Rental Profit
112(1) provides that a tenant is entitled to have his or her security deposit
reimbursed at the end of the tenancy agreement.
Section 112(2) goes on to
provide that the landlord must within 7 business days after the tenant gave up
vacant possession or abandoned
the premises, reimburse to the tenant the amount
of the security deposit, other than an amount the landlord is entitled to
112(5) sets out the procedure for retaining a security deposit. This provision
requires the landlord to undertake a range
of actions within 7 business days
after the tenant gave up vacant possession or apparently abandoned the
premises. One of these
under section 112(5)(a) is to give written notice in the
prescribed form, if any, of his or her intention to retain or continue
so much of the security deposit as is specified in the notice for the purpose
specified in the notice.
this case, the landlord gave an RT08 Notice of Landlords Intention to Retain
Security Deposit to the tenants by mail dated 12
March 2015. This is well after
the 7 business day time limitation, noting that the landlord entered into
possession of the premises
on 28 October 2014.
security deposit retention process set out in section 112 of the Act has not
been followed by the landlord and therefore there
is no valid basis for her to
retain the security deposit. The landlord must therefore return the full amount
of the security deposit
to the tenants.
note that in the landlord’s RT01 compensation application under section
122 of the Act, there is no indication of the amount
of compensation the
landlord is seeking. Furthermore the grounds on which the application is made
according to the landlord is
stated on the form as, “
Please refer to
attachment for details of dispute.”
are 8 attachments, which include:
communications between the parties regarding the lease renewal claimed by the
a copy of the
rent ledger;
photographs from
the 29 October 2014 outgoing inspection;
the outgoing
property condition report date 29 October 2014;
a copy of the
RT08 Notice of Landlord’s Intention to Retain Security Deposit dated 12
March 2015 and supporting documentation);
a copy of the
ingoing condition report dated 27 February 2013;
copies of RT04
breach notices given to the tenants dated 4 November 2014, 24 November 2014 and
13 January 2015; and
confirmation to the landlord from Mr Tony Fearn of One Real Estate dated 8
November 2014 that the rental advertisement for
the premises was now live on a
property website.
can only distil from these attachments that the landlord’s compensation
application is for the items set out in the RT08
Notice of Landlords Intention
to Retain Security Deposit dated 12 March 2015, namely:
making good
damage to the property - $965;
ancillary property destroyed – $350;
premises or ancillary property left in an unreasonably dirty condition - $100;
paying unpaid
rent - $12,100.
will deal with the application for compensation relating to loss of rental
profit under section 122 of the Act. I note that for
the reasons I set out in
paragraph 42 above, the maximum amount of loss of rental profit claimable as
compensation by the landlord
is 2 weeks rent because I concluded that a new
periodic tenancy agreement had been entered into and not a new fixed term
case I am incorrect in finding that the parties had entered into a new periodic
tenancy and there was in fact a new fixed term
tenancy, the landlord’s
application for compensation for loss of rental profit would fail. It would
fail for the reasons set
out in the recent decision by a Delegate of the
Commissioner of Tenancies in the matter of
Craig Sandy v Danny Sonephet
Sananikone and Peta Thi Dong Ha Do
(RT1415-0167) dated 25 February
that matter the delegate concluded that section 112(8) precluded a
landlords’ compensation claim under section 122 for loss
of rent and loss
caused to the landlord in securing new tenants, if it was made later than 3
months after the tenant had abandoned
the premises.
respectfully agree with the delegates’ reasoning in that matter and find
that it has direct applicability to this matter
where the tenants abandoned the
property on 28 October 2014 but the compensation application under section 122
of the Act was made
by the landlord on 28 March 2015.
relevant extract of the Delegate’s reasoning from the abovementioned
decision in
is set out below:
101. Section
112(6) provides in effect that, in circumstances where a tenant abandons
leased premises, a landlord may continue to
hold all or part of the security
deposit against an amount that the landlord may recover under section 122 as
compensation
for loss of rent the tenant would otherwise have been liable to
pay and loss associated with securing new tenants for the premises.
102. Section 112(8) imposes an important qualification upon the
landlord’s right to make a claim under section 11 in respect
losses described in section 112(6). It provides:
(8) The landlord is not entitled to claim under section 11 part or all
of the amount of the loss referred to in subsection
(6) unless:
(a) the Commissioner receives an application to determine the
distribution of the tenant’s deposit; or
(b) the loss is claimed under section 122,
as soon as practicable after the loss can be calculated and in any
case within 3 months from the date on which the tenant apparently
the premises.
103. Although s 112(8) is part of a section that is principally
concerned with how the security deposits are to be dealt with,
operation is to impose a three month time limit upon section 122 compensation
claims where the losses the subject of
the claim are losses described in
section 112(6) – that is losses following abandonment. In cases where
there is no application
by the tenant in respect of the security deposit (see
generally section 113) a claim must be made under section 122 as soon
practicable and in any event no later than three months form the date of
abandonment.
104. The landlord’s application for ‘compensation for loss
of rent’ was made more than 3 months after the tenant
vacated the
premises. If the application is one to which section 112(8) applies, the
consequence is that the landlords claim is
out of time.”
Compensation Application for Matters Other Than Unpaid Rent
I stated in paragraph 49 of these reasons, I can only distil from the
application for compensation for loss suffered by the landlord
under section
122 of the Act filed by the landlord, that the specific items being claimed are
those set out in the RT08 Notice
of Landlords Intention to Retain Security
Deposit dated 12 March 2015, namely:
good damage to the property;
ancillary property destroyed;
premises or ancillary property left in an unreasonably dirty condition;
unpaid rent.
landlord confirmed at the resumption of the Inquiry on 29 April 2015 that she
seeks compensation for those specific items. I
have already dealt with the loss
of rental profit claim (called ‘unpaid rent’ by landlord) above.
This leaves items
(a), (b) and (c) for consideration.
note there is no disagreement between the parties with respect to the ingoing
condition report dated 27 February 2013. I specifically
asked the tenant this
question at the resumption of the Inquiry on 29 April 2014 and was advised that
the tenants agreed with the
ingoing condition report on 27 March 2013. I note
that the copies of the ingoing condition report provided in both the landlord
and tenants materials are not signed by the tenants, however as there is no
dispute about the ingoing condition report I have not
considered its validity.
also note that the effect of section 28A of the Act which provides that the
condition report that had effect for the original
fixed term tenancy continues
to have effect with respect to the new tenancy agreement. Accordingly pursuant
to section 28 of the
Act the ingoing condition report is conclusive evidence of
the condition of the premises and ancillary property at the commencement
landlord confirmed that no periodic inspections of the property were undertaken
during the tenancy. She said that the various
issues regarding the condition of
the property only came to light when the outgoing condition report was
conducted. She also confirmed
that the required works to rectify the damage or
issues have been undertaken.
Landlord in her materials provided a document called ‘Summary of
Costs’ retained from the security deposit which
Making good damage to the premises and ancillary
Paint damage and
repairs – above stairs (half costs), bedroom 3 above windows and cornices,
red pillar in garage (refer to attached
quotes from Bill Warren)
Front door fly
screen (materials from Bunnings and local labourer 1 hour @
Replacing ancillary property lost or destroyed:
(materials from Bunnings)
plants from Bunnings average $20 per plant)
Cleaning premises or
ancillary property left in an unreasonably dirty condition:
Back garden
total clean-up and front garage area weeding and clean up (local labourer 5
hours @ $20/hr)
landlord also submitted quotes from Bill Warren Painting Service dated 2
February 2015 and 18 February 2015 advising that the
works will total $1026
(GST exclusive). The landlord also submitted photographs in a document format
dated 29 October 2014 which
apparently identifies the various damage to the
walls, front pillar and front flyscreen. I note the photographs are not date
The landlord confirmed that the photographs form the basis of her
evidence of the damages to the premises.
was some dispute regarding the outgoing condition report. The tenants submitted
that despite two requests made by them, they
were never advised by the
landlord or her partner as to when the outgoing inspection would take place
after vacant possession
was given to the landlord. They also provided a
statutory declaration from Deborah Curry who stated that she was present with
Allison Hooper on 28 October 2015 when keys were returned to the
landlord’s partner. Ms Curry stated that at no time did
landlord’s partner indicate when a final inspection of the property would
take place.
landlord however submitted that the inspection of the premises was undertaken on
29 October 2014 following receipt of the keys
returned on 28 October 2014. The
landlord also stated that Ms Hooper was advised of the time the inspection was
to be undertaken.
there are conflicting views between the parties regarding the notification by
the landlord as to when the outgoing inspection
would be undertaken, I find the
evidence provided by Ms Curry in her statutory declaration to be
persuasive.
addition to this issue the landlord did not give the tenants the outgoing
condition report until a short time after the tenant
had already received a
copy from NTCAT, as a part of the landlord’s materials, on 13 March 2015.
The outgoing condition report
is dated 29 October 2014 and only signed by the
landlord. Clearly the tenants did not accept the outgoing condition report.
Accordingly
as the landlord has not complied with the requirements of section 110 of the
Act and further that the tenants did not
accept the outgoing condition report,
the outgoing condition report dated 29 October 2014 cannot be considered to be
evidence of the condition of the premises and ancillary property at
the end of the tenancy.
means that for the landlord to succeed in her compensation application with
respect to damages and other issues with the condition
of the premises and
ancillary property the onus is on the landlord to convince me on the balance of
probabilities that the tenants
have not given the premises and ancillary
property back to the landlord at the end of the tenancy in a reasonable state
and in a reasonably clean condition allowing for reasonable wear and
tear (Section 51(2) of the Act refers).
note that section 51(3) of the Act provides that a tenant is not in breach of
the agreement specified in section 51(2) if the landlord
had notice that the
repairs or maintenance were required. There were no submission made by the
tenants of the effect that the landlord
was provided with such notice in
relation to the items raised by the landlord.
tenants have however made a general submission that most of alleged damages are
fair wear and tear, pre-existing issues or the
responsibility of the
respect to the tenants general argument of ‘reasonable wear and
tear’ the onus of establishing that damage is fair
wear and tear rests on
Furthermore the cases on ‘wear and tear’ limit it to deterioration
occurring naturally as a consequence of normal
determining responsibility for the various damages in this matter and in light
of the limited submissions on this point
made by the tenants, I am not
convinced that any of the matters raised by the landlord would be categorised
as reasonable wear
and tear in the light of the length of the tenancy.
will deal with each of the landlord’s compensation claims in turn.
landlord has claimed compensation for making good damage to the premises and
ancillary property comprised of:
Paint damage and
repairs – above stairs (half costs), bedroom 3 above windows and cornices,
red pillar in garage (refer to attached
quotes from Bill Warren)
Front door fly
screen (materials from Bunnings and local labourer 1 hour @
landlord referred me to photographs dated 29 October 2014 in the materials
submitted in support of her compensation application.
summary of the landlord’s claims in relation to the damage shown on these
photographs, the tenants’ views as to responsibility
and my findings are
as follows:
(a) Photographs
1, 2 and 3 – water damage and furniture scuff marks on stairwell
The landlord did not seek to claim compensation for
the water damage shown which her investigations have revealed to have been
by a water leak issue from the adjoining unit. The landlord however
wishes to claim half the cost of repainting the wall due to
the scuff mark on
the wall. The ingoing condition report did not identify a scuff mark on this
The tenants claimed that the walls were cleaned with sugar soap. They
claimed that the marks on the wall may ‘possibly’
be the residue
from body corporate pest spraying. The tenants also submitted photographs taken
prior to handover of the premises
to the landlord. Their photographs also show
the same scuff mark on that wall. I do not accept the argument put forward by
tenants because their own photograph shows the same marks which they
claimed was cleaned with sugar soap. It is reasonable to
expect that this
cleaning should have removed any residue from pest spraying on the wall.
I am satisfied that the damage appears to have been caused while the
tenants were in occupation of the premises. I will allow
compensation
calculated as half (ie. $214.50) of $429.00 in accordance with the quote
provided by Bill Warren Painting Services
dated 2 February 2015.
(b) Photographs 4, 5, 6 and 7 – damage to paint on various
The landlord’s photographs display in bedroom 3
what the landlord calls damage to paint on the wall above the window to the
balcony and damage to the paint on the walls above the window to the shade
The condition on the ingoing condition report is stated as
The tenants claimed that this damage is from previous curtain rods. The
tenants put forward evidence of photographs purported to
be taken on February
2012 when one of the tenants, Ms Alison Hooper, was a tenant of the same
premises under a separate tenancy.
Some of these photographs appear to show
similar damage. I note however these photographs are not date stamped.
Despite the evidence submitted by the tenant, the condition of the walls in
the ingoing condition report provides that they were
clean. Section 28 of the
Act makes it clear that the ingoing condition report is
evidence of the condition of the premises and ancillary property at the
commencement of the tenancy. I am unable to look to evidence
prior to the
tenancy in question as to the condition of the premises.
Accordingly I will allow compensation in favour of the landlord in the sum
of $314.60 in accordance with the quote provided by
Bill Warren Painting
Services dated 2 February 2015.
(c) Photograph 8 – damage to flyscreen door.
The alleged
damages are holes in the flyscreen door. The landlord’s photographs
display some patching confirmed as undertaken
by the tenants. The landlord
however said there were more holes in the flyscreen which are not visible in
the photograph.
The tenants submitted that the holes occurred after the landlord took
possession of the premises. I note that the photograph of
the flyscreen door
taken by the tenants prior to handing over the premises, does not reveal
visible holes in the flyscreen.
Unfortunately neither of the landlords and tenants photographs provide a
clear indication of whether there are holes in the flyscreen.
Given that the outgoing condition report was not accepted by the tenants,
there is no conclusive evidence of the condition of the
premises when it was
vacated. I am not satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the tenants
are responsible for the claimed
damage to the flyscreen door. This aspect of
the landlord’s compensation claim is dismissed.
(d) Photograph 9 – paint damage to front pillar.
landlord’s photograph displays some paint damage near the base of the
The ingoing condition report under the heading ‘garage/carport’
has a hand written entry that states ‘
Poles- Damage on (illegible)
pole – to be inspected repaired
The tenant submitted that the pillar was repainted in June/July 2014 and
that the location close to the ground suggests poor workmanship/water
and therefore the landlord’s responsibility. The tenant also submitted
that it may have also been caused when a
water pressure clean that was carried
out while they were in occupancy of the premises.
If this was caused by the water pressure clean I would have thought it
reasonable for the tenants to have noticed this damage
and reported it to the
I will allow compensation in favour of the landlord in the sum of $385.00
in accordance with the quote provided by Bill Warren
Painting Services dated
18 February 2015.
landlord has claimed compensation for replacing ancillary property lost or
destroyed as follows:
(materials from Bunnings)
plants from Bunnings average $20 per plant)
ingoing condition report states adjacent to the item called
‘Reticulation’, ‘
Wait to test in dry season.
addition to this the ingoing condition report makes no mention of pot plants or
any general comment about the gardens.
tenants submitted that the landlord never arranged a time to test the
reticulation and that the tenants replaced broken sprinkler
heads and tested
them prior to vacating. The tenants provide a copy of a receipt from Bunnings
dated 20 October 2014 showing the
purchase of a hose connector and an
irrigation pipe riser.
tenants also submitted that when they came into possession of the premises some
of the pots located at the courtyard of the premises
did not contain plants.
The tenants however conceded that about 5 plants died while they occupied the
dismiss the landlord’s application for compensation for the replacement of
reticulation equipment as I am not convinced that
the reticulation was in
working order at the commencement of the tenancy. I allow compensation in the
sum of $100 for the replacement
of 5 plants.
the landlord has claimed compensation for cleaning premises or ancillary
property left in an unreasonably dirty condition.
Specifically, $100 to clean
up the back garden and front garage areas weeding and clean up. The landlord
clarified that the cleaning
was required in the garden area and the
note that the ingoing condition report does not provide any comment with respect
to the garage floor ie. whether any rubbish was
present. It does however
provide that the windows, flyscreens, light fittings and bench in the garage
are all clean. With respect
to the rear garden and veranda of the property
there are no comments stating that the property is clean or otherwise.
tenants submitted that they had tidied up as best they could however they had no
option available to them to dispose of the garden
landlord referred me to the photographs of the premises taken by the tenants
prior to handing over the premises to the landlord.
The landlord specifically
referred me to the photograph showing what appears to be some rubbish (eg.
empty pots) in the rear garden.
I note the same photographs taken by the
tenants show the garage as appearing to be clean of any rubbish and no obvious
the tenant has conceded that they could not fully dispose of the garden rubbish
I will allow half the compensation claimed by
the landlord, which totals
I order that:
to section 113 of the Act, the landlord shall return the full amount of the
security deposit being $2,720.00 to the tenants
no later than 2 weeks from the
date of these reasons for decision.
tenant shall pay the landlord compensation under section 122 of the Act due to
the tenants failure to give the premises and ancillary
property back to the
landlord in reasonable state of repair and in a reasonably clean condition,
allowing for reasonable wear and
tear, for the following
damage and repairs: $914.10;
(b) replacing
plants: $100.00;
(c) cleaning
and removal of rubbish: $50.00
than those items of compensation set out in order number 2, all other aspects of
the landlord’s application for compensation
are dismissed.
tenants’ application for the return of overpaid rent (plus interest) from
1 March 2014 to 28 October is dismissed.
Dated 6 May 2015
Demetrios Laouris
Delegate of the
Commissioner of Tenancies
Christensen and Taylor,
Residential Tenancies Law and Practice in NSW
(6th ed.) (2014), Federation Press at [2.13.3].
General Insurance v Cooper [2006] ACTSA 20.
(1901) 17 TLR 570.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (323 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter