URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTRTCmr/2015/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:22:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Fearon -v- Gerich [2015] NTRTCmr 4 (19 May 2015)
REASONS FOR THE ORDER OF THE COMMISSIONER OF TENANCIES
INQUIRY - Thursday, 9 April 2015
DUANE APPO AND DEBBIE FEARON (‘Tenants)
DANIEL GERICH (‘Landlord)
RT1415-0499
is a determination of an application by the Tenants dated 30 January 2015 in
respect of premises being 101 Lackman Terrace, Alice
Springs in the Northern
Territory of Australia (‘the premises’), seeking:
application for disciplinary action against the agents acting for the
declaration of excessive rent; and
(c) compensation
for breaches of the tenancy agreement and the Act by the
Notice of Inquiry dated 26 February 2015 was posted to the parties. The Inquiry
was conducted on Thursday, 9 April 2015. The following
appeared at the Inquiry
and made submissions:
(a) Mr Fraser and Ms Richards of LJ Hooker
Alice Springs as agents for the landlord.
(b) Mr Duane Appo and Dr Debbie Fearon, the tenants.
the conclusion of the hearing on 9 April 2015, the parties were given an
opportunity to provide further submissions by 19 April
evidence before the Inquiry consisted of the following materials:
materials submitted by the tenants and filed under the tab ‘Applicants
Materials’ on the Commissioner of Tenancies
file RT1415-0499;
materials submitted by the landlord and filed under the tab ‘Respondents
Materials’ on the Commissioner of Tenancies
file RT1415-0499;
(c) the oral
evidence of Mr Fraser, Ms Richard, Dr Fearon and Mr Appo.
the basis of the above evidence I find there is a tenancy agreement between the
landlord and the tenants in respect of the premises
within the meaning of and
subject to the provisions of the Act. The key details of the tenancy agreement
are as follows:
Duration: Fixed term tenancy agreement commencing
13 September 2014 and ending 12 September 2015
Rent: $ 720 per week payable weekly in advance
Security Deposit: $2,880
landlord purchased the premises on 22 August 2014.
of the due diligence reports the landlord required before purchasing the
premises was a report CMP Electrics.
report from CMP Electrics dated 27 June 2014 stated that, “
The house is
in generally good condition electrically
I could not
find earth stake usually below meter box maybe buried in concrete, should be
showing with connection of earth cable
Certificates
of Occupancy for the house dated 15 May 1992, the garage dated 21 May 1992 and
the veranda dated 26 February 2002 were
provided as evidence by the landlord as
to the compliance with relevant building and safety standards.
tenancy commenced on 13 September 2014.
ingoing condition report was carried out. The ingoing condition report was dated
12 September 2014 but signed by the agents for
the landlord on 16 September 2014
and by the tenants on 23 September 2014. Pursuant to section 28 of the Act, the
ingoing condition
evidence of the condition of the
premises and ancillary property at the commencement of the tenancy.
tenants confirmed there was a procedure to submit requests for repairs, which
were to be in writing. This was through the LJ Hooker
portal on the LJ Hooker
website and then later done via e-mail.
tenants provided screen shots of a number of maintenance requests made by the
tenants on the LJ Hooker portal. These are as follows:
(i) 17 December
2014 – Bedroom airconditioner needs repair or replacement. Roof and
guttering on patio needs attention due to
leaks. Shed swampy needs repair and
(ii) 2 January
2015 – Swampy fan motor has stopped working.
(iii) 5 January
2015 – Exhaust fan in ensuite not working. Sprinkler heads blocked up for
lawn reticulation. 1 wheelie bin removed
by council.
(iv) 11 January
2015 – No hot water.
tenants served the following RT04B Notices to Landlord to Remedy Breach of Term
of Agreement as follows:
December 2014 – Failure to repair partially working evaporative cooler on
January 2015 – Failure to remedy maintenance requests for leaks in drains
and gutters around patio area. Now gutters
coming away from house due to no
January 2015 – Respond to question about wheelie bin asked on
January 2015 regarding documentation about
condition report saying 2 bins provided.
(iv) 12 January
2015 – Failure to remedy maintenance request for repair of sprinkler heads
for lawn reticulation, reported 5
January 2015;
(v) 12 January
2015 – Failure to remedy maintenance request for repair of exhaust fan in
ensuite, reported 5
January 2015;
(vi) 12 January
2015 – Failure to remedy maintenance request for the repair of evaporative
cooler on shed as per tenancy agreement
– reported on
December 2014 – Swampy on
the Inquiry the tenants advised that despite serving the various RT04B notices
on the landlord they had no intention of applying
for termination of the
tenancy. This is not to say termination would have been awarded if applied for
by the tenants.
tenants provided copies of a significant amount of e-mails from 11 January 2015
to 20 January 2015 between them and the landlord’s
agent, in relation to
the various items requiring maintenance or repair. Without summarising each and
every e-mail, the e-mails collectively
reveal a deterioration of the
relationship between the tenants and the landlord’s agents. Furthermore
the e-mails generally
reveal that the tenants were requiring speedier action in
relation to the maintenance issues especially the electricity issues which
regarded as a major safety issue.
these communications, the landlord effected repairs to a number of the specific
items reported by the tenants.
tenants are unsatisfied with a range of issues concerning the premises and
lodged an application to the Commissioner of Tenancies
for the relief specified
in paragraph 1 above.
Disciplinary Action Against Real Estate
application for disciplinary action against the Ms Richards and Mr Fraser of LJ
Hooker is dismissed. The Commissioner of Tenancies
does not have jurisdiction to
take disciplinary action against real estate agents.
appropriate forum is the Agents Licensing Board established under the
Licensing Act
Application for compensation due to
psychological stress – electrical defects
tenants alleged that the landlord has caused reckless endangerment of life by
failing to ensure that the main electrical service
to the house and main earth
were compliant with the relevant code before offering the property to
tenants alleged that the landlord was in breach of section 47 of the Act as he
should never have offered the premises for a tenancy
unless the premises met all
the health and safety requirements specified under an Act that may apply to
residential premises or ancillary
property. Similarly, the tenants also alleged
that the landlord was in breach of section 48 which provides that it is a term
tenancy agreement that the landlord must ensure the premises are habitable,
meet all health and safety requirements specified under
an Act that applies to
the premises and are reasonably clean when the tenant enters into occupation of
the premises.
note that any claim of breach of section 47 of the Act, which is an offence,
relates to a time period prior to the existence of
a tenancy agreement between
the parties and is therefore not a matter I am able to deal with. The more
appropriate avenue for seeking
the investigation and potential prosecution of an
alleged breach of section 47 is for a request to be made of the Commissioner of
Tenancies (acting in his capacity under section 13(3)(d) of the Act.
tenants have also submitted that “
previous court decisions have held
the owner of premises liable to prosecution for breaches of safety even when
they didn’t
know of the breach, just because they were reasonably expected
. “ The tenants have included in their materials a copy of the
decision of the Coroner in the
Inquest into the death of Monica Presley
and an extract from an undated article in the Deakin Law Review headed
The Decision in Northern Sandblasting P/L v Harris’
I note that the cases referred to in the Deakin Law review extract relate to the
law of tort, specifically negligence (duty of care).
The Commissioner of
Tenancies does not have jurisdiction to entertain applications in tort even
though a dispute in tort may arise
between the same parties raising the same
factual issues that underpin the contractual
am required to consider the issues in this regard raised by the tenants within
the confines of the tenancy agreement and the Act,
specifically whether there
has been a breach of clause 47 of the tenancy agreement and section 48 of the
Act. I will therefore proceed
two defects were identified by Mr Appo who according to the tenants’
materials has electrical qualifications and relevant
experience. These defects
were as follows:
electrical service wire to the house. According to the maintenance order issued
by the landlord’s agent, “
There is an issue with the powerline
that runs on the garage, it has been rubbing which is causing the insulation to
wear off and
needs to be fixed before it causes a major safety
ii. the earth stake with connection of
earth cable could not be identified (main earth electricity issue).
apparently caused significant distress to Mr Appo in particular given his
apparent knowledge of such defects. It is also apparent
from the significant
volume of materials provided by the tenants in their submission regarding
electrical safety, that these issues
were of a very serious concern to
stated earlier the landlord prior to purchasing the property obtained a report
dated 27 June 2014 from CMP Electrics. This report
noted that, “
house is in generally good condition electrically
.” The report also
I could not find the earth stake usually below the meter box
maybe buried under the concrete, should be showing with connection of
tenants submitted that despite the various permits to occupy for the house and
other structures provided by the landlord’s
agent, the main earth and main
earth electricity issue were directly related to how an unapproved shed was
built on the property.
landlord’s agent submitted that PowerWater inspected the property and
provided verbal advice that the main earth electricity
issue did not constitute
an existing hazard but suggested it should be fixed as it may become one.
Furthermore Power and Water also
verbally advised that there was no danger to
the occupants. The landlord’s agent provided a copy of a Connection Report
001650 issued by PowerWater on 15 December 2014, which under the heading
Details of Other Matters in Contravention of Service rules”
states “Service mains touching carport and within reach
parties were in general agreement that:
unsafe electrical service issue was reported by the tenant on 17 December and
fixed by the landlord’s contractor on 30
December 2014; and
earth stake issue was reported by the tenants on 11 January 2015 and fixed by
the landlords contractor on 16 January 2015.
landlord’s agent drew attention to the fact that NT Worskafe inspected the
electrical works carried out to rectify the defects
and observed
compliance.
their submissions dated 17 April 2015, the tenants stated, “
acknowledge that the 2 major electrical issues were fixed diligently
They further stated, “...
we believe that we have shown that they should
not have been present in the first place. We again request acknowledgement that
four months our family was in danger and due to his knowledge of the
consequence of such faults: Duane was distressed, unable to
sleep, often absent
from work and unable to fulfil his family commitment
the tenants are asserting the landlord has breached the tenancy agreement and
the Act, they bear the onus of proving this assertion.
I do not doubt that the tenants’ distress regarding these issues is
genuine, in the absence of an independent expert report,
it is difficult to
determine with a degree of certainty or confidence that a breach has occurred
which has in some way endangered
the lives of the tenants. In any event under
section 48 of the Act I am only required to determine whether the landlord has
his obligation to ensure the premises meet all health and safety
requirements.
note the report issued by NT Work Safe dated 3 March 2015 emanating from the
inspection regarding the electricity supply line issue,
states as follows at
page 3 under the heading, ‘Compliance status of previously issued
outstanding notice’, “
Notice number: 1260. Status: Not complied
” Unfortunately I have not been provided with any further
evidence which explains this non-compliance issue.
tenants directed me to section 68 of the
Electricity Reform Act
provides that a person who operates an electrical installation must take
reasonable steps to ensure that the installation complies
with and is operated
in accordance with technical and safety requirements imposed under the
Regulations.
of the objects of the
Electricity Reform Act
as stated in its objects
under section 3 is ‘
to establish and enforce proper safety and
technical standards for electrical installations
Electricity Reform
Act provides that the term “electrical
installation
“a set of wires and associated
fittings, equipment and accessories installed in a place for conveying,
controlling, measuring
or using electricity that is, or is to be, or has been,
supplied for consumption in the place.”
note that the Regulation 3 of the Electricity Reform Regulations
For the purposes of sections 67(1) and 68(1) of
the Act, it is a safety and technical requirement of these Regulations that an
installation must comply with AS 3000 and any other Australian
Standard called up by AS 3000
NT Work Safe inspection report dated 3 March 2015 at page 2 provides under the
heading ‘Inspection Details’ that the
purpose of the NT Work Safe
inspector’s entry on the premises was to, “
assess compliance with
Electricity Reform Act
”. The inspector then went on to state in the
With regards to the aerial cables and main connection box I
observed compliance with I.A.W S/NZ 3000 2007 and PowerWater Service
inspection was conducted after the repairs to the electricity supply line were
carried out. By implication this would appear
to confirm that prior to the
repairs being effected, the electricity supply line defect identified by the
tenants did not comply
with section 67 of the
Electricity Reform
with respect to the earth stake issue I note the Electrical Safety –
Certificate of Compliance issued by CMP Electrics
on 27 January 2015 describes
the work certified as, “
Install new earth stake as required to
”. As stated earlier compliance with AS 3000 is the prescribed
safety and technical requirement that electrical installations
must comply with.
on the evidence I find that on the balance of probabilities the landlord has
breached the tenancy agreement by failing to ensure
the premises meet all health
and safety requirements under an Act that applies to residential premises.
made this finding I must consider whether I am able to grant compensation under
section 122 of the Act. The key issue is whether
the tenants have suffered
‘loss or damage’. It is clear from the evidence that the tenants
have not suffered any loss
arising from the breach.
in terms of ‘damage’, the tenants have asked for compensation
totalling $4860.96 to cover the unpaid leave that
Mr Appo took due to the
psychological stress and strain this situation had placed him under. The tenants
provided a medical certificate
from Dr Tom Keaney dated 23 January 2015 and an
undated letter from the Doctor which stated that Mr Appo, “
stressed, in distress, with changes in his mood and difficulty
.” The letter went on to say that the issues associated with
the electrical defects regarding the premises and Mr Appo’s
address these issues had clearly caused real and significant stress to the
122(5) of the Act provides that the Commissioner is not to make an
order for the payment of compensation in respect of death,
physical injury, pain
or suffering.
also do not find any basis for awarding compensation for damages for breach of
contract causing distress or physical
respectfully agree with the legal analysis of the Delegate in the decision of
the Commissioner of Tenancies in Miller V Doodridge
. In that matter
the Delegate stated:
“In relation to damages the Tenant
cannot claim compensation for “pain and suffering”. Pain and
suffering is an
entirely subjective sensation of conscious distress. Insofar as
the Tenant claims for stress and distress which falls into the category
“pain and suffering” she cannot be compensated for that. However
pain and suffering does not necessarily include feelings
of anger and
indignation, mere inconvenience or disappointment. The plaintiff cannot recover
for physical injury either.
I cannot see why other damages would not be available on the grounds
analogous to common law damages under contract. The general object
of damages is
to compensate a party not to penalise the other. The purpose is to put the party
in the position they would have been
in if the contract had been performed.
Tenancy agreements are akin to contracts albeit heavily regulated by statute.
The compensation
awarded should be such as may fairly and reasonably be
considered either arising naturally (ie. according to the usual course of
things) from such a breach of contract itself, or such as may reasonably be
supposed to have been in the contemplation of both parties,
at the time they
made the contract, as the probable result of the breach of it (see Hadley v
Baxendale (1854) 156 ER 145).
In Baltic Shipping v Dillon
[1993] HCA 4
(1993) 176 CLR 344
McHugh of the High Court of Australia stated:
“The application of basic principle concerning the awarding of
damages for breach of contract requires an award of damages for
distress or
disappointment where it is an express or implied term of the contract that the
promisor will provide pleasure or enjoyment
or personal protection for the
promisee. Unless this Court were to refuse to follow Burton, Hobbs and Bailey as
well as the decisions
in Stedman and Athens-McDonald Travel Services Pty Ltd,
damages must also be recoverable for distress or disappointment consequent
upon the suffering of physical inconvenience as the consequence
of a breach of
evidence does not reveal any physical inconvenience suffered by the tenants as a
result of this particular breach of contract.
122(3)(a) of the Act also provides that in determining whether to order the
payment of compensation to a party the Commissioner
must take into consideration
a number of factors. One of those factors includes whether the person from whom
compensation is claimed
has taken all reasonable steps to comply with his or her
obligations. In fairness to the landlord, it was not unreasonable to consider
the electrical safety and standard of the premises to be acceptable given the
electrical status report he had received prior to purchasing
the premises from
CMP Electrics. The landlord then acted diligently in rectifying the electrical
defects once it became clear they
required repair.
no loss or damage has been suffered by the tenants, I find that no compensation
is payable as a result of the landlord breaching
the tenancy agreement by
failing to ensure the premises meet all health and safety requirements under an
Act that applies to residential
Application for
Compensation Due to Landlord’s Breach of Duty to Repair
122(2) of the Act provides that a party may not apply for compensation
for loss or damage suffered by reason of a breach of
the landlord’s duty
to repair, unless notice under section
of the Act has been given.
58(1) of the Act makes it a term of the tenancy that if a property
requires repair the tenant, as soon as reasonably practicable
after becoming
aware of the need for repairs, is to notify the landlord orally or in
writing. Section
58(3) of the Act provides that
if the Landlord requests the tenant to
put notice in writing the tenant is not taken to have given notice under section
unless the notice is given in writing.
57 of the Act makes it a term of the tenancy agreement that the
Landlord must ensure that the premises and ancillary property
in a reasonable
state of repair when a tenant enters into occupation of the premises; and
maintained in a
reasonable state of repair having regards to their age, character and
prospective life.
Landlord does not breach that term unless they have notice of the repair
(under section
58 of the Act) and if they have acted with
reasonable diligence to have
the defect repaired.
note at the hearing, the tenants were asked to identify the items requiring
repair which they claim the landlord has failed to act
with reasonable diligence
in effecting repair. I will deal with each of those identified items in
also note that the other repairs items specified in the tenants application
presumably were attended to in a diligent manner by
the landlord and therefore
require no further consideration.
Main Bedroom
Airconditioner
ingoing condition report states that the airconditioner vent in bedroom 1 is
clean, good condition, Conia split system
.” On page 16 of
the ingoing condition report under the heading “General”, it states,
Coni 4 x Split systems, 1 x Daikin, 1 x Comia (dining
).” There is no statement whether the airconditioners are in
working order.
tenants submitted that they didn’t utilise the airconditioner in the main
bedroom until the weather became hotter in mid-October
2014. The tenants stated
that they slept in their children’s bedroom or in the lounge room for a 2
month period due to the
airconditioner fault in the main bedroom.
is common ground that the tenants issued a maintenance request to the
landlord’s agent on 24 or 25 October 2014. It is also
common ground that
the airconditioner was repaired on 24 December 2014.
tenants claim that from when the fault was reported they made contact with the
landlord’s agent a number of times to get
the airconditioner fixed. They
further claim that the contractor advised them that he had only received the
work order from the landlord’s
agent to fix the airconditioner on 18
December 2014.
landlord’s agent provided a copy of a work order dated 25 October 2014
asking the contractor to quote on replacing the system.
The same work order was
re-issued on 17 December 2014. The landlord’ agent submitted that there
was a delay in work due to
the contractor requiring parts to be shipped from
tenants have questioned the landlord’s agent’s version of events
regarding the part form Adelaide and have suggested
that I directly question the
contractor. I should make it clear at this point that if the evidence of the
contractor was considered
critical by the tenants they could have taken steps to
obtain a statutory declaration from him or to ask him to attend as a witness
during the hearing. In any event nothing turns on this issue.
the importance of having a functional main bedroom airconditioner during the
hotter weather period in Alice Springs, the relevant
repairs should have been
given some urgency by the landlord. The evidence indicates the landlord’s
agent had to reissue a work
order to quote on the replacement of the
airconditioner on 17 November 2014.
find that the landlord has failed to act with reasonable diligence in effecting
repairs to the airconditioner in the main bedroom.
I will allow compensation
representing what would amount to a 5 week deduction in rent of $25 per week. In
addition, for disappointment
from physical inconvenience I award an amount of $100. The total compensation
for this particular breach is $225.00.
Evaporative
Airconditioner (Swampy) in House and Shed and the Wheelie Bin
tenants seek compensation for the loss of use of:
evaporative air-cooler in the house which they submit was reported as in need
of repair on 12 November 2014. It was repaired
and serviced on 13 November
2014. It was reported again as in being in need of repair on 2 January 2015 but
the repair was refused.
The tenants claimed their
enjoyment of the house was severely compromised and their electricity
consumption significantly increased
from $637.81 on 30 December 2014 to
$1,134.92 on 12 March 2015 due to reliance on the split system
airconditioners.
(b) the evaporative air cooler in the rear garage was reported as requiring
repair on 17 December 2014 however repairs were never
effected. The tenants
claim this has affected their use and enjoyment of the premises.
wheelie bin was removed. This was reported
by the tenants to the landlords agent by phone on 27 November 2015 and then
in writing on 5 January 2015.
The tenant correctly
noted that the 2
wheelie bin is noted as being
present in the ingoing condition report and that the cost of a hiring a second
wheelie bin from the
Alice Springs Town Council is $269.50 per year.
tenants submitted that when they were first considering the rental of the
premises which they had discussed with Brandy Jenkes
from LJ Hooker Alice
Springs, they were referred to the Elders website which still had the sales
listing for the premises. The tenants
provided a copy of the relevant internet
advertisement, which amongst other things states, “
There are split
system and evaporative air-condition throughout the property to accommodate the
temperature for all seasons.
The landlord’s agent submitted that:
no maintenance
request was ever received from the tenant for the evaporative airconditioner in
the house. The tenant apparently arranged
it directly with Alice Refrigeration
but was paid for by the owner to maintain a good relationship with the
completed on 17 December 2014 but the owner subsequently advised that he would
not be maintaining the evaporative ariconditioning
to the residence as it is
fully serviced with split systems;
the evaporative
airconditioner to the shed was never in working order and it was never intended
for use because it does not service
a habitable room. The owner was not inclined
to repair this unit which was advised to the tenants; and
wheelie bin was removed because Alice Springs Town Council regulations stipulate
that each residential property is entitled
to one wheelie bin. The second
wheelie bin was removed by the rubbish contractor on instructions from the
Council. The landlord’s
agent tendered a copy of an Alice Springs Town
Council Rates notice for the property dated 26 July 2013 which stipulated that
charges for garbage was $296.50 for one item of unimproved capital value (I
assume one wheelie bin). The landlord’s agent also
provided a copy of an
e-mail dated 9 February 2015 sent to him by Tina Hall, Rates Officer, from
Alice Springs Town Council where
she stated, “
101 Lackman Terrace has
been paying for 1 x 240lt wheelie bin only. At some stage someone has obtained
an extra bin for the property
without notifying the council.
tenancy agreement confers the exclusive right of occupancy in respect of the
land and in respect of all of its fixtures and all
non-fixed facilities intended
to remain upon the land during the tenancy. Accordingly if the premises include
evaporative airconditioners
and a second wheelie bin then the exclusive use and
quite enjoyment of those items forms part of the tenancy agreement.
tenancy agreement signed by the parties does not specify any exclusions in terms
of the services such as the evaporative airconditioning
or the second wheelie
bin. These items are all listed on the ingoing condition report. The tenants
claim to have noted the evaporative
airconditioning in the advertisement they
were asked to view by Brandy Jenkes from LJ Hooker Alice Springs (representing
the landlord).
Furthermore the tenants stated at the hearing that the reason
they chose to upgrade from their previous rental property to the premises
question was because of features such as the evaporative air-conditioning as
well as the presence of a second wheelie bin.
the case of Huskisson v
the Australian
Capital Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal
When a prospective tenant sights the property and
notes the existence of facilities or service of various kinds the tenant is
to presume that those facilities or services will form part of the
tenancy unless the landlord makes it clear, before the tenancy
agreement is
entered, that those services and facilities will not be provided. Perhaps, the
most common example of this principle
is where a house contains built in
air-conditioning and heating appliances which the tenant assumes are functional,
only to discover
later that they are non-functional. In these circumstances it
is not open to the landlord to assert that no representation had ever
that the facilities were functional. The representation is implied in the fact
that the facilities were visibly present
during the pre-tenancy
inspections
agree with the Tribunal’s reasoning and accordingly award compensation on
the basis of damages due to loss of bargain. The
Tenant had bargained and
contracted for premises with evaporative airconditioning and a second wheelie
bin. They did not get what
they had contracted for. They are therefore entitled
to compensatory damages which equate to the difference in what they contracted
for and what they in fact received. I calculate the amount of compensation as
(a) $15 for
every week that the evaporative airconditioning in the house was unavailable
after being reported to the landlord, repaired
by the landlord and then
breaking down again. I count 14 weeks and therefore order $210.00 in
compensation;
every week that the evaporative airconditioner in the shed/garage has not been
available for use which was from the commencement
of the tenancy to the date of
the hearing. I count 28.5 weeks and therefore award a total of $142.50 in
compensation.
(c) for the
loss of use of the wheelie bin from the date it was first reported to the
landlords agent as being removed to the date
of the hearing I award $100 in
compensation;
(d) In relation
to the tenants’ increased electricity usage due to the unavailability of
the evaporative airconditioner in
the house, I note that it is not clear
whether the increase in electricity charges is solely attributed to the
reliance on the split
system Airconditioners. Accordingly I am prepared to
allow half the difference between the tenants’ 30 December 2014
electricity
charges and the 12 March 2015 electricity charges. This totals
tenants were able to rely on the split system airconditioners and no physical
discomfort resulted in disappointment and
distress, I make no award of
compensation under that head of damages.
note that the awards of compensation set out above in paragraph 73(a) to (c) are
in relation to actual loss or damage suffered.
I have also allowed for a rent
reduction based on the same calculations later in these
Smoke Alarms
tenants submitted that due to their concerns with the electricity fault they
decided to conduct their own testing of the smoke
alarms and also arranged for
Wormald to carry out relevant tests. Their own testing revealed that 2 alarms
were faulty.
technical service call report from Wormald dated 28 January 2015 passed all the
smoke alarms except for:
bedroom – ‘Fail old 9 volt type’;
ii. bed 3 – ‘Fail old 9 volt
Wormald report does not however indicated what tests were conducted to test the
smoke alarms and whether the terminology ‘fail’
means failing a
smoke test or because the alarms are non-complaint with current standards.
tenants gave a copy of the Wormald report to the landlord’s agent during a
regular inspection on 30 January 2015. It appears
that no action has been taken
to repair or replace the alleged faulty smoke alarms by the landlord.
tenants referred to clause 41 of the tenancy agreement which states, “As
soon as practicable after receiving advice from
the tenant that any smoke alarm
in the Property does not function when tested:
(a) test the
smoke alarm; and
(b) replace the
smoke alarm if it does not function when tested.
tenants then arranged for Mr Ettridge from NT Fire and Emergency Services to
attend the premises on 9 February 2015.
landlord’s agent provided a copy an email sent to him on 9 February 2015
from Mr Ettridge stating as follows:
We had a request from
the person renting 101 Lackman Terrace to do an inspection to see if the house
was currently meeting Fire Service
Regulation as to its installed smoke alarms.
After inspecting the house we found that the house had 4 photoelectric smoke
installed which is more than the current Fire Service Regulations require
for that type of house.”
tenants submitted that, “...
despite the e-mail from Mr Ettridge to Mr
Fraser it is our opinion that the house still does not comply with the relevant
regulations.
As Mr Fraser continues to reject our requests for this to be
rectified, no further action has been taken by LJ Hooker or the owner.
detectors remain incorrectly placed and 2 out of 6 are still not
functioning
light of the e-mail from Mr Ettridge dated 9 February 2015 to the
landlord’s agent, the tenants have not provided enough
evidence to
convince me on the balance of probabilities that the landlord has breached his
duty under section 48 to ensure that the
premises and ancillary property to
which the tenancy agreement relates meet all health and safety requirements
specified under an
Act that applies to residential premises or ancillary
relation to the landlord’s obligation to effect repairs or replace the
smoke alarm, I note that clause 41 of the tenancy
agreement does not provide
that the test must be conducted by an independent qualified person. The minimum
clause 41 requires is
for the tenant to carry out a test and then notify the
landlord if it fails. The tenants have done this, therefore the landlord must
either repair or replace the relevant smoke alarms. The fact that they have not
done this to the date of the Inquiry places the landlord
in breach of the
tenancy agreement.
am unable to order compensation as the tenants have not suffered any loss or
damage, particularly in light of the advice provided
by Mr Ettridge that 4
photoelectric smoke alarms is more than the current Fire service Regulations
require for this type of house.
pursuant to section 138(e) I will order that the landlord must effect repairs or
replace the 2 faulty smoke alarms as advised
to his agents by the tenants within
3 weeks from the date of these reasons for decision.
tenants claim that the landlord has not acted with reasonable diligence in
effecting repairs to the rear patio area of the premises.
The tenants submitted
that they reported the issue on 17 December 2014. The patio area did in fact
flood during heavy rains in early
January 2015 due to the leaks in the roof
landlord referred to the e-mail of one of the tenants, Dr Fearon, sent on 11
January 2015 which states, “
Leaking patio roof and blocked guttering
system. My husband fixed this at our expense
find that it was reasonable on the landlord’s part to view this e-mail as
advice that no action was required to repair the
gutters as in the tenants word
they had been fixed. I also find that the period in which the landlord did not
effect repairs from
the date the issues were first reported on 17 December 2014
(taking into account the general difficulty in procuring tradesman services
the Christmas period) to 11 January 2015 when the landlord was advised the issue
had been fixed by the tenants, is not enough
for me to determine that the
landlord did not act with reasonable diligence.
tenants apparently reported the ongoing problems to the landlord’s agent
with the roof gutters at a regular inspection on
30 January 2015. The tenants
submitted that they made it very clear that the gutters still required attention
despite the work done
by the tenants themselves. The tenants however did not
submit a written maintenance request until 10 March 2015.
note that at the commencement of the Inquiry the tenants agreed that there was a
procedure in place to submit all requests for repairs
or maintenance in
57(2) provides a landlord is not in breach of his or her duty to ensure and
maintain the premises in a reasonable state of
repair unless he or she has
notice of the defect requiring repair and fails to act with reasonable diligence
to have the defect repaired.
58(3) provides that if the landlord request the tenant to put the notice in
writing, the tenant is not to be taken to have
given notice under subsection (1)
unless it is given to the landlord in writing.
landlord’s agent referred to an email from Kelly Richards of LJ Hooker
Alice Springs to Bree Pettit dated 10 March 2015
in which she stated,
Can you let the owners know about this email. The gutters need
cleaning out especially patio area. Get Geoff – please chase
someone else to do it urgently.
the apparent urgent priority placed on this maintenance request by the
landlord’s agent, as at the date of the Inquiry
I was advised that the
required maintenance and repairs had not been effected.
find that the landlord has failed to act with reasonable diligence in effecting
the required maintenance and repairs. The tenants
evidence was that they
suffered the loss of the use of the patio area which became flooded during heavy
down pours in January. However,
no evidence was provided as to any loss or
damage suffered by the tenants from the date on which written notice was
provided ie.
10 March 2015 to the date of the Inquiry. Accordingly I will not
award any compensation for this breach.
to section 138(e) of the Act I will order that the landlord must, within 3 weeks
from the date of these reasons, effect maintenance
and repairs and/or replace
the relevant sections of the blocked or leaking roof guttering and drains on the
premises so they are
restored to a functional state and prevent flooding of
water in the patio/veranda area of the premises.
Excessive Rent
tenants have applied under section 42 of the Act for a declaration that the rent
payable under the tenancy is excessive.
42(3) provides that the Commissioner of Tenancies may only make an excessive
rent declaration if in the opinion of the Commissioner
the rent is
regard to the general level of rents for comparable premises in the same or
similar localities and the cost of any services
provided in connection with
the tenancy agreement by the landlord or tenant; or
(b) because the
level of services provided under the agreement has, in the opinion of the
Commissioner, been reduced to a significant
extent, having regard to the cost
of any services provided in connection with the tenancy agreement by the
landlord or tenant.
tenants submitted that they chose to rent the premises because of its attractive
features. They also submitted that rent is excessive:
(a) due to the
owner’s refusal to fix the evaporative airconditioners in the house and
shed which has significantly reduced
the amenity and their enjoyment of the
premises; and
(b) with the
withdrawal of these services, the rental price is much higher in comparison with
other houses in the areas with similar
features; and
believed the premises to have top quality finishes but this is not the case. The
tenants noted the split system airconditioners
were referred to by the
airconditioner technician as being of ‘cheap’
The tenants submitted a printed search undertaken on the domain.com.au property
website for rental properties within the post
code 0870. This search shows 16
properties offered for a weekly rent ranging from $1,000 though to $460 per
week. It is of
note that the 3 properties seeking the highest rent are all 4
bedroom properties. 12 of the 13 properties offered for rent from
week and below were all 3 bedroom properties. I note that the premises the
subject of the tenancy agreement between
the landlord and tenant is a 4
bedroom home.
tenants have not submitted any other evidence of a licensed valuer’s
report or an independent real agent’s opinion
on fair market rent for
the premises. I note the landlord has not made any submissions regarding
this issue despite being afforded
the opportunity to do so.
on the evidence before me, I am not of the opinion that the rent charged for
these premises is excessive when compared to
other properties in a similar
I find that there has been a significant reduction in services provided under
this agreement, specifically the evaporative
airconditioners and the wheelie
bin. The submission made by the landlord’s agent are clear that that
none of these services
will be repaired or reinstated for the remainder of the
order that the tenancy agreement between the landlord and tenants is varied so
that from 10 April 2015 rent payable shall be
$695.00 per week up until the
end of the tenancy agreement on 12 September 2015. The landlord and tenants
shall determine an
appropriate arrangement whereby the excess rent of $25 per
week paid by the tenants after 9 April 2015 is either utilised as a
toward future rent or repaid to the tenants.
I order that:
application for disciplinary action against the landlord’s real estate
agents is dismissed.
application for compensation due to psychological stress is dismissed.
landlord shall pay the tenants the sum of $225.00 in compensation for the
failure to act with reasonable diligence in effecting
repairs to the
airconditioner in the main bedroom.
landlord shall pay the Applicants the sum of $701.05 in compensation for the
loss of use of the evaporative airconditioners, the
second wheelie bin and part
of the increased electricity charges paid by the Applicant.
landlord must effect repairs or replace the 2 faulty smoke alarms as advised to
the landlord’s agents by the tenants within
3 weeks from the date of this
landlord must, within 3 weeks from the date of these reasons, effect maintenance
and repairs and/or replace the relevant sections
of the blocked or leaking roof
guttering and drains on the premises so they are restored to a functional state
and prevent flooding
of water in the patio/veranda area of the premises.
tenancy agreement between the landlord and tenants is varied so that from 10
April 2015 rent payable shall be $695.00 per week
up until the end of the
tenancy agreement on 12 September 2015. The landlord and tenants shall determine
an appropriate arrangement
whereby the excess rent of $25.00 per week paid by
the tenants after 9 April 2015 is either utilised as a credit towards future
or repaid to the Applicants.
Dated 19 May 2015
Demetrios Laouris
Delegate of the
Commissioner of Tenancies
Sandblasting P/L v Harris
(1997) 188 CLR 313
Shipping v Dillon
[1993] HCA 4
[2006] NTRTCmr
Shipping v Dillon
[1993] HCA 4
(1993) 176 CLR 344
[2011] ACAT
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (297 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter