URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTSCFC/2021/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:23:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Northern Territory of Australia v EH & Anor [2021] NTSCFC 5 (20 August 2021)
Northern Territory of Australia v EH & Anor
PARTIES: NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
PUBLIC GUARDIAN
TITLE OF COURT: FULL COURT OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NOs: 2020-02510-SC
2020-02431-SC
DELIVERED: 20 August 2021
HEARING DATE: 1 September 2020
JUDGMENT OF: Grant CJ, Southwood and Kelly JJ
CATCHWORDS:
MENTAL HEALTH – Guardianship order – Powers of Guardian
Question of law reserved for Full Court – Scope of Public
Guardian’s authority under guardianship order to make decisions
relation to health care action and related matters – Whether
guardian’s power extended to consent to medical interventions
physical restraint to prevent contamination of catheter site, administration of
medication and treatment in secure area
of geriatric ward – Terms of the
legislation contemplate substitute consent to medical procedures which are
inconsistent with
adult’s expressed or demonstrated views and wishes, and
restrictive of adult’s freedom of action – Provision for
consent advances rather than diminishes individual rights or protections –
Principle of legality has no application
– Appeal allowed and application
for review granted.
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
Coco v The Queen
[1994] HCA 15
(1994) 179 CLR 427
Daly v Thiering
[2013] HCA 45
Ex p Le Heup
(1811) 18 Ves 221
[1983] 1 NSWLR
Lee v New South Wales Crime Commission
[2013] HCA 39
(2013) 251 CLR 196
[2014] HCA 20
(2014) 253 CLR 455
McLaughlin v Fosbery & Ors
[1904] HCA 55
Public Advocate v C, B
(2019) 133 SASR 353,
[1982] 2 NSWLR 508
Re Application for Guardianship Order (BCB)
SR (WA) 338
Re DJR and Mental Health Act
[1983] NSWLR 557
(1952) 69 WN (NSW) 341
[2003] QGAAT 14
Minor) (Medical Treatment: Courts Jurisdiction)
[1992] 4 All ER 627
[1984] 1 NSWLR 694
Secretary, Department of Health and Community
Services v JWB and SMB
Marion’s case)
[1992] HCA 15
(1992) 175 CLR 218
X7 v Australian Crime Commission
[2013] HCA 29
(2013) 248 CLR 92
, referred to.
T Carney and D Tait,
The Adult Guardianship Experiment: Tribunals and
Popular Justice
, The Federation Press, 1997
REPRESENTATION:
Plaintiff/Applicant: T Moses
First Defendant/Respondent: D McConnel
Second Defendant/Respondent M Littlejohn
Solicitors:
Plaintiff/Applicant: Solicitor for the Northern Territory
First Defendant/Respondent: North Australian Aboriginal Justice Agency
Second Defendant/Respondent Direct brief
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 38
IN THE FULL COURT OF THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Northern Territory of Australia v EH & Anor
Nos. 2020-02510-SC & 2020-02431-SC
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
Plaintiff/Applicant
First Defendant/Respondent
PUBLIC GUARDIAN
Second Defendant/Respondent
CORAM: GRANT CJ, SOUTHWOOD & KELLY JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 20 August 2021)
[1] On 15 July 2020, a Judge of the Supreme Court consolidated these two
proceedings and referred them to the Full Court pursuant
Supreme Court Act 1979
(NT). The sole issues arising for determination
are whether the Public Guardian’s authority under a guardianship order
on 18 March 2019 includes the power to consent to:
(a) physical contact with the first defendant, in the form of handholding and
gentle pressure of limbs to prevent contamination of
the site and infections
when the first defendant has his supra-pubic catheter changed;
(b) the administration of medication to the first defendant, namely oral
carbamazepine and olanzapine, for agitation and disinhibition;
(c) continued treatment of the first defendant in a secure area of the geriatric
ward of the Palmerston Regional Hospital, where
he has been treated since 2018.
[2] That care and treatment is referred to compendiously in these Reasons as
the “medical interventions”.
Factual background
[3] The facts are largely uncontroversial. At the time of the hearing the
first defendant was an 80-year-old man with frontotemporal
dementia presenting
as disinhibition, aggression, agitation and impulsivity. On 18 March 2019, the
Northern Territory Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (“the
Tribunal”) made a guardianship order appointing the Public Guardian as
guardian for the
first defendant’s personal matters and conferring
authority on the Public Guardian to make decisions regarding:
(a) where and with whom the first defendant is to reside;
(b) “health care action” within the meaning of the
Guardianship
of Adults Act 2016
(c) the first defendant’s day-to-day care, including facilitating access
to support services.
[4] At the material times, the first defendant was resident in the secure
geriatric ward at the Palmerston Regional Hospital. The
purpose of that
placement was to minimise his agitation in order to reduce reliance on sedation
and staff intervention. The first
defendant was not able to leave the secure
ward without assistance. There is nothing in the evidence to suggest that the
first defendant
wished to leave the geriatric ward unassisted.
[5] The first defendant had a suprapubic catheter in place as a result of a
urinary retention condition. The catheter was required
to be changed every four
to six weeks. When being changed, the area around the catheter had to be kept
sterile to avoid the risk
of infection. During the course of that procedure,
the first defendant’s treating team held his hands and guided his arms
away from the site to prevent him from touching and contaminating the site.
Those interventions were partly precautionary and partly
responsive to voluntary
or involuntary movements by the first defendant. The alternative to that
intervention was an increased use
of sedation, which gave rise to an increased
risk of adverse health outcomes.
[6] The first defendant’s medication regime included the administration
of carbamazepine twice-daily for the behavioural and
psychological symptoms of
his dementia, and olanzapine as required for acute episodes of agitation,
including sometimes when his
suprapubic catheter was being changed.
[7] Against that background, in August and September 2019 a geriatrics
registrar at the Palmerston Regional Hospital made applications
pursuant to
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
authorising the medical interventions. In November 2019, a third application
was made to the Tribunal for an order pursuant
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
that the Public Guardian’s
authority under the guardianship order included the power to consent to the
medical interventions.
The import of that application was that an order
pursuant to
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
unnecessary, and it was effectively made in substitution for the first two
applications. The issue arising on the third application
resolves ultimately to
the question whether the medical interventions are “health care”
within the meaning of the
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
. The Tribunal
ultimately found that they were not, largely on the basis that “health
care” does not include coercive
[8] The Territory subsequently brought an application for leave to appeal
against that decision, and commenced separate proceedings
seeking a declaration
that the Public Guardian’s authority under the guardianship order includes
the power to consent to the
medical interventions. That application for
declaratory relief was brought in the event that the Supreme Court formed the
the Tribunal did not have power to make an order in the terms sought
pursuant to
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
consequence that the appeal might fail on that jurisdictional ground rather than
proceeding to a determination of the substantive
The historical context
[9] The appointment of substitute decision-makers for the protection of the
property and personal interests of vulnerable citizens
developed as part of the
parens patriae
guardian (known as a “committee”) to look after the property and
person of a ward, and developed special principles and concepts, such as the
“best interests” test, to be applied in
the exercise of powers by
guardians. That jurisdiction was given to the superior courts of the Australian
colonies, and the powers
conferred were inherent and plenary in nature unless
modified by legislation.
1890 (53 Vict ch 5) was enacted to govern mental
health law in England and Wales, and many of its features were copied in the
The analogue
legislation in Australia generally conferred a lunacy jurisdiction on the
relevant Supreme Court, but preserved the
operation of the general law
concerning the appointment and powers of a guardian (still called a
“committee”) except
to the extent that the general law was altered
by the legislation. The legislation provided that when proved to the
satisfaction
of the Court that a person was of unsound mind and incapable of
managing his or her affairs, a “committee of his estate”
appointed if necessary, and also “a committee of his person” when
[11] The legislation also authorised justices to issue warrants for the
apprehension of an “insane” person, and to direct
that person to be
received into a hospital for the insane or a licensed house (subject to
requirements for medical certification).
The legislation was largely silent as
to the powers of a committee when appointed. However, the legislation assumed
that a committee
of the person appointed by the Court had authority at general
law to direct the represented person to be received into a hospital
insane or a licensed house. A committee could also “settle and change at
pleasure the lunatic’s residence”,
and “select a licensed
house as the place of enforced
residence”.
That included
authority on the part of the committee, when appointed, “to cause the
removal of the lunatic from one place
of residence to another if circumstances
justify such action”.
power extended to using force to detain a protected person, and to authorise
others to do the same.
[12] However, there was a limited need for the involvement of the superior
courts from the mid-nineteenth century to the 1960s. This
was because people
with mental illness, intellectual disability or some other condition bearing on
capacity were ordinarily confined
and managed within institutions. Under those
arrangements, personal decisions about treatment, lifestyle and education were
by the institution, and it was assumed in practice – whatever the
strict position at general law might have been – that
practitioners working in those institutions could authorise and carry out
treatment on people lacking capacity without need
for consent. In fact, courts
sometimes refused to appoint a guardian to provide consent to medical treatment
on the basis that “the
ultimate responsibility for any treatment where the
patient is incapable of giving a true consent must remain with the hospital and
the medical authorities who recommend and give the
treatment”.
ordinarily only became involved where an issue concerning property rights arose,
and in those circumstances the relevant
Public Trustee was routinely appointed
to manage the person’s
[13] The decline in the use of institutions to confine people suffering from
conditions which impaired their capacity brought with
it a renewed focus on how
those people could make legally effective choices, including valid consent to
medical treatment. Without
a proxy with the power to make legally valid
decisions, those who lacked competence might be deprived of access to necessary
therapeutic treatment and services. At the same time, it was recognised
that recourse to the inherent jurisdiction of the superior
courts presented
practical difficulties, because of both limitations in jurisdiction and the
expense and complexity of the procedures
involved. In that former respect, the
inherent jurisdiction extended only to the mentally ill and the profoundly
retarded, and excluded
dementia and most forms of mental
retardation.
[14] As a result, all Australian jurisdictions implemented schemes under
which some form of guardianship tribunal, with an associated
public advocate or
public guardian, was given statutory power to appoint substitutes to make
legally valid decisions on behalf of
those who lacked the competence to do so,
most commonly and significantly in relation to the management of property and
medical treatment. Under the legislation enacted for that purpose in
New South Wales, Tasmania, South Australian and Western Australia,
provision was
made for representatives or “persons responsible” to provide consent
on behalf of a person who needed medical
treatment but was unable to provide
personal consent.
[15] This allowed medical staff to identify a close friend or relative who
could give consent if required (in some cases without need
for the appointment
of a guardian). This obviated the need for a specific order from a tribunal
unless the treatment fell into an
excluded category of serious medical
treatment, which ordinarily included such matters as sterilisation, termination
of pregnancy
and donation of bodily tissue. Under all of the Australian
schemes, substitute decision-makers were required to comply with principles
incorporated into the legislation to regulate the exercise of powers and duties
in the guardianship role. Those principles included
such matters as consulting
with the person subject to the order, taking his or her views into account, and
acting in his or her “best
interests”.
[16] As part of that Australia-wide process of guardianship reforms, the
Adult Guardianship Act
(NT) came into operation in the Northern Territory
on 30 June 1989. Under that scheme, applications for the appointment of a
were heard and determined by the Local Court, rather than by a lay
tribunal as in the other States and Territory. Under the terms
legislation, the appointment of a guardian under a full order conferred on the
guardian the power “to consent to any
healthcare that is in the best
interests of the represented
The exercise of
that authority was subject to the “best interests”
requirement.
The further
consent of the Local Court was required only in relation to a “major
medical procedure”, which included
procedures generally accepted by the
medical profession as being of a “major nature”, and medical
procedures relating
to contraception and the termination of a
In determining
whether to authorise a major medical procedure, the Local Court was also
required to apply the “best interests”
[17] During the operation of the predecessor guardianship legislation, in
both the coronial jurisdiction and the Local Court the specific
question arose
as to whether the guardian of a represented person had power to consent to
detention and restraint for the purpose
of medical treatment in circumstances
where there was a full guardianship order in place pursuant to s 17 of the
Adult Guardianship Act
[18] In the coronial findings into the death of Rita Anderson on 16 May 2002,
the Deputy Coroner drew attention to a lack of clarity
as to the extent of the
powers under guardianship orders in relation to coercive treatment and
placement. In
Satu Wieland v
, the Local Court
concluded that in the circumstances of that case the guardian had power to
consent to detention and restraint for
the purpose of medical treatment as
“part and parcel” of the power to consent to medical treatment.
That finding was
consistent with the conclusion reached in
Re Application for
Guardianship Order (BCB)
Those findings are in turn consistent with the historical acceptance that
authority to provide substitute consent for medical treatment
is an attribute of
guardianship
, and that authority
extended to ensuring that a person who was legally incapable of giving consent
to medical treatment received
such medical care as was required.
[19] Accordingly, subject to the requirement to procure the Local Court's
consent in relation to major medical procedures, an adult
guardian was
considered to have power under the predecessor legislation in the Northern
Territory to consent to detention and restraint
for the purpose of medical
treatment in circumstances where there was a full guardianship order made
pursuant to s 17, or a conditional
guardianship order made pursuant to
s 18, which conferred the power to consent to any health care that was in
the best interests
of the represented person. In a practical sense, the power
vested in guardians to consent to health care in the best interests of
represented person would often have been rendered nugatory in the absence of an
attendant power to consent to restraint. Given
the nature of the disabilities
suffered by persons falling within the ambit of the legislation, it was to be
expected that represented
persons would on occasions be resistant to or
non-compliant with treatment in their best interests.
[20] However, given the uncertainties arising from the lack of express
provision in the legislation, where the adult guardian had
consented to health
care but the person was resistant to provision of the care, the minimum
restraint necessary in the circumstances
was used to enable the most
conservative form of care to be provided. In the ordinary course, the matter
was then brought back before
the Local Court out of an abundance of caution to
seek a variation to the adult guardianship order to give express authority to
guardian to consent to the use of the minimum restraint necessary for the
provision of health care in the best interests of the person.
[21] Some advocates questioned whether the
Adult Guardianship Act
permitted any regime of coercive treatment, either with or without an order of
the Local Court expressly authorising restraint, but
no finding was ever made in
those terms. Such a result would have been inconsistent with the fact that the
legislation did not contemplate
repeated applications in the
that necessity. The matter was not determined authoritatively
by the Supreme
Court during the operation of the
Adult Guardianship Act
The relevant operation of the
Guardianship of Adults Act
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
commenced on 28 July 2016.
It repealed the
Adult Guardianship Act
and conferred jurisdiction in
adult guardianship matters on the Tribunal. The Public Guardian is, in effect,
the guardian of last
Under the terms of the
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
(a) The Tribunal may make an order appointing a guardian for an adult if
satisfied that:
(i) the adult has impaired decision-making capacity;
(ii) the effect of that impairment is that for some or all “personal
matters” the adult is unable to exercise decision-making
capacity; and
(iii) the adult is in need of a guardian for some or all of those
(b) The term “personal matter” is defined to mean “a matter
relating to the adult’s personal affairs (including
health care) or
lifestyle”. The definition then provides examples of personal matters,
which include “accommodation”
and “health
(c) The Tribunal must specify in a guardianship order the “personal
matters” for which the guardian has
(d) The Tribunal may impose restrictions on the guardian’s authority,
impose requirements to be complied with by the guardian
in relation to the
exercise of the guardian’s authority, and give directions to the guardian
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
provides that a
guardian for an adult must make decisions in relation to the personal matters
for which the guardian has authority
under the guardianship order as and when
such decisions are required. For the purpose of doing so, the guardian is
authorised to
do anything on behalf of the adult that the adult could lawfully
do if the adult had full legal capacity. However, the guardian’s
authority is subject to the Act and the terms of the guardianship order.
[24] Consistently with the principles which were developed and applied in the
parens patriae
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
in relation to an adult must exercise
that authority in accordance with the guardianship principles set out in
s 4 of the Act and
in the adult’s “best interests”. In
determining what is in the adult’s best interests, the decision-maker
take into account all relevant considerations, giving them the weight which is
appropriate in the circumstances. In determining
what is appropriate, the
decision-maker must ensure that the authority is exercised in a way that
“is the least restrictive
of the adult’s reasonable decision and
action as is practicable”.
The relevant considerations are specified to include, amongst other
(a) maintenance of the adult’s freedom of decision and action to the
greatest extent practicable;
(b) the provision to the adult of appropriate care, including health care; and
(c) maintenance of the adult’s right to be treated with dignity and
[25] The term “health care” is defined broadly to mean health
care of any kind, “including: (a) anything that is
part of a health
service, as defined in section 5 of the Health Practitioner Regulation National
Law; and (b) the removal of tissue
from a person’s body in accordance
Transplantation and Anatomy Act
The definition
is broad in scope, and inclusive rather than exhaustive. The reference to a
“health service” as defined
in s 5 of the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law operates only to specify various categories of
healthcare provider
not inform the question to be determined in this appeal.
[26] Where the matters for which the guardian has authority under the
guardianship order include health care actions, the guardian
can make consent
decisions about those health care actions for the represented
The term “health
care action”, for an adult, is defined to mean “commencing,
continuing, withholding or withdrawing
health care for the
“consent decision”, about health care action, is defined to mean
“a decision to give or refuse consent
for the taking of the health care
[27] The only express restrictions on a guardian’s authority to make
consent decisions about health care actions are where the
matter is subject to
an advance consent decision pursuant to the
Advance Personal Planning Act
(NT), or where the matter involves “restricted health
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
stipulates each of the following matters
to be “restricted health
(a) sterilisation of an adult, unless it occurs as a consequence of health care
action that is taken primarily to treat an illness
of or injury to the adult;
(b) termination of a pregnancy of an adult, unless it occurs as a consequence of
health care action that is taken primarily to treat
an illness of or injury to
(c) removal from an adult of non-regenerative tissue (as defined in
Transplantation and Anatomy Act 1979
) for transplantation to another
(d) health care provided for medical research purposes; and
(e) health care prescribed by regulation to be restricted health care.
Guardianship of Adults Regulations 2016
prescribe as
“restricted health care”:
(a) health care of a kind that is not yet accepted as evidence-based, best
practice health care by a substantial number of health
care providers
specialising in the relevant area of health care; and
(b) electroconvulsive therapy.
[29] The scheme of the legislation is to give a person appointed as the
guardian for an adult with authority in relation to health
care the power and
corresponding duty to make decisions in relation to those matters when such
decisions are required. For the purpose
of doing so, the guardian is authorised
to do anything on behalf of the adult that the adult could lawfully do if the
adult had full
legal capacity. That power and duty is subject to, and guided
by, a number of mechanisms under the legislation. Most significantly,
may only be made in accordance with the guardianship principles set out in
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
and in the adult’s
“best interests”; and consent may not be given to “restricted
health care”
. A primary
consideration in a guardian’s deliberations is to ensure the provision to
the adult of appropriate health care.
[30] Unlike some statutes in other Australian jurisdictions dealing with the
appointment and powers of
, the powers of a
guardian under common law and in equity are not expressly preserved. In that
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
is not facilitative, but
rather prescriptive of those matters. It is unnecessary for these purposes to
determine whether by operation
Supreme Court Act 1979
the Supreme Court retains the jurisdiction of Chancery to appoint a guardian
in the exercise of its equitable jurisdiction; but the
powers of a guardian
appointed under the
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
are circumscribed by
the terms of that legislation.
[31] Against that background, the Tribunal’s decision that the Public
Guardian’s authority under the order for appointment
did not extend to
authorising the medical interventions was predicated on the following matters:
(a) because a guardian is authorised only to make a decision to give or refuse
consent for the taking of the health care action for
the represented adult, and
because coercion “is anathema to
, a guardian may
not authorise coercion, including the medical interventions in this case;
(b) the principle of legality requires that a power for a guardian to authorise
coercion against a represented adult would need to
be conferred in the clearest
and most unambiguous terms;
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
makes express and
exclusive provision for circumstances in which a represented adult may be
subjected to coercion;
(d) properly construed, the term “health care” does not include
coercive measures.
[32] The proposition that a guardian’s authority is limited by some
concept of volition is anomalous in this context. The anomaly
lies in importing
a requirement for volition into a process necessitated by and predicated on an
inability to exercise decision-making
capacity. In the ordinary course, any
intentional touching of another person for the purpose of providing medical
treatment is unlawful
unless the person has consented to being treated. In
circumstances where the patient has not provided consent to medical treatment,
the subjection to that medical treatment is involuntary in nature (leaving aside
any provision for substitute decision-making).
That is so whether or not the
patient actively resists. Accordingly, where the patient is incapable of
providing consent, any medical
treatment performed on the patient will
necessarily be in the absence of the patient’s personal volition.
[33] There is no warrant in the language of the statute, or having regard to
its subject matter, for the adoption of a construction
which would see a person
appointed as a guardian with authority to make decisions in relation to a
person’s health care, without
any relevant restriction in the terms of the
order, limited to providing consent to health care of a particular kind, namely
care to which the patient is not in any way resistant. Apart from
finding no support in the language or purpose of the statute itself,
construction would be inconsistent with its terms.
[34] First, in determining what is in the adult’s best interests, the
guardian must take into account “the adult’s
views and wishes as far
as it is practicable to do
That express
provision recognises both that it will ordinarily not be possible to ascertain
any sort of informed view on the part
of the represented adult, and that it may
in any event be necessary in the adult’s best interests to provide consent
is inconsistent with the adult’s expressed or demonstrated views and
[35] Secondly, in determining what is in the adult’s best interests,
the authority must be exercised in a way that “is
the least restrictive of
the adult’s freedom of decision and action as is
practicable”.
express provisions recognise that it may be necessary in the represented
adult’s best interests to authorise medical
interventions which are
restrictive of the adult’s freedom of action.
[36] Thirdly, the legislation already contains an express limitation on the
scope of “health care” which may be the subject
of consent decisions
by the concept of “restricted health
Those express
provisions recognise the legislature’s consideration of the limits of
consent decision-making in the personal
matter of health care.
[37] Even where there is some active physical resistance by the represented
adult, focusing on volition and coercion as narrowing
concepts for “health
care” is, as the plaintiff submits, inconsistent with a scheme for
surrogate decision-making where
the adult lacks the capacity to either accede to
or refuse treatment. The principles governing decision-making under the
legislation
require a consideration of whether the treatment is consistent with
the represented adult’s wishes, but do not require consistency
wishes. Those same principles have application to all substitute
decision-making under the legislation. By way of example,
a guardianship order
conferring authority over financial affairs permits, and in some senses assumes,
financial decision-making contrary
to the wishes and volition of the represented
adult and coercive treatment of his or her property.
[38] To the extent that there is any ambiguity concerning the scope of the
term “health care”, that portion of the Second
Reading Speech
extracted in the Tribunal’s reasons for
suggests that the
purpose of the
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
was to broaden the scope
of “health care” to allow efficient substitute decision-making and
to avoid treatment delays
while approvals were sought from some form of
guardianship tribunal (as was previously the practice under the former
legislation).
The Minister identified that the only limit on the scope of the
term was for “restricted health care”.
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
would appear in this respect
to be most closely modelled on the
Guardianship and Administration Act
of the Queensland legislation provides that unless
the Tribunal otherwise orders, “a guardian is authorised to do, in
with the terms of the guardian’s appointment, anything in
relation to a personal matter that the adult could have done if the
capacity for the matter when the power was exercised”. That provision is
effectively replicated in
Guardianship of Adults Act
. A “personal matter” is defined in the Queensland
legislation to include where, and with whom, the adult lives, and
health care. There is no material point of distinction between that definition
and the definition in the
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
[40] In the matter of
, the Guardianship and Administration
Tribunal of Queensland stated:
This definition of personal matters is very wide as the section provides that
it includes any matter relating to the adult’s
care or welfare except
special personal matters and special health care. ... Special health care
includes sterilisation, termination
of pregnancy, removal of tissue for
donation, participation in special medical research or experimental health care
and electroconvulsive
therapy and psychosurgery. These are the matters which are
specifically excluded, otherwise if it relates to the adult’s care
welfare the guardian can consent. The definition of personal matters also
specifically includes health care but does not limit
it to this type of care.
... Accordingly a guardian who is appointed to make decisions in relation to all
personal matters can essentially
make all the decisions in relation to a very
broad range of matters and should not be read in a restricted or limited
Furthermore, the definition of personal matters also specifically lists as a
personal matter “legal matters not relating to
finance or property”.
Consent to being retained or contained in a particular place is in the
Tribunal’s view a legal
matter, which a guardian can consent to if the
adult is unable to give a valid consent. Any restriction or containment will not
to “false imprisonment” if consent is given to the
containment or restriction. This is acknowledged by Peter MacFarlane
in his book
Queensland Health Law Handbook (2001) where he states at p 100 “In some
instances the restraint will be lawful.
This will be the case where the patient
consents...”. Clearly then if the patient could have consented to make the
lawful then a guardian on the basis of
and the definition
of personal matters can also provide this
[41] It must be assumed that in adopting the model
in place in Queensland the legislature was aware of how those provisions were
applied in that jurisdiction.
[42] In Tasmania and Victoria, the legislation provides that appointment as a
full guardian confers the powers and duties which the
guardian would have if he
or she was a parent and the represented person his or her child, and includes
the authority to decide on
a place of residence and
healthcare.
That structure is
quite different to the Territory scheme, but draws attention to the fact that
the adoption of a construction which
limited a guardian’s authority to
consent to health care or medical treatment to which the adult is not resistant
inconsistent with the general law concerning the matters in respect of
which a legal guardian may provide consent. For example,
in the case of a minor
who lacks the requisite capacity, consent to medical treatment will ordinarily
be provided by the child’s
parents or legal guardian. The authority to
provide consent to medical treatment in those circumstances includes where the
has been expressly refused by the child, and extends to medical
treatment to which the child is
However, as under
the statutory schemes, the consent of the parents or guardian will be
insufficient in relation to certain types
of procedures. While recourse is made
to the common law principally to shed light on the context in which the
provisions were enacted,
the position at common law may be influential in the
process of interpreting the provisions of a statute concerning basic principles
such as the powers of a
[43] The Tribunal’s reliance on the “principle of legality”
falls to be considered in this context. That is because
the principle, to the
extent that it can have any operation in these circumstances, is a legal
assumption that the legislature would
not have intended to abrogate the
fundamental common law right of patient autonomy. The purpose of both the
assumption and the common
law principle is to provide protection to the
individual. For this reason, the assumption will be diminished in effect if the
given exceed those under the common law and/or where the legislative
provision affords enhanced protection to the
individual.
particularly so where a clear legislative object may be discerned. As Gageler
and Keane JJ observed in
Lee v New South Wales Crime Commission
The principle ought not, however, to be extended beyond its rationale: it
exists to protect from inadvertent and collateral alteration
rights, freedoms,
immunities, principles and values that are important within our system of
representative and responsible government
under the rule of law; it does not
exist to shield those rights, freedoms, immunities, principles and values from
being specifically
affected in the pursuit of clearly identified legislative
objects by means within the constitutional competence of the enacting
legislature.
[44] Although many of the authorities speak of the principle of legality
being rebutted by “clear and unambiguous language”,
and this has
been taken by some to require express abrogation, there is no doubt that the
application of the principle may be rebutted
by necessary
implication.
“clear and unambiguous language” encompasses both express words and
words of necessary implication. In this
case, the assumption either has no
application or is clearly rebutted.
[45] First, having regard to the history and principles of guardianship at
general law described above, it would seem unlikely that
there was ever a
fundamental common law (or equitable) right of patient autonomy in relation to
persons lacking the capacity to make
binding decisions concerning medical
treatment or the facilities in which the treatment was to be administered, at
least where a
legal guardian had been appointed.
[46] Secondly, the appointment of guardians in the
parens patriae
ensure that people suffering from conditions which impaired
their capacity could
have legally effective decisions made for them by proxy, including valid consent
to medical treatment, lest
they be deprived of or delayed from access to
necessary and therapeutic treatment and services. Such appointments, and
legislation
providing for such appointments, are to advance the represented
adult’s right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard
physical and mental health, rather than in diminution of the individual’s
rights or protections.
[47] Thirdly, the terms of the legislation contemplate the substitute
consent to medical procedures which are inconsistent with the
expressed or demonstrated views and wishes, and restrictive of the adult’s
freedom of action. Those provisions
displace such common law rights as might
otherwise subsist, by necessary implication at the very least. The application
of the assumption
that a statute does not incidentally affect common law rights
is inapt to a field in which there is a long history of legislative
interventions to ensure that persons are provided with safe and effective health
care. As Basten JA said in
Harrison v Melhem
(in relation to a scheme
for motor vehicle accident compensation which was said to affect common law
“[B]oth the existence of an effective remedy and controls over the
extent of compensation have long since moved beyond the scope
of the general law
unaffected by statute, and had become the specific attention of widespread
statutory interventions.
... [W]here consideration of the legislation, in a given statutory context,
favours a construction involving greater rather than lesser
constraint, there is
no reason not to give effect to the construction so
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
ensures that the best
interests of the adult are advanced by incorporating an exhaustive set of
principles and express exclusions
by which the power to consent to medical
treatment is governed. While it would no doubt have been possible for the
legislature to
have made bald provision that a guardian’s authority to
make consent decisions about health care action allows consent to
“restrictive
practices” or “coercive measures” (to adopt
the Tribunal’s terminology), a provision in those terms would
run the risk
of displacing, or at least de-emphasising, the carefully calibrated
decision-making process prescribed by the legislation.
[49] That is, the decision-maker’s authority must be exercised in the
adult’s best interests; in determining the adult’s
best interests
the decision-maker must obtain the adult’s current views and wishes as far
as practicable and give appropriate
weight to the relevant considerations; and
in determining what is appropriate the authority must be exercised in a way that
least restrictive of the adult’s freedom of decision and action as
is practicable in the circumstances. As already stated,
that process
necessarily connotes the consent to procedures which are restrictive of freedom
of decision and action if that is in
the adult’s best interests. As the
plaintiff submits, physical manipulations which are a necessary incident of the
safe performance
of a medical procedure may include modest physical restraint
during the performance of that procedure, even in the absence of specific
consent. For those reasons, the proposition that “health care”
cannot and does not include physical restraint of short
duration in the form of
gentle pressure of limbs to prevent contamination of the site and infections
should be rejected.
[50] That conclusion is in no way precluded by, or inconsistent with, the
fact that under the
Mental Health And Related Services Act 1998
treatment must not be administered to a person admitted as an involuntary
patient unless it has been authorised by the
; and that mechanical
restraint of a patient may only be applied subject to strict conditions and
expressly in the absence of the
. The requirement for
the Tribunal’s authorisation under that legislation is directed to very
different circumstances in which
the patient has been involuntarily admitted on
the basis of some mental illness or mental disturbance, that condition may not
the patient’s decision-making capacity, and there is no appointment
of a substitute decision-maker in place to advocate for
the patient and make
decisions in his or her best interests. The conditions on mechanical restraint
are imposed because it involves
the application of devices (including belts,
harnesses, medicals and straps) on a patient’s body to restrict the
movement for extended periods, again in relation to patients
with conditions which do not necessarily impair their decision-making
or the capacity to consent to medical treatment.
[51] We turn then to consider the operation of
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
Subsection 35(1)
The Tribunal may make an order that a guardian, or another specified person,
is authorised to take specified measures to ensure the
represented adult
complies with the guardian’s decisions in the exercise of the
guardian’s authority.
[52] The proposition that this section establishes or confirms that a
guardian’s authority does not include consent to modest
physical restraint
during the process of changing a catheter must have as its premise that the
guardian’s authority is limited
in that way. Otherwise,
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
does no such thing. A provision in
general terms empowering the Tribunal to authorise a guardian or some other
person to take specified
measures to ensure a represented adult complies with
the guardian’s decisions does not lead necessarily to the conclusion,
the context of medical treatment at least, that consent to therapeutic measures
which the adult in any way resists falls outside
the scope of the
guardian’s authority.
[53] The position would be different under a legislative regime which
provided for the appointment of a guardian (whether clothed
with general law or
exclusively statutory powers) by a guardianship tribunal, but then expressly
reserved to the tribunal exclusive
power to direct where and with whom the
represented person was to reside; to authorise the detention of the person at
the place where
he or she is to reside pursuant to that direction; and to
authorise those involved in the care of the represented person to use such
as may be reasonably necessary for the purpose of ensuring the proper medical or
dental treatment of the person.
It would have been a simple matter for the legislature to make provision in
those terms, following on the position adopted in South
Australia, but it chose
not to do so.
[54] Moreover, the terms of the provision do not readily lend themselves to
the actual performance of medical procedures. This is
illustrated in the
Explanatory Statement for the Bill, which relevantly states:
This clause allows the Tribunal to make an order where the guardian or
another specified person is authorised to take specific measures
or actions to
ensure a represented adult complies with a guardian’s decision. For
example, this will allow for a represented
adult to be removed from a setting
where they may be subject to abuse, exploitation or neglect but from which they
refuse to be removed.
Orders of this nature may only be made by the Tribunal
and must be reassessed within 42 days of the order being made.
An order under this clause may only be made if the Tribunal is satisfied that
authorising the specified measures to be taken is the
only appropriate way to
protect the represented adult from harm, neglect, abuse or
exploitation.
[55] However, this is not to say that
Guardianship of
Adults Act 2016
has no application to consent decisions in relation to
health care. For example, there may be circumstances in which a guardian
consented to some essential medical treatment of the represented adult, but the
adult refuses to leave home and attend hospital
for the purpose of receiving
that treatment, or (if already in hospital) refuses to leave the ward to go to
an operating theatre
for the purpose of receiving the treatment. As the
plaintiff concedes, the power of the guardian to make consent decisions in
to health care action would not extend to the forcible conveyance of
the represented adult (at least not in the absence of an express
empowering the guardian to take such measures and actions as are reasonably
necessary to ensure that the represented person
complies with any decision of a
guardian). In those circumstances, application would properly be made to
authorise agents of the
hospital and/or guardian to forcibly take the adult to
the facility or to the operating theatre as the case may be.
take another example, there may be circumstances in which the measures necessary
to overcome resistance to medical treatment by
the adult would go beyond the
modest physical restraint involved in the medical interventions under
consideration in this case.
There may be some doubt that those measures are a
necessary incident of the safe performance of a medical procedure which are
by the general consent to that
Those circumstances
might warrant an application to the Tribunal for authorisation to apply that
An application of
that type would be consistent with the common practice of guardians operating
under the general law to obtain
judicial sanction before exercising any uncommon
restraint on or interference with the liberty of the represented person, even
the scope of their authority comprehended that restraint or interference.
Whether such an application is necessitated or warranted
is an assessment of
fact and degree, and a complex one which would involve a careful consideration
of the “best interests”
criteria set out in the legislation and
which would be informed by whether the health professionals involved considered
further authorisation was required.
[57] Even allowing the
potential application of the provision to health care, it does not support the
proposition that the medical
interventions fall outside the guardian’s
authority. It may be noted further that on the facts of this case,
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
had no application to those aspects
of the medical interventions which involved the administration of medication and
continued treatment
in a secure area of the secure geriatric ward. There was no
suggestion of any resistance or failure in compliance with the guardian’s
decisions in relation to those matters, and they otherwise quite clearly fell
within the Public Guardian’s authority to make
decisions concerning
residence and accommodation, health care action and day-to-day care.
Disposition
[58] For these reasons, the Tribunal’s reasoning and conclusions were
in error. In the ordinary course, leave to appeal would
be granted in this
case. There was sufficient doubt about the question of law determined by the
Tribunal to justify the grant of
leave; and that question of law is of
considerable specific and general importance in the context of consent decisions
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
. However, the application for
leave to appeal, and any consequential appeal, are concerned only with the
orders made rather than
the reasons for those orders.
[59] The orders ultimately made by the Tribunal were that the application for
an order pursuant to
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
that the Public Guardian’s authority under the guardianship order
included the power to consent to the medical interventions
be dismissed; and
that the medical interventions were authorised by the Tribunal pursuant to
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
. The form of those
orders gives rise to a consideration whether, even accepting that the Tribunal
was wrong in the conclusion of
law ultimately drawn, it was open to it to make
orders in the terms sought by the Public Guardian and the Territory pursuant to
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
[60] That section allows the Tribunal to “make orders as to the
exercise by a guardian of the guardian’s authority”.
Guardian and the Territory were effectively seeking orders declaratory of the
scope of the Public Guardian’s authority
under the order for appointment
which had previously been made by the Tribunal. Given the operation of the
legislation, it was unnecessary
for the Public Guardian to seek clarifying
orders or for the Tribunal to make orders in those terms. However, it was
lawful to do
so. The terms of
Guardianship of Adults Act
were broad enough to allow orders in those terms. The application
involved a right which was the subject of controversy. The Public
Guardian had
a proper interest in obtaining clarification, and the question was one which
fell squarely within the Tribunal’s
those circumstances, the Tribunal’s dismissal of the Public
Guardian’s application
was predicated on error and is amenable to
correction on appeal.
[61] Although it was similarly open to the Tribunal to make the orders it did
pursuant to
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
was also predicated on error. Given the existence of those orders, and the
publication of these Reasons, it is strictly
unnecessary to grant declaratory
relief that the Public Guardian’s authority under the guardianship order
includes the power
to consent to the medical interventions. However, the
plaintiff is entitled to a declaration in those terms to vindicate its position
that the Public Guardian’s authority derives from the terms of the order
appointing it as guardian rather than from the orders
subsequently made by the
Tribunal pursuant to
Guardianship of Adults Act
[62] Accordingly, the following orders are made:
In proceeding No 2020-02431-SC
to appeal is granted.
orders made by the Northern Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal on 25
June 2020 in File No 21647381 are set aside.
In proceeding No
2020-02510-SC
that the Public Guardian’s authority under the guardianship order made on
18 March 2019 includes the power to consent
(a) physical contact, in the form of handholding, gentle pressure of limbs to
prevent contamination of the site and infections when
the first defendant has
his supra-pubic catheter changed;
(b) the administration of medication, namely oral carbamazepine and olanzapine,
for agitation and disinhibition; and
(c) continued treatment in a secure area of the geriatric ward of the Palmerston
Regional Hospital where the first defendant has
been treated since 2018.
[63] We will hear the parties in relation to the costs of both
proceedings if need be.
_________________
[2020] NTCAT 17
[86]-[125].
The first defendant died after the
hearing of the appeal and the application for judicial review, but before
delivery of these Reasons.
The death of the first defendant notwithstanding,
the Full Court has determined these matters because they involve issues
the lawfulness of the medical interventions applied during the first
defendant's life which are not purely hypothetical.
Re DJR and Mental Health
[1983] NSWLR 557
See, for example, the
(No 45 of 1898) of New South Wales, the operation of which was
considered by the High Court in
McLaughlin v Fosbery & Ors
[1904] HCA 55
McLaughlin v Fosbery &
[1904] HCA 55
(1904) 1 CLR 546
McLaughlin v Fosbery &
[1904] HCA 55
(1904) 1 CLR 546
Public Advocate v C, B
(2019) 133 SASR 353, 356 [12].
See, for example,
(1952) 69 WN (NSW) 341
T Carney and D Tait,
Guardianship Experiment: Tribunals and Popular Justice
, The Federation
Press, 1997, pp 11-12.
[1984] 1 NSWLR
[1983] 1 NSWLR 54
[1982] 2 NSWLR
Adult Guardianship Act
(NT), s 17.
Adult Guardianship Act
(NT), s 20.
Adult Guardianship Act
(NT), s 21.
Adult Guardianship Act
(NT), s 21(8). The need to procure the consent of a guardian, or an order
of the court as the case may be, was expressly waived
in cases of emergency.
This recognised the primary common law exception to the requirement that medical
treatment be preceded by
consent where treatment is carried out in an emergency
situation on a patient who is incapable of giving consent. In such a situation,
the common law, and the concomitant statutory exemption, recognised that a
health care professional can perform any medical procedures
which are reasonably
necessary in the circumstances: see, for example,
Collins v Wilcock
[1984] 1 WLR 1172.
Satu Wieland v HS
Re Application for
Guardianship Order (BCB)
[2002] 28 SR (WA) 338.
This was a decision of the
Guardianship and Administration Board of Western Australia, in relation to a
67-year-old resident of
a nursing home who required physical and/or chemical
restraint on occasions to ensure his physical safety and to permit therapeutic
interventions. The Board concluded that under the Western Australian
legislation a guardian would have power to consent to the use
of restraints,
even allowing for the fact that the use of restraint is a complex matter which
could only be assessed in the context
of a holistic care management regime
rather than viewed in isolation.
Re Insane Patient
69 WN (NSW) 341
Ex p Le Heup
(1811) 18 Ves 221.
Section 13(2)
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
provides that the Tribunal may appoint
the Public Guardian only if there is no other individual who is eligible for
appointment under
s 15 of the Act.
Guardianship of Adults Act
Guardianship of Adults
Guardianship of Adults
Guardianship of Adults
Guardianship of Adults
s 21(4)(a).
Guardianship of Adults
Guardianship of Adults
For example, services provided
by registered health practitioners, hospital services, mental health services,
pharmaceutical services,
ambulance services, community health services,
pathology services, et cetera.
Guardianship of Adults
Guardianship of Adults
Guardianship of Adults
Guardianship of Adults
Guardianship of Adults
The matters stipulated as "restricted health
care" are reflective of the position obtaining at general law concerning
consent for serious and non-therapeutic procedures: see
Secretary, Department of Health and Community Services v JWB and SMB
(Marion’s case)
[1992] HCA 15
(1992) 175 CLR 218.
The central finding in
Marion's case
was that the authorisation of a superior court was
necessary for the non-therapeutic sterilisation of a mentally handicapped minor;
and that the parent alone cannot consent. This represents a qualification to
the general rule that an incompetent minor's parent
or guardian has power to
consent to medical treatment of the child.
Guardianship of Adults
It is not immediately apparent whether the
position remains that consent to procedures falling within the scope of
“restricted
health care” would be required from the Supreme Court in
the exercise of the
parens patriae
may make a consent decision about "restricted health care action" pursuant to
s 44 of the
Advanced Personal Planning Act 2013
. It is unnecessary
to decide that issue for these purposes.
See, for example,
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
Guardianship
[2020] NTCAT 17
[2020] NTCAT 17
[103]-[109].
[2020] NTCAT 17
[110]-[114].
[2020] NTCAT 17
[115]-[125].
Guardianship of Adults
Guardianship of Adults
Guardianship of Adults
[2020] NTCAT 17
[2003] QGAAT 14
[27]-[28] per President Lyons (now Justice Lyons of the Queensland Supreme
See, for example,
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
See, for example,
Minor) (Medical Treatment: Courts Jurisdiction)
[1992] 4 All ER 627
which the English Court of Appeal dealt with a case involving a 16-year-old girl
who was seriously ill with
anorexia nervosa
but refused treatment. The
Court of Appeal left undisturbed a finding by the court below that the parents
had power to authorise
the child’s transfer to a specialist unit in order
to be force-fed.
See, for example, the
observations made in relation to the interpretation of criminal codes by
reference to the common law position:
Vallance v R
[1961] HCA 42
(1961) 108 CLR 56
The Queen v Barlow
(1997) 188 CLR 1
Daly v Thiering
[2013] HCA 45
249 CLR 381
, [32]-[33].
Lee v New South Wales Crime
[2013] HCA 39
(2013) 251 CLR 196
, 310 [313].
See, for example,
[1994] HCA 15
(1994) 179 CLR 427
, 438 (Mason CJ, Brennan, Gaudron and McHugh JJ),
446 (Deane and Dawson JJ);
X7 v Australian Crime Commission
[2013] HCA 29
, 109 [24] (French CJ and Crennan J): ‘clear words or necessary
implication’, 603 [119], 604 [125] (Hayne and Bell JJ):
‘by express
words or necessary intendment’;
Lee v The Queen
[2014] HCA 20
(2014) 253 CLR 455
466 [31] (French CJ, Crennan, Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ): ‘clear words or
those of necessary intendment’.
Harrison v Melhem
[2008] NSWCA 67
72 NSWLR 380
, 409 [220]-[221]; cited with approval by the High Court in
[2013] HCA 45
(2013) 249 CLR 381
, [32]-[33].
Mental Health and Related
Services Act 1998
Mental Health and Related
Services Act 1998
See, for example,
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
, the effect of
which was considered by the Full Court of the Supreme Court of South Australia
Public Advocate v C, B
(2019) 133 SASR 353. The observations made by
the Full Court at [30] endorsing the application of the principle of legality by
judge at first instance were directed to the question whether the Tribunal
was vested with exclusive power to authorise detention
and the application of
Explanatory Statement,
Guardianship of Adults Bill 2016
In those circumstances, the
medical practitioners would be protected by the operation of
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
, which operates such that a consent given
by a guardian in the exercise of the guardian's authority has effect as if the
had been given by the represented adult.
authorisation by the Tribunal would have the effect under
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
that the guardian or other person is not
liable to any action for false imprisonment or assault, or any other action,
claim or demand arising out of taking a measure under the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (423 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter