URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTLC/2022/28.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:21:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ronald Nishimura Sterry v The Commissioner of Police [2022] NTLC 28 (20 December 2022)
Ronald Nishimura Sterry v The Commissioner of Police
PARTIES: RONALD NISHIMURA STERRY
COMMISSIONER OF POLICE
TITLE OF COURT: FIREARMS APPEAL TRIBUNAL
FILE NO(s): 2022-01865-LC
DELIVERED ON: 20 December 2022
DELIVERED AT: Darwin
HEARING DATE(s): 26 October 2022
JUDGMENT OF: Chief Judge Elizabeth Morris (Chairperson)
CATCHWORDS:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW – FIREARMS APPEAL TRIBUNAL – APPEALS
–LOCAL COURT ORDERS
Finding of guilt in Local Court – return of firearms licence –
Commissioner’s statutory powers – revocation
of licence –
order of Local Court made without power – restriction on powers of
Commissioner
Firearms Act 1997
Weapons Control Act 2001
Local Court (Criminal Procedure) Act 2015
(NT), s 130B
State of NSW v Kable
(2013) 252 CLR 118;
Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural Affairs v Bjardwaj
(2002) 209 CLR 598
Collector for Interstate Destitute Person (Victoria)
[1946] HCA 50
(1946) 74 CLR 461
Suter v Commissioner of Police of the Northern Territory
[1998] NTSC 81
(1998) 147 FLR
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW – FIREARMS APPEAL TRIBUNAL – APPEALS –
OFFENCES - PENALTIES
Finding of guilt in Local Court – disqualification of firearms licence
– revocation of licence – length of disqualification
punctuation of Act – difference between semicolon and comma
Firearms Act 1997
Interpretation Act 1978
Burrarrwanga v Rigby
[2009] NTSC 57
, applied and distinguished
Leigh v Heath
[2016] NTSC 50
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Territory Revenue (NT)
[2009] HCA 41
(2009) 239 CLR 27
Re Collins; Ex
parte Hockings
[1989] HCA 42
(1989) 167 CLR 522
Mainteck Services Pty Ltd v Stein
[2014] NSWCA 184
(2014) 89 NSWLR 633
Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs v Savvin
[2000] FCA 478
(2000) 171 ALR 483
Pearce, D.C. Statutory Interpretation in Australia, 9
LexisNexus Butterworths, 1997.
Quirk, Greenbaum, Leech et al. A Comprehensive Grammar of the English
Language, Longman, London, 1985.
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: J Bortoli
Respondent: M McCarthy
Solicitors:
Appellant: Counsel
Respondent: Solicitor for the Northern Territory
Judgment category classification: A
Judgment ID number: [2022] NTLC 028
Number of paragraphs: 78
IN THE FIREARMS APPEAL TRIBUNAL
AT DARWIN IN THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
2022-01865-LC
RONALD NISHIMURA STERRY
COMMISSIONER OF POLICE
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
(5 DECEMBER 2022)
THE TRIBUNAL
CHIEF JUDGE ELIZABETH MORRIS (CHAIRPERSON)
INTRODUCTION
appeal has been lodged with the Firearms Tribunal by Ronald Nishimura Sterry,
pursuant to s 51(1) of the
Firearms Act (NT)
against a decision of the Commissioner of Police.
Sterry is seeking that the decision of the Commissioner be revoked, that his
shooter’s licence be returned to him and costs
Respondent has submitted that the decision of the Commissioner should be
confirmed and the appeal dismissed.
Act allows a question of law or procedure to be determined by the Chairperson
alone, without the need to convene the
appeal raises questions of law that are appropriate to be heard and determined
by the Chairperson alone.
THE DECISION
5 July 2022, a delegate of the Commissioner of Police determined to revoke Mr
Sterry’s shooter’s licence (no. 1045252),
any certificate of
registration for firearms, and any permits. This determination was purported to
be pursuant to s 40(3), read
with s 10(2A)(a)(i) of
THE PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS OF LAW
questions of law raised by the appeal are:
1. Whether an order made
by the Local Court in Alice Springs on 11 February 2022 restricted the
Commissioner from exercising his statutory
power to revoke Mr Sterry’s
licence; and
2. Whether s 10(2A)(a)(i) of
disqualifies Mr Sterry from
obtaining a shooter’s licence for two years from the date he was found
guilty of an offence against
Weapons Control Act 2001
Sterry was charged with various offences arising out of an incident that
occurred near his home in Alice Springs on 27 April 2021.
These charges
Count 1: Within the boundaries of a town, municipality or
community government, carry a loaded firearm exposed to view in a public
contrary to
section 78(3)
Firearms Act
Count 2: Within the boundaries of a town, carry a firearm exposed to public
view in a public place, contrary to
section 78(2)
Firearms Act
Count 3: Go armed in public without lawful occasion and in such a manner as
to cause fear to a person of reasonable firmness and courage,
contrary to
section 69 of the
Criminal Code
Count 4: Without lawful excuse, carry a controlled weapon (bayonet) in a
public place, contrary to
section 7(1)
Weapons Control Act
Count 5: Possess a firearm contrary to the purpose established as being the
genuine reason for possessing the firearm, contrary to
section 58(2)
Firearms Act
27 July 2021 a delegate of the Commissioner of Police suspended Mr
Sterry’s shooter’s licence and advised him by letter
that he was;
“charged with offences against the Act – namely, Carry
a Loaded Firearm in A Public Place & others. Should these offences
proved, your licence will automatically be revoked and you will not be eligible
to hold a licence for a minimum period of 2 years.
This suspension will remain in force until all matters pertaining to Case
22115270 have been dealt with by a court of law, and includes
any statute appeal
In accordance with Section 42(2), you are required to immediately surrender
your photographic Shooter’s Licence and any further
firearms and
ammunition in your possession to Police upon service of this
charges proceeded in the Local Court at Alice Springs on 19 October 2021 as a
contested hearing on all charges. Various facts
and matters were admitted and
Mr Sterry gave evidence. Counts 2, 3 and 5 were withdrawn by the Prosecution at
the conclusion of
the evidence. The matter was adjourned for decision in
relation to Counts 1 and 4.
Court handed down its decision on 11 February 2022. Count 1 was dismissed, but
Mr Sterry was found guilty in relation to Count
4, the offence pursuant to the
Weapons Control Act
. The Court proceeded to sentence Mr Sterry, without
conviction, to a 6 month good behaviour bond.
transcript reflects the following exchange and orders of the
MR BORTOLI: Your Honour, I would be seeking in this case,
given his prior good character and given, of course, that count 1 has
dismissed, that your Honour would consider a without conviction bond in the
matter. Mr Sterry is a 28-year old who has never
been in trouble with police
before. He has a very positive working history. Your Honour, I can go through
all the details if you
wish, but you did hear quite a lot of that in his
evidence, in any event.
HIS HONOUR: Yes.
MR BORTOLI: I do note that what my friend has just said and we would be
asking, in the circumstances, that the weapon be returned
to him. Obviously, it
is involved in the offending; but, otherwise, he is able to lawfully possess
that weapon, albeit, as your
Honour has found, not in the circumstances that he
was at the relevant time.
MS HAYWARD: Also, your Honour, if I might just add, just so that
there’s no confusion with the offence - the firearm, in relation
1 - I think it’
Firearms Act
, an order be made that it be
returned to Mr Sterry, your Honour, and that he has been found not guilty of
that offence.
HIS HONOUR: Do I need to make any order in relation to his licence?
MS HAYWARD: No, your Honour.
HIS HONOUR: Because it’s been suspended, it hasn’t been
cancelled, I presume, by the Commissioner, or it has been?
MS HAYWARD: No, it hasn’t.
THE DEFENDANT: It’s suspended, I believe.
HIS HONOUR: Yes.
MS HAYWARD: No. So, that Act’s really silent on that, your Honour.
The court may make the order to disqualify. So, or not
- or re-apply for a
licence. But there is no - now that he is found not guilty a firearm offence,
that should be - - -
HIS HONOUR: Yes, all right. Yes.
MS HAYWARD: - - - lifted.
HIS HONOUR: Well, Mr Sterry, on this particular day, you acted as a Good
Samaritan and took steps that you considered to be appropriate
in all of the
circumstances. I am certainly in agreement with you, as you have heard, in
respect of charge 1. But, I am of the
view that it wasn’t appropriate to
fix that bayonet to the rifle, in all of the circumstances. I do agree with Mr
submission, that you are a person of excellent character. You
have always been a person who has been a responsible gun owner and
reflected in the fact that you do have a licence and have had one for some time,
prior to this matter. I will make the relevant
orders, returning the items to
I am satisfied, in the circumstances, in regard to count 2, that I should
proceed without recording a conviction, and I accept the
submission from your
legal representative that I can deal with the matter by way of a good behaviour
bond, which I will make for
a very short period of time, noting the fact and
taking into account your age and your prior good character.
In respect to count 2, without conviction, you will be released today on
entering into a good behaviour bond in the sum of $500, with
your undertaking to
remain out of trouble for the next six months. I impose a victim's levy of
$150. I order that the bayonet may
be returned to you and, pursuant to
Firearms Act
, I order that the defendant’s rifles and ammunition, as
well as his licence, be returned to him.
Any other orders?
MS HAYWARD: Just for clarification, your Honour, it’s count 4, I
believe, is the count - - -
HIS HONOUR: Count 4, I beg your pardon. Yes.
MS HAYWARD: The other charges were withdrawn.
HIS HONOUR: Yes, in respect of count 4. So, I am not quite sure what the
process might be with the Commissioner, in you making the
relevant requests for
the return of all of those items. But, I presume, you would just go to the
police station, would you?
MS HAYWARD: I think that would be the first port of call, your Honour.
Judge’s orders were reduced to writing, with the bond being signed by Mr
Sterry on 11 February 2022. The order regarding
the other matters was signed by
a Court Registrar and sealed with the Court seal. This order
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
Bayonet to be returned to the Defendant, Mr Ronald Sterry.
Pursuant to Sect 93(d) of
Firearms Act
, the Defendants rifles, ammunition and
license are to be returned to him.
is very unfortunate that the Court’s attention was not drawn by either
Counsel to the full relevant provisions of the
Firearms Act
, particularly
in relation to findings of guilt of an offence against the
Weapons Control
. The Prosecutor appears to make mention of a discretionary power but
continues her submission “But there is no - now that
he is found not
guilty a firearm offence, that should be - - - .....- - -
Firearms Act
(3) The Commissioner may, by
written notice served on the holder of a licence, permit or certificate of
registration, revoke the licence,
permit or certificate:
(a) for any reason for which the holder would be required to be refused a
licence or permit of the same kind or a certificate of registration;
Firearms Act
10 General restrictions on
grant of licence
(1) The Commissioner, on receiving an application for a licence, may grant
or refuse to grant the licence.
(2A) The Commissioner is not to grant a licence to a person who has been
found guilty of an offence against this Act or the
Weapons Control Act
or in which a firearm was involved unless:
(a) in a case where, on the trial or hearing in relation to the offence:
(i) an order under
Sentencing Act 1995
mentioned in
section 130(2)
of that Act (or a provision of a law in force in the
Commissioner, is of similar effect) has been made directing that the person be
discharged on giving security in accordance with the
section; or
(ii) a pecuniary penalty only has been imposed;
and not less than 2 years have elapsed since the person was found guilty of
the offence; and
(b) in the case where a custodial sentence was imposed – 5 years
have elapsed since the applicant was found guilty of the offence
or released
from custody, whichever is the later.
93D referred to by the Judge and noted in the Court order is as
93D Court may order
(1) If the court is satisfied that the person in whose name the firearm to
which the offence mentioned in section 93A relates is
registered:
(a) is implicated in the offence – the court may order that the firearm
(and any ammunition in the possession of the person)
is forfeited to the
Territory; or
(b) is not implicated in the offence – the court may not order the
firearm to be forfeited but may order that it be returned
to that person.
(2) Subsection (1) applies to a firearm in the possession of a person
mentioned in that subsection despite that the firearm is not
registered in that
person's name.
provisions of s 93D are clearly reliant on an offence mentioned in s 93A.
Section 93A provides for the circumstances where ‘a
court finds a person
guilty of an offence against this Act or the
Weapons Control Act 2001
or involving a firearm’ and then specifically provides for
revocation and disqualification.
is clear that the s 93D provision provides a basis for forfeiture or return of a
firearm or firearms and ammunition, not a licence.
Indeed the next section of
effect on general power
A decision or action of the court under section 93A, 93B or 93D does not
affect any power under this Act to revoke or suspend a licence,
certificate of registration.
11 February 2022 Mr Sterry’s rifle, bayonet, ammunition and a hard copy of
his licence were returned to him.
appeal by either Mr Sterry or the Complainant in the criminal charges was filed.
Nor was any application made pursuant to
Sentencing Act
to reopen proceedings to correct sentencing errors.
some correspondence between the delegate of the Commissioner of Police, Mr
Sterry and his legal representative, including various
actions of the Police
which are not relevant to this proceeding, on 5 July 2022 the Decision was made.
This decision revokes Mr Sterry’s
shooter’s licence, any certificate
of registration for firearms; and any
. Mr Sterry was served
notice of that decision on 8 July 2022.
offence contrary to the
Weapons Control Act
is not defined as a
‘disqualifying offence’ pursuant to the
Firearms Act
Regulations 1997 (NT)
Mr Sterry’s licence was not automatically revoked pursuant to s 40(1) of
Notice of Revocation relies on the power of the Commissioner to revoke in
certain circumstance pursuant to s 40(3)(a) of
, in conjunction
with the directive in s 10(2A) of
preventing a person from
obtaining a licence for a period of two years from the date of the finding of
guilt of an offence against
Weapons Control Act
DECISION CONTRARY TO ORDER OF LOCAL COURT
Appellant contends that the decision of the delegate of the Commissioner to
revoke his licence was contrary to the decision and
order of the Local Court on
11 February 2022 that his licence be returned to him.
Respondent submits that the order, even if valid or effective, did not purport
to prevent or fetter the Commissioner from subsequently
exercising the statutory
power conferred on him to revoke the Appellant’s licence; or alternatively
the order was invalid and
a nullity, which was not binding on the
Commissioner.
the time of the making of the Local Court order, the physical licence was in the
possession of the police, having been seized along
with his firearms on or
around 27 April 2021, at the time of the initial incident.
is important to note that the granting of a licence and direction not to grant a
licence pursuant to s 10 of
is one of the Commissioner, not the
Local Court. The Court’s involvement in relation to this section is as to
what penalty
is imposed for a finding of guilt for an offence. The consequences
for a Defendant of the various penalties for future licence applications
often the subject of submissions on sentence in cases involving firearms and
weapons. The Court can of course, upon a finding
of guilt, also impose a
further disqualification for a specified period pursuant to s 93A.
is clear from his Honour’s words that he did not intend to exercise any
statutory discretionary power to further disqualify
Mr Sterry from holding a
shooter’s licence and possessing firearms pursuant to s
. At that point in time the
suspension of the licence was no longer maintained and the license was not yet
subject to any revocation.
Local Court Judge, in my view, did not have the power to either reinstate a
licence or allow the authority to possess a firearm,
only the power to revoke
and disqualify. The power used to order return of the firearms themselves does
not encompass licensing
matters. Thus, for the order to be valid, the Judge must
have been referring to the license as a ‘physical thing’ in
decision. I note he referred to ‘the return of all of those
after making the
do not accept the submission that it could be implied that s 93D should be
interpreted by necessary implication to empower a Court
to order the return of
the ability to hold a firearms licence, because only license holders can possess
such. Whilst only licence
holders may ‘possess’ a firearm, there
would be instances where ‘ownership’ as distinct from
‘possession’
should be returned. This would thus allow someone to
benefit from the sale of, or otherwise transfer ownership of a firearm to
party. The clear absence of the mention of a licence in s 93D limits
its power to firearms and ammunition as defined only.
Mr Sterry’s circumstances, no order under s 93D may have been necessary
for the return of his firearms. He had not, nor had
anyone, been found guilty of
an offence to which his ‘firearm’ relates. His firearms should have
merely been returned
in the normal course of events following the withdrawal of
Firearms Act
charges against him, had he not been found guilty of a
disqualifying offence.
there is no indication the Judge was utilising any other power, such as the
general civil jurisdiction to deal with a claim
concerning a right of ownership
of property referred to by the
, there is a power for the
Court to return property which has come into possession of police on application
of a claimant as the Court
is clear from the transcript that the order returning the bayonet itself
purported to be pursuant to the
Weapons Control Act 2001
Again it is
unfortunate that the Court’s attention was not drawn to the specific
provisions of
, particularly s 20(2):
Forfeiture by courts
(1) If a person is found guilty of an offence against section 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 13 or 14(5):
(a) the court may order that the weapon or body armour to which
the offence relates be returned to a specified person; or
(b) if the court does not make an order under paragraph (a) – the
weapon or body armour to which the offence relates is
forfeited to the Territory.
(2) The court may only make an order under subsection (1)(a) if:
(a) the person to whom the weapon or body armour is to be
returned is not the person found guilty of the offence; and
(b) the person to whom the weapon or body armour is to be
returned is, in the opinion of the court, the owner of the
weapon or body armour; and
(c) the court is satisfied that the person to whom the weapon or
body armour is to be returned is authorised to possess the
weapon or body armour under this Act.
Mr Sterry was a person found guilty of the offence, and thus should have been
precluded from the making of such an order.
Appellant submits there is an obligation on all persons, including the
Executive, to obey a Court order unless and until that
order is set aside or
stayed pending the outcome of an
as the Respondent rightly points out, the
principles apply to
superior courts. His Honour Gageler J observed that;
is, however a critical distinction between a superior court and an inferior
court concerning the authority belonging
to a judicial order that is made
without jurisdiction. A judicial order of an inferior court made without
force as an order of that court. One consequence is
that failure to obey the order cannot be a contempt of court. Another is that
order may be challenged collaterally in a subsequent proceeding in which
reliance is sought to be placed on it. Where there is doubt
judicial order of an inferior court is made within jurisdiction, the validity of
the order “must always remain
an outstanding question” unless and
until that question is authoritatively determined by some other court in the
exercise of
judicial power within its own
is not to say that an order of an inferior court is necessarily a nullity even
if erroneously made.
the nature of a court order be unclear, the starting point for its
interpretation must be that it is a valid order within the
Court to make. That being the case, and there being no power for the Local
Court to grant a shooters licence,
only to revoke it or disqualify, the Courts
order for return of the licence, in my view, refers solely to the licence as a
Appellant submits the license as a physical thing cannot be separated from the
authority that being granted or holding a licence
entails. However, similar to
a physical driver’s licence and a Court order disqualifying someone from
driving or holding a
licence for a period of time, a licence is both the piece
of plastic, which can sometimes be used for other things, such as
identification;
and the right to drive a car on public roads. There may be good
policy reasons for the seizing or destruction of the thing, so that
cannot hold themselves out to be so licensed, but a licence is capable of
separate physical confirmation in card form.
consideration of the legitimacy or otherwise of the orders of the Local Court
returning various pieces of property to Mr
Sterry, including the bayonet,
rifles, ammunition and his licence, is not a necessary predeterminate to the
Tribunal’s determination.
This is because, whatever the orders, they do
not and cannot override the Commissioner’s duty not to grant a licence in
circumstances. A decision, or a purported decision, under s 93D does
not affect any power under
to revoke, or suspend a licence,
permit or certificate of
registration.
accept the contention of the Respondent that the order of the Local Court,
whether valid or effective or invalid and a nullity,
did not purport to prevent
or fetter the Commissioner from subsequently exercising the statutory power
conferred on him to revoke
the Appellant’s licence.
MEANING OF SECTION 10(2A) AND ITS SUBSEQUENT AMENDMENT
Tribunal accepts and is bound by, the decision in
Burrarrwanga v Rigby
[2009] NTSC 57
Burrarrwanga
) for the legislation as it was at that time.
His Honour Justice Southwood states:
“[11] In my opinion,
Firearms Act
provides for mandatory suspension of a firearms
licence in two circumstances. First, if a person is found guilty of an offence
Firearms Act
and a pecuniary penalty is imposed, a person is
prevented from obtaining a firearms licence for a period of two years from the
when the person was found guilty of the offence. Secondly, if the person
is found guilty of an offence against the
Firearms Act
and a custodial sentence
is imposed, a person is prevented from obtaining a firearms licence for a period
of five years from the
date when the offender was found guilty of the offence or
the date when the person is released from custody, whichever is the latter.
Honour had in the paragraph prior outlined the reasoning thus:
Firearms Act
is a little unclear. The intention of
the legislature would have been clearer if the word ‘and’ appearing
at the beginning
of the second last line of
s 10(2A)(a)
had immediately followed
the comma at the end of the first line of
s 10(2A)(a)(ii)
; and if all possible
sentencing dispositions had been covered. Nonetheless, given that
s 10(2A)(a)
divided into two subparagraphs, the semi colon interposed after the word
‘section’ at the end of
s 10(2A)(a)(i)
, the word ‘or’
appearing at the end of
(a) (i), which is disjunctive, and the semi
colon interposed after the word ‘offence’ at the end of
(2A)(a), the structure of
is such that it is has three parts. The parts
are based on the three kinds of sentencing disposition that are referred to in
subsection namely, non-conviction discharge or bond, fine and custodial
sentence. The length of the time for which a licence cannot
be granted by the
Commissioner following the revocation of a licence by the operation of s 40(1)
of the Act varies in accordance
with the severity of the three kinds of
sentencing disposition referred to in the subsection.
the decision of
Burrarrwanga
delivered 6 November 2009, the
has been amended. Relevantly
was amended by the
and other Legislation Amendment Act
Section 10(2A)(a)(i)
referred to
(2) Section 10(2A)(a)(ii)
the comma previously mid in the relevant part of the sentence “a pecuniary
penalty only has been imposed, and not less
than 2 years have elapsed since the
person found guilty of the offence:” has been replaced with a
is the Appellant’s submission that this amendment does not alter the
interpretation of the section as outlined by his Honour
Burrarrwanga
If it were intended to do so, then other amendments would have been made to
address some of the issues that his Honour highlighted.
It is further submitted
that when considering the second reading speech, and noting the absurd results
that would flow, as well
as the text and structure; the meaning is otherwise
unaltered from its consideration in
Burrarrwanga
Respondent submits that, for various statutory interpretation reasons, the
substitution of the semicolon with the comma does alter
the legislative intent
of the section, and thus, the two year impediment to granting of a licence now
applies to all of the preceding
sentencing options.
section has been referred to in one other matter since the amendment. In
Leigh v Heath
[2016] NTSC 50
, his Honour, Justice Hiley considered an
appeal from the Local Court where it was contended that there was an error by
Court in not taking into account the mandatory disqualification when
imposing a discretionary disqualification. The punctuation
change was not
referred to and there was not detailed consideration of the construction of the
that case Mr Leigh had been convicted and fined for his offences. Thus the
Burrarrwanga
’ interpretation of the previous legislation was
not necessarily enlivened, as it was commonly understood that the two year
period applied to fines. The
Burrarrwanga
question being, did it also
apply to the previous subsection mentioning s 10 and s11 orders. His Honour in
Leigh v Heath
did note “Indeed counsel for the appellant sought a
finding of guilt without conviction, which finding may well have triggered
operation of s 10(2A)(i) and thus the automatic two year
disqualification”.
the case did not turn on the construction of the part of the section that
concerns the instance before this Tribunal and
provides little assistance in
that regard.
It is well recognised that the starting point for statutory interpretation is
the consideration of the text itself. As stated;
has stated on many occasions that the task of statutory interpretation must
begin with a consideration of the text
itself. Historical considerations and
extrinsic materials cannot be relied on to displace the clear meaning of the
text. The language
which has actually been employed in the text of legislation
is the surest guide to legislative intention. The meaning of the text
require consideration of the context, which includes the general purpose and
policy of a provision, in particular the mischief
it is seeking to
Consideration
of the text necessarily involves consideration of the words, the punctuation and
other intrinsic or grammatical aids
to interpretation.
Honours Toohey and McHugh JJ in
Re Collins; Ex parte Hockings
[1989] HCA 42
at 525 confirm;
“There is no reason why the use of a
comma after the words "breach of the rules of an organization or of a branch of
an organization"
should be discarded or thought to serve no purpose in the
construction of the definition”
Leeming JA in
Mainteck Services Pty Ltd v Stein Heurtey SA
[2014] NSWCA 184
warned “a prerequisite to relying on punctuation is being
satisfied that it has been used consciously and not haphazardly”.
the text Statutory Interpretation in Australia, 9
ed. (1997) the
author considers the recognition to be afforded consideration of
punctuation;
“However, the courts should recognise that
drafters usually punctuate with a view to enhancing the understanding of their
legislation.
To ignore this fact is to make the task of both drafter and
interpreter more difficult and is likely to lead to a misunderstanding
legislation in question.”
author later alerts the reader;
“If regard is to be had to
punctuation, it is important that its grammatical use be properly understood and
applied:...”
work A Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language (1985) is cited by her
Honour Katz J in
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v
[2000] FCA 478
(2000) 171 ALR 483
“The authors point out
(at 1622) that, typically, the semicolon is used as replacement for the word
in order to show that ‘ ‘two
independent clauses are regarded as being sufficiently related to belong to one
sentence’’.
They further point out, however (at 1623), that the use
of a semicolon may sometimes be followed by the use of the word
‘’or’’. As to the use of the semicolon in the latter
circumstances, they
say (emphasis added):
Such a use (in effect, replacing a comma) is chiefly found in rather formal
writing and in sentences whose complexity already involves
the use of one or
more commas and whose major divisions call for a hierarchical superior
punctuation mark if the reader is not to
be momentarily puzzled or
considering s 10(2A) of the Act, it is noted that;
1. The semicolon
in subsection (a)(i) is followed by ‘or’ and the new semicolon in
subsection (a)(ii) is followed by ‘and’.
2. The legislation was ‘consciously’ amended following the
decision in
Burrarrwanga
, with the Explanatory Statement for the amending
Bill stating
“This clause amends
Firearms Act
. The majority of
amendments made by this clause either update the use of conjunctions, correct
the use of punctuation marks, omit
surplus words or aim to being the
into conformity with the current drafting style.”
3. The paragraph and indent of the layout of the section puts the two year
lapse on a new line tabulated to the same point as both
parts (i) and (ii).
Referral to Second Reading Speech
Interpretation Act 1978
of extrinsic material in interpreting Act
(1) In interpreting a provision of an Act, if material not forming part of
the Act is capable of assisting in ascertaining the meaning
of the provision,
the material may be considered:
(a) to confirm that the meaning of the provision is the ordinary meaning
conveyed by the text of the provision taking into account
its context in the Act
and the purpose or object underlying the Act; or
(b) to determine the meaning of the provision when:
(i) the provision is ambiguous or obscure; or
(ii) the ordinary meaning conveyed by the text of the provision taking into
account its context in the Act and the purpose or object
underlying the Act
leads to a result that is manifestly absurd or is unreasonable.
section then goes on to list, without limiting, some of the types of material
that may be considered.
Interpretation Act
permits consideration of the Second Reading Speech to
confirm the meaning is the ordinary meaning. Section 10(2A) has been mentioned
in various Second Reading Speech’s throughout its legislative life.
provision was initially inserted by s 7 of the
Firearms Amendment Act (no.2)
. In the section originally inserted, subparagraph 10(2A)(a)(ii)
ended with a comma. Then in 2003 the
Firearms Amendment Act 2003 (NT)
amended the section again. This amendment changed the period of disqualification
from 12 months to two years and extended the period
for custodial penalties to
five years, as well as including offences pursuant to the
Weapons Control Act
Second Reading Speech of the 2003 Bill states:
“The current
provisions relating to the period of disqualification for a person applying to
register a firearm for an offence
under the act are confusing and ambiguous.
The bill will provide a new procedure, simplifying the regime into a three-tier
as follows: where a person has been found guilty of an offence, and a
court has imposed a pecuniary penalty, the person cannot apply
to register a
firearm for a period of two years. Where, however, the court has imposed a
period of imprisonment, the period will
be five years. In some instances, a
breach of the act may be more appropriately dealt with by the issue of an
infringement notice.
Therefore, an infringement notice similar to an offence
under the Traffic Act, may be issued by a member of the police force in certain
circumstances.”
appears that the three tiered system referred to involved fines, custody, and
minor matters where an infringement scheme could
be imposed, the penalties
imposed under s 10 and s 11 were not mentioned at all. However, his Honour in
Burrarrwanga
considered this Speech and determined the three tiered
system as previously referenced.
explanatory memorandum for the amendment that replaced the comma
“The majority of amendments made by this clause
either update the use of conjunctions, correct the use of punctuation marks,
omit surplus words or aim to bring the
Firearms Act
into conformity with the
current drafting style.”
second reading speech merely states that
“The Bill also makes
a number of amendments to the
Firearms Act
Weapons Control Act
majority of these amendments are minor statute law
revisions.”
consideration of the extensive and thorough submissions of the Appellant, as
well as the Respondent around statutory construction,
in my view, the change
from comma to semicolon does have an effect on the legislation, such that the
determination of its meaning
Burrarrwanga
is now distinguished. I do
so, not by rejecting his Honour’s reasoning, but following it and applying
it to the section as
it now reads.
reject the Appellant’s submission that the change is merely to
‘reflect current drafting style’ and the submission
that it is used
as replacement or alternative comma, without grammatical change.
am satisfied that the use of the semicolon was a deliberate drafting and
grammatical device, operating to show that two independent
clauses are
sufficiently related to belong to one sentence. Following the approach taken by
her Honour Katz J, the paragraph must
be read as whole and unsevered paragraph,
with both specific circumstances expressed in subsection a(i) and subsection
a(ii) subject
to the two year time condition.
following the interpretative path described in
Burrarrwanga
, but with the
amendment of the semicolon, section (2A) is still in three parts. Firstly;
orders under
; secondly fine only; and thirdly a custodial
sentence. However, “and not less than 2 years have elapsed since the
found guilty of the offence;” applies both to orders under
subsection (i) – the
orders, as well as orders under
subsection (ii), fine only offences. This is because the semicolon creates a
separation, not of
the section as a whole, but of the following part of the
sentence, so it refers to both preceding circumstances.
being the case, a two year lapse since a finding of guilt applies to all of the
following sentencing dispositions of the Local
Court for offences against the
Firearms Act
Weapons Control Act
, or in which a firearm was
1. An order under
– a dismissal without
2. An order under
– without recording a conviction a release on
giving security to be of good behaviour (a no-conviction bond)
3. A similar order under old legislation or from another jurisdiction
4. A pecuniary penalty (a fine, with or without conviction)
five year lapse is required for an offence where a custodial sentence was
I note that his Honour in
Burrarrwanga
“[12] If a person who is found guilty of committing an
offence against the
Firearms Act
receives neither a pecuniary penalty nor a
custodial sentence, the person may be re-granted a firearms licence forthwith by
the Commissioner.”
it appears that an alternative interpretation may be that such a person may
never be able to be granted a licence. This is because
s (2A) commences with the
“The Commissioner is not to grant a licence to a person who has been
found guilty of an offence against this Act or the
Weapons Control Act 2001
in which a firearm was involved unless...”
The options that follow, including periods of suspension, are the only
circumstances in which this mandatory exclusion can be overcome.
mean that a person who has had any other sentence imposed after a finding of
guilt, whether convicted or not, cannot
be granted a licence. Thus penalties
involving for example, community work orders, a conviction and bond, or
community based orders
could result in the inability to ever obtain a
reading of the section is accepted, incongruity and absurdity in relation to the
penalty of the suspension arises. How can
being convicted and released on a
bond, incur a lesser mandatory restriction than not being convicted and having
the charge dismissed?
However given the penalty imposed in this case, the
broader implications and possible interpretations of the restriction are not
before this Tribunal for necessary determination.
order of the Judge on 11 February 2022 was that the actual licence as a thing
must be returned to Mr Sterry.
order does not change or bind the Commissioner in the exercise of their duties
pursuant to
, to revoke a licence when required to do so.
Commissioner was required to do so in the circumstances where there was a
finding of guilt for an offence pursuant to the
Weapons Control Act 2001
the penalty that was imposed by the Local Court Judge, Mr Sterry is not to be
granted a licence unless two years have elapsed
from the date he was found
guilty of the offence, being 11 February 2022, thus eligibility commences on 11
February 2024.
two questions of law raised by the appeal are answered thus:
an order made by the Local Court in Alice Springs on 11 February 2022 restricted
the Commissioner from exercising his statutory
power to revoke Mr Sterry’s
2. Whether s 10(2A)(a)(i) of
disqualifies Mr Sterry from
obtaining a shooter’s licence for two years from the date he was found
guilty of an offence against
Weapons Control Act
appeal is dismissed and I confirm the decision of the delegate of the
Commissioner dated 5 July 2022.
__________________________
Firearms Act
Letter dated
27 July, 2021 to Mr Sterry signed by a delegate of the Commissioner of Police
Transcript of Court
Proceedings No. 22115270 11 February 2022,
Notice of Appeal, Attachment
Firearms Act,
Firearms Regulations, 1997
93A Revocation and
disqualification
(1) If a court finds a person guilty of an offence
against this Act or the
Weapons Control Act 2001
or involving a firearm,
the court may:
(a) revoke the person's licence or permit and disqualify the
person from holding a specified licence or permit for the period specified
the court; and
(b) order that the person is not to apply for a licence or
permit or to register a firearm for the period of disqualification.
period for which a court may disqualify the person is in addition to any period
of automatic disqualification under this
Transcript of
proceedings 11 February 2022 p
Local Court Act
Local Court (Criminal Procedure) Act 2015 (NT)
Transcript of
proceedings 11 February 2022 p
State of NSW v
(2013) 252 CLR 11
; Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
Affairs v Bjardwaj
[2002] HCA 11
(2002) 209 CLR
State of NSW v
(2013) 252 CLR 118, at [56] Gageler J – citations
Collector for Interstate Destitute Person (Victoria)
[1946] HCA 50
(1946) 74 CLR 461
Suter v Commissioner of Police of the Northern Territory
[1998] NTSC 81
(1998) 147 FLR
Firearms Act 1997
Heath [2016] NTSC at 18
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue (NT)
[2009] HCA 41
(2009) 239 CLR 27
Pearce D C, Statutory Interpretation in Australia, 9
ed. (1997) at
4.78, p 205
Second reading
speech to the Firearms Amendment Bill: Northern Territory, Parliamentary
Debates, Legislative Assembly, 28 May 2003
Second reading
speech to the Justices and Other Legislation Amendment Bill: Northern Territory,
Parliamentary Debates, Legislative
Assembly, 23 February 2011 (Delia Lawrie)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (233 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter