URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTSC/2025/70.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:22:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kurniawan v Gifkins [2025] NTSC 70 (26 September 2025)
Kurniawan v Gifkins
[2025] NTSC 70
PARTIES: KURNIAWAN, Virna
GIFKINS, Warren
TITLE OF COURT: SUPREME COURT OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: 2024-03498-SC
DELIVERED: 26 September 2025
HEARING DATES: 30 June 2025 & 1 July 2025
JUDGMENT OF: Brownhill J
CIVIL PROCEDURE – Appeal from Local Court – Appeal on a question
of law – Distinction between questions of law and
mere questions of fact
– Whether grounds of appeal are in substance questions of law
–Various asserted questions of law
found to be mere questions of fact
DEFAMATION – Appeal from Local Court – Whether Local Court erred
in holding the alleged defamatory imputations were not
conveyed – Whether
Local Court erred in holding the alleged defamatory statements were
substantially true – Whether Local
Court erred in holding that the common
law defence of qualified privilege applied – Whether Local Court erred in
holding that
the defendant was not motivated by malice –Whether Local
Court erred in making an adverse credibility finding in respect of
respondent – No error of law found – Appeal dismissed
Aravas v Metropolitan Water, Sewerage & Drainage Board (NSW)
(1970) 72 SR (NSW) 596
; Banque Commerciale SA (in liq) v Akhil Holdings
(1990) 169 CLR 279
; Barbaro v Amalgamated Television Services Pty
(1985) 1 NSWLR 30
; Bassell v McGuiness
(1981) 29 SASR 508
Brown v Repatriation Commission
(1985) 7 FCR 302;
Federal Commissioner of
Taxation v Brixius
; Cush v Dillon
[2011] HCA 30
(2011) 279 ALR 631
Channel Seven Sydney Pty Ltd v Mahommed
[2010] NSWCA 335
(1982) 148 CLR 658
; Development Consent Authority v Phelps
[2010] NTCA 3
(2010) 27 NTLR 174
; Drummoyne Municipal Council v Australian Broadcasting
Corporation
(1990) 21 NSWLR 135
; Farah Constructions Pty Ltd v Say-Dee
Pty Ltd (2007) 230 CLR 89; Farquhar v Bottom
[1980] 2 NSWLR 38
Mort Ltd v Murray
(1976) 133 CLR 58
Haritos v Federal Commissioner of
[2015] FCAFC 92
(2015) 233 FCR 315
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Housing Commission (NSW) v Tatmar Pastoral Co Ltd; Kemp v Findlay
[2025] NSWCA 4
Lee v MacMahon Contractors Pty Ltd
(2018) 41 NTLR 16
Leotta v Public Transport Commission (NSW)
(1976) 50 ALJR 66
v The Queen
(1999) 200 CLR 48
Matheson v Schneideman
[1930] NZLR 15;
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
(1986) 162 CLR 24
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
(2018) 264 CLR
Mirror Newspapers Ltd v Harrison
[1982] HCA 50
(1982) 149 CLR 293
(2020) 349 FLR 409
Norbis v Norbis
[1986] HCA 17
(1986) 161 CLR 513
Development Consent Authority
(2012) 31 NTLR 5
Prince v Malouf
[2014] NSWCA 1
Roberts v Bass
(2002) 212 CLR;
Rofe v Smith’s
Newspapers Ltd
(1924) 25 SR (NSW);
Rush v Nationwide News Pty Ltd (No
[2019] FCA 496
R v Waldron (No 3)
[2024] NSWDC 15
[2002] NSWCA 1
Soulemezis v Dudley (Holdings) Pty Ltd
10 NSWLR 24
Tracy Village Sports & Social Club v Walker
Union Bank of Australia v Harrison, Jones & Devlin Ltd
[1910] HCA 44
Viro v The Queen
(1978) 141 CLR 88
, referred to.
Local Court (Civil Procedure) Act 1989
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: PA
Respondent: ML
Solicitors:
Appellant: Turner Freeman Lawyers
Respondent: Hunt & Hunt Lawyers
Judgment category classification: B
Judgment ID
Number: Bro2511
Number of pages: 75
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Kurniawan v Gifkins
[2025] NTSC 70
No. 2024-03498-SC
VIRNA KURNIAWAN
WARREN GIFKINS
CORAM: BROWNHILL J
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 26 September 2025)
appellant (‘Ms Kurniawan’) claimed damages for defamation in the
Local Court against the respondent (‘Mr
Gifkins’). The claim related
to the content of a status report (‘report’) written by Mr Gifkins
in his capacity
as the chair of the management committee of a body corporate of
an apartment building in Darwin. The report was emailed to all owners
apartments in the building. The report described various legal proceedings
involving or relating to Ms Kurniawan, and stated that
her behaviour had caused
the body corporate committee members to spend time and legal costs of
approximately $18,000. The report
was alleged to convey nine imputations
defamatory of Ms Kurniawan. The Local Court dismissed the
This is an appeal from the
decision of the Local Court.
[2] Initially,
there were eight grounds of appeal, some with sub-grounds, comprising a total of
22 grounds. These were reframed at
the hearing into 21 grounds argued to be
questions of law. The asserted questions of law related essentially to: (a)
whether the
Local Court erred in holding that three of the nine alleged
imputations were not conveyed by the report; (b) whether the Local Court
in holding that six of the nine alleged imputations were substantially true; (c)
whether the Local Court erred in holding that
the common law defence of
qualified privilege applied; (d) whether the Local Court erred in holding that
Mr Gifkins was not motivated
by malice in publishing the report; (e) whether the
Local Court erred in admitting into evidence an affidavit made by Mr Gifkins
response to an interrogatory; and (f) whether the Local Court erred in making an
adverse credibility finding about Ms Kurniawan.
undisputed facts
[3] The Local
Court found the following facts,
which were not in dispute on the appeal.
apartment building had a long-standing ‘no pets’ rule. (In the
Reasons, this was also referred to as ‘the
no dog rule’.)
[5] Some time
prior to November 2018, after he purchased one of the apartments, Mr Yerriah (Ms
Kurniawan’s partner) became a
member of the management committee of the
body corporate. Mr Yerriah tried twice to amend the body corporate’s
by-laws to permit
dogs in the apartments. Those efforts were not
successful.
November 2018, Ms Kurniawan moved into Mr Yerriah’s apartment with a dog.
After receiving complaints about the dog,
the management committee told Mr
Yerriah that the dog could not remain in the building. Ms Kurniawan and Mr
Yerriah refused to remove
the dog. The management committee issued a notice of
breach of the apartment building by-laws.
November 2018, the management committee commenced proceedings in the Northern
Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(‘NTCAT’) to compel Mr
Yerriah to comply with the ‘no pets’ rule in the by-laws.
February 2019, there was an incident at the communal pool in the apartment
building involving Ms Kurniawan, Mr Gifkins and
other residents.
February 2019, there was an incident in the foyer of the apartment building
during which the building manager, Jason Gay,
pushed Ms Kurniawan after she
put her phone near his face and filmed him. He was charged with assault.
February 2019, Ms Kurniawan and Mr Yerriah accessed a locked storage cage in the
apartment building assigned to Mr Gifkins,
removed his belongings and relocked
the cage with their own padlock.
February 2019, there was another incident at the communal pool in the apartment
February 2019, there was an incident near the lift in the basement of the
apartment building involving Ms Kurniawan, Mr
Gifkins and another resident, Judy
Richardson.
February 2019, Mr Gifkins, Ms Richardson and Mr Gay applied for personal
violence restraining orders (‘PVROs’)
against Ms Kurniawan.
[14] During
February to May 2019, various complaints were made that someone was slamming the
fire exit door and the swimming pool
gate, sometimes twice in succession.
[15] On 19 March
2019, Mr Yerriah sent an email to all owners of apartments in the building
alleging inappropriate use of body corporate
funds to pay for PVRO
applications.
[16] On 15 April
2019, interim PVROs were issued restraining Ms Kurniawan from filming and
harassing Mr Gifkins, Ms Richardson and
[17] On 18 April
2019, Ms Kurniawan and Mr Yerriah each applied for PVROs against Mr Gifkins and
Mr Gay. Only one was issued. The
other three applications were refused.
[18] On 29 April
2019, the NTCAT ordered Ms Kurniawan and Mr Yerriah to remove the dog from the
apartment building by 24 May 2019.
[19] On 29 April
2019, Mr Gay pleaded guilty to assaulting Ms Kurniawan by pushing her. No
conviction was recorded and there was no
penalty other than a victim’s
impact levy.
[20] On 29 April
2019, there was an incident in the foyer of the apartment building in which Ms
Kurniawan and Mr Gifkins had a verbal
altercation and Mr Gifkins called the
Police. Ms Kurniawan was issued with a notice to appear alleging a contravention
of the PVRO.
[21] On 7 May
2019, Ms Kurniawan applied for a review of the NTCAT decision.
[22] By 24 May
2019, Ms Kurniawan and Mr Yerriah had not removed the dog from the apartment
[23] On 8 June
2019, Ms Kurniawan, Mr Yerriah and the dog moved out of the building.
[24] On 8 July
2019, Ms Richardson’s application for a PVRO against Ms Kurniawan was
granted, with effect for 12 months.
[25] On 8 July
2019, Ms Kurniawan applied for a PVRO against Ms Richardson.
[26] On 9 July
2019, Ms Kurniawan applied for a PVRO against another committee member, Mr
Brittain. This application was later dismissed,
with costs.
[27] On 15 July
2019, Ms Kurniawan’s application for a PVRO against Ms Richardson was
[28] On 2 August
2019, Ms Kurniawan’s application for review of the NTCAT decision about
the dog was dismissed.
August 2019, Mr Gifkins published to the apartment owners a Chairman’s
August 2019, Mr Yerriah proposed a motion to be passed at the body corporate
annual general meeting for issue of a breach
notice against Mr Gifkins in
relation to a Mr Zec.
August 2019, Mr Gifkins applied for a PVRO against Mr Yerriah and Mr Zec.
September 2019, Mr Yerriah filed an application in the NTCAT seeking orders for
the removal of wi-fi access points, two
lock boxes and a sticker from the common
property in the apartment building. In the application, Ms Kurniawan was stated
Yerriah’s representative in the NTCAT proceedings.
September 2019, the hearing into Ms Kurniawan’s breach of the PVRO on 29
April 2019 commenced.
September 2019, Mr Yerriah informed the NTCAT that he and Ms Kurniawan would be
lodging a complaint to the Law Society
against the body corporate’s
[35] On 26-29
September 2019, Mr Gifkins circulated drafts of the report to other committee
members and the body corporate’s
September 2019, the body corporate’s barrister recommended to Mr Gifkins
various amendments to the draft report.
30 September 2019, Mr Gifkins sent the report to owners of the apartments.
October 2019, Ms Kurniawan was found not guilty of breaching the PVRO on 29
April 2019.
[39] The report
sent by Mr Gifkins the subject of the defamation claim is as follows:
Body Corporate – Status Report – October 2019
to Open the Kimono
A large number of legal cases have
been going on all this year. It is time body corporate members became aware of
what has been occupying
most of your committee members, building and strata
managers’ time and energy. Today before the courts are 1 NTCAT case, 3
Violence protection orders and 1 criminal case. All cases concern the owner of
unit 4, Chris Yerriah (
) and his partner, Virna Kurniawan.
These legal matters appear to be driven by a desire by the unit owner to
intimidate, harass, annoy
and frustrate the Committee’s substantive work.
There is no sign that there will be an end to the use of the legal system to
these ends. Details and impact are described.
“The Dog Case”
hostilities started when the unit owner moved into the building in November
2018, bringing with him his girlfriend and her dog.
The dog was kept in his
apartment, contrary to the Body Corporate by-laws. When I was appointed your
chair, several members complained
When I discussed the dog with the unit-owner in the foyer, he initially denied
was a dog. He later said the dog is only in his apartment and does not
touch body corporate property, so it is not the Committee’s
concern. In
2017 and 2018, attempts were made by the unit-owner, during his tenure as a
Committee Member, to amend the Body Corporate’s
by-laws to allow
unit-owners to keep small dogs in their apartments at the Marrakai complex. On
both occasions, the majority of unit
owners voted against the proposed
amendments. However, the unit-owner refused to remove his dog. With that stance,
the committee
voted to take a case to NTCAT to get an order that the dog be
removed. As soon as the unit-owner and his partner received the NTCAT
they became aggressive and behaved in an intimidating and harassing manner
against Committee Members, Judy Richardson, myself
and Jason Gay (the building
manager), which resulted in a number of Protection Orders being made by the
you are all aware, the NTCAT found in favour of the Marrakai, and ruled that the
dog had to be removed from the building. However,
the dog remained in the
building and the unit-owner immediately commenced an action to dispute the
NTCAT’s findings, challenging
the legality of the MBC by-law concerning
pets at the Marrakai.
to the legal complexities of the unit-owner’s NTCAT appeal, the Committee
voted to engage legal representation. Counsel
was engaged to review Commonwealth
law, Territory law and to collect and assess historical MBC records that
revealed how the existing
by-laws were constituted and updated through the life
of the Marrakai under the
Unit Titles Act
the interim, the unit-owner sought a stay of the NTCAT’s original ruling
(to remove the dog) pending the NTCAT’s review
determination. The stay
application was refused, with the result that the unit-owner had [to] remove the
dog. Despite this, the dog
still remained in the building. To enforce the NTCAT
ruling I registered the Original Order at the Local Court ... in order to have
the Local Court enforce the ruling that the dog be removed. The unit-owner and
his partner then relocated to another building with
reviewing the evidence and hearing legal submissions by counsel for both sides,
the NTCAT upheld the original decision, concluding
that the Marrakai by-laws
concerning pets had been legally constituted, validly enacted and had legal
force. The unit-owner’s
dog case was dismissed.
Lock-Box, Sticker and Wi-Fi Case”
month the same unit-owner lodged another NTCAT case challenging the lawfulness
of an emergency phone lock box, a sticker, and
building Wi-Fi infrastructure
being on common areas of the Marrakai. The Committee voted again to engage legal
representation in
this matter. This case is currently before the NTCAT, so I
will not discuss its details in this notice.
the NTCAT [cases] were on foot, there has been 11 [PVROs] and 2 criminal cases
before the local courts.
Violence Protection Orders
Committee Members have had
to self-represent or engage their own lawyers, at a cost to themselves, to deal
with applications made
by the unit-owner and his partner for [PVROs] at the
Local Court.
the Local Court has ordered 3 [PVROs] refraining Virna Kurniawan from harassing,
intimidating or verbally abusing three
Committee members: Judy Richardson, Jason
Gay and myself. Those orders were made following evidence being led about
various events
involving Chris Yerriah and his partner Virna Kurniawan,
1. Aggressive
behaviour against Committee Members during BBQs by the pool area, where police
needed to attend to instruct the unit-owner
and his partner to leave the pool
2. Constant
slamming of the security gate and fire exit doors below Judy’s apartment,
causing noise to resonate loudly and many
sleepless nights, as well as damage to
the electronic latch for the fire exit door. This resulted in a new security
camera being
installed to monitor that part of the building.
Kurniawan verbally abusing and swearing at Judy and I as we were standing in the
4. Breaking
into Cage 25, and damaging property belonging to me, in order for the unit owner
to use Cage 25 to store his own property.
Again, police were called several
times. However, despite telling police he will remove his property from cage 25,
the unit owner
still occupies Cage 25.
Local Court dismissed Ms Kurniawan’s applications for [PVROs] against
Judy, Jason and I. The Judge who summarily dismissed
the case in which Ms
Kurniawan applied for a [PVRO] against Judy, remarked that she is not allowed to
use the courts to intimidate
Kurniawan’s [PVRO] claim against another Committee Member, Phil Brittain,
is currently before the courts.
Yerriah lodged claims for [PVROs] against Jason Gay and myself. The case against
me was dismissed. Against Jason, it was accepted
on the grounds as building
manager, Jason is obliged to be polite and courteous to all unit owners,
including Mr Yerriah.
are 2 [PVRO] applications currently before the courts, which I have initiated,
against Chris Yerriah and Steve Zec.
these cases are before the court, so I will not go into further details. If you
are interested in them, they will all be heard
at the local court (Nichols
Place) in Darwin on 7
October at 2pm.
May of this year, Jason Gay pleaded guilty to assaulting Virna Kurniawan, in a
case reported in the NT News in the following terms:
“Gay admitted to
shoving the woman during a recent flare-up of their long-running dispute, after
the woman provoked him by
filming him with her mobile phone. The court,
recognising that it was a ‘low-level assault – being a single
with ‘a trigger of provocation, the phone being waved in his
face while he’s at work’, ordered a non-conviction
in this case, and
Jason was ordered to pay the mandatory $150 victims levy contribution. Of Ms
Kurniawan’s Victim Impact Statement,
the Judge remarked, ‘I can only
disregard the victim impact statement’ because it ‘at times ...
looks as if it’s
relating more to a war crime than the material on the
agreed facts before the court” (NT News, ‘Ruff Justice over
15 May 2019).
Kurniawan is presently criminally prosecuted for breaching the [PVRO] in which I
am protected from her abuse and harassment. This
prosecution case, with evidence
heard from myself, Jason Gay and Phil Brittain, was heard last month. The matter
has been adjourned
for judgment at the Local Court (Nichols Place) in Darwin on
October at 9.30am.
on your committee
The amount of time and effort required to
apply for or defend against a [PVRO] is time consuming. To prepare a claim you
lodge it at the court civil registry. The claim requires the preparation
of [a] sworn affidavit lodged with the courts. At first
hearing, the merits are
assessed and the applicant and defendant are encouraged to do mediation. At
mediation, for half a day to
try and find common ground and agree the best way
forward. If mediation fails, you go back to court for another hearing and a
decision by the judge. So it’s ... at least 3 days of effort, spread
over several months.
you add in the time taken for 3 NTCAT hearings and 2 criminal cases we have all
contributed at least 40 days of effort each. Collectively
I would estimate more
than $20,000 of our personal money spent on these cases and the committee has
voted to spend approx. $18,000
of body corporate funds to protect the body
corporate and its committee as appropriate. So in essence Judy, Jason, myself
have contributed an extraordinary amount of time and money to protect
the integrity of the Marrakai Body Corporate.
Committee, as you can imagine, is feeling strained over the constant litigation
mounted in these cases. However, we will continue
these efforts to protect the
MBC as required.
Warren Gifkins
Appeal on a question of law
[40] The right
of appeal from a decision of the Local Court in civil proceedings is conferred
Local Court (Civil Procedure) Act 1989
section provides that a party may appeal to the Supreme Court on a question of
law from a final order of the Local Court.
The law relating to
the nature of an appeal on a question of law
MacMahon Contractors Pty Ltd
the Court of Appeal of the Northern Territory addressed the principles relating
to the nature of an appeal from the Work Health Court
(which had become the
Local Court) to the Supreme Court in proceedings under the
(NT), which appeal was confined by s 116 of that Act to ‘a
question of law’. That provision was in the same terms as
Local Court (Civil Procedure) Act 1989
[42] The Court
of Appeal adopted and repeated what Mildren J had said about the effect of those
Tracy Village Sports & Social Club v
The principles repeated
by the Court of Appeal (at [15]) were:
(a) In the evaluation of witnesses who gave conflicting accounts as to the
preliminary facts, if the trial judge prefers one account
to another, that
decision is a question of fact to be determined by the trial judge and is not
reviewable on appeal. It may be that
the reason given for preferring one witness
to another is patently wrong, but nevertheless, no appeal lies. Regardless of
judge’s reasons, if there is evidence which, if believed, would
support the finding, there is no error of law.
(b) If, on the other hand, there is no evidence to support a finding of fact
which is crucial to an ultimate finding that the case
fell within the words of
the statute, there is an error of law.
(c) A finding of fact cannot be disturbed on the basis that it is
‘perverse’ or ‘against the evidence’ or
the weight of the evidence’ or ‘contrary to the overwhelming weight
of the evidence’. Nor may the
Supreme Court review a finding of fact
merely because it is alleged to ignore the probative force of evidence which is
all one way,
even if no reasonable person could have arrived at the decision
made, and even if the reasoning was demonstrably unsound.
(d) The drawing of inferences from primary facts to arrive at secondary facts is
subject to the same limitations that apply to primary
facts. If there are no
primary facts upon which a secondary fact could be inferred, and the secondary
fact is crucial to the ultimate
finding as to whether or not the case fell
within the words of the statute, there is an error of law. If there are primary
upon which a secondary fact might be inferred, there is no error of
(e) It is not sufficient that an appellate court would have drawn a different
inference from those facts. The question is whether
there were facts upon which
the inference might be drawn. If a trial judge draws an inference which cannot
reasonably be drawn, it
errs in point of law and its decision can be reviewed on
[43] The Court
of Appeal added (at [16]-[18]) that, where the process of statutory
interpretation is involved, the following principles
(a) The ordinary or non-technical meaning of a word is a question of fact.
(b) The meaning of a technical legal term is a question of law.
(c) A finding that facts come within the ordinary or non-technical meaning of a
statutory word or phrase is one of fact which can
be disturbed only if: (i)
there is no evidence to support the finding of fact; (ii) the trial judge has
misdirected themselves in
law; or (iii) the finding of fact is required by the
statute to be determined through the application of a correct legal process
requiring, for example, procedural fairness or taking relevant considerations
into account.
(d) When it is necessary to engage in a process of construction of the meaning
of a word (or phrase) in a statute, a question of
law will be involved, but the
question may be a mixed one of fact and law. A question exclusively of law
arises if, on the facts
found, only one conclusion is open.
[44] At the
outset of the appeal hearing, I raised with the parties a concern that none of
the grounds of appeal in the notice of
appeal were expressed as questions of
law, and appeared to raise pure issues of fact or issues of mixed fact and law,
a characterisation
supported by the parties’ written submissions.
[45] In response
to my concerns about this issue, counsel for Ms Kurniawan, Ms Hart, argued that
I am bound by, and should follow
exclusively, the decision of the Full Court of
the Federal Court in
Haritos v Federal Commissioner of
That decision
concerned the right of appeal to the Federal Court under
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
(Cth), which permitted a party
to a proceeding before the Administrative Appeals Tribunal to appeal to the
Federal Court ‘on
a question of law’. Five members of the Full Court
held that the right of appeal under
may extend to mixed questions of
fact and law in circumstances where legally erroneous fact finding has occurred.
[46] The Full
Court of the Federal Court held (at [192]) as follows:
In summary,
the context (particularly s 7 of the AAT
and noting what we have said
especially at [149] above as to s 45 not providing an
of s 44 each
indicates that the right of appeal in s 44 should not be read as meaning
that ‘may appeal to the Federal Court
of Australia, on a question of law,
from any decision of the Tribunal’ may never extend to a mixed question of
fact and law
or as requiring that the question of law be a ‘pure’
question. Rather, it may more accurately be said that the right
of appeal does
not extend to mere questions of fact. As French CJ, Gummow and Bell JJ
emphasised in
, at [19], the Court ‘should not usurp the
fact-finding function of the AAT’ ... It follows that the right of appeal
not extend to mixed questions of fact and law where, in order to decide the
question of law, the Court must positively determine
a question of fact itself,
rather than judicially review the Tribunal’s fact finding. As Brennan J
Waterford v Commonwealth
A finding by the AAT on a matter of fact cannot be reviewed on appeal unless
the finding is vitiated by an error of law. ... The error
of law which an
appellant must rely on to succeed must arise on the facts as the AAT has found
them to be or it must vitiate the
findings made or it must have led the AAT to
omit to make a finding it was legally required to make. There is no error of law
in making a wrong finding of fact.
It follows that legally erroneous fact finding may found an appeal on a
question of law within s 44. [citations omitted]
[47] As to what
constitutes ‘legally erroneous fact finding’, the Court held (at
[194]-[197] and [202]) that the appellate
body should not usurp the fact-finding
function of the Tribunal, but fact-finding is an entirely different exercise
from the evaluation
of the fact-finding process of the Tribunal (as fact-finder)
to decide upon its legality. Where found facts are capable of falling
without the description used in a statute, the decision on which side of the
line they fall is a decision of fact and not
law. If the facts found from the
evidence are
necessarily
within the description of a word or phrase in a
necessarily
outside it, a contrary decision is wrong in law.
Further, a finding of fact may be vitiated by an error of law, such as where a
of fact is based on a misdirection of law, or comprises jurisdictional
error such as denial of procedural fairness. Further (at [212]-[213]),
an error of law to make a decision which is irrational, illogical and not based
upon findings or inferences of fact supported
by logical grounds, a conclusion
which is not to be lightly drawn and not every lapse in logic is sufficient to
constitute an error
decision in
was not referred to in
The doctrine of precedent
necessary to refer to this fundamental doctrine because Ms Hart submitted that I
was ‘bound’ to follow
, not because it was highly
persuasive, but because it was binding on me under the doctrine of
[50] As the High
Court observed in
Lipohar v The
the ultimate
foundation of precedent which binds any court to statements of principle is that
a court higher in the hierarchy of
the same juristic system, and thus able to
reverse the lower court’s judgment, has laid down that principle as part
relevant law. As the Full Court of the Supreme Court of South Australia
observed in
a decision of one
court cannot be truly binding upon another unless both courts are within the
same hierarchy of courts, and the
existence of an appeal from the inferior court
to the superior court which binds it is inherent in and essential to the
of precedent.
[51] The Full
Court of the Federal Court of Australia is not part of the hierarchy of courts
in the Northern Territory. It is not
able to reverse a judgment of this Court.
Only the Northern Territory Court of Appeal can do that. Consequently, this
Court is not
bound in accordance with the doctrine of precedent to follow the
decision in
; it is bound to follow the decision in
, even if this Court considers that decision to be wrong.
[52] In support
of the submission that I am bound to follow
, Ms Hart referred to
the decision in
Farah Constructions Pty Ltd v Say-Dee Pty
In that decision,
Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Callinan, Heydon and Crennan JJ held (at [135]) that
intermediate appellate courts and trial
judges in Australia should not depart
from decisions in intermediate appellate courts in another jurisdiction on the
interpretation
of Commonwealth legislation or uniform national legislation
unless they are convinced that the interpretation is plainly wrong and
principle applies in relation to non-statutory law. Under this principle, I
would not be bound to follow
if I was convinced the principles
set out in it were plainly wrong.
Local Court (Civil Procedure) Act
is not Commonwealth legislation
or uniform national legislation and is not part of the common law. Consequently,
the principle in
Farah Constructions
does not strictly operate here.
Further, the decision in
may be distinguishable because it
concerns s 44 of the Commonwealth Act, and is founded upon a number of
matters which are not applicable
Local Court (Civil
Procedure) Act
, as referred to in footnotes 6-9 above.
[54] Relevantly
to this appeal, I do not consider there to be any material difference between
the principles set out in
Lee v MacMahon
and the principles set out in
which impact upon the determination of this appeal. For the
purposes of this appeal, I accept that the decision in
persuasive, including because it relates to a statutory provision in identical
Local Court (Civil Procedure) Act
there are no material differences to the principles set out in
, I will follow and apply the principles set out in
The relevant principles – the nature of an appeal under
[55] Ms Hart
argued that the effect of
is that if the trial judge made a
decision which ‘is not in accordance with the facts’, then an appeal
against that decision
is on a question of law. That is an inaccurate statement
of the effect of the decision in
[56] I discern
and apply the following principles to the appeal under
Local Court (Civil Procedure) Act
(a) The right of appeal under
does not extend to a mere question of
fact and may extend to mixed questions of fact and law. It is not confined to
pure questions
(b) The right of appeal under
does not extend to mixed questions of
fact and law where, in order to decide the question of law, the Court must
positively determine
a question of fact itself.
(c) To be the subject of an appeal under
, a finding of fact must be
legally erroneous, i.e., it must be vitiated by an error of law which arises on
the facts as found by
the Local Court, it must vitiate the findings made, or it
must have led the Local Court to omit to make a finding that it was legally
required to make.
(d) Legally erroneous fact finding comprises the following:
(i) Where the facts found by the Local Court on the evidence are necessarily
within or necessarily outside the description of a word
or phrase in a statute,
a contrary decision. This type of error could, it seems to me, extend to the
common law elements or requirements
of a claim or a defence.
(ii) Where a finding of fact is based on a misdirection of law.
(iii) Where a finding of fact comprises jurisdictional error such as a material
denial of procedural fairness.
(iv) Where a finding of fact is irrational, illogical and not based upon
findings or inferences of fact supported by logical grounds,
a conclusion which
is not to be lightly drawn and not every lapse in logic is sufficient to
constitute an error of law. This would
include where there is no evidence (as
distinct from insufficient evidence) which could support the finding of fact.
(v) Where, in finding a question of fact, the Local Court failed to take into
account a relevant consideration which the Local Court
was legally bound to take
into account or had regard to an irrelevant consideration which the Local Court
was legally bound not to
Identification of the question(s) of law the subject of the appeal
Question(s) of law must be identified with precision
[57] At the
outset of the hearing, Ms Hart initially argued that the effect of
is that an appellant is not required to identify in the notice of
appeal the questions of law the subject of the appeal because:
(a) there is no
requirement to do so in the
Supreme Court Rules 1987
(‘SCRs’) and; (b) in
, the Federal Court held that
questions of law need not be identified with precision. Again, that is an
inaccurate statement of the
effect of the decision in
, the Federal Court held (at [85]-[86]) that the subject matter of
an appeal under s 44 of the Commonwealth Act is limited to the
question(s)
of law, which is not merely a qualifying condition to ground an appeal. Rather,
the question of law and it alone is the
subject matter of the appeal and the
ambit of the appeal is confined to
The Federal Court held (at
[91]) that it is of ‘great importance’ that the question(s) of law
should be stated with precision
, which was the point of the
which required the notice of appeal to identify the question(s)
[59] This is
clearly inconsistent with the proposition that, because the SCRs do not contain
a requirement that the notice of appeal
identify the question(s) of law, there
is no requirement for an appellant to identify them with precision or at all.
The Federal
Court expressly held that it was of great importance that the
question(s) of law be stated with precision, and that requirement did
Federal Court Rules
but on the fundamental basis that the
question(s) of law are the subject matter and ambit of the appeal.
[60] The Federal
Court held (at [94]) that whether a question(s) of law has been identified must
be approached as an issue of substance,
but the appeal court must be satisfied
that there is in fact a question of law. The Federal Court added (at [97]) that,
as a superior
court of record, the Federal Court has jurisdiction to decide
whether a notice of appeal states a question of law and does so with
precision and, if it does not, whether an appellant should have leave to amend
the notice of appeal to remedy the defect.
Further (at [107]), this jurisdiction
extends to a question of law which was not identified before the trial judge.
Again, these
statements are entirely inconsistent with the proposition that an
appellant need not identify the question(s) of law the subject
of the appeal
with precision, a submission which Ms Hart repeated a number of
Amendment of the notice of appeal – the 21 asserted
questions of law
[61] Despite
those submissions, at the outset of the appeal hearing Ms Hart handed up a
document headed ‘Questions of Law’
which she said included
‘all’ of ‘the exact’ questions of law, based on her
written submissions. Ms Hart
sought leave to amend the notice of appeal to
replace the grounds of appeal stated therein with the 21 ‘questions of
referred to in that document. That leave was granted subject to the
Court’s determination that the ‘questions’
contained in the
Questions of Law document were ‘questions of law’ within
Local Court (Civil Procedure) Act
[62] The amended
notice of appeal filed later that day pursuant to the granted leave deleted the
original grounds of appeal and replaced
them with the 21 asserted questions of
law set out in the ‘Questions of Law’
Further ‘embedded’ questions of law –
no inadequacy of reasons question
[63] Immediately
after leave was granted to amend the notice of appeal to replace the grounds of
appeal with the 21 ‘questions
of law’, Ms Hart sought to make
submissions about the legal principles relating to inadequacy of reasons. These
were argued to arise because ‘this is embedded within’
the 21 ‘questions of law’, it was not a separate ground
it was a question of law whether reasons are inadequate, and the original
grounds of appeal contained in the notice of
appeal had raised inadequate
[64] None of the
21 ‘questions of law’ which had just before this been said to
of the questions to be determined on appeal referred to a
failure by the Local Court to give adequate reasons for a particular finding
decision on any issue. No further application was made to amend the notice of
appeal to include an inadequacy of reasons ground.
Hart’s reference to the original grounds of appeal was equally baffling,
given the grant of leave to amend the notice
of appeal to replace the original
grounds with the 21 ‘questions of law’ just moments before. Further,
there was no generally
expressed inadequacy of reasons ground in the original
notice of appeal. Only one ground (ground 5) had referred to a failure to
adequate reasons, but that was not repeated in the 21 new ‘questions of
[66] In her
reply, Ms Hart again sought to make submissions about the legal principles
relating to inadequacy of reasons and repeated
that an inadequacy of reasons
ground was embedded in all of the 21 asserted questions of law. She argued that
if a decision maker
fails to provide adequate reasons, impliedly, they have
failed to take into account a relevant matter or have taken into account
irrelevant matter in coming to the decision. Asked what authority she was citing
for that proposition, she referred to
Soulemezis v Dudley
at 279. I was
unable to find any such proposition on that page or elsewhere in that
initially formulated by Ms Hart at the hearing, and as confirmed by the amended
notice of appeal filed that day, this appeal
does not raise any question
relating to the inadequacy of the Local Court’s reasons. As held by the
Federal Court in
set out in paragraph
above, the subject matter of this
appeal is limited to the 21 asserted questions of law, which alone are the
subject matter of the
appeal and the ambit of the appeal is confined to them. It
is of great importance that questions of law the subject of the appeal
with precision. In dealing with the subject matter of this appeal, there is no
warrant to entertain some broad, generalised
and implied complaint that the
Local Court’s reasons are inadequate.
[68] It is worth
repeating the observations of Mahoney JA (Samuels JA agreeing) in
Housing Commission (NSW) v Tatmar Pastoral Co
(at 384-385) that the
duty to give reasons does not exist in respect of every matter of fact or of law
which was or might have been
raised in the proceeding, and it is not the duty of
the judge to decide every matter which is raised in argument, as the judge may
decide a case in a way which does not require the determination of a particular
submission and, in such a case, it may be put to
[69] Noting
those observations, in my view, Ms Hart’s submissions relating to
inadequacy of reasons (and other matters) were
a colourable attempt to
characterise errors asserted to be made by the Local Court as errors of law when
the real gravamen of the
complaints is that, in Ms Kurniawan’s contention,
the Local Court wrongly decided that Ms Kurniawan lacked credibility and
decided the factual questions which determined the outcome of the case. So much
is confirmed by the consideration of the
21 asserted questions of law
Relief sought
the notice of appeal, the relief sought by Ms Kurniawan was that the whole of
the judgment of the Local Court should be set
aside, judgment should be entered
against Mr Gifkins in an amount to be assessed by this Court or, alternatively,
the matter be remitted
to the Local Court for determination of damages.
[71] The first
point is that an appeal is from the
of the Court, not from the
judgment. If the appeal were to be allowed, the appropriate order would be for
the order of the Local
Court dismissing Ms Kurniawan’s claim for damages
to be set aside.
[72] As regards
determination of damages if the appeal were to be allowed, at the hearing Ms
Hart accepted that the matter should
be remitted to the Local Court for
determination of damages.
The asserted questions of law regarding
the imputations findings
asserted question of law (amended notice of appeal,
[73] The first
asserted question of law was stated as follows:
misdirected himself in relation to the test for ordinary reasonable reader by
failing to consider the appropriate context
of the [report] and by attributing
an unreasonable understanding of the meaning to the reader. (Paragraphs [19],
[29] and [31] of
[74] Insofar
as I understood it (including by reference to the first ground of appeal in the
original notice of appeal), this ground
is concerned only with imputations 1, 8
and 9, which were the imputations the Local Court found were not conveyed by the
Those imputations were:
Kurniawan] was knowingly involved in 1 NTCAT case, 3 [PVROs] and 1 criminal case
which were not genuine and were driven by a desire
to intimidate, harass, annoy
and frustrate the Committee’s substantive work (the entire [report] but
especially paragraph 6).
Kurniawan] is a criminal who is guilty of breaching a [PVRO] in favour of [Mr
Gifkins] (the entire [report] but especially paragraphs
6, 15, 21, 25, 27,
Kurniawan] engaged in abuse and harassment of [Mr Gifkins] such that she
breached a [PVRO] (the entire [report] but especially
paragraphs 6, 15, 18, 20,
21, 25, 27, 29).
[75] Ms Hart
submitted that the relevant test in assessing whether an alleged defamatory
meaning or imputation is conveyed by a publication
is that set out by Wigney J
Rush v Nationwide News Pty Ltd (No
namely (at [74]) that
the question is whether the publication would have conveyed the alleged
imputations to an ordinary reasonable
person, i.e., what the words used would
have conveyed to the ordinary reasonable reader, reading (at [77]) the entire
publication
and considering the context as a whole, taking into account emphasis
that may be given by conspicuous headlines or captions, and
(at [80]) taking
into account that the ordinary reasonable reader may be influenced by the
overall tone or tenor of the publication
in question. Wigney J cited the
observation of Gleeson CJ in
Drummoyne Municipal Council v Australian
Broadcasting Corporation
that ‘[i]t is a feature of certain forms of defamation that one can read
or hear matter published concerning a person and be
left with the powerful
impression that the person is a scoundrel, but find it very difficult to discern
exactly what it is that the
person is said or suggested to have done
[76] Ms Hart
acknowledged that the Local Court did (at [13]-[14]) correctly identify the test
and referred to both those authorities.
However, she argued that the Local Court
had misdirected itself in the application of those authorities because the Local
failed to consider the context of the report as a whole and had made
an unreasonable and erroneous finding that the alleged imputations
conveyed by the report.
noteworthy that in
, Wigney J held (at [73]) that the question of
whether a defamatory meaning or imputation is conveyed by a publication is a
[78] The Local
Court found (at [19]) that the ordinary reader would not infer that Ms Kurniawan
was ‘not genuine is [sic] being
a defendant to a criminal proceeding and 3
PVROs’, so imputation 1 was not conveyed by the report. The Local Court
[18]) that paragraph 6 of the report was referring to proceedings that
were ‘today before the courts’, being the NTCAT
proceeding about the
wi-fi access points, etc, the three PVROs and the criminal proceeding in which
Ms Kurniawan was the defendant.
The finding at [19] was a finding that the
asserted imputation was not conveyed because it was that Ms Kurniawan was
knowingly involved
in proceedings which were not genuine and were driven by her
desire to intimidate etc, but she was not a party to the NTCAT proceeding
was a defendant to the other proceedings. In other words, the ordinary reader
would understand that, as a non-party or defendant,
she did not commence those
proceedings, so they could not have been driven, ingenuously, by her desire to
intimidate, etc.
[79] Ms Hart
submitted that the Local Court had ‘misread’ imputation 1 which
‘relies’ on proceedings Ms Kurniawan
had brought. The Local Court
did not ‘misread’ imputation 1. Imputation 1 refers specifically to
paragraph 6 of the report,
which expressly refers to the proceedings then before
the courts. Imputation 1 refers to one NTCAT case, three PVROs and one criminal
case, being the proceedings referred to in paragraph 6 of the report. The only
NTCAT case then before the courts was the wifi, etc
proceeding commenced by Mr
Yerriah and the only criminal case then before the courts was the charge against
Ms Kurniawan for breaching
a PVRO. There were also undetermined applications for
PVROs brought by Mr Gifkins to which Ms Kurniawan was the defendant.
Local Court found (at [29]) that the report ‘does little more than’
state that Ms Kurniawan was prosecuted for
breaching a PVRO and does not convey
the asserted imputation of guilt in imputation 8. The Local Court made the same
finding (at
[31]) regarding imputation 9.
asserted question of law is, in substance, solely a question of fact. It takes
issue with the Local Court’s findings
of fact that imputations 1, 8 and 9
were not conveyed by the report on the sole basis that the findings must have
involved a misdirection
as to the law because they were contrary to the findings
sought by Ms Kurniawan on the evidence. This is confirmed by Ms
Kurniawan’s
written submissions, which argued that each of imputations 1,
8 and 9 were ‘comfortably carried’ by the entire report
ordinary reasonable reader.
[82] Whether the
asserted imputations would have been conveyed by the report to the ordinary
reasonable person or not is patently
a decision of fact and not law. It is not
the case that the report
necessarily
conveys the asserted imputations,
rather it is capable of doing so
or not doing so
and the decision whether
it does or not involves weight being given to one or other elements of the
report and involves matters of
degree. To uphold the appeal on this question
would require this Court to make its own, different, factual finding on the
before the Local Court.
[83] It is not
open to Ms Kurniawan on this appeal to raise this
asserted question of law (amended notice
of appeal, [5])
[84] The second
asserted question of law was stated as follows:
misdirected himself in relation to the well-established principle in
Newspaper and Harrison
by failing to approach the construction of the
[report] on the basis that that case was limited to publications that refer only
the plaintiff being charged or arrested and no more in respect of imputations
[85] Ms Hart
submitted that the relevant authority was
Mirror Newspapers Ltd v
in which Mason J
(Wilson J agreeing) held (at 300-301):
...[T]here is now a strong
current of authority supporting the view that a report which does no more than
state that a person has
been arrested and has been charged with a criminal
offence is incapable of bearing the imputation that he is guilty or probably
of that offence. ... The ordinary reasonable reader is mindful of the
principle that a person charged with a crime is presumed innocent
until it is
proved that he is guilty. Although he knows that many persons charged with a
criminal offence are ultimately convicted,
he is also aware that guilt or
innocence is a question to be determined by a court ... and that not
infrequently the person charged
is acquitted.
[86] Ms Hart
acknowledged that the Local Court had (at [28]) correctly identified the
principle by reference to this authority. However,
she argued that the Local
Court had misdirected itself in the application of that authority because the
Local Court had failed to
approach the assessment of imputations 8 and 9 on the
basis that the principle was confined to a publication which referred to a
person being arrested and/or charged with a criminal offence and said nothing
else. In other words, she argued that if the publication
said anything in
relation to criminal conduct beyond ‘arrested’ and/or
‘charged’, an imputation of guilt
would necessarily follow. Here,
the report stated, for example, that the criminal ‘proceeding’ had
been heard but was
not yet decided and that Mr Gifkins and two other people had
given evidence.
[87] In making
this submission, Ms Hart sought to draw a distinction between a person being
‘charged’ with a criminal
offence and a person being
‘prosecuted’ for a criminal offence because ‘the presumption
of innocence sometimes
does not apply to someone who is being prosecuted for a
crime’. The basis for that novel submission was not identified.
[88] As set out
in paragraph
above, the Local
Court found that the report ‘does little more’ than state that Ms
Kurniawan was charged with breaching
the PVRO, which Ms Hart argued necessarily
indicates that the decision in
Mirror Newspapers v Harrison
misapplied.
decision allowed an appeal from the Court of Appeal which had overruled the
trial judge’s decision that a newspaper
article about the appellant having
been arrested in relation to an assault on a politician was not capable of
bearing the implications
that the plaintiff was directly or indirectly involved
in the assault and that the plaintiff was guilty of a criminal offence in
relation to the assault. The newspaper article reported that the plaintiff and
others had been arrested in connection with the assault,
following a month of
intensive investigation by a special squad of detectives tasked by the Deputy
Premier with finding the culprit.
Further to what his Honour said set out above,
Mason J held (at 303) that any publication which goes on to say or suggest that
charge was well founded, i.e., that the plaintiff was guilty, carries the
imputation of guilt. His Honour held (at 303) that the
newspaper article focused
attention on the violence of the assault, the intensive nature of the
investigation and the circumstance
that a ‘special squad of
detectives’ ‘worked around the clock’ to fulfil a directive
from the Deputy Premier
that the culprits be found, which no doubt suggested
that the matter was regarded as important by the Government and by the police.
Nevertheless, his Honour said he failed to understand how a reasonable reader
would read it as meaning that the plaintiff was guilty
of the offence or that he
was involved in the assault.
[90] It is clear
therefore that the decision in
does not stand for the principle
of law that, if a publication says something in addition to the fact that the
plaintiff has been
arrested and/or charged with a criminal offence, or if a
report says a person is being ‘prosecuted’ for a criminal offence,
it necessarily conveys to the ordinary reasonable reader the imputation that the
plaintiff is guilty of that offence. It follows
that, for the Local Court to
find that the report ‘does little more than’ state that Ms Kurniawan
has been charged with
a criminal offence, is not an error of law because it
acknowledged that something else was stated in the report.
[91] No error of
law is demonstrated and this ground fails.
[92] The other
submissions made under this ‘question of law’ were that the report
implied that Ms Kurniawan was guilty
of the offence of breaching the PVRO
because it referred to more than Ms Kurniawan simply being charged with
breaching the PVRO,
such as her engaging in harassing, intimidating or verbally
abusing committee members, and referred to the evidence upon which the
were made (including aggressive behaviour towards committee members). Putting
aside the question of law dealt with above, these
arguments solely take issue
with the Local Court’s factual finding that the report would not convey to
the ordinary reasonable
person imputations 8 and 9.
asserted question of law (amended notice of
appeal, [6])
[93] The third
asserted question of law was stated as follows:
His Honour failed to
apply the principle that whether imputations are conveyed must be considered in
the context of the entire [report]
as a whole in respect of imputations 1, 8 and
argument in relation to this asserted question appeared to be that the Local
Court failed to consider whether the imputations
were conveyed from a reading of
the report as a whole.
[95] The Local
Court (at [13]) stated that assessing imputations is a two step process, the
second of which is to determine if the
words actually have the meaning alleged
given the context of the publication, citing
On the pages of that
decision specifically identified by the Local Court (at 385-386), Hunt J
observed that he was urged by the defendants
in that case to construe the matter
complained of as a whole, because it also contained the defendant’s denial
to the asserted
imputation. This is a clear indication that the Local Court was
cognisant of the requirement to construe the report as a whole.
[96] Essentially,
the only basis for the assertion that the Local Court had failed to do so was
that the Local Court found that imputations
1, 8 and 9 were not conveyed.
asserted question of law is, in substance, solely a question of fact. It takes
issue with the Local Court’s findings
of fact about asserted imputations
1, 8 and 9 on the sole basis that they must have involved a failure to consider
the report as
a whole because they were contrary to the findings sought by Ms
Kurniawan on the evidence. To uphold this ground, the Court would
be required to
make its own, and different, findings of fact.
[98] It is not
open to Ms Kurniawan on this appeal to raise this ground.
asserted questions of law regarding the defence of justification
asserted questions of law (amended
notice of appeal, [9], [10])
[99] The fourth
and fifth asserted questions of law were stated as follows:
Honour failed to take account of relevant evidence that established that on 29
April 2019, [Mr Gifkins] called the police without
any reasonable basis. This
evidence was highly relevant to the justification defence for imputations 1 and
7 as well as malice.
His Honour mischaracterised the CCTV footage tendered for the April foyer
incident in paragraphs [11], [75] and [77] of the judgment
as his Honour’s
conclusion does not correctly describe what was depicted in the recording. There
was in fact no evidence in
support of this finding.
[100] The Local
Court found (at [91]) that all of the imputations made in the report were
substantially true. The imputations found
to have been made in the report were
imputation 2, which was conceded by Mr Gifkins (at [20]), imputation 3 (at
[23]), imputations
4, 5 and 6 (at [24]), and imputation 7 (at [25]).
[101] Those
imputations were:
Kurniawan] became aggressive and behaved in an intimidating and harassing manner
against Committee members Judy Richardson, [Mr
Gifkins] and Jason Gay when she
received an NTCAT notice which behaviour resulted in a number of [PVROs] being
made by the Court
against her (the entire [report] but especially paragraph
Kurniawan] was responsible for bringing before the local courts 11 [PVROs] and 2
criminal cases whilst her partner prosecuted
another NTCAT case challenging the
lawfulness of a lock-box, a sticker and building Wi-Fi infrastructure being on
common property
(the entire [report] but especially paragraphs 13-15).
Kurniawan] became aggressive against Committee members during BBQs by the pool
area (the entire [report] but especially paragraphs
Kurniawan] verbally abused and swore at Judy Richardson and [Mr Gifkins] whilst
they were standing in the basement (the entire
[report] but especially
paragraphs 17, 20).
Kurniawan] broke into cage 25 and damaged property belonging to [Mr Gifkins] for
her partner to use cage 25 to store his own property
(the entire [report] but
especially paragraph 21).
Kurniawan] has mis-conducted herself so as to endanger the integrity of the
Marrakai body corporate (the entire [report] but especially
paragraphs 31,
incident the subject of the fourth and fifth asserted questions of law was an
interaction between Ms Kurniawan, Mr Gifkins
and Mr Brittain in the foyer of the
apartment building on 29 April 2019, Mr Gifkins calling the police and Ms
Kurniawan being issued
with a notice to appear alleging a breach of the PVRO
against her. There was CCTV footage of this incident but not did not have any
audio recording.
[103] The Local
Court described this incident, in the chronology of ‘less controversial
facts’ (at [11]) that Ms Kurniawan
‘leaves the common area
while’ Mr Gifkins is in the foyer. The Local Court found (at [75]) that Mr
Gifkins was in the
foyer talking to Mr Brittain, Mr Gifkins said he heard the
gate slam two or three times and he looked out and saw Ms Kurniawan, the
shows the gate through the window and it can be seen to shut twice in quick
succession, and Mr Gifkins’ evidence that
it was slammed was accepted. The
Local Court rejected (at [76]) Ms Kurniawan’s evidence that she did not
slam the gate, preferring
Mr Gifkins’ evidence. The Local Court found (at
[77]) that Ms Kurniawan came into view immediately after the slam and the CCTV
showed her and Mr Gifkins exchange words, during which Ms Kurniawan swore at him
and was generally abusive.
[104] Ms Hart
argued that I should watch the CCTV footage to determine for myself whether the
Local Court had ‘mischaracterised’
the evidence to such a degree
that it made a finding without any evidence to support it. Reliance was placed
at [217] where the Full Court of the Federal Court held that
the Tribunal had made an error of law in giving no weight to the evidence
independent witness who corroborated the evidence of the appellant on the basis
that the independent witness’s evidence
was derived from a tainted source,
namely the appellant.
Federal Court held (at [218]) that to so conclude was not to enter into the
field of merits review or fact-finding, but
was to supervise the legality of the
fact-finding process of the Tribunal. The evidence was said to be central and
important evidence.
The Federal Court held that an examination of the evidence,
without the need for any weighing of evidence or choosing between available
inferences or findings, revealed that the evidence did not derive from the
tainted source.
[106] In the
context of all of the other evidence about incidents between Ms Kurniawan and
body corporate members during this long-running
‘feud’, I do not
accept that the evidence about the incident on 29 April 2019 was central and
important evidence in the
sense described in . Ms Hart argued that it was
important as evidencing Mr Gifkins’ malice against Ms Kurniawan because
CCTV footage established that Mr Gifkins was waiting in the foyer to
confront Ms Kurniawan, called the police because he thought
Ms Kurniawan had
slammed the gate, and the verbal altercation between Ms Kurniawan and Mr Gifkins
only occurred after he called the
police ‘for no valid reason’. It
was argued that Mr Gifkins’ call to the police was
‘unreasonable’
because ‘who calls the police for slamming a
gate?’ and thus it was evidence of malice.
[107] These
matters confirm the immateriality of this evidence in the context of all of the
interactions the subject of this ‘feud’.
Its immateriality in that
broader context explains the failure of the Local Court to make reference to
this incident specifically
when addressing the defence of justification and
whether imputations 2 to 7 were substantially true.
[108] Ms Hart
was inviting this Court to do precisely what the Federal Court in
said it was not doing, namely to engage in a merits review of the Local
Court’s fact-finding by weighing evidence and choosing
between available
inferences or findings.
[109] Here, the
evidence included both affidavit evidence and oral evidence from both Ms
Kurniawan and Mr Gifkins about what happened.
The CCTV footage had no audio. The
Local Court found that Ms Kurniawan had slammed the gate, and that she and Mr
Gifkins had exchanged
words during which she swore at him and was generally
abusive. It was not in dispute that, at some point, Mr Gifkins called the police
and Ms Kurniawan was charged with breaching the PVRO in relation to this
incident. The Local Court’s findings were rationally
open on the evidence
and any other conclusion would require the weighing of evidence or choosing
between available inferences or
findings, which is not permitted in an appeal on
a question of law.
Relevant and irrelevant
considerations?
[110] Ms Hart
made a bizarre and confusing submission to the effect that aspects of the CCTV
footage not mentioned by the Local Court
were ‘relevant
considerations’ which the Local Court had ‘failed to take into
account’ and aspects of the
CCTV footage mentioned by the Local Court were
‘irrelevant considerations’ which the Local Court should not have
into account. It was her submission that the terms ‘relevant’
and ‘irrelevant’ considerations in this context
‘can be used
interchangeably when it comes to appeals’ with the term
‘relevant’ in the evidence law sense
of probative to a fact in
issue. It was her submission in reply that a failure by a decision maker to take
into account evidence
which satisfies the criteria for relevance in
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
is an error of law.
[111] Initially,
it was not clear to me whether Ms Hart was referring to error in the sense of
House v The King,
involving a decision wrong in law for a failure to take into account a relevant
consideration, or for taking into account an irrelevant
consideration.
[112] In reply,
Ms Hart submitted as follows:
I submit that the exercise of a
discretion susceptible to challenge, it has to be in accordance with the
principles in
. ... So therefore, if there’s any mistakes
of fact, that simply shows a question of law, which is a legal error.
is a patently erroneous submission. This was later clarified, or withdrawn, and
Ms Hart submitted that taking into account
an irrelevant fact or failing to take
into account a relevant fact
be an error of law.
stated, that is also an erroneous submission. To make out error, it would first
have to be shown that the decision appealed
from was a discretionary
That has not been
shown in this appeal either in respect of the Local Court’s decision to
dismiss the claim for damages, or
the Local Court’s findings that some of
the asserted imputations were not conveyed by the report, that such asserted
imputations
as were conveyed were substantially true, and that the defence of
qualified privilege was made out. Without expressing a concluded
view, it is
difficult to see how the Local Court’s decision or findings are
discretionary in the relevant
Secondly, reference would
have to be made to: (a) a statutory provision or common law principle which
demonstrated that a court determining
this case or an aspect of it was bound, as
a matter of law, to take a particular factual consideration into account, or was
prohibited,
as a matter of law, from taking a particular factual consideration
into account;
and (b) that the
Local Court had (as applicable) failed to consider or had considered such a
consideration, such that it had committed
legally erroneous fact-finding.
content of the CCTV footage, or aspects of it, (which is evidence) cannot
sensibly be described as ‘relevant considerations’
‘irrelevant considerations’ in this sense.
[116] It is not
open to Ms Kurniawan on this appeal to raise these grounds of
asserted question of law (amended notice
of appeal, [11]
[117] The sixth
asserted question of law was stated as follows:
His Honour failed to
apply the well-established legal principles in relation to the justification
defence that an imputation is substantially
true only if it is established that
every material part of it was substantially true.
[118] Ms Hart
argued in writing that the Local Court did not set out any legal principles
relating to the defence of justification,
and only set out (at [84]) that
Defamation Act 2006
(NT) provides that it is a defence
to the publication of defamatory matter if the defendant proves that the
defamatory imputations
carried by the matter are substantially true. It was,
however, accepted that
accords with the common law position that
partial justification is not a defence.
[119] Given the
Local Court’s reference to
, which accords with the common law
position, that detailed written submissions were made to the Local Court about
the principles
to be applied to this defence, and the approach taken by the
Local Court to the assessment of whether each imputation was substantially
it is sufficiently clear that the Local Court was cognisant of the relevant
principles, which may be summarised as follows.
[120] In order
to establish that an imputation is substantially true, Mr Gifkins had to
establish that every material part of it was
That does not mean that Mr
Gifkins had to prove the truth of every detail of the words of an imputation;
rather he had to ‘meet
the sting’ of the
imputation.
The imputation must
not be considered in a meticulous sense; rather the words employed must be true
in substance and in fact.
Inaccuracy in some detail which does not alter or aggravate the character of the
imputations is immaterial.
[121] The Local
Court found (at [92]) that imputation 1 was not conveyed by the report, but
found that, if it had been, it was substantially
true because Ms Kurniawan was
listed as Mr Yerriah’s representative in the second NTCAT proceedings, the
triviality and timing
of the commencement of those proceedings indicated that
they were commenced in retaliation for the body corporate enforcing the no
rule, and they were not genuine but were primarily to harass and intimidate the
members of the management committee. The Local
Court found (at [93]) that the
PVROs then before the courts were initiated by the committee members in response
to the harassment
by Ms Kurniawan which was her retaliation to the enforcement
of the no dog rule. The Local Court found (at [94]) that the criminal
arose from the same matters where Ms Kurniawan was intending to harass and
intimidate Mr Gifkins.
[122] Ms Hart
argued that these findings were erroneous because the various proceedings were
not commenced by Ms Kurniawan, so the
imputation that she was knowingly involved
in them, they were not genuine and they were driven by her desire to intimidate,
annoy and frustrate the committee’s work could not be
substantially true.
[123] It was
clearly open to the Local Court to make these findings, including because of its
finding (at [16]) that the report equated
the actions of Ms Kurniawan with the
actions of Mr Yerriah and suggested they were working as a team.
alleged error is not an error of law comprised of ignoring a material part of
the imputation, but a complaint about the
facts as found or inferred by the
Local Court, when there was clearly evidence to support those findings or
inferences.
[125] No error
of law is demonstrated and this ground fails.
asserted question of law (amended notice of appeal, [12])
seventh asserted question of law was stated as follows:
failed to take into account relevant evidence that [PVROs] were applied by the
MBC members including [Mr Gifkins] while
mediation was an available option in
the circumstances in which the cease-and-desist letter was sent by Ward Keller
to the appellant
on 19 February 2019, and [Ms Kurniawan] and [Mr Yerriah]
agreed to attend mediation but they never heard back and instead [Mr Gifkins]
al applied for the [PVROs] on 25 February 2019, and this would have not
supported the truth of imputations 1 and 7.
[127] Insofar as
I understood it, the submission of Ms Hart was that the Local Court had
‘failed to take into account a relevant
consideration’, namely that
mediation was an option before a PVRO was granted which Ms Kurniawan and Mr
Yerriah had indicated
a willingness to engage in, and the failure to take this
matter into account comprised an error of law. I repeat my observations
above about the flaws in such an
argument and the proper approach to such a ground of appeal.
[128] On 18
February 2019, solicitors acting for the body corporate wrote to Ms Kurniawan
informing her that, since the NTCAT proceedings
seeking to enforce the no dog
by-law had been initiated, she had engaged in aggressive and abusive behaviour
against members of the
body corporate, requesting that she immediately cease
behaviour against them, and inviting her to participate in a mediation
conference to pursue a resolution of the
[129] On 19
February 2019, Ms Kurniawan emailed the solicitors indicating she and Mr Yerriah
would like to have a mediation conference
prior to 5 March 2019.
[130] On 24
February 2019, the incident near the lift in the basement involving Ms
Kurniawan, Mr Gifkins and Ms Richardson occurred.
The Local Court found (at
[65]-[70]) that Mr Gifkins and Ms Richardson were waiting for the lift in the
basement, Ms Kurniawan saw
them, approached them closely and spoke to them in an
aggressive manner, calling Ms Richardson (who was suffering from terminal brain
cancer) a ‘fucking bitch’ and saying ‘I hope you die
soon’. The Local Court found that Ms Kurniawan looked
aggressive and angry
on the CCTV footage, a fact which Mr Gifkins confirmed in his evidence. The
Local Court found Ms Kurniawan then
forced her way in front of Mr Gifkins and Ms
Richardson to get in the lift.
[131] On 25
February 2019, Mr Gifkins, Ms Richardson and Mr Gay applied for PVROs against Ms
[132] In those
circumstances, Ms Kurniawan’s acceptance of the offer of mediation is
wholly immaterial, having been completely
overshadowed by her conduct towards Mr
Gifkins and Ms Richardson on 24 February 2019, which prompted them to seek the
PVROs the following
day, and which undoubtedly led them to reject as
disingenuous Ms Kurniawan’s acceptance of the offer of mediation.
[133] Even if
this ground was properly a question of law, which I do not accept, the Local
Court’s failure to take into account
when assessing the truth of the
asserted imputations the evidence about Ms Kurniawan accepting the offer of
mediation is entirely
rational and appropriate.
[134] No error
of law is demonstrated and this ground fails.
asserted question of law (amended notice of appeal, [13])
[135] The eighth
asserted question of law was stated as follows:
His Honour failed to
accord [Ms Kurniawan] procedural fairness in his finding that [Ms Kurniawan]
knew of the no dog rule before she
moved into the Marrakai building. This
erroneous finding was critical to his Honour’s view of both [Ms
Kurniawan’s] credit
and to the truth defence. This finding was flawed
because [Ms Kurniawan’s] knowledge of the no dog rule was neither pleaded
in the Defence nor raised by [Mr Gifkins], who never put to her that she was
lying in this regard. It was an elementary breach of
the rules of procedural
fairness to make a finding based on a matter that was never in evidence.
[136] The Local
Court held (at [33]) that it had concluded Ms Kurniawan told lies about not
using bolt cutters to cut a lock, and
that she was getting changed when Mr
Gifkins took photos of her, and that it had found other parts of her evidence
unreliable, so
where her evidence conflicted with the evidence of other
witnesses or other evidence such as CCTV, it was not accepted.
[137] The Local
Court held (at [39]) that there were a number of controversial matters which
required findings. The first of those
was Ms Kurniawan’s knowledge of the
no dog rule. The Local Court observed (at [40]) that Ms Kurniawan’s very
first answer
in cross-examination was whether she knew dogs were not allowed and
her answers raised issues as to her credibility. A passage of
cross-examination is set out in which Ms Kurniawan was asked if she knew before
she moved into the building that there was a
by-law that did not permit dogs in
the building. She answered: ‘I wasn’t completely sure about
it’. She was asked
if she was aware before she moved in that Mr Yerriah
had made two attempts to change the by-laws so that dogs were permitted. She
answered: ‘I wasn’t – no, I’m not aware exactly what he
is doing’. Asked if Mr Yerriah had told her
there was a by-law that did
not permit a dog, she answered: ‘No, [he] did not tell me
[138] The Local
Court found (at [41]) that it was highly unlikely that Ms Kurniawan was not
aware of Mr Yerriah’s unsuccessful
attempts to change the by-laws by the
time she moved in. The Local Court observed (at [42]) that Ms Kurniawan’s
first answer
was that she was not completely sure about the no dog rule, which
suggested she did know something about dogs not being allowed,
and by the third
answer she was clear that Mr Yerriah had not told her about the no dog rule. The
Local Court found (at [43]) this
unusual and unlikely, and found that Ms
Kurniawan moved in, with a dog, knowing it was against the rules.
[139] Ms Hart
made the following oral submission about this ground:
And the main
issue with this adverse credit finding was that his Honour did not have
discretion, because finding the discretion –
finding credibility of a
witness is not a discretionary matter.
[140] Ms Hart
confirmed that her submission was that the Local Court had no jurisdiction to
make a finding about a party’s credibility
when she had given evidence
before the Court and added:
At the same time there is no discretion
for the court to make adverse credit finding for a party if the question was not
put in that
order to [Ms Kurniawan].
submission appeared to be that the Local Court had no power to make a finding
that Ms Kurniawan was lying because the proposition
that she was lying was not
put to Ms Kurniawan in cross-examination, and the issue of whether she knew
she moved in was not a fact in issue because it was
not pleaded in the Defence. Acknowledging that no objection was taken to the
questioning on what was said to be an irrelevant issue, and that Ms
Kurniawan’s credibility was in issue generally, Ms Hart
submitted that Ms
Kurniawan had been denied procedural fairness in relation to this finding.
[142] There was
no necessity for it to be put to Ms Kurniawan in cross-examination that she was
lying about her knowledge of the no
dog rule because the Local Court did not
make a finding that Ms Kurniawan lied in the witness box about this issue. The
Local Court
found, on the basis of her answer that she was not completely sure
having a dog was against the rules. The distinction between that finding and the
express findings that Ms Kurniawan lied
lock and that she was getting changed when Mr Gifkins took photos of her, makes
that clear.
Reading the Local Court’s reasons as a whole, the finding was
that Ms Kurniawan’s evidence on this issue was unreliable,
evidence on various other issues.
[143] To find
that Ms Kurniawan was an unreliable witness was not a denial of procedural
fairness in circumstances where there were
differing versions before the Court
of numerous interactions between the players, those players were called to give
evidence, and
the Local Court would be required to consider their credibility in
determining the factual contests.
assertion that this ‘erroneous’ finding was ‘critical’
to the Local Court’s assessment of
Ms Kurniawan’s credibility and
the justification defence simply cannot be accepted, given the positive findings
that she lied
in the witness box in relation to two other issues, and gave
unreliable evidence in relation to numerous other matters.
[145] Further,
credibility evidence may be adduced in cross-examination, whether it relates to
a fact in issue in the proceedings
[146] In reply,
Ms Hart submitted that the Local Court gave ‘too much weight to adverse
credit findings to the extent that his
Honour failed to take into account what
was relevant in essence in finding the defences’. When it was pointed out
that giving
too much weight to evidence is merely a question of fact, and that
none of the 21 asserted questions of law referred to giving too
much weight to
this evidence, she responded that: ‘one of the grounds of appeal includes
credibility ... and that falls under
the same umbrella’.
submission supports the view expressed in paragraph
above, that there was a colourable
attempt to disguise pure questions of fact as questions of law.
[148] No error
of law is demonstrated and this ground fails.
asserted question of law (amended notice of appeal, [14])
[149] The ninth
asserted question of law was stated as follows:
erroneously took account of matters not particularised by [Mr Gifkins] in the
Defence and not in issue in finding the justification
defence. His Honour failed
to restrict [Mr Gifkins] to his pleaded case. It is a fundamental rule of
fairness that a party is restricted
to his pleaded case.
[150] This was a
complaint that, in assessing the justification defence, the Local Court
conflated the various findings about the
‘controversial facts’ and
relied upon all of them, rather than those particularised by Mr Gifkins in his
Defence when
pleading the justification defence in respect of each asserted
imputation.
[151] Imputations
1, 8 and 9 are set out in paragraph
above. Imputations 2 through 7 are
set out in paragraph
submitted by counsel for Mr Gifkins, Ms Hamlyn, this complaint can only arise in
relation to imputations 1 through 7, as
imputations 8 and 9 related only to the
guilt of Ms Kurniawan in the criminal proceeding for breaching the PVRO. As also
by Ms Hamlyn, the ‘controversial facts’ found by the Local
Court were pleaded in the Defence to relate to each of the
imputations as
follows (with the dots indicating that a controversial fact was pleaded in
relation to a particular
imputation):
Imputation →
Controversial fact ↓
First pool incident
Second pool incident
Locked storage cage
Persistent filming
Basement incident
Slamming gates
April 2019 foyer incident
Involvement in legal proceedings
* Only insofar as it was evidence of the slamming complaint
** Only NTCAT
proceedings relating to removal of the dog and PVROs sought by Mr Gifkins, Mr
Gay and Ms Richardson against Ms Kurniawan
[153] It follows
that all of the controversial facts were pleaded in relation to imputations 1,
2, 3 and 7. The pleadings in relation
to imputations 4, 5 and 6 were more
confined, consistently with the more confined and specific subject matter of
each. Imputation
4 related specifically to aggression against committee members
around the pool during BBQs, and it was expressly dealt with by the
Local Court
in that way (at [97]). Imputation 5 related specifically to swearing at Mr
Gifkins and Ms Richardson in the basement,
and it was expressly dealt with by
the Local Court in that way (at [98], referring to [65]-[70]). Imputation 6
related specifically
to damaging property (the lock) and breaking into the
locked storage cage, and it was expressly dealt with by the Local Court in
way (at [99], referring to [47]-[54]). There is nothing in this complaint.
[154] Even if
this were not the case, a conclusion of error would not necessarily follow. It
is well-established that pleadings are
not ends in themselves but a means to the
end of attaining justice, and a party may be permitted to depart from its
[155] In oral
submissions, Ms Hart argued that the Local Court’s finding that imputation
4 was substantially true was erroneous
because it took into account
‘holistically the whole findings that he has made’ in relation to
the uncontroversial facts.
The foundation for this submission appeared to be the
Local Court’s finding (at [97]) that Ms Kurniawan ‘was aggressive
against committee members around the pool and BBQ area
for reasons discussed
’. Given that there were only two incidents referred to under the
heading ‘controversial facts’ which involved Ms
Kurniawan and
committee members around the pool, this submission is unsustainable.
[156] Ms Hart
also submitted that it was relevant to this ground of appeal that
Mr Gifkins had, during both of the pool incidents,
taken a photo of
Ms Kurniawan, about which she confronted him. This was said to be ‘a
relevant factor’ which the Local
Court had not taken into account when
assessing the truth of imputation 4 because it was the reason that Ms Kurniawan
became aggressive.
I repeat my observations at paragraph
above about the flaws in such an
argument and the proper approach to such a ground of appeal.
[157] Imputation
4 does not contain any reference to a reason for Ms Kurniawan’s aggression
– it is simply that she became
aggressive. Consequently, any reason for
her aggression cannot be relevant to the assessment of the truth of the
imputation. When
I pointed that out to Ms Hart, her response
Your Honour, with respect, the truth of imputation
doesn’t work like that. Because it is an essential part of the imputation,
but the truth of the imputation is relevant to the reason that why she went to
the pool area. It was because of the undisputed fact
that [Mr Gifkins had taken
her photo].
[158] I also
pointed out that, if Ms Kurniawan was pressing as relevant that she had a reason
to become aggressive, that must necessarily
be an acknowledgement of the truth
of the imputation that she became aggressive. Ms Hart’s response
Yes, your Honour. But at the same time the relevant fact which
was pleaded in the defence that it goes directly to the sting of imputation
relevant. However, your Honour, I submit that if this is your Honour’s
view about the imputation, the truth of this imputation
as – that the fact
that [Mr Gifkins] took a photo of [Ms Kurniawan], which resulted in her coming
to the pool area, I respect
your opinion and view on that.
[I indicated I had not formed any final views in this respect.]
I understand your Honour’s point. But with respect, this fact provides
the reason as why she became aggressive. Therefore, is
relevant to the truth of
the imputation.
[159] Nothing
said contradicted the propositions that: (a) the reason for the aggression,
which was not part of imputation 4, is irrelevant
to the assessment of its
truth; and (b) the fact that there was a reason for the aggression concedes the
truth of imputation 4.
[160] No error
of law is demonstrated and this ground fails.
Asserted questions
of law relating to common law qualified privilege
asserted questions of law (amended
notice of appeal, [16], [17])
[161] The tenth
and eleventh asserted questions of law were stated as follows:
Honour misdirected himself in relation to the well-established principles with
respect to the relevance of the defamatory matter
to the privileged occasion and
failed to take into account relevant matters such as inflammatory tone and
language of the [report],
heading of criminal proceedings, time to open the
kimono in finding what was germane to the publication.
His Honour failed to properly identify what part or parts of the [report]
were irrelevant to the privileged occasion.
[162] The Local
Court recorded (at [104]) Ms Kurniawan’s concession that the report was
made on an occasion of privilege within
the defence of qualified privilege. The
Local Court rejected (at [106]) Ms Kurniawan’s submission that parts of
went beyond what was germane and reasonably appropriate to the
occasion of privilege.
[163] There were
two aspects to the tenth ground. The first complaint was that the Local Court
misdirected itself as to the common
law principles regarding the relevance of
the report to the privileged occasion because, at [85] of the Reasons, reference
Defamation Act
, which was not relied upon by
Mr Gifkins in his Defence.
[164] The Local
Court referred (at [87]) to the common law qualified privilege, to the fact that
the parties had referred to several
authorities on that privilege, and (at
[87]-[90]) the Local Court quoted from three of those authorities addressing the
when it applies and what its limits are.
[165] Ms Hart
argued that it should be inferred from the Local Court’s reference to
, and its analysis of the operation of the defence of qualified
privilege (at [106]-[107]) that the Local Court had erroneously applied
instead of the principles applicable to the common law privilege. This
submission was altered during argument to one that the Local
Court had applied
and the common law principles ‘at the same
[166] The Local
Court found (at [107]) that the report was ‘germane to the
occasion’. Those words do not appear in
They do appear in the
extract from
set out by the Local
Court at [89]. In concluding that the defence of qualified privilege was
established, the Local Court did not
find that the conduct of Mr Gifkins in
publishing the report was ‘reasonable in the circumstances’. That is
requirement for the
defence of qualified privilege
(s 27(1)(c)).
[167] There is
no substance to the submission that, in referring (at [106]) to the report
having explained why proceedings were commenced,
Ms Kurniawan’s hostile
reaction to those proceedings, the effect of the harassment of committee
members, the financial time
and costs associated with further proceedings, and
the outcome of those proceedings, the Local Court took into account the matters
(the nature of the business environment in which Mr Gifkins
operated) and (h) (whether the report contained the substance of Ms
Kurniawan’s
side of the story and, if not, whether a reasonable attempt
was made to obtain and publish a response from her). Nothing about the
Court’s summary of the content of the report, which was relevant to
whether it was germane to the occasion (the occasion
being identified at [102]),
suggests even remotely that the Local Court was applying
[168] Ms Hart
argued that the Local Court’s reference (at [86]) to
requiring Ms Kurniawan to prove the report was actuated by malice, together with
the Local Court’s consideration (at [108]-[117])
of malice, was also an
indication that the Local Court had applied
with or instead of the
common law principles applicable to the defence of qualified privilege. In the
reply to the defence of qualified
privilege, Ms Kurniawan pleaded that the
report was published with malice. Malice was, therefore, a matter which the
Local Court
had to determine when considering the defence of qualified
[169] These
matters demonstrate that, despite referring to
earlier in the Reasons,
the Local Court did not apply that provision and applied the common law
privilege principles when deciding
that the defence of qualified privilege was
[170] The second
aspect of this ground was a complaint that the Local Court failed to consider
the tenor and inflammatory language
used in the report in concluding that the
defence of qualified privilege was made out, which was also said to be another
that the Local Court had misdirected itself and not applied the
common law principles. Reliance was placed on the words ‘harassing’
and ‘intimidating’, ‘breaking into’ the storage cage,
and the headings ‘Criminal proceedings’
and ‘Time to open the
kimono’ as demonstrating that the report was not germane to the occasion.
[171] Ms Hart
acknowledged that vituperative or emotional language or tone in a publication is
relevant to both whether qualified
privilege is made out (i.e., whether the
publication was germane to the occasion) and the issue of malice. Under the
heading ‘No
malice’, the Local Court found (at [110]) that there was
no malice evident in the report. The Local Court dealt specifically
[111]-[115]) with the heading ‘Time to open the kimono’.
[172] The Local
Court found (at [107]) that the report was germane to the occasion ‘and
not excessive’. That finding is
immediately followed by the section of the
reasons dealing with malice. I do not accept that, in making the finding at
Local Court ignored and did not take into account the language and
tone of the report, being considerations which may also be relevant
to the issue
of malice. The finding that the report was not ‘excessive’ is a
finding that the language and tone of the
report was not such as to render the
report, or any part of it, beyond what was germane and reasonably appropriate to
the occasion.
eleventh ground was no more than a complaint that the Local Court had not found
that parts of the report were not germane
and reasonably appropriate to the
occasion. It is either repetitive of the tenth ground or, in substance, solely a
question of fact.
If the former, it fails for the same reasons that the tenth
ground does. If the latter, it is not open to Ms Kurniawan to raise it
[174] No error
of law is demonstrated and these grounds fail.
Asserted questions
of law relating to common law qualified privilege and malice
asserted questions of law (amended
notice of appeal, [19], [20])
twelfth and thirteenth asserted question of law were stated as
His Honour misdirected himself in relation to
well-established legal principles relevant to determination as to whether [Mr
was actuated by express malice.
His Honour erroneously relied upon and applied incorrect legal principles at
paragraphs [84] and [85] of the judgment. Section 27
(NT) was not pleaded in the Defence. It also differs from the qualified
privilege defence in common law. This was wholly irrelevant
to any matter in
issue in the proceedings.
[176] Ms Hart
submitted that the Local Court had not referred to any of the authorities
regarding malice, and had referred only to
(which speaks of malice), thereby demonstrating misdirection as to the
principles relating to malice.
submission is not an accurate characterisation of the Reasons and I reject it.
Two of the three authorities cited by the
Local Court (at [87]-[90]) were cases
which turned on the issue of malice.
is a leading
authority in which the High Court confirmed (at [79]) that malice is properly
defined as a motive for, or a purpose
of, defaming the plaintiff that is
inconsistent with the duty or interest that protects the occasion of the
publication. The passage
set out by the Local Court (at [87]) from
states that qualified privilege is qualified by the condition that the
occasion must not be used for some purpose or motive foreign
to the duty or
interest that protects the making of the statement. This is a direct reference
in the Reasons to the common law definition
(referred to by the
Local Court at [88]-[89]), French CJ, Crennan and Kiefel JJ repeated (at [14])
what had been said by the majority
of the High Court in
Roberts v Bass
adding that qualified privilege is lost if the person making the statement did
so for an improper motive, ‘express malice’
being the term of art
used to describe an improper motive. One of the passages cited by the Local
Cush v Dillon
(being [19]) is part of their Honours’
explanation of the relationship between qualified privilege and malice (at
[13]), which
included (at [15]) that express malice cannot be approached in
isolation independent of whether there was present a duty or interest
would support the privilege because a conclusion of express malice requires a
finding that the maker of the statement was actuated
by a motive not connected
to the furtherance of the duty or interest so found, (at [17]) that a statement
which was extraneous to,
and made outside of, the ‘umbrella’ of the
privilege would not be protected by it and it would not be necessary to address
the question of malice, and (at [19] – a passage quoted by the Local
Court) to identify the limits of the privilege, it is
necessary for the trial
judge to consider the matter of the duty or interest and rule whether the
defendant has published something
‘beyond what was germane and reasonably
appropriate to the occasion’. Satisfied of that, their Honours went on to
(at [24]) the issue of malice as it arose in the case before them.
[180] That is
precisely the approach the Local Court took in this case. Satisfied (at [107])
that the report was germane to the occasion
and not excessive, the Local Court
went on to consider (at [108] ff) the issue of malice.
[181] There was
no dispute between the parties as to the legal principles applicable to express
malice. There was, therefore, no cause
for the Local Court to further recite the
legal principles in addressing the issue.
[182] No error
of law is demonstrated and these grounds fail.
asserted question of law (amended notice of appeal, [21])
fourteenth asserted question of law was stated as follows:
Honour failed to infer an improper motive from a relevant fact that first and
second pool incidents, basement incident and April
2019 incidents [sic] were all
evidence of [Mr Gifkins] malice towards [Ms Kurniawan] as he engaged in abusive
and intimidating behaviour.
Roberts v Bass
, the majority of the High Court held (at [76]) as
Improper motive in making the defamatory publication must
not be confused with the defendant’s ill-will, knowledge of falsity,
recklessness, lack of belief in the defamatory statement, bias, prejudice or any
other motive than duty or interest for making the
publication. If one of these
matters is proved, it usually provides a premise for inferring that the
defendant was
actuated by an improper
motive in making
publication. Indeed, proof that the defendant knew that a defamatory statement
made on an occasion of qualified privilege was untrue
is ordinarily conclusive
evidence that the publication was actuated by an improper motive. But, leaving
aside the special case of
knowledge of falsity, mere proof of the
defendant’s ill-will, prejudice, bias, recklessness, lack of belief in
truth or improper
motive is not sufficient to establish malice. The evidence or
the publication must also show some ground for concluding that the
lack of belief in the truth of the publication, recklessness, bias, prejudice or
other motive existed on the privileged
actuated the
publication. ... That is because qualified privilege is, and can only be,
destroyed by the existence of an improper
motive that actuates the publication.
[emphases in original]
[185] Further, a
dislike of the plaintiff, or an indignation at what the defendant believed to be
the plaintiff’s conduct (together
with their taking advantage of the
occasion to expose that conduct), is not sufficient to establish express malice
unless that is
shown to be the dominant (or paramount) motive for the
defendant’s publication.
Further, a finding that a defendant acted emotionally when publishing a
statement does not mean that the defendant was motivated
by an improper
[186] While
dispute between Ms Kurniawan and Mr Yerriah on the one hand and Mr Gifkins and
other members of the management committee
on the other, might permit an
inference that there were some feelings of ill-will, dislike or indignation on
Mr Gifkins’ part
towards Ms Kurniawan, that is clearly not sufficient to
infer that he was motivated by an improper purpose to publish the report.
Local Court expressly referred (at [108]) to the long and protracted
[187] From the
facts as found by the Local Court about the two pool incidents, the basement
incident and the April 2019 incidents,
no inference could rationally be drawn
that Mr Gifkins had engaged in ‘abusive and intimidating behaviour’
Kurniawan. No such inference was drawn by the Local Court.
[188] Even if
that inference were drawn, it would not be sufficient to establish that Mr
Gifkins published the report with an improper
motive, particularly where Mr
Gifkins denied any such improper motive in cross-examination, gave
evidence-in-chief as to his motives,
which were not improper, and was found by
the Local Court to be a credible witness.
[189] I pause
here to record that, contrary to the submission of Ms Hart, the evidence of what
occurred during the pool and other
incidents relied on is not ‘direct
evidence [of] malice’. The evidence would, if accepted (which they were
not), be the
basis for the drawing of an inference that Mr Gifkins published the
report for the improper purpose. Such an inference is not ‘direct
[190] The Local
Court took into account (at [109]) a degree of hostility on Mr Gifkins’
part. It took into account (at 110])
that the report accurately described the
various proceedings. It took into account (at [111]-[115]) the language of the
took into account (at [116]) that Mr Gifkins sent drafts of the
report to the other committee members and the body corporate’s
lawyer, and
adopted the recommended changes. It found (at [117]) that the publication was
not actuated by malice.
asserted question of law is, in substance, solely a question of fact. It
complains that the Local Court should have made
a finding which it did not and
seeks to have this Court make it. That would require the weighing of evidence or
choosing between
available inferences or findings, which is not permitted in an
appeal on a question of law.
[192] It is not
open to Ms Kurniawan on this appeal to raise this
asserted question of law (amended notice
of appeal, [22])
fifteenth asserted question of law was stated as follows:
failed to take account of the relevant matter which is the overall inflammatory
tenor of the [report] in which [Mr Gifkins]
repeatedly accused [Ms Kurniawan] of
harassment, intimidation and criminal conduct, especially in paragraphs 21, 27
and 29 of the
[194] Paragraph
21 of the report is part of the summary of the evidence giving rise to the
making of the three PVROs against Ms Kurniawan
to prohibit her from
‘harassing, intimidating or verbally abusing’ three committee
members. Paragraph 21 refers to ‘[b]reaking
into Cage 25, and damaging
property’ belonging to Mr Gifkins. Paragraph 27 is the heading
‘Criminal Cases’, which
is followed by a paragraph about the
criminal case against Mr Gay, and by paragraph 29, which refers to Ms
Kurniawan being ‘presently
criminally prosecuted for breaching’ the
PVRO in which Mr Gifkins is protected from her ‘abuse and
harassment’,
with the prosecution case involving evidence from Mr Gifkins
and two other witnesses being heard the month before.
[195] This is a
report about the consequences for the body corporate and its members of the
protracted dispute with Ms Kurniawan and
her partner. Those consequences
included applications for, and the grant of, PVROs in favour of three body
corporate members restraining
Ms Kurniawan from, in respect of two of them,
using a device to film or record them, in respect of one of them, from using the
near the letterboxes to exit or enter the building, and for all three, from
harassing or verbally abusing
[196] In that
context, use of the words ‘abuse’, ‘harassment’ and
‘intimidation’ are not vituperative
inflammatory.
They are words
entirely accurate and appropriate to the context. Similarly, where there were
two criminal cases arising from this
dispute, the words ‘criminal
cases’ is not vituperative or inflammatory. So too, what was said about
the prosecution
of Ms Kurniawan for breaching the PVRO. Given the Local
Court’s findings about the ‘locked storage cage’ incident,
namely that Ms Kurniawan used bolt cutters to cut Mr Gifkins’ combination
lock from the storage cage, removed his items and
replaced the lock with one of
her own, the use of the words ‘breaking into’ and ‘damaging
property’ are again
not vituperative or inflammatory and are entirely
accurate and appropriate to the context.
asserted question of law is, in substance, solely a question of fact. It seeks
to challenge the Local Court’s finding
of fact (at [110]) that there was
no malice evident in the report, when the Reasons clearly demonstrate that the
Local Court took
into account the words appearing in the report, and to have
this Court make a different finding. That would require the weighing
of evidence
or choosing between available inferences or findings, which is not permitted in
an appeal on a question of law.
[198] It is not
open to Ms Kurniawan on this appeal to raise this
asserted question of law (amended notice
of appeal, [23])
sixteenth asserted question of law was stated as follows:
failed to take account of the relevant fact that the heading ‘Time to open
the kimono’ was used by [Mr Gifkins]
in circumstances where [Ms Kurniawan]
was both Asian and a woman. His Honour erroneously relied upon
, where the parties were business people and the expression was used
in a business context.
[200] The Local
Court addressed this heading at [111]-[115]. Reference was made to the
submission that this heading was racist, sexist
and strongly indicative of
malice. The Local Court observed Ms Kurniawan give evidence in person. The Local
Court expressed understanding
why someone might take offence to the phrase, but
accepted Mr Gifkins’ evidence that he was not using it to cause offence,
and his evidence that it was a commercial term he had used in the past to refer
to being open and transparent.
[201] In the
face of those reasons, there is no foundation for the submission that the Local
Court failed to take into account Ms
Kurniawan’s race and gender when
considering whether the heading was used with malice. Furthermore, the Local
reference to
R v Waldron (No
was simply supportive of
Mr Gifkins’ evidence that it was a commercial or business term he had used
in the past. Given that
it is Mr Gifkins’ motive that matters, there was
nothing erroneous about referring to that decision.
[202] Ms Hart
also made an oral submission which was not grounded in the asserted question of
law, that the Local Court should have
rejected Mr Gifkins’ evidence
term the day
before giving supplementary evidence about his use of it, over the
objection of Ms Kurniawan.
asserted question of law is, in substance, solely a question of fact. It seeks
to challenge the Local Court’s finding
of fact (at [110]) that there was
no malice evident in the report, when the Local Court clearly took into account
the heading, and
to have this Court make a different finding. That would require
the weighing of evidence or choosing between available inferences
or findings,
which is not permitted in an appeal on a question of law.
[204] It is not
open to Ms Kurniawan on this appeal to raise this
asserted question of law (amended notice
of appeal, [24])
seventeenth asserted question of law was stated as follows:
Honour erroneously failed to take account of the relevant fact that [Mr Gifkins]
failed to inform the recipients of the [report]
that the criminal proceedings he
had caused to be brought against [Ms Kurniawan] had been dismissed and conclude
on that basis that
[Mr Gifkins] was actuated by malice. Mr Gifkins had told
recipients of the [report] that [Ms Kurniawan] was facing criminal prosecution.
It was as much of interest to those recipients to know that she was acquitted.
The only explanation for this failure is that [Mr
Gifkins] did not want the
recipients to know that his attack on [Ms Kurniawan] was baseless. That really
means he was actuated by
[206] Ms Hart
Schneiderman
proposition that, where a defendant becomes aware that the statement is false
but thereafter still refuses to withdraw it
or apologise, that may be evidence
from which malice can be inferred.
[207] It is only
necessary to repeat the proposition to demonstrate the flaw in the submission
that the authority applies here. There
is no suggestion or argument here that
the statement in the report that Ms Kurniawan was the subject of an ongoing
criminal proceeding
is false. If that statement is not false, there is nothing
to correct or apologise for.
[208] Furthermore,
in that case, what was
held by the New Zealand Supreme Court was
(at 155), by reference to authority, that while a refusal on the part of a
defendant to
apologise for, or retract, a defamatory statement when they become
aware of its falsity may be properly considered on the issue of
damages, it is
(at all events
) to be regarded as evidence of malice.
The Court observed (at 155-156) that it was somewhat difficult to see why such
evidence should
not be taken into consideration for the purpose of considering
the issue of malice, but it was unnecessary to express a concluded
the point. The Court held (at 156-157) that a direction by the trial judge to
the jury that a failure to retract was not
evidence of malice was not a
misdirection.
[209] The case
does not stand for the proposition for which it was relied upon and the
proposition is not relevant to the present
case when the statement in question
was not false.
[210] Furthermore,
the words ‘attack’ and ‘baseless’ in the asserted
question are inappropriately emotive
characterisations of the report and the
particular part of it which was in issue. Nor is there any merit in the
submission that the
only available inference from Mr Gifkins’ failure to
notify the recipients that Ms Kurniawan was acquitted is that he was
by malice. The point of the report was to inform the owners about how
the body corporate’s money and time had been expended.
The report set that
out in relation to the criminal proceedings, and made clear they had been heard
but not determined. It also expressly
indicated when and where the decision
would be delivered, if any recipient was interested to hear the outcome.
[211] Even if
this ground was a question of law (which I do not accept), no error of law has
been demonstrated and this ground fails.
question of law (amended notice of appeal, [25])
eighteenth asserted question of law was stated as follows:
Honour erroneously took into account an irrelevant matter in determining the
existence of malice. The irrelevant matter was the
objective accuracy of the
[report] at [110] of the judgment where malice depends on [Mr Gifkins’]
state of mind.
[213] I repeat
my observations at paragraphs
above about the flaws in such an
argument and the proper approach to such a ground of appeal.
[214] As set out
in paragraph
above, knowledge on
the part of the defendant as to the falsity of a defamatory statement is a
highly relevant, potentially conclusive,
matter in considering the issue of
malice. If a statement is objectively true, a finding that the publisher knew it
was false would
be extremely difficult, if not impossible, to make. How this was
said to be an irrelevant matter is difficult to comprehend.
[215] No error
of law is demonstrated and this ground fails.
asserted question of law (amended notice of appeal, [26])
nineteenth asserted question of law was stated as follows:
Honour’s reasoning at [116] of the judgment clearly reveals both a
misunderstanding of the law and how [Ms Kurniawan] put
her case, which deprived
[Ms Kurniawan] of procedural fairness. The paragraph [is repeated].
The dichotomy expressed, that is, either no malice or that both [Mr Gifkins]
and his lawyer were actuated by malice is fallacious.
With respect it shows a
misunderstanding of the concept of malice which, in this area, is publication
for an improper purpose. That
state of mind can easily exist whether or not a
defendant obtained legal advice or followed such advice.
[217] The Local
Court held (at [116]) that Mr Gifkins had sent drafts of the report to the other
committee members and to the body
corporate’s lawyer, and adopted all
changes recommended, which, the Local Court found, suggested no malice, or that
and the lawyer were acting with malice, which was unlikely.
[218] On any
approach to the need for precision in identifying a question of law, this is
not, in substance, a question of law. It
is a series of submissions which are,
overall, unpersuasive.
[219] In oral
submissions, Ms Hart argued that malice on the part of the lawyer was irrelevant
and the ‘fallacy’ was that
receiving legal advice about the content
of a proposed publication does not give a person ‘a licence to put some
which [are] inflammatory and inappropriate, extraneous, in the
publication’.
[220] The Local
Court was not making any findings about malice on the part of the body
corporate’s lawyer. The Local Court was,
rationally, taking into account
the conduct of Mr Gifkins in relation to the content of the report prior to its
publication, namely
the step of having the report settled by the body
corporate’s lawyer, which could rationally bear upon the consideration of
whether he published that report for an improper purpose not germane to the
occasion of its publication. That is not to say that
getting legal advice as to
the content necessarily denies the existence of malice. It is simply taking
account of a fact probative
to that issue along with the other facts relevant to
that issue.
[221] Even if
this ground was a question of law (which I do not accept), no error of law is
demonstrated and this ground fails.
Asserted question of law
relating to admission of interrogatory answer 4
asserted question of law (amended notice of appeal,
twentieth asserted question of law was stated as follows:
erred by admitting into evidence, over objection by [Ms Kurniawan] [Mr
Gifkins’] own answers to [Ms Kurniawan’s]
interrogatory 4 as his
evidence. His Honour did not have a discretion to admit evidence which the
Evidence Act
renders inadmissible. Court rules cannot operate to repeal
an item of legislation.
February 2024, the Local Court delivered reasons for a ruling that
Mr Gifkins could tender and rely upon as part of his
evidence-in-chief an
affidavit he had made earlier in the proceedings deposing to all of the
materials he had in his possession about
the subject matter of the report at the
time of its publication. The Local Court admitted the affidavit because the
affidavit evidence
filed by Mr Gifkins as his evidence-in-chief had
inadvertently failed to include the materials he had in his possession at the
he made the report, it was a necessary part of his case to establish that
the materials he had provided a firm or logical basis for
the imputations
conveyed by the report, and there was no prejudice to Ms Kurniawan because she
was on notice of Mr Gifkins’
intention to seek to rely on this affidavit
and thereby had the opportunity to cross-examine Mr Gifkins about it if she
[224] Ms Hart
argued that the affidavit was rendered inadmissible by the hearsay rule in
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
She argued that a lack of prejudice cannot render inadmissible evidence
admissible, there was prejudice because Ms Kurniawan
had conducted her case and
her cross-examination of Mr Gifkins on the basis that the affidavit was
inadmissible, and the Local Court’s
interpretation of rule 30.11 of the
SCRs and rule 17.08 of the
Local Court Rules
‘fallacious’.
[225] The short
answer to these arguments is that nothing contained in that affidavit was the
subject of findings by the Local Court,
or otherwise featured in the Local
Court’s decision. If admitting this affidavit was an error, about which I
express no opinion,
it was not an error which had any bearing at all upon the
outcome of the case. There was absolutely no possibility that the error
have affected the decision.
[226] No error
of law is demonstrated and this ground fails.
Asserted question of law relating to credibility
asserted question of law (amended notice of appeal,
[227] The twenty
first asserted question of law was stated as follows:
erred in making the finding in relation to [Ms Kurniawan’s] knowledge of
the no dog rule, as this was neither placed
in the Defence nor such case was
made by [Mr Gifkins] at trial and in cross-examination and so deprived [Ms
Kurniawan] of procedural
[228] This is a
repetition of the eighth asserted question of law. No additional submissions
were made in respect of this ground separately
from those made in respect of the
eighth asserted question of law.
[229] For the
reasons set out above in relation to the eighth asserted question of law, no
error of law is demonstrated and this ground
Disposition
[230] None of
the 21 grounds of appeal have been made out.
[231] The appeal
is dismissed.
[232] I will
hear the parties as to costs.
-----------------
Kurniawan v Gifkins
NTLC [the decision does not appear to have been allocated a number]
(‘Reasons’).
Reasons at [11].
v MacMahon Contractors Pty Ltd
(2018) 41 NTLR 168
Tracy Village Sports & Social Club v
[1992] NTSC 91
(1992) 111 FLR 32
at 37 per Mildren J. Mildren J’s observations
had also been adopted and repeated by the Court of Appeal in
[1993] NTCA 127
(1993) 4 NTLR 79
at 84 per Gallop, Martin and Angel JJ.
Haritos v Federal Commissioner of
[2015] FCAFC 92
(2015) 233 FCR 315
Section 7 provided that only the
President and the Deputy President of the Tribunal were required to be lawyers.
There is no equivalent
to that provision in the
Local Court (Civil Procedure)
Section 45 provided that the
Tribunal could refer questions of law to the Federal Court. There is no
equivalent to that provision
Local Court (Civil Procedure)
The history was set out at
[116]-[117], which included that for a period of four years after its enactment,
the alternative construction
of s 44 (that it conferred a right of appeal
on pure questions of law only) would have meant that the only remedy available
courts in relation to an error of law by the Tribunal which was not a
pure question of law would have been the High Court under
Constitution
, which seemed unlikely to be the intention of the
Parliament. There is no such history in relation to the
Local Court (Civil
Procedure) Act
At [118]-[162], the Court reviewed
numerous authorities and concluded (at [161]-[162]) that they showed that the
appeal jurisdiction
did not extend to questions of fact and that not all mixed
questions of fact and law stand outside the appeal jurisdiction. There
such body of authority in relation to
Local Court (Civil
Procedure) Act
The purpose was noted at [133],
namely to ensure that the merits of the case are dealt with, not by the Federal
Court, but by the
Lipohar v The Queen
[1999] HCA 65
(1999) 200 CLR 485
per Gaudron, Gummow and Hayne JJ, citing
Favelle Mort Ltd v
[1976] HCA 13
(1976) 133 CLR 580
at 591 per Barwick CJ.
Bassell v McGuiness
(1981) 29 SASR 508
at 509 per King CJ, citing
Viro v The Queen
(1978) 141 CLR 88
Barwick CJ, at 120 per Gibbs J, at 129 per Stephen J.
Farah Constructions Pty Ltd v Say-Dee Pty
(2007) 230 CLR 89.
at [124] and
[158], referring to earlier decisions to that effect, apparently with approval.
Brown v Repatriation Commission
(1985) 7 FCR
302 at 304;
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Brixius
(1987) 16 FCR 359
at 363-364.
Soulemezis v Dudley
(Holdings) Pty Ltd
(1987) 10 NSWLR 247.
Housing Commission (NSW) v
Tatmar Pastoral Co Ltd
[1983] 3 NSWLR 378
at 385-386, recently cited with
approval in
Kemp v Findlay
[2025] NSWCA 46
per Ward P (Leeming
and Ball JJA agreeing).
The Questions of Law document
refers to these paragraphs ‘of the MCO’, being the ‘matter
complained of’,
i.e., the report. It is clear from ground 3 in the
original notice of appeal that this was intended to be a reference to the
of the Local Court’s reasons for decision.
Rush v Nationwide News Pty
[2019] FCA 496.
Drummoyne Municipal Council
v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
(1990) 21 NSWLR 135
Mirror Newspapers Ltd v
[1982] HCA 50
(1982) 149 CLR 293
Farquhar v Bottom
2 NSWLR 380.
House v The King
at 505 per Dixon, Evatt and McTiernan JJ.
Norbis v Norbis
[1986] HCA 17
161 CLR 513
per Mason and Deane JJ (Brennan J agreeing);
Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
(2018) 264 CLR 541
per Gageler J, at [85], [87] per Nettle and Gordon JJ (Kiefel CJ agreeing),
[147], [150] per Edelman J.
While sentencing orders, cost
orders, interlocutory orders and assessments of damages have been held to be
discretionary, judgments
that a party was negligent or guilty of contributory
negligence, that a testator made inadequate provision for a member of his
and a finding that a contract is unjust have been held not to be
discretionary. See D Mildren,
The Appellate Jurisdiction of the Courts in
ed, The Federation Press, 2023, [7.38] and the
authorities there cited.
Minister for Aboriginal
Affairs v Peko Wallsend Ltd
(1986) 162 CLR 24
at 39, 44, 47 per Mason J
(Gibbs CJ agreeing).
Channel Seven Sydney Pty Ltd
[2010] NSWCA 335
per McColl JA (Spigelman CJ, Beazley
JA, McClellan CJ at CL and Bergin CJ in Eq agreeing).
Rofe v Smith’s
Newspapers Ltd
[1924] NSWStRp 71
(1924) 25 SR (NSW) 4
at 22 per Street ACJ;
Channel Seven
Sydney Pty Ltd v Mahommed
[2010] NSWCA 335
per McColl JA (Spigelman
CJ, Beazley JA, McClellan CJ at CL and Bergin CJ in Eq agreeing).
Appeal Book (‘AB’):
pp 139-140.
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
(NT), which provides
that the credibility rule (in
– that credibility evidence about
a witness is not admissible) does not apply to evidence adduced in
cross-examination if the
evidence could substantially affect the assessment of
the witness’s credibility. ‘Credibility evidence’ is
(relevantly)
evidence relevant to the credibility of a witness that is relevant
only because it affects the assessment of the credibility of the
See, for example,
of Australia v Harrison, Jones & Devlin Ltd
[1910] HCA 44
(1910) 11 CLR 492
Griffith CJ;
Aravas v Metropolitan Water, Sewerage & Drainage Board
(1970) 72 SR (NSW) 596;
Banque Commerciale SA (in liq) v Akhil
Holdings Ltd
(1990) 169 CLR 279
at 293 per Dawson J;
Leotta v Public
Transport Commission (NSW)
(1976) 50 ALJR 666
Dare v Pulham
148 CLR 658.
Cush v Dillon
[2011] HCA 30
per French CJ, Crennan and Kiefel JJ.
Roberts v Bass
[2002] HCA 57
Cush v Dillon
[2011] HCA 30
Barbaro v Amalgamated
Television Services Pty Ltd
(1985) 1 NSWLR 30
at 50, citing
[1975] AC 135
Prince v Malouf
per McColl JA; Basten JA; Ward JA.
AB, pp 1361, 1362,
Skalkos v Assaf
[2002] NSWCA 14
, where it was held that it was not erroneous to take a
vituperative tone into account in that case, where the content of the
publication
was false and irrational and the publication was to a wide audience
raising issues of reasonableness.
R v Waldron (No 3)
[2024] NSWDC 159.
Matheson v Schneideman
[1929] NZGazLawRp 48
[1930] NZLR 151.
at [64] per Grant CJ, and at [113] per Coulehan AJ, citing
Development Consent Authority v Phelps
[2010] NTCA 3
(2010) 27 NTLR 174
Phelps v Development Consent Authority
(2012) 31 NTLR 51
at [7]. See also
at [192] citing
Waterford v Commonwealth
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (598 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter