URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTWHC/2023/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:23:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Tran v Northern Territory of Australia [2023] NTWHC 3 (6 February 2023)
CITATION: Tran v Northern Territory of Australia
[2023] NTWHC 3
PARTIES: Thuy Quyen Tran
Northern Territory of Australia
TITLE OF COURT: WORK HEALTH COURT
FILE NO(s): 2021-03347-LC
DELIVERED ON: 6 February 2023
DELIVERED AT: DARWIN
HEARING DATE(s): 11 January 2023
JUDGMENT OF: JR GORDON
CATCHWORDS:
Discovery; ‘possession, custody or power’; discoverability of
material relied upon by expert witness
Work Heath Court Rules
Goben Pty Ltd v The Chief Executive Officer of Customs (No 2)
[1996] FCA 1657
(1996) 68 FCR 301
FCT v Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ptd
(1979) 143 CLR 499
Comptroller General of Customs v Zappia
92 ALJR 1053
Psalidis v Norwich Union Life Australia Ltd
Lonrho Ltd v Shell Petroleum Co Ltd
[1980] 1 WLR 627
REPRESENTATION:
Worker: T. Anderson
Employer: K. Sibley
Solicitors:
Worker: Halfpennys
Employer: Roussos Legal Advisory
Judgment category classification: B
Judgment ID number: [2023] NTWHC 3
Number of paragraphs: 43
IN THE WORK HEALTH COURT
AT DARWIN IN THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY OF
No. 2021-03347-LC
THUY QUYEN TRAN
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
REASONS FOR DECISION
(Delivered 6 February 2023)
Judicial Registrar Gordon
is an application by the Worker for discovery, seeking a range of documents,
identified in the interlocutory application by reference
to various exchanges of
correspondence from the Worker’s solicitors to the Employer’s
solicitors.
preliminary issue with respect to the discovery of worksheets and a job
description was disposed of quickly, with orders by consent.
balance of the application, relating to documents relied upon by a medical
expert engaged by the Employer, was argued on 11 January
2023 and a decision on
same was reserved.
that the matter has second listed hearing dates in April 2023, to avoid any
detrimental delay associated with this interlocutory
decision, on 16 January
2023 the parties were subsequently notified that the following orders would be
“Within 21 days the Employer to discover to the Worker details and
copies of any 'literature' relied upon by Dr du Plessis in
his reports dated 13
August 2021 and 22 August 2022”
are the reasons for that decision.
is unnecessary for the purpose of this decision to detail either the procedural
history, the medical evidence, or the issues in
dispute save to say, broadly,
that the Worker has made a claim for compensation for an injury, being
bilateral wrist injury including but not limited to Neurogenic pec
minor syndrome and symptomatic thoracic outlet syndrome and/or
bilateral carpel
tunnel syndrome
which liability is denied by the Employer.
LJ du Plessis is a Consultant Neurologist and Rehabilitation Physician engaged
by the Employer to undertake independent medical
examinations of the Worker and
provide expert reports.
authored reports in relation to the Worker dated 13 August 2021 and 22 August
correspondence to the Employer dated 27 October 2022 the Solicitor’s for
the Worker notes:
“In relation to the report of 31 August 2021 Dr du Plessis:
(a) refers to "a significant number of studies" (p.9 at [4]) which apparently
establish that carpal tunnel syndrome is not caused
or contributed to by minor
he refers or on which he
relies contrary to the requirements of opinion
(b) refers to "literature" which apparently indicates that heavy physical
work results in carpal tunnel syndrome, presumably to the
exclusion of any other
he refers or on which he
relies contrary to the requirements of opinion
evidence;...
In relation to the report of 22 August 2022 of Dr du Plessis:
(a) the doctor again refers to "literature" (p.12 at (e)) without providing
any details of the "literature" again contrary to the
requirements of opinion
evidence...”
du Plessis in a supplementary report dated 20 December
“I am of the opinion that it is inappropriate for me to be asked to
supply information that the neurologist of Ms Tran should
be aware of. When I
have a particular case relating to a particular condition/problem and it needs
review, I do the review online
and do not make copies of these journal articles.
However, Dr Rosen could access the various documents relating to what I recorded
from the medical literature, and if the matter proceeds to hearing, I will be
happy to supply the Court with my references. I would
encourage Ms Tran’s
legal team to research the connection between carpal tunnel syndrome and light
physical work such as Ms
Tran was performing as opposed to heavy physical work,
which can cause carpal tunnel syndrome. It is my opinion that Ms Tran’s
neurologist should be up to date with the medical opinions/information regarding
carpal tunnel syndrome and physical activities.
This literature dates back to at
least 2002.”
further in relation to the literature referred to in the report prepared in
“I have indicated earlier in this response that I reviewed the
necessary journal articles relating to pathologies at the time
assessment and I do not keep copies of all the journal articles I read. There is
however a significant amount of information
regarding this topic of which I am
sure Dr Rosen is
Work Heath Court Rules 1998
compels mutual discovery by the
parties of documents:
are or have been in the party's possession; and
relate to a matter in question between the
Relevantly,
possession is defined as meaning “
possession, custody or
parties agree that the sources of information relied upon by a medical expert to
form their views and conclusions with respect
to a Workers injury, relate to a
matter in question between the parties and are therefore discoverable.
it was conceded by the Employer that this extends to research, resources and
literature accessed by a medical expert in undertaking
their review of a Worker
and reporting to the commissioning party.
Nonetheless,
the Employer however, says that in this matter the Workers request cannot be
seen as a proper request for discovery,
as the documents are not in the
possession custody or power of the Employer.
Employer acknowledges the existence of the material and concedes that it should
be produced in a timely manner should the Employer
intend upon calling and
relying on the evidence of Dr du Plessis. But the Employer notes that Dr du
Plessis has clearly indicated
I do the review online and
make copies
of these journal
Employer submits therefore that what the Worker seeks is not documents in the
possession of the Employer, but seeks an order for
Dr du Plessis to re-research
the medical issues and compile said literature for the purposes of
Worker takes issue with the approach being undertaken by Dr du Plessis who
if the matter proceeds to hearing, I will be happy to supply
the Court with my
references”
for the Worker notes that matter is indeed listed for hearing, and the earliest
at which it may commence is just 3 months’
time on 3 April 2023. The
Worker argues that the material is pressing now, the Worker may wish to put same
to her medical experts
and needs adequate time to do so in the lead up to the
hearing. I agree.
vagueness with which Dr du Plessis reassures that ‘
matter goes to hearing, the Court will be supplied his references, is of no
comfort to the Worker as to when they may have the
benefit of reviewing such
should also be noted that at the interlocutory hearing I did not accept Dr du
Plessis’ conclusion that Dr Rosen (a medical
expert engaged by the Worker
in relation to the Work Health Court proceedings), should simply undertake his
own research and this
would satisfy him as to the literature relied upon by Dr
du Plessis.
is quite likely the medical experts will peruse like material in undertaking
research, as Dr du Plessis notes “[t]
here is however a significant
amount of information regarding this topic”,
dating as he says, back
Even for a medical lay
person such as myself, it appears abundantly clear that there is no way Dr Rosen
can adequately satisfy himself
that he has accessed the very resources relied
upon by Dr du Plessis in the commission of his own research into the Workers
and symptomology. Dr du Plessis’ view in this regard was not
pressed by counsel for the Employer.
it is acknowledged that counsel for the Employer conceded that procedural
fairness must be accorded to the Worker in allowing
sufficient time for
inspection of the material, once compiled and supplied by Dr du Plessis.
to try and fast track the process, the Employer consented to an order at the
conclusion of the interlocutory hearing “
That within 7 days the
Employer to request in writing from Dr du Plessis details and copies of any
'literature' relied on in his reports
dated 13 August 2021 and 22 August
.” Of course, this order does not impose any positive obligation
upon Dr du Plessis to provide his response within any set timeframe,
Nonetheless,
the Employer maintains their position that the request for this literature is a
matter for the Employer and Dr du Plessis,
and that it ought to be undertaken
informally, not by way of an order for discovery.
key question in this application for discovery is not whether the test of
discoverability has been met but rather whether the
documents are in the
possession custody or power of the Employer and therefore capable of being
subject to an order for discovery.
Goben Pty Ltd v The Chief Executive Officer of Customs (No
“The expression “possession, custody or control”, which
appears in s 33 of the Tobacco Act, is a common one. It
is used by courts in
relation to subpoenae duces tecum.... The term appears in s 35A of the Customs
Act. A similar term “possession,
custody or power” is used in the
Federal Court Rules 1979 (Cth) with respect to discovery of
documents.”
Honour considered
Commissioner of Taxation (Cth) v Australian & New
Zealand Banking Group Ltd; Smorgon v Cmr of
where Mason J
“The content of ‘control’ is somewhat different from
that of ‘custody’; however, both are ‘wide
enough to include
many types of possession which are not commensurate with full ownership... There
is to my mind no reason to limit
the scope of ‘custody and control’
to ‘exclusive custody and control’.”
authority, in my view, supports a plain and broad interpretation of
‘power, custody and control’ where such terminology
is imported into
Rules of Court.
High Court gives further guidance as to the construction of the expression
‘possession custody or control’ in
Comptroller General of Customs
“none of the
terms, “possession”, “custody” or “control”
has a fixed legal meaning”
, “the power or authority of
a person in relation to a thing connoted by any one or more of those terms in
statutory collocation
is a question of degree”.
at [32] finding “
The reference to “the possession, custody or
control” of dutiable goods is appropriately construed as a compendious
to that degree of power or authority which is sufficient to enable a
person to meet the [statutory] obligations ...”
such an approach to present circumstances highlights the Employers obligation
for continuing discovery, as enshrined at Rule
12.04 of the
Work Health Court
my view, where the Employer has the power and control necessary to compel Dr du
Plessis to compile and discover the literature
relied upon for the purposes of a
report, which has been served on the Worker, and is being relied upon by the
Employer, then they
should proactively attend to the process of discovery.
party should not be bound by the timeframes a medical expert ascribes to the
urgency of production, the Rules of Court impose on
ongoing obligation directly
on the parties. The mere fact a medical professional has not yet attended to the
compilation of relevant
material does not, in my view, go so far so as to place
such material outside the ‘possession, custody or control’ of
party who has the power to call upon them.
for the Worker further relied upon
Psalidis & Anor v Norwich Union Life
Australia Limited
their submission that the Employer had the requisite control over the documents
sufficient to warrant an order for discovery.
Cavenough J adopted the frequently accepted definition of power established by
Lord Diplock in his 1980 decision of
Lonrho v Shell Petroleum Co
“.... the expression ‘power’ must, in my view, mean a
presently enforceable legal right to obtain from whoever actually
document inspection of it without the need to obtain the consent of anyone
else. Provided that the right is presently
enforceable, the fact that for
physical reasons it may not be possible for the person entitled to it to obtain
immediate inspection
would not prevent the document from being within his power
Worker submits that, in engaging an independent medical expert to procure
medical evidence for the purpose of litigation, this
creates a legal
relationship whereby the Employer is entitled to compel their medical expert to
attend to the compilation and discovery
of materials pertinent to the findings
in the report.
Worker submits that there exists a presently enforceable right to obtain the
documentation. This proposition was not resisted
by the Employer.
is no indication that the material requires further consent to obtain or is
subject to subscription, or access to restricted
medical journals, or otherwise,
simply that the compilation and delivery of the documents had not yet been
undertaken by Dr du Plessis.
further supports the proposition that a lack of immediacy or physical possession
is not necessarily a bar to having control
of documentation.
Court has frequently taken a broad and facilitative view of discovery and the
concept of ‘possession, custody or control’
and I intend to do so
my view the request by the Worker does not fall outside the realm of discovery
and the Employer ought be compelled to discover
the broadly defined
‘literature’ relied upon by Dr du Plessis, and I have so ordered.
21 days the Employer to discover to the Worker details and copies of any
'literature' relied upon by Dr du Plessis in his reports
dated 13 August 2021
and 22 August 2022.
are at liberty to apply with respect to
Statement of Claim filed 12
January 2022 at paragraph 4
Affidavit of Catherine Louise Spurr filed 24 November 2022 at
Affidavit of
Catherine Louise Spurr filed 10 January 2023 at “CLS8”, page
Ibid at page
Work Heath Court Rules
at Rule 12.01(a)
Work Heath Court Rules 1998
Paragraph 10
Paragraphs 10 & 11
(1996) 68 FRC 301 at
(1979) 143 CLR
(2018) 92 ALJR
[1980] 1 WLR 627
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (150 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter