URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTRTCmr/2015/28.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:22:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jonathan Bortoli and Glenda Bortoli -v- Jennifer Webber [2015] NTRTCmr 28 (9 October 2015)
REASONS FOR THE ORDER OF THE COMMISSIONER OF TENANCIES
JONATHAN BORTOLI AND GLENDA BORTOLI ('TENANTS')
JENNIFER WEBBER ('LANDLORD')
RT1415-0818
is a determination of an application by the tenants dated 23 May 2015 in respect
of premises being 4/75 Hutchison Terrace, Bakewell
in the Northern Territory of
Australia (‘the premises’), seeking an order under the
Residential Tenancies Act (NT)
(‘the Act’) for the return of
part of the security deposit under section 113 of the Act.
the directions hearing held on 31 July 2015 it was agreed by the parties that a
hearing was not required and the matter should
be dealt with on the basis of
written submissions.
Submissions
from the tenants were received on 5 August 2015 and 24 August 2015.
Submissions
were received from the landlord on 13 August 2015 and 28 August 2015.
only other evidence considered in relation to this application was the tenancy
agreement between the parties dated 15 March 2010.
facts between the parties are not in dispute. In summary:
the parties
executed a written tenancy agreement for the period 19 October 2010 expiring on
17 March 2011, at a weekly rental rate
of $450 and a security deposit of
on 1 March 2011
a memorandum of variation was signed by the parties on the same terms extending
the tenancy for another year;
on 14 March 2012
the landlords sent the tenants an unsigned memorandum of variation extending the
tenancy for a further year and purporting
to increase rent to $470 per week from
13 April 2012. A ‘Notice to Tenant of Rent and/or Security deposit
Increase” purporting
to increase rent to $470 per week was also sent to
the tenants with the memorandum of variation;
the tenants
refused to sign the memorandum of variation and wrote to the landlord advising
of this refusal and further that they would
not pay the increased rent;
the consequence
of the tenants’ refusal was that the tenancy of the premises continued as
a periodic tenancy from 16 March 2012
(section 83 of the Act);
sometime in
August 2012 the tenants advised the landlord’s agent that they were
terminating the periodic tenancy and that they
would vacate the premises on 23
August 2012;
throughout the
periodic tenancy the tenants continued to pay the rent of $450 and not the
increased rent notified by the landlord;
after vacating
the premises the landlord retained $380 for ‘unpaid rent’ from the
security deposit and returned $1420
to the tenants.
The Submissions by the Parties
issue in dispute between the parties is whether the landlord could validly
increase the amount of rent payable by the tenants
in the circumstances set out
above and therefore lawfully retain unpaid rent from the security deposit.
submissions were received from the parties. It is not convenient to reproduce a
detailed account of these submissions however
I have summarised what I view to
be the substantive submissions below.
summary, the tenants’ submissions were as follows:
section 41(1) of
the Act prevented the landlord from unilaterally increasing the rent payable
under the periodic tenancy;
the tenants
accepted that the Local Court of the Northern Territory in the case of
Holdeth Investments Pty Ltd v Ivinson &
that section 41 did not apply to periodic tenancies;
the tenants
submitted that this was however an observation (ie. obiter dictum) made by the
presiding magistrate, Dr Lowndes SM, and
should not be followed;
the tenants
submitted that based on statutory interpretation principles section 41 must
apply to both fixed and periodic tenancies;
alternatively
the tenants submitted that does not to apply to periodic tenancies, then based
on the applicable common law principles,
a landlord cannot unilaterally increase
rent under a periodic tenancy without the agreement of the tenant;
the tenants
referred to the case of
Queensland Court of Appeal rejected an argument that it was implied in every
weekly (periodic) tenancy that the landlord
could unilaterally increase the
rent payable by giving the tenant one week’s notice of the rental
if it were held
that a landlord could unilaterally increase rent during a periodic tenancy it
would leave no remedy for the tenant
save for making an excessive rent
application.
summary, the landlord’s submissions were as follows:
section 41(1) prohibits the landlord unilaterally increasing the rent payable
during a periodic tenancy;
section 41(1)
only exists to prescribe the manner in which a landlord may unilaterally
increase the rent payable during the currency
of a fixed term period;
the comments of
Dr Lowndes SM in the case of
regarding the application of section
41 as it applies to periodic tenancies are not obiter dictum but form part of
the rationes descidendi;
the following
observations made by his Honour at [153] and [155] of Holdeth were said to
support the landlord’s position:
During the currency of that periodic tenancy,
the appellant could have increased the rent at the end of each rental period, as
period would be considered to represent a separate agreement. The appellant
could have at any time increased the rent to $250 per
week or more, without
contravening s 41 of the Act
The appellant was entitled to increase the rent without running
foul of s 41. It is also my view that it was not strictly necessary
appellant to give the respondents a notice in the form prescribed by the Act of
an increase in the rent, though that notice
served the purpose of communicating
to the respondents the appellants intention to charge a higher rent in
consideration of the respondents
being granted exclusive
the tenancy was
due to expire on 15 March 2012. There was no option which granted the tenant a
further term and there was no obligation
on the landlord to offer any terms of
renewal. It follows that the parties were at liberty to broker a fresh
contractual agreement
unfettered by the constraints of section 41;
landlord notified the tenant of the rent increase, the tenant had potentially 3
options available: 1. accept the terms offered,
2. accept the terms offered and
make an application pursuant to s 42 for an excessive rent declaration or 3.
reject the terms and
the tenants act
of remaining in possession following the rent increase amounted to acceptance by
them of the terms upon which the
landlord was willing to contract; and
this was not a
circumstance where the landlord was unilaterally seeking to vary the terms of an
existing contract which the tenant
did not agree to, which was the situation in
Mitchell v Wieriks
. The contract in question ended at the conclusion of
the fixed term on 15 March 2012 and nothing prevented the landlord from
the rent for the new tenancy
Section 41 and the Tenancy
41(1) and (2) of the Act provide as follows:
41 Increases in rent
landlord may increase the rent payable under a tenancy agreement only if:
(a) the right to increase the rent; and
(b) the amount
of the increase in rent or the method of calculation of the increase in rent,
is specified in the agreement.
(2) A proposal to increase the rent payable under a tenancy agreement is
of no effect unless at least 30 days written notice is
given to the tenant
(a) the amount of the increase; and
(b) the date
from which the increase is to take effect
nothing turns on this issue, I note that the tenancy agreement dated 15 March
2010 which was signed by the parties, may not
appear to contain a right to
increase rent nor any method of calculation of the increase in rent.
64 of the tenancy agreement, appears to restate the requirements of section 41
of the Act and while arguably not providing for
the right to increase the rent
it does not set out a method of calculating the increase in rent.
The application of s 41 to periodic tenancies
Commissioner of Tenancies forms part of a hierarchy which includes the Local
Court and ultimately the Supreme Court. The Commissioner
is required to apply
the law as found by the Local Court until such time as the Supreme Court decides
the case of
the central finding of the Local Court was that
section 41 of the Act was not intended to supplant the common law by precluding
landlord and tenant from mutually agreeing to increase rent during the term of
a tenancy or during any extension of the original
is well established that courts or tribunals are not bound in law by obiter
dicta or analysis that is not essential to the holding
of the court sustaining
accept the argument put forward by the tenants that His Honour’s
observation at [129] in Holdeth that section 41 did not apply
to periodic
tenancies is obiter dictum.
is however highly persuasive, and in my view the reasoning and finding on this
issue should be followed in the present matter.
His Honour’s reasons for
making this observation are set out in detail in his reasons for decision in
and I do not propose to restate them here.
therefore reject the tenants’ submission that section 41 applies to the
present matter.
Agreement to an increase in rent
finding that section 41 does not apply to the periodic tenancy in this case,
does not however mean that the landlord could unilaterally
decide to increase
rent which then legally bound the tenant to pay the increased rental amount.
landlord’s interpretation of Dr Lowndes’ observations in
at [153] and [155] are in my view misconceived. I do not
interpret his Honour’s observations to be of the effect that a landlord
has free rein to increase rent at will during a periodic tenancy.
is true that a landlord can validly increase the rent payable during a periodic
tenancy without having to comply with section 41,
however, the tenant must agree
in line with ordinary contract law principles.
this matter, the tenants made it clear they did not agree to the rent increase
by refusing to sign a memorandum of variation, providing
written notice of their
refusal of the rent increase and by not paying the increased rent.
83 provides that the fixed term tenancy agreement continues to apply to the
premises on the same terms and conditions (one
of those being rent) which
applied immediately before the day the term ends, but as a periodic tenancy.
should be noted that the tenancy (in other words the tenants’ right to
occupy the premises) in this case was not at an end
when the fixed term expired.
The tenancy continued but as a periodic tenancy. The fixed term tenancy plus the
various periods of
periodic tenancy all make up the ‘tenancy’ in
‘tenancy’ as provided in section 82(1)(a) of the Act is only
terminated if the landlord or tenant terminate under the
Act. The landlord in
this case did not terminate the tenancy in accordance with section 90 of the
Act. The tenancy was in fact terminated
by the tenants after a periodic tenancy
was in place for approximately 5 months.
argument put forward by the landlord, that when the fixed term in question
expired the legal relationship between the parties
was at an end and nothing
prevented the landlord from increasing the rent for the new tenancy proffered,
cannot be correct. It ignores
the fact that the tenancy continued pursuant to
section 83 of the Act and the tenants remained in possession of the premises. If
there was a break in possession by the tenants after the fixed term tenancy had
expired and they then later retook possession, this
argument would carry more
weight because there would be two discrete tenancies and not one continuous
the situation that confronted the landlord in this case, where the tenancy
converted to a periodic tenancy and the tenants had
refused the rent increase,
the options available to the landlord were to:
(a) terminate
the periodic tenancy in accordance with section 89 of the Act by giving the
tenants 42 days’ notice;
(b) terminate
in accordance with (a) above and offer a new tenancy at the increased rental
rate to commence on the expiry of the 42
day notice period; or
(c) continue
with the periodic tenancy at the original rent amount.
note that these options are consistent with the conclusion drawn by the court in
the case of
Mitchell v Wieriks
referred to in the tenants’
submissions.
find that there was no valid basis for the landlord to retain a portion of the
security deposit as unpaid rent, being the amount
representing the difference
between the increased rent and the original rent for the duration of the
periodic tenancy.
order that the landlord shall return the amount of $380.00 to the tenants by no
later than 30 October 2015.
9 October 2015
Demetrios Laouris
Delegate of the
Commissioner of Tenancies
[2009] NTMC 16
Garcia v National Australia Bank
[1998] HCA 48
(1998) 194 CLR 395
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (149 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter