URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCA/2025/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:16:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mpwerempwer Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC v Minister for Territory Families & Urban Housing as delegate for the Minister for the Environment & Anor [2025] NTCA 6 (12 May 2025)
Mpwerempwer Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC v Minister for
Territory Families & Urban Housing as delegate of the Minister for the
Environment & Anor
[2025] NTCA 6
PARTIES: MPWEREMPWER ABORIGINAL CORPORATION RNTBC
MINISTER FOR TERRITORY FAMILIES AND URBAN HOUSING as delegate of the
MINISTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT
FORTUNE AGRIBUSINESS FUNDS MANAGEMENT PTY LTD
(ACN 607 474 251)
TITLE OF COURT: NORTHERN TERRITORY COURT OF APPEAL
FILE NO: AP 3 of 2024 (22407093)
DELIVERED: 12 May 2025
HEARING DATE: 22 and 23 August 2024
JUDGMENT OF: Kelly, Huntingford and Burns JJ
CATCHWORDS:
APPEALS – Administrative review – Merits review – Review de
novo – Misconstruction – Impermissible use
of conditions –
Failure to consider – Procedural fairness.
ENERGY AND RESOURCES – Water – Water access licences –
STATUTORY INTERPRETATION – Legislative purpose – Earlier and
later provisions – Ordinary meaning -
Water Act 1992
s 30(3)(a)(ii)
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
Interpretation Act 1978
Parks and Water Legislation Amendment Act 2024
Water Act 1992
s 30(3)(a)(i)
s 30(3)(a)(ii)
, s 71E(4)(a),
s 90(1)(ab)
Statute Law Amendment (Territory Economic Reconstruction) Bill 2021
Buzzacott v Minister for Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population
and Communities (No 2)
[2012] FCA 403
(2012) 187 LGERA 161
Buzzacott v Minister for
Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities
[2013] FCAFC 111
Canberra Tradesmen’s Union Club Inc v Commissioner for Land
and Planning
[1999] FCA 262
(1999) 86 FCR 266
Coulton v Holcombe (
[1986] HCA 33
DVO16 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection and Anor
273 CLR 177
Environment Centre Northern Territory
(NT) Inc v Minister for Land Resource Management
[2015] NTSC 30
(2015) 35 NTLR 140
Esber v The Commonwealth
[1992] HCA 20
(1992) 174 CLR 430
Fraser Henleins Pty Ltd v
[1945] HCA 49
(1945) 70 CLR 100
GPT RE Ltd v Belmorgan Property Development Pty
[2008] NSWCA 256
(2008) 72 NSWLR 647
ICM Agriculture Pty Ltd v Commonwealth of
[2009] HCA 51
(2009) 240 CLR 140
JB v Northern Territory
[2019] NTCA 1
Kavvadias v Commonwealth Ombudsman
[1984] FCA 55
(1980) 1 FCR 80
King Gee Clothing
Co Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1945] HCA 23
(1945) 71 CLR 184
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
159 CLR 550
LPDT v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services
and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 12
(2024) 98 ALJR 610
Michelmore v Minister for
Environment and Conservation
[2004] SASC 415
; Mison v Randwick Municipal
(1991) 23 NSWLR 734
Moriarty v Independent Commissioner Against
Corruption (NT)
[2022] NTSC 46
Mpwerempwer Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC
v Minister for Territory Families & Urban Planning as Delegate of the
Minister for Environment
& Anor; Arid Lands Environment Centre Inc v
Minister for Environment & Anor
[2024] NTSC 4
Multicon Engineering
Pty Ltd v Federal Airports Corp
(1997) NSWLR 631
MZAPC v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2021] HCA 17
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
Queensland v Humane
Society International (Australia) Inc
[2019] FCAFC 163
(2019) 272 FCR 310
R v Australian
Broadcasting Tribunal; ex parte Hardiman
[1980] HCA 13
(1980) 144 CLR 13
Re Costello
and Secretary, Department of Transport
[1979] AATA 184
(1979) 2 ALD 934
Shi v Migration
Agents Registration Authority
[2008] HCA 31
(2008) 235 CLR 286
Suttor v Gundowda Pty
[1950] HCA 35
(1950) 81 CLR 418
SZBEL v Minister for Immigration
Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
(2006) 228 CLR 152
TAB Ltd v Racing
Victoria Ltd
[2009] VSC 338
Television Corporation Ltd v Commonwealth;
Amalgamated Television Services Pty Ltd v Postmaster-General (Cth)
[1963] HCA 30
University of Wollongong v Metwally (No 2)
(1985) 59 ALJR
Water Board v Moustakas
(1988) 180 CLR 491
, referred to
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: C Young KC with L Hilly
First Respondent: C Jacobi KC with T Cramp
Second Respondent: SA McLeod KC
Solicitors:
Appellant: Central Land Council
First Respondent: Solicitor of the Northern Territory
First Respondent: Ward Keller
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 112
IN THE COURT OF APPEAL
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Mpwerempwer Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC v Minister for
Territory Families & Urban Housing as delegate of the Minister for
Environment
[2025] NTCA 6
No. AP 3 of 2024 (22407093)
MPWEREMPWER ABORIGINAL CORPORATION RNTBC
MINISTER FOR TERRITORY FAMILIES AND URBAN HOUSING as delegate of the
MINISTER FOR ENVIRONMENT
First Respondent
FORTUNE AGRIBUSINESS FUNDS MANAGEMENT PTY LTD
(ACN 607 474 251)
Second Respondent
CORAM: KELLY, HUNTINGFORD and BURNS JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 12 May 2025)
[1] Much of the
Northern Territory of Australia is arid. The further one ventures from the coast
the more likely it is that you will
encounter desert or semi-desert environments
with little or no permanent surface water features like rivers or lakes. In such
environment access to water has always been vital to life and hence to the
ability of communities to survive and thrive. Water and
sites traditionally
associated with access to, or use of water also have significance for the
traditional occupants of arid lands.
The importance of water rights in Australia
was recognised in
ICM Agriculture Pty Ltd v
Commonwealth of Australia
a plurality of the High Court (Hayne, Kiefel and Bell JJ) said, at
In Australia, water and rights to use water are of critical
importance, not just to those who are immediately interested in particular
rights, but to society as a whole.
[2] The present
case is about access to and use of water in an arid environment. Singleton
Station is a 2,949 square kilometre property
situated in the Western Davenport
region of the Northern Territory, about 380 km north of Alice Springs and 120 km
south of Tennant
Creek. The nearest settlement is Ali Curung, about 30 km to the
east. The second respondent, Fortune Agribusiness Funds Management
(Fortune) is the lessee of the property under a Perpetual Pastoral Lease.
[3] Fortune
proposes developing about 3,500 hectares of the property for the purpose of
intensive irrigated horticulture, growing
crops such as mandarins, table grapes,
dried grapes, onions, avocados, muskmelons and jujube. For this project to
succeed, Fortune
needs access to water. Potentially a lot of water. The only
water available is groundwater held in the underground aquifer which
accessed by a bore or bores on the property.
[4] Access to
groundwater in the Northern Territory is regulated by the provisions of the
Water Act 1992
(NT) (the Act). On 18 August
2020, Fortune applied to the Controller of Water Resources (the Controller)
of the Act for a licence to take groundwater for the purpose of
this project. On 8 April 2021, the Controller made a decision to
grant Fortune
Licence WDPCC10000 (the Original Licence) allowing Fortune to potentially take
up to 40 gigalitres (40,000 megalitres)
of groundwater each year from aquifers
in the Central Plains Management Zone in the Western Davenport Water Control
District. This
water was to be taken from bores on Singleton Station.
[5] The right of
Fortune to take water under the Original Licence was conditional upon Fortune
satisfying eight “Conditions
Precedent” set out in the Original
Licence. The Original Licence also provided for the project to be developed in
four Stages.
The eight Conditions Precedent were required to be satisfied before
Stage 1 could proceed, at which time Fortune would be entitled
to take 12,780
megalitres of water per year. Stage 1 was to continue for a period of 2 years
from the date that the Controller was
satisfied that the Conditions Precedent
had been satisfied. Thereafter the project could only progress to Stages 2, 3,
the approval of the Controller. Fortune was entitled to take
increasing quantities of water in each of the subsequent Stages, culminating
an entitlement to take 40,000 megalitres each year in Stage 4.
[6] To put the
amount of water which Fortune could potentially take annually under the Original
Licence into perspective, one gigalitre
of water is equivalent to 400 Olympic
size swimming pools. The period of the Original Licence was 30 years from the
date of grant.
[7] In May 2021,
the present appellant, Mpwerempwer Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC (MAC), at that
time represented by the Central Land
Council (CLC), together with the Arid Lands
Environment Centre Inc (ALEC) and other parties, sought a review by the Minister
Environment (the Minister responsible for administering the Act) of the
decision of the Controller to grant the Original Licence.
Both MAC and ALEC
submitted that the Minister should set aside the Controller’s decision and
substitute a decision to refuse
the licence application.
[8] MAC is the
prescribed body corporate for the native title holders of the Singleton Station
pastoral lease. The native title holders
possess rights and interests relating
to the land which forms Singleton Station, including the right of access for the
maintaining and protecting places of importance to the native title
owners, the right to hunt and gather, and the right to take and
use the natural
resources of the land and waters.
[9] ALEC is an
environmental organisation formed to support the protection of arid lands in
Central Australia.
[10] In July
2021, the Minister for Environment referred the application for review to the
Water Resources Review Panel (the Review
Panel) pursuant to
the Act. The Review Panel was required to consider the application for review
“and advise the Minister accordingly”.
The Minister could then
either uphold the decision under review or substitute the decision that, in the
Minister’s opinion,
the Controller should have made in the first
The Review Panel received
and considered submissions from multiple entities, including the Central Land
Council (effectively for
present purposes MAC) and the Environment Centre NT
October 2021, the Review Panel provided its report to the Minister for
Environment. An issue raised by the Review Panel
was the dearth of material in
the Controller’s decision or the Original Licence itself, when
specifically addressing one of
the “key objectives” of the
applicable Water Allocation Plan (WAP); protection of Aboriginal cultural values
with water. We will digress to note that
of the Act permits
the relevant Minister to declare a part of the Territory to be a water control
district and allocate a name to
that district. The Minister may then declare a
water allocation plan in respect of a water control
Singleton Station is
within the Western Davenport Water Control District. At all relevant times there
was in existence a Western
Davenport Water Allocation Plan (WDWAP), one of the
objectives of which was to:
Protect Aboriginal cultural values
associated with water and provide access to water resources to support local
Aboriginal economic
development.
November 2021, the Minister for Environment delegated her powers under
of the Act relating to the applications for review of the Controller’s
decision to the Minister for Territory Families and
Urban Housing, the first
respondent to the present appeal. To avoid confusion, we will in this judgment
refer to the Minister for
Territory Families and Urban Housing simply as
“the Minister”, and where it is necessary to refer to the Minister
Environment, we will use the full description of that office.
November 2021, the Minister signed a revised licence, number WDCP10358 (the
Licence). The Minister granted the Licence
in the same terms as the Original
Licence but amended by the inclusion of two further Conditions Precedent (CP9
and CP10) and by
the extension of the period for Stage 1 of the project from 2
years to 3 years.
[14] Both MAC
and ALEC were dissatisfied with this outcome. Each separately commenced
proceedings in the Supreme Court seeking judicial
review of the Minister’s
decision to grant the Licence. Those proceedings proceeded to hearing before the
primary Judge. On
31 January 2024, the primary Judge made orders dismissing each
of the proceedings.
[15] MAC has
appealed from the decision of the primary Judge. ALEC has not sought to
Water Act 1992
[16] After the
events relevant to the present appeal, the provisions of the Act were
substantially amended by the
Parks and Water Legislation Amendment Act
(NT). The provisions of the Act quoted or referred to in this judgment
are those in force at the relevant time. The Long Title of
An Act to provide for the Investigation, allocation, use,
control, protection, management and administration of water resources, and
related purposes
[17] The Act
does not contain a provision setting out the objects of the Act with any greater
specificity than is found in the Long
[18] Part 6 of
the Act is concerned with “groundwater”, which is defined in
s 4 as meaning:
water occurring or obtained from below the
surface of the ground (other than water contained in works, not being a bore,
for the distribution,
reticulation, transportation, storage or treatment of
water or waste) and includes water occurring in or obtained from a bore or
[19] Subject to
the provisions of the Act, property in and rights to the use, flow and control
of groundwater in the Northern Territory
vests in the
The Controller has power
under s 60 of the Act to grant a licence to take water from a bore. As will
be addressed below, s 60 was
amended with effect from 29 September 2021,
which was after the Controller granted the Original Licence but before the date
the Minister decided to grant the Licence. That section provided as at
the date of the grant of the Licence:
Grant of licence to take
groundwater
(1) Subject to this Act, the
may, on the
own initiative or on application in the
manner and form, grant to a person a
may be granted under subsection (1) subject to such terms and conditions, if
any, as are specified in the
(3) Subject to subsection (4), a
shall be granted for such period, not exceeding 10 years, as is specified in the
may be granted under subsection (1) for a period exceeding 10 years if:
is for a purpose, or meets criteria, that the Minister, by
notice, specifies as justifying a longer period; or
is satisfied that special circumstances justify the longer period.
[20] Before the
amendment to the provision was made on 29 September 2021, s 60(4) was in
the following terms:
(4) The Controller may, where in the opinion of the Minister there are special
circumstances that justify so granting the licence,
grant a licence for such
period exceeding 10 years as is specified in the licence document.
[21] On the face
of the provision, the power vested in the Controller by s 60 is broad. The
section makes it clear, however, that
the power is subject to other provisions
of the Act. Part 10 Division 2 of the Act is titled “Powers concerning
licences and
rights of use”. Within Division 2, s 90
Factors to be considered
(1) In deciding whether to grant, amend or modify a
or in making a
extraction licence decision
into account any of the following factors that are relevant to the decision:
(a) the availability of
in the area in question;
allocation plan
applying to the area in question;
(b) the existing and likely future demand for
for domestic purposes in the area in question;
(c) any adverse effects likely to be created as a result of activities under the
on the supply of
to which any person other than the
is entitled under this Act;
(d) the quantity or quality of
to which the
is or may be entitled from other sources;
(e) the designated
and the quality criteria pertaining to the
(f) the provisions of any agreement made by or on behalf of the Territory with a
State of the Commonwealth concerning the sharing
(g) existing or proposed facilities on, or in the area of, the
in question for the retention, recovery or release of drainage
whether surface or sub-surface drainage
(h) the adverse effects, if any, likely to be created by such drainage
resulting from activities under the
on the quality of any other
or on the use or potential use of any other
(i) the provisions under the
relating to the
development
in the area in question;
(j) other factors the
considers should be
into account or that the
is required to
into account under any other law in force in the Territory.
(2) In this section:
includes the person to whom a
is or is to be granted when the
acts on the
own initiative without an application having been made.
[22] Section 60
is not one of the provisions of the Act specifically referred to in
s 90(1). As such, s 90 can only apply to a decision
to grant a licence
to take water from a bore under s 60 of the Act if such a decision is a
“water extraction licence decision”
for the purposes of s 90(1)
of the Act. The term “water extraction licence” is defined in
s 4 of the Act as including
a licence under s 60 to take water from a
bore. There can be no doubt, therefore, that the terms of s 90 of the Act
apply to a decision
of the Controller under s 60 to grant a licence to take
water from a bore.
[23] One of the
factors which the Controller must take into account in deciding whether to grant
a licence to take water from a bore
is “any water allocation plan applying
to the area in question”.
Section 22B of the Act provides for the making of water allocation plans, and is
in the following terms:
Water allocation plans
(1) The Minister may, by notice in the
, declare one or more
allocation plans
in respect of all or part of a
control district.
(2) The Minister must specify the period (not longer than 10 years) that a
allocation plan
is to remain in force.
(3) The Minister must ensure that a review of a
allocation plan
is conducted at intervals not longer than 5 years.
resource management in a
control district is to be in accordance with any
allocation plan
declared in respect of the district.
allocation plans
control district are to ensure that:
is allocated within the estimated sustainable yield to
(b) the total
use for all
(including those provided through rural stock and domestic use and
granted under
is less than the sum of the allocations to each beneficial use;
(c) the right to
granted under
is able to be traded (in part or in full); and
(d) as far as possible – the full cost for
resources management is to be recovered through administrative charges to
licensees and operational contributions from licensees.
(6) An allocation under subsection (5)(a) is to include an allocation to the
environment
(7) An allocation under subsection (5)(a) is to
water reserve
if any of the
district to which the
allocation plan
[24] The term
“water resource management” found in s 22B(4) is not defined in
The present appeal
[25] The Grounds
of Appeal advanced by MAC are:
Misconstruction of
s 30(3)(a)(ii)
primary judge erred in finding that
s 30(3)(a)(ii)
of the Act did not require
the Minister to comply with
of the Act as in force on
15 November 2021 before granting the Licence for a period exceeding 10
primary judge should have found that the Minister was required to comply with
of the Act as in force on 15 November 2021 when exercising her
review function under the Act.
Misconstruction of
(1)(ab) of the
primary judge erred in finding:
“planning and management of the water resource in a water control district
was and remains the meaning of ‘water
resource management’”
for the purpose of
of the Act; and
“does not predetermine a water extraction licence decision
so as to prohibit any departure from the provision of a declared
allocation plan”; and
“there is no requirement that a water extraction licence decision must
accord with, or not be inconsistent with, a water
allocation plan applying to
the area in question.”
primary judge should have found that:
resource management” for the purpose of
includes the grant
of a licence to take groundwater pursuant to
of the Act (water
extraction licence decision); and
by operation of
s 90(1)(ab)
of the Act a water extraction
licence decision must accord with and not be inconsistent with, a water
allocation plan declared pursuant
of the Act applying to the
area in question.
Impermissible use of
primary judge erred in failing to find that by the imposition of conditions
precedent 5, 7, 8, 9 and 10 and the staging conditions
the Minister
impermissibly deferred consideration of relevant matters in
(ab), (b), (c), (e), (g), (h) and (k) of the Act to the Controller.
or in the alternative, the primary judge erred in failing to find that by the
imposition of condition precedent 10 the Minister
impermissibly deferred
consideration of relevant matters in
s 90(1)(ab)
, (c), (h) and (k) of the
Act to the second respondent (Fortune).
primary judge erred in failing to find that by the imposition of CP 5, 7, 8, 9
and 10 the Minister failed to decide the application
before her as the
conditions precedent left open the possibility that the proposal as carry out
would be significantly different
to the proposal the subject of the
application.
Failure to consider Aboriginal cultural
primary judge erred in finding that Aboriginal cultural values were not a
mandatory relevant consideration by reason of
of the Act read in
conjunction with the Western Davenport Water Allocation Plan.
primary judge erred in finding that the Minister did consider Aboriginal
cultural values “from the fact that the Minister
added condition CP
10” in circumstances where the Minister identified cultural values as a
relevant consideration, but granted
a licence in circumstances where no
consideration was given by her to cultural values as CP 10 required an
Aboriginal cultural values
impact assessment to be undertaken in circumstances
where no such assessment had been undertaken.
primary judge failed to consider whether the Minister afforded procedural
fairness to MAC in respect of the requirements of a
cultural impacts
assessment.
the alternative, the primary judge failed to give reasons to support the finding
that the Minister afforded procedural fairness
to MAC in respect of the
requirements of a cultural impacts assessment.
or in the alternative, the primary judge erred in finding that the obligation to
afford procedural fairness to MAC was satisfied
“after it had made written
representations to the Review Panel and engaged in the Review Panel’s
processes”.
[26] In its
written submissions, MAC identified five errors of law which it said underpinned
the 12 pleaded grounds of appeal. The
alleged errors were:
a) misconstruction of
s 30(3)(a)(ii)
of the Act (
b) misconstruction of
(1)(ab) of the Act (
c) the impermissible use of conditions (
d) a failure to consider Aboriginal cultural values (
e) errors in considering arguments in respect of a denial of procedural fairness
[27] Counsel for
MAC structured their submissions by reference to these five Issues. We will
adopt a similar approach.
Notice of Contention
[28] While the
first respondent (the Minister) provided written submissions to the effect that
she would restrict her involvement
in the present appeal to submissions directed
to the proper construction of the Act, consistent with the principles stated in
R v Australian Broadcasting Tribunal; ex parte
she also filed a
Notice of Contention in the following terms (omitting formal
MAC Ground 9 (Appeal Ground 1): Construction of
30(3)(a)(ii)
Water Act 1992
(2) Should the primary judge be in error in concluding that
of the Act as it stood at the time of the Controller’s decision applied on
the review as a result of the operation of
(3)(a)(ii), the
First Respondent contends that:
(a) the First Respondent was satisfied that there were “special
circumstances” as the existence of special circumstances
was a contested
issue on the review which the Review Panel resolved and the First Respondent
accepted, and in any event was satisfied
of matters which together amount to
“special circumstances” within the meaning of
, justifying
the grant of the licence for a longer period than 10 years and in accordance
Water Act 1992
(3) Should the primary judge be correct in finding that the First Respondent
was not satisfied that special circumstances justified
the grant of the licence
for a period of 30 years that being “the longer period” referred to
s 60(4)(b)...the
First Respondent contends that:
(a) the effect of non-compliance with
is only that a licence for a
period longer than 10 years would not be valid, not that there would be no valid
licence at all.
ALEC Ground 1 (Appeal Ground 2): Construction of
Water Act 1992
(4) The First Respondent contends that the finding that there is no
requirement that a water extraction licence decision must accord
with, or not be
inconsistent with a water allocation plan applying to the area in question...is
supported on the following additional
(a) A “water allocation plan” within the meaning of
Water Act 1992
(NT) is only that part of the content of plan that
addresses the matters specified in
, and while a plan when published may
include other information, such other information, if included, is not the
“water allocation
plan” within the meaning of the Act.
Issue 1: Misconstruction of
s 30(3)(a)(ii)
relevant background to this issue is that
of the Act prescribes, subject
to the provisions of the Act generally, the powers available to the Minister on
the hearing of an
application to review a decision of the Controller. One of
those powers, and that which the Minister purported to exercise in the
matter, is the power to substitute for the Controller’s decision
“the decision that, in the opinion of the Minister,
the Controller should
have made in the first
[30] An issue
arose in the application of this provision in the present case.
On 29 September 2021, between the date of the making
Controller’s decision to grant the original Licence and that made by the
Minister to grant the Licence after the review
of the Controller’s
decision, amendments to the provisions of
of the Act took effect. The pre-
and post-amendment forms of
are set out at [19]-[20] above.
of the Act is important because it prescribed, in general terms, that the
Controller could not issue a licence to take groundwater
for a period exceeding
10 years except in accordance with
When the Controller made the
decision to grant the original Licence, she was not required to determine
whether special circumstances
existed justifying a licence of 30 years,
because, under
as it stood at the time, that was a matter for
determination by the relevant Minister. The Controller made her decision on
2021. Before that date, on 15 February 2021, the Minister for
Environment had provided her opinion, by endorsement on a Ministerial
document, that there were special circumstances justifying the grant of a
licence for 30 years. Those circumstances were:
the scale of the proposed
project, the level of investment in the project, the time required to develop
the project and the potential
economic benefits for the Northern Territory.
evidence before the primary judge was to the effect that the Minister to whom
the Minister for Environment had delegated
the consideration of the application
for review had, as part of the Minister’s briefing, reviewed and
considered the Minister
for Environment’s decision, the Controller’s
decision and the submissions made by the relevant parties to the Review
[33] Before the
primary judge, MAC contended that in applying
s 30(3)(a)(ii)
of the Act the
Minister was obliged to make the decision referred to in that subsection based
on the provisions of
as they were at the time of the
Minister’s decision, and not as they were at the time that the
Controller’s decision
was made. The effect of that requirement, MAC
submitted, was that the Minister erred in law in granting the Licence for a
period. This was because, MAC submitted, there had been no relevant
Gazette notice by the Minister pursuant to
and, in addition,
was not satisfied because the Controller did not determine
whether special circumstances justified a licence for a period exceeding
years, in this instance 30 years.
[34] The primary
judge did not accept that the Minister had to apply the law as it stood at the
date of the Minister’s decision.
The primary judge said, at
[234]-[236]:
[234] In my opinion, the sub-paragraph should be
interpreted such that the decision which the Controller “should have made
the first instance” means a decision under the law as it stood at the
time of the Controller’s decision. The fact that
the Minister is required
to take into account factual matters or factual considerations arising
subsequently to the Controller’s
decision does not mean that the Minister
is required to take into account legislative changes enacted subsequently. In my
the relevant question is: “How could the Minister be of the
opinion that her intended substitute decision was the one which
the Controller
‘should have made in the first instance’ if the intended substitute
decision is to be made under a statutory
framework which did not exist at the
time of the Controller’s decision?” Logically, the Controller could
not have made
a decision in the first instance to comply with a legislative
provision which had not come into effect.
[235] The construction I prefer accords with the ordinary grammatical meaning
of the text of
s 30(3)(a)(ii).
It is consistent with context and legislative
purpose. The result is not unreasonable or absurd. As applied in the present
it operates to preserve the ‘value’ of the processes engaged
in by multiple parties in the 12 months preceding the amendment
the Act. In my opinion, there is no incongruity in the Minister being able to
take into account subsequent facts, but not being
bound by subsequent changes in
the law. Facts which emerge subsequently may well highlight deficiencies in the
Controller’s
decision, and lead the Minister to make a decision which, in
the Minister’s opinion, the Controller should have made in the
instance; whereas the fact that the law may have changed says nothing about
whether the decision was the one which the Controller
should have
in the first instance, before the legislative change.
[236] In my judgment, the unamended
of the Act applied on the review, as
a result of the text of
s 30(3)(a)(ii).
On that basis, the Minister did not err
in law by failing to comply with
, as in force on 15 November 2021. MAC’s contentions referred
to in [221] cannot be maintained, and ground 9 should be
MAC’s submissions on appeal
submitted that there was an inconsistency between the primary judge’s
acceptance that, in making the decision under
s 30(3)(a)(ii)
of the Act, the
Minister was obliged to consider the factual matters or considerations that
arose after the making of the Controller’s
decision and the determination
by the primary judge that the Minister was obliged to apply the law as it stood
at the time of the
Controller’s decision. MAC advanced the following
submissions supporting its submission that the primary judge was in error.
[36] First, MAC
submitted that, in exercising her power under
of the Act, the
Minister was undertaking a “merits” review of the Controller’s
decision. The Minister was, in effect,
required to conduct a fresh, or
de novo, hearing of Fortune’s application for a licence. The language
did not restrict the Minister to considering only those matters
which had been before the Controller. MAC submitted that it would
be anomalous
to construe the provision as restricting the Minister to consideration of the
law as it stood at the time of the Controller’s
[37] Secondly,
MAC submitted that the orthodox position for a review body charged with merits
review is to conduct the review by reference
to the facts and circumstances,
including the law, as they stand at the date of the
submitted that, contrary to the determination of the primary judge, the use of
the words “the Controller should have
made in the first instance” in
s 30(3)(a)(ii)
of the Act did not evince a legislative intention to
displace that orthodox position. Rather, it was submitted, the text of the Act
supported the orthodox position for the following reasons:
a) First, the powers vested in the Review Panel by
of the Act confirm
that the Minister is undertaking contemporaneous review when exercising the
Minister’s power under sub paragraphs
30(3)(a)(i) or (ii) of the Act. The
powers vested in the Review Panel include the power to require a person to
appear before the
Review Panel and/or to produce any relevant documents, to
require a person to give evidence on oath, to require a person appearing
the Review Panel to answer relevant questions and to enable the Review Panel or
a person authorised by it, to enter and inspect
land for the purposes of a
proceeding before the Review Panel. Upon completion of its function, the Review
Panel is obliged to advise
the Minister. The Minister, therefore, in making a
determination whether to uphold the decision or to substitute a fresh decision,
is not confined to considering only the material that was before the Controller.
MAC submitted that there is no reason to distinguish
between factual and legal
considerations when the Minister makes the determination.
b) Secondly, MAC submitted that the powers vested in the Minister by
s 30(3) are expressed to be “subject to this Act”.
submitted that it was open to the legislature to express in clear terms any
temporal modification to the orthodox position that
the applicable law is that
at the time of the review and the legislature had not done so. Further, the
absence of a transitional
provision to preserve the operation of s 60(4)
with regard to applications pending at the time of the amendments to s 60,
MAC submitted,
tells against the application of the repealed provision in the
review process.
Thirdly (and somewhat unnecessarily) MAC submitted that there had
been no suggestion by any party that s 30(1) gave rise to an accrued
so as to invoke the operation of
Interpretation Act 1978
(NT). That section
provides that the repeal of an Act, or part of an Act, does not affect a right,
privilege, obligation or liability
acquired, accrued or incurred under an Act or
the part of the Act so repealed.
The Minister’s submission on appeal
[39] Before the
primary judge, the Minister accepted that the applicable law governing the
Minister’s review of the Controller’s
decision to grant the original
licence was the law at the time of the Minister’s review. The Minister
argued before the primary
judge that the requirements of s 60 (4) of the
Act, as amended, had been complied with. The primary judge held that the
requirements
of s 60(4) as amended had not been complied with, but this did
not matter as the law applicable on the Minister’s review was
as it stood at the time of the Controller’s decision. The primary judge
held that the applicable law had been complied
with by the Minister on the
[40] On the
present appeal, the Minister’s principal position was to support the
decision of the primary judge, with an alternative
position that, if the
applicable law was as found in the amended s 60(4), the primary judge was
in error in finding that the requirements
of the amended section had not been
met (Notice of Contention, Ground (2)).
Minister accepted before this Court that she was obliged to perform a
de novo merits review of the Controller’s decision.
The Minister
supported the primary judge’s reasoning that the use of the words
“which the Controller should have made
in the first instance” by the
legislature in
(3)(a)(ii) of the Act evinced an intention that
the Minister, in conducting a review under
, was to apply the
provisions of s 60(4) as they were at the time of the Controller’s
[42] In the
alternative, and addressing Ground (2) of the Notice of Contention, the Minister
submitted that the primary judge erred
in finding that there was no evidence
that the Minister was satisfied that special circumstances existed which
justified the grant
of a licence for a period of 30 years. The Minister
submitted that it should be inferred from the surrounding circumstances that
had found special circumstances justifying the grant of a 30-year lease. In that
regard, the Minister observed that after receiving
the report of the Review
Panel, she determined to grant the Licence “on the same basis as the
Controller” but subject
to additional conditions. In the Minister’s
reasons accompanying her decision, and under the heading “Licence
the Minister said:
Concerns were raised by Reviewing
Persons regarding the 30 year tenure of the licence.
The Review Panel is of the view that a licence term of greater than 10 years,
with suitable conditions precedent and staged entitlements,
is appropriate for a
large-scale development such as that
[43] Before the
primary judge, the Minister submitted that in taking that course she should be
understood as having accepted the Minister
for Environment’s opinion
regarding the existence of special circumstances when she, the Minister,
exercised her powers under
of the Act, and as such she had complied
with the requirements of s 60(4)(b) of the Act as amended.
[44] The primary
judge did not accept that submission, saying, at [258] –
[258] The question for my determination is whether, in the
absence of a clear statement to this effect, an inference can properly
that the Minister was satisfied that special circumstances justified the licence
period of 30 years. Counsel for MAC caution
against reliance on
“implications, obtuse references or imprecisions”. I consider that
caution both appropriate and relevant.
My concern is that acceptance of the
submissions of counsel for the Minister would require a deal of conjecture on my
[259] As I interpret s 60(4) of the Act, in force at the date of the
Minister’s decision, the Minister was required to be satisfied
special circumstances justified the grant of a licence for a period of 30 years,
that period being “
longer period” referred to in
s 60(4)(b). The use of the definite article points to the need for
satisfaction about the actual
proposed period of a particular licence, not
simply more general satisfaction that it be for a period exceeding 10 years.
[260] I bear in mind that the property in and the rights to the “use,
flow and control” of all water in the Territory,
including groundwater, is
vested in the Territory. The Minister exercises those rights on behalf of the
Territory. As counsel for
MAC point out, s 60(4)(b) is an important constraint
on the exercise by the executive of the power to grant a licence to exploit
important resource. They refer to the decision of the majority
Forrest & Forrest Pty Ltd v Wilson
, for the proposition that
where a statutory regime confers power on the executive government to grant
exclusive rights to exploit
the resources of the State, the regime will, subject
to provision to the contrary, be understood as mandating compliance with the
requirements of the regime as essential to the making of a valid
MAC contends that satisfaction by the Controller that “special
circumstances” existed was a jurisdictional pre-condition
to the exercise
of the power. Having found (in [244]) that the reference to the Controller in s
60(4)(b) is to be read and understood
as a reference to the Minister on review,
I will treat MAC’s contention to be that satisfaction by the Minister on
review that
“special circumstances” existed was a jurisdictional
pre-condition to the exercise of the power exercised by her to grant
for the longer period of 30 years.
[261] MAC submits that the only assessment made of “special
circumstances” in this case was that by Minister Lawler when
she provided
an opinion as to special circumstances on 15 February 2021. The only
reference to “special circumstances”
in the decision of the Minister
on review was her observation that Minister Lawler had provided her opinion on
special circumstances
and that the reviewing parties had raised a concern about
Minister Lawler’s ability to make a decision on account of apprehended
The Minister did not state whether or not she agreed with the opinion of
Minister Lawler.
[262] MAC has established that there is no evidence that the Minister was
satisfied that special circumstances justified the grant
of a licence for a
period of 30 years, that being “the longer period” referred to in s
60(4)(b). As mentioned in [245]
above, the Minister did not expressly state her
satisfaction that special circumstances justified the licence period of 30
Further, although the Minister made reference to the decision of Minister
Lawler (the first Minister), that was in a different context.
The Minister did
not state that she adopted the opinion of Minister Lawler. I do not agree that
the Minister “should be understood
to have accepted the first
Minister’s opinion”, simply because it was attached to the
ministerial briefing document.
Further, the suggestion that the Minister relied
on the Controller’s opinion cannot be sustained because, for reasons
in [242], the Controller did not relevantly state her own satisfaction
and her decision was more likely than not based on Minister
opinion, and not the Controller’s own opinion. Finally, the suggestion
that the Minister was entitled to rely
on the opinion of the Review Panel
similarly cannot be sustained because of the very limited comments made by the
Review Panel, referred
to by me at [255] above.
[263] My conclusion is that, if it were a jurisdictional pre-condition that
the Minister needed to be satisfied that special circumstances
justified the
grant of a licence for a period of 30 years, then that pre-condition was
not satisfied.
(Citations omitted)
[45] Before this
Court, the Minister submitted that there could be no doubt that the duration of
the licence was a live issue before
the Review Panel and herself. The CLC, in
its written submissions to the Review Panel, contended that the Controller
should not have
granted the Original Licence for a period greater than 10 years.
The Environment Centre NT Inc submitted that a licence in excess
of 10 years was
not warranted, pointing to the high degree of scientific uncertainty
underpinning the WDWAP. Fortune submitted that
a licence term of 30 years was
warranted due to the time required to develop the project, the scale of the
project, the level of
investment in the project and the potential economic
benefits of the project. In the present appeal, the Minister submitted that
was all before the Review Panel and the Minister had accepted the findings of
the Review Panel leading to the inference that
the Minister had agreed that
there were special circumstances justifying a licence in excess of 10 years and,
in particular, of 30
[46] The primary
judge stated that the decision of the Minister made after receiving the report
of the Review Panel did not contain
a clear statement to the effect that the
Minister was satisfied that special conditions justified the licence period of
The primary judge was unwilling to
that the Minister had
made such a determination: see [44] above. In the present appeal, the Minister
submitted that the primary judge
had erred in that
Fortune’s submissions on appeal
[47] Fortune
accepted that in undertaking a review of the Controller’s decision as
permitted by
of the Act the Minister was undertaking a
“merits” or “contemporaneous” review of the
Controller’s
decision. Fortune adopted the reasons of the primary judge
for ruling that the Minister was obliged by the terms of
s 30(3)(a)(ii)
the Act, in determining to substitute the Minister’s decision for that of
the Controller, to apply the terms of s 60(4)
as they existed at the date
of the Controller’s decision. This ruling was dictated, it was said, by
the ordinary grammatical
meaning of the text in
s 30(3)(a)(ii)
supported by the legislative purpose of the Act.
[48] Fortune
submitted that the primary judge’s reasoning process was orthodox and MAC
had failed to make out this aspect of
the appeal.
submissions in reply
submitted that the text of
s 30(3)(a)(ii)
of the Act does not support the
construction now urged by the Minister, and that it would have been easy for the
legislature to make
it clear that in exercising the power conferred by
s 30(3)(a)(ii)
the Minister was to apply the law, and in particular the
terms of s 60(4) of the Act, as they were at the time of the
Controller’s
[50] The true
purpose and effect of
s 30(3)(a)(ii)
, MAC submitted, is to confer upon the
Minister, when performing a review, the relevant powers and discretions of the
Controller necessary
to make that decision. MAC submitted that this was
consistent with comments made by Hiley J regarding
s 30(3)(a)(ii)
Environment Centre Northern Territory (NT) Inc v
Minister for Land Resource
Unlike provisions which enable an appellate tribunal to vary
the original decision,
the decision of the Minister under
s 30(3)(a)(ii)
is his or her decision.
(emphasis added)
distinction between varying the orders made by an original decision maker and
exercising a jurisdiction to make a fresh decision
was referred to by Brennan J
Brian Lawler Automotive Pty Ltd and Collector of
subsequently cited in
at [100], by reference to analogous powers in
the now repealed
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
A decision by the Tribunal...to affirm the original decision
leaves the original decision intact, and that is the only decision which
effect under the enactment: the original powers are not drawn upon by the
Tribunal’s order. Equally, a decision to set
aside the decision under
review and remit the matter for reconsideration...requires the original
repository of the powers and discretions
to exercise them afresh: they are not
exercised by the Tribunal.
(1) grants the original powers and
discretions to the Tribunal, but it does not require the Tribunal to exercise
them unless the
Tribunal is making a fresh order the effectiveness of which
depends upon their exercise.
submitted that a decision made by the Minister under
s 30(3)(a)(ii)
decision of the Minister exercising the requisite original powers and
discretions of the Controller. MAC submitted that the
words “in the
opinion of the Minister, the Controller should have made in the first
instance” simply make it clear that
the Minister is conferred with the
necessary powers and discretions to make a “fresh” decision. In
other words, the provisions
s 30(3)(a)(ii)
simply make it clear that the
function of the Minister in that provision is that he or she exercises the
powers and discretions available
to the Controller afresh and not as a process
of reviewing the correctness of the Controller’s decision.
referred this Court to the decision of the Full Court of the Supreme Court of
South Australia in
Michelmore v Minister for
Environment and
Conservation.
The statute
there under consideration conferred power on a Court to substitute for a
challenged decision “any decision, direction
or restriction that should
have been made in the first instance”. The Full Court (Perry J, with whom
Doyle CJ and Vanstone
J agreed) said, at [61]:
Insofar as the
ERD Court is empowered to reach the decision “that should have been made
in the first instance”, the ERD
Court stands in the shoes of the
submitted that this statement confirms that the phrase “that should have
been made in the first instance” involves
the conferral of power and is a
reference to the conferral upon the Minister of the powers and discretions of
the original decision
maker. In the present case, MAC submitted, there is
nothing in the conferral upon the Minister of the relevant powers and
discretions
of the Controller that required those powers and discretions to be
fixed at the time the Controller exercised them. The law in this
submitted, is clear and was expressed by Brennan J in
Esber v The
Commonwealth
on a rehearing de novo, the question for decision is whether an applicant should
be granted a right, the law as it then exists
is applied, not the law as it
existed at an earlier time.
[55] Although
MAC embraced the proposition that the Minister “stands in the shoes
of” the Controller in making a decision
s 30(3)(a)(ii)
submitted that the reference to “the Controller” in
the Act is not to be taken to be a reference to the Minister on review. MAC
referred to the
Explanatory Statement to the
Law Amendment (Territory Economic Reconstruction) Bill 2021
(the Bill), which
introduced the amendments to s 60(4), as evidencing a legislative intention
that after the amendment of s 60(4)
the Minister’s opinion or
discretion was no longer relevant to determining whether a licence should be
granted for a period
exceeding 10 years. The Explanatory Statement relevantly
The previous section refers to a ministerial discretion to
grant a licence to take groundwater for a period exceeding 10 years, which
otherwise be the maximum period stipulated in subsection 60(3). The clause
alters the operation of the old subsection 60(4)
by providing for a licence to
meet criteria to justify the longer licence period, whereas previously the
decision was based upon
the Minister’s opinion.
This creates additional certainty for industry, as this allows for the
creation of set criteria and circumstances which can be made
available to
applicants and provide transparency in the decision-making process.
submitted that the Minister’s suggested interpretation required the
Minister to take into account the facts and circumstances
as they existed at the
time of the Minister’s review determination but to apply the law as it
applied at the time of the Controller’s
decision. There was, MAC
submitted, no textual basis for this bifurcation. The Minister’s suggested
interpretation would also
lead to the impossible construction that the decision
the “Controller should have made at first instance” includes
consideration
of material that was not, and could not have been, before the
Controller such as the findings and recommendations of the Review Panel.
[57] About the
Minister’s Notice of Contention, MAC submitted:
a) the Minister never, in fact, reached any satisfaction about “special
circumstances” which would justify the grant
of a licence for a term of 30
years (Ground 2); and
b) nothing in the Act justified severing that term of the Licence which exceeded
10 years, leaving the first 10 years of the Licence
as valid (Ground 3).
submitted that it could not be inferred that the Minister had reached a state of
satisfaction about special circumstances
justifying a licence period exceeding
10 years on the basis that she had accepted a finding about special
circumstances made by the
Review Panel. The primary judge, MAC submitted, did
not accept that a finding about special circumstances had been made by the
[59] It was
argued before the primary judge that the statement of the Review Panel that it
was of the view “that a licence term
of greater than 10 years, with
suitable conditions precedent and staged entitlements [was] appropriate for a
large-scale development
such as that proposed” constituted a statement by
the Review Panel that it was satisfied that there were special circumstances
justifying the grant of a licence for a period exceeding 10 years, being 30
years in the present case. It was further argued that
the Minister expressly
adopted the Review Panel’s conclusion.
[60] Regarding
this submission, the primary judge said, at
Panel did not find that there were any special circumstances which justified the
grant of a licence for the longer period
of 30 years. It simply expressed the
view correctly attributed to it [that a licence term of greater than 10 years,
with suitable
conditions precedent and staged entitlements [was] appropriate for
a large-scale development such as that proposed]. The Minister
then did no more
than set out the view of the Review Panel that a licence term of greater than 10
years was “appropriate”
for a large-scale development such as that
proposed. It would therefore be more correct to say that the Minister set out
now contended to have been the Review Panels finding of a special
circumstance. However, I do not agree that the Review Panel made
finding in relation to special circumstances, because it made no mention of
being satisfied that special circumstances justified the
licence period of 30
(Italicised as per original)
submitted that the Minister’s case on the Notice of Contention was that
she should be taken to have reached an implicit
state of satisfaction that there
were special circumstances justifying the grant of a 30-year licence based on
implicit findings
made by adopting implicit findings of another body, being the
Review Panel. MAC submitted that this was inappropriate, citing the
decision in
LPDT v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship,
Migrant Services and Multicultural
where it was
A reviewing court does not engage in a review of the merits of
the decision, reconstruct a decision-making process, rework the apparent
upon which a decision has been made, or rewrite the reasons for decision.
[62] Addressing
Ground 3 of the Notice of Contention MAC submitted there is nothing in the words
of the Act to suggest that licences
granted under the Act are severable where
the licence is purported to be granted for a term longer than that permitted by
There is also nothing in the record that suggests that the Minister
made, or intended to make, a decision to grant the Licence for
a period of 10
years. Indeed, MAC submitted, Fortune itself had not sought a 10 year licence
and had made no submissions on the issue
of severance. Such a licence had not
been the subject of consideration by the Controller, the Review Panel or the
Minister herself.
Consideration
[63] The legal
question which requires resolution on Issue 1 is: did the provisions of
s 30(3)(a)(ii) of the Act require the Minister
to determine what decision
“the Controller should have made in the first instance” by reference
to s 60(4) as it was
at the time of the Controller’s decision or at
the time of the Minister’s determination?
[64] This issue
only arises because s 60(4) was amended in the period between the
Controller’s decision and the Minister’s
review decision. It is
highly unlikely that this Issue will arise in other cases. It must nevertheless
be confronted in this case.
In our respectful opinion, the primary judge was
incorrect for the reasons that follow.
[65] Where a
statute provides a right of review of an administrative decision, the first
issue to be addressed will normally be to
determine the nature of the review. It
is accepted by all parties that the obligation cast on the Minister by s 30
of the Act in
undertaking the review of the decision of the Controller was to
conduct a hearing de novo. It is clear from the provisions of s 30,
enables the Minister to receive fresh evidence by way of advice from the Review
Panel, and the provisions of s 31 of the Act
that permits the Review Panel
to take evidence for the purpose of formulating its advice to the Minister, that
the review undertaken
by the Minister is not one based upon the necessity of
identifying error in the Controller’s decision. The Minister “stands
in the shoes” of the Controller and decides the review based on the
Minister’s own opinion of the merits of the application.
conducting a merits review by way of hearing de novo it is the orthodox
position, as stated by MAC, that the review is conducted
by reference to the
facts and circumstances, including the law, as they are at the date of
But the intention of the
legislature as found in the statute will prevail over orthodoxy where there is a
conflict. The primary judge
found that the intention of the legislature, as
expressed in the words of s 30(3)(a)(ii) of the Act, was that the Minister
was obliged
to apply the law as it stood at the date of the Controller’s
[67] In reaching
that conclusion, the primary judge was influenced by a desire to give efficacy
to the words “the Controller
should have made in the first instance”
in the section. It is clear, for the reasons noted above, that these words did
restrict the Minister to deciding the review based solely on the factual
material before the Controller. If the words were to have
any restrictive
application to the review undertaken by the Minister, it could only be to
restrict the Minister to forming her opinion
based on the law as it stood at the
time of the Controller’s decision.
possible to hypothesise sound policy reasons for the legislature adopting such
an approach. As the present case demonstrates,
preparation of an application for
the grant of a licence to take groundwater can be a lengthy and costly exercise,
involving the
formulation of a business case and the retention of experts to
provide opinions on, inter alia, the availability of groundwater and
effect that granting the licence will have on the groundwater in the district
and thus on the environment generally. It
would not be surprising for the
legislature to have intended to protect applicants whose application had
proceeded as far as approval
by the Controller from any subsequent changes in
the law which may otherwise require the application process to be recommenced.
the reasons that follow, that would be the result of the application of
MAC’s construction of s 30(3)(a)(ii).
application for review under s 30 of the Act, the Minister has only four
possible options. The Minister may:
a) uphold the action or decision of the Controller (s 30(3)(a)(i));
b) substitute for the Controller’s decision the decision that the Minister
is satisfied should have been made by the Controller
in the first instance
(s 30(3)(a)(ii));
c) refer the matter back to the Controller for reconsideration
(s 30(3)(a)(iii)); or
d) refer the matter to the Review Panel for advice (s 30(3)(b)).
[70] Where the
Minister refers the matter to the Review Panel for advice, upon receipt of that
advice the Minister has only two options.
The Minister may (a) uphold the action
or decision of the Controller or (b) substitute for the Controller’s
decision the decision
that the Minister is satisfied should have been made by
the Controller in the first
The Act does not
permit the Minister to refer the matter back to the Controller for
reconsideration where the Minister has referred
the matter to the Review Panel
and has received its advice.
[71] It follows
that in the present case, if MAC is correct, the Minister on review could not
have approved the decision of the Controller
because the Controller (they
submitted) had not determined for herself that a licence for the period of 30
years was justified as
required by the amended s 60(4). Nor could the
Minister make her own determination that the licence period of 30 years was
because by the time the Minister came to make the review decision the
amendments to s 60(4) had come into effect vesting in the Controller
power to determine that a licence period of 30 years was justified.
consequence of adopting MAC’s construction of s 30(3)(a)(ii) is that,
in the absence of transitional provisions in
the Bill, a lacuna exists in the
procedures prescribed by the Act affecting applications which were made and
processed under the
Act as it was prior to the amendments to s 60(4) but in
relation to which the Minister had made no decision on review under s 30
until after the amendments took effect. The only possible action that the
Minister could take, regardless of the merits of the application,
regardless of
the cost to the applicant and other interested parties, would be to substitute a
decision to refuse the application.
The Minister cannot refer the matter back to
the Controller to allow the Controller to determine under the amended
s 60(4) whether
a licence period of 30 years is justified.
[73] This would
be an absurd outcome. It is difficult to contemplate any sound policy objective
for such an approach. This Court should
not lightly attribute such absurdity to
the legislature. Such a construction should only be accepted if the Court is
driven to it
by the clear words of the statute precluding a more rational
construction. The other possibility, that the legislature had neglected
include transitional provisions in the Bill, is another inference that should
not lightly be drawn.
construction of s 30(3)(a)(ii) adopted by the primary judge and now
supported by the Minister and Fortune has its own difficulties.
There is force
in MAC’s submission that the interpretation of s 30(3)(a)(ii) adopted
by the primary judge leads to a potential
for the Minister, in determining what
decision “should have been made at first instance” by the
Controller, to act upon
material which was not and could not have been before
the Controller. The interpretation of s 30(3)(a)(ii) adopted by the primary
judge and now supported by the Minister and Fortune, however, is strained in the
sense that it removes the review in the section
from the orthodox position
regarding de novo reviews and where the words under consideration will only
operate in rare circumstances
where there has been a change in the legislation
affecting a matter which is susceptible to review under s 30 of the Act. It
is difficult
to accept that s 30(3)(a)(ii) was drafted as it is to guard
against the remote possibility that the Act may someday be amended in
as to affect the outcome of a review under s 30.
identified absurdity to which MAC’s interpretation of s 30(3)(a)(ii)
leads, and the difficulties referred to in the
previous paragraph, fall away,
however, if it is accepted that the Minister, in standing in the shoes of the
Controller on a review
under s 30, can exercise all the powers of the Controller
including the power under s 60(4)(b) to decide whether there are special
circumstances justifying a lease of 30 years. Such an approach would make the
relevant provisions of the Act coherent and remove
the need for transitional
provisions. It would also restore the nature of the review pursuant to s 30
to the orthodox position to
which I have referred. Such an approach would also
be consistent with the decision in
. There is nothing in the
Explanatory Statement which requires a different approach. The terms of the
Explanatory Statement merely
describe the changes to be made by the Bill.
[76] Before the
primary judge, the Minister accepted that the law to be applied in deciding to
grant the Licence to Fortune after
the review hearing was s 60(4) as
amended. The Minister submitted that the requirements of the amended
s 60(4)(b) had been satisfied
when the decision was made to grant the
Licence. In the present appeal the Minister has taken a different approach,
embracing the
primary judge’s approach to interpretation of
s 30(3)(a)(ii). There may well be good forensic reasons for this change of
but in our opinion the approach taken by the Minister before the
primary judge was correct.
[77] Before the
primary judge, and in the present appeal, MAC has consistently asserted that the
reference to “the Controller”
in s 60(4)(b) cannot be taken to
be a reference to the Minister on review. MAC submitted that it is the
Controller, and not the Minister,
who is empowered by s 60(4)(b) to make
the relevant finding. MAC submitted that this position is not displaced by
reference to “the
Controller” in s 60(1) which provides the
Controller with the power to make a decision “in the first
MAC submitted that this power to make a decision in the first
instance is “not the power exercised by the Minister when undertaking
review “. This is because, MAC submitted, the Minister is not empowered by
the Act to make the decision “at first instance”
but only on review
pursuant to s 30(3)(a)(ii). No authority was cited for this submission, and
it appears that it is based solely
on the terms of the relevant provisions of
[78] The primary
judge accepted that reference to the Controller in s 60(4)(b) of the Act is
to be read and understood as a reference
to the Minister on review. The primary
judge only addressed that question, however, in the context of considering
MAC’s submissions
in the event that his Honour’s primary
interpretation of s 30(3)(a)(ii) was wrong. In our opinion, to gain a
proper understanding
of the legislative intention behind the use of the words
“should have been made at first instance” in s 30(3)(a)(ii)
is necessary to understand the nature of the review which the Minister
undertakes pursuant to s 30.
, Kiefel J said regarding merits review, in the context of proceedings
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act
(Cth) on a review of a decision made by the Migration Agents Regulation
term “merits review” does not appear in the
, although it is often used to explain that the function of the Tribunal
extends beyond a review for legal error, to a consideration
of the facts and
circumstances relevant to the decision. The object of the review undertaken by
the Tribunal has been said to be
to determine what is the “correct or
preferable decision”. “Preferable” is apt to refer to a
decision which
involves discretionary considerations. A “correct”
decision, in the context of review, might be taken to be one rightly
the proper sense. It is, inevitably, a decision by the original decision-maker
with which the Tribunal agrees. Smithers
Collector of Customs
(NSW) v Brian Lawlor Automotive Pty Ltd
said that it is for the Tribunal to determine whether the decision is
acceptable, when tested against the requirements of good government.
because the Tribunal, in essence, is an instrument of government
administration.
reasons of the members of the Full Court of the Federal Court in
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
what is apparent from
, that the Tribunal reaches its conclusion, as to what is the correct
decision, by conducting its own, independent, assessment and
determination of
the matters necessary to be addressed. To the contrary of the argument put by
the respondent on this appeal, that
the Tribunal's exercise of power is
dependent upon the existence of error in the original decision, Smithers J
denied that the Tribunal
was limited to something of a supervisory role. As his
Honour said, the Tribunal is authorised and required to review the actual
decision, not the reasons for it.
considering what is the right decision, the Tribunal must address the same
question as the original decision-maker was required
to address. Identifying the
question raised by the statute for decision will usually determine the facts
which may be taken into
account in connection with the decision. The issue is
then one of relevance, determined by reference to the elements in the question,
or questions, necessary to be addressed in reaching a decision. It is not to be
confused with the Tribunal’s general procedural
powers to obtain evidence.
The issue is whether evidence, so obtained, may be taken into account with
respect to the specific decision
which is the subject of
(Footnotes omitted)
[80] As the
parties acknowledged in their submissions to this Court, in undertaking a review
of the Controller’s decision the
Minister stands in the shoes of the
Controller. This means that the Minister addresses the question which was
addressed by the Controller
and exercises the powers that are then available to
the Controller in addressing that issue. The facts that are relevant to the
review are those which are demonstrated to exist at the time
that the Minister makes the review decision, which may not be the same
which were determined by the Controller at first instance. The powers which the
Minister may exercise in making the review
decision are those that would be
available to the Controller if he or she were addressing the issue at the time
of the Minister’s
review decision. This follows of necessity from an
acceptance that the Minister in making the review decision was obliged to apply
the law as it existed at the time of that decision.
[81] As at the
date of the review decision, the Controller, if she had been addressing
Fortune’s application afresh, would have
been obliged to consider
s 60(4) as it was at that time and decide whether special circumstances
existed justifying the grant of
a licence for a period of 30 years. This is
exactly what the Minister was empowered, and obliged, to do in exercising her
function under s 30. The attempt by MAC to distinguish between
powers available only at first instance and those available on review
Minister is contrary to principle and is an approach not required by the words
of the statute.
[82] It follows
that MAC is successful on Grounds of Appeal 1 and 2 (Issue 1). That, however, is
not the end of the matter. By Ground
2 in the Notice of Contention, the Minister
says that if Grounds of Appeal 1 and 2 are upheld, this Court should find that
the primary
judge erred by finding that the Minister had not complied with
accepted by the Minister that in her reasons for decision on review she did not
directly state that she was satisfied that
there were special circumstances
justifying the grant of a 30-year licence. There can, however, be no doubt that
the issue of the
period of the proposed licence was live before the Controller
at first instance, and the Review Panel and the Minister on review.
understand the submission made by the Minister in the present appeal is that it
should be inferred from all of the circumstances
surrounding the granting of the
Licence that the Minister was satisfied that special circumstances existed
justifying a 30-year licence.
There can be no doubt that a court may draw
inferences from the totality of the evidence in cases such as the present. As
the plurality
of the High Court said in
Minister for Immigration and Border
Like other historical facts to be determined in other civil
proceedings, the facts as to what occurred in the making of the decision
determined in an application for judicial review on the balance of probabilities
by inferences drawn from the totality of
the evidence.
(Footnotes omitted)
application by Fortune was for the grant of a 30-year licence. The decision of
the Controller in granting the Original Licence
was to grant a 30-year licence.
This decision was based, amongst other things, on the opinion of the Minister
for Environment expressed
in writing on 15 February 2021 that there were
special circumstances justifying a 30-year licence as identified by her. This
the context in which what followed should be understood.
[85] The next
event of relevance was the referral of the applications for review of the
Controller’s decision to the Review
Panel by the Minister for Environment.
As persons aggrieved by the decision of the Controller, MAC (at that time as
part of a conglomerate
of parties being represented by the CLC) and ALEC, among
others, sought a review by the Minister for Environment of the
Controller’s
decision. The right to seek such a review is conferred by
s 30(1) of the Act. The Minister for Environment then referred “the
matter” to the Review Panel for advice.
[86] Consistent
with the role of the Minister in conducting a review under s 30 as
conducting a de novo hearing, the words “the
matter” in s 30
must extend beyond a simple review of whether it was open to the Controller to
make the decision she did. In
our opinion, it would extend to reconsideration by
the Minister of whether there are special circumstances justifying a licence for
a period greater than 10 years. This would be so whether the review is conducted
under the unamended provisions of s 60(4) or the
amended provisions. The
importance of this observation is that it was part of the function of the Review
Panel, both before and after
the amendment to s 60(4), to advise the
relevant Minister on whether a 30-year licence was justified. There is no reason
that the Review Panel did not understand the nature of its
[87] Before
referring to the Review Panel’s report to the Minister for the
Environment, it is important to understand the specific
submissions made to the
Review Panel by the review parties. MAC submitted that the grant of a licence
for a greater period than 10
years was inappropriate given the scientific
uncertainty underlying the Groundwater Model used by the Controller to determine
amount of groundwater in the aquifer and how much of that water could be
sustainably used by Fortune. This was effectively a submission
that despite the
special circumstances identified by the Minister for Environment and conveyed to
the Controller, the Minister for
Environment should, on review, find that the
uncertainty around the Groundwater Model should lead to a decision on the de
novo review
that a licence of 30 years duration was not justified. Indeed, the
submission went further, as recognised by the Review Panel, and
challenged the
existence of the special circumstances identified by the Minister for
Environment. The submission by MAC therefore
challenged the existence of the
identified special circumstances and the scientific basis of the
Controller’s decision.
against this background that the Review Panel stated in its
Licence period
making her decision to grant the Licence for 30 years, the Controller sought the
opinion of the Minister, in accordance with
section 60(4)
. The Minister affirmed that in her opinion there are special
circumstances that justify a 30-year term licence.
submit that the Controller should not have applied her discretion to grant the
Licence for a period of 30-years given the scientific
uncertainty underpinning
the WAP and the risk of serious and irreversible harm.
submits that the Controller should not have granted the Licence for a period
greater than 10 years and maintains that the special
circumstances referred to
by the Minister do not exist in this case and refer to the circumstances
included in section 5.2.1 of the
Guideline: Special Circumstances for water
extraction terms of up to 30 years
Panel is of the view that a licence term of greater than 10 years, with
suitable conditions precedent and staged entitlements,
is appropriate for a
large-scale development such as that
[89] The context
in which the Review Panel gave the advice set out in the previous paragraph is
that the decision under review was
one in which a 30-year licence had been
granted. The submissions made by the review parties were, relevantly for present
directed towards a decision to grant a 30-year licence. The function
which the Review Panel was undertaking was advising the Minister
for Environment
on a hearing de novo regarding, relevantly, whether a licence of 30 years
should be granted. While the advice given
by the Review Panel refers to a view
that “a licence term of greater than 10 years” is appropriate, in
the circumstances
it must be seen as advice that the special circumstances
identified by the Minister for Environment would justify a 30-year licence
long as appropriate conditions and safeguards were put in place.
[90] If the
Review Panel had been of the view that the special circumstances identified by
the Minister for the Environment did not
exist, or that in combination with the
other relevant material those circumstances did not justify a 30-year licence,
duty of the Review Panel to provide that advice to the Minister for
Environment. The fact that it did not do so supports the inference
Review Panel considered a 30-year licence to be justified.
September 2021, before the Review Panel delivered its advice on 14 October
2021, the amendment to
to which we have referred took effect. After
the Minister for Environment delegated her powers under
of the Act to
conduct the review to the Minister, on 12 November 2021 the Minister received a
Ministerial Briefing in relation to
the matter. The Briefing correctly
identified for the Minister that her role was to conduct a merits review of the
decision made
by the Controller.
[92] Annexed to
the Briefing were limited extracts from the Act. These extracts did not include
, either in its form before amendment or after. In our opinion no
inference can be drawn from the absence of a copy of
from the limited
extracts of the Act provided to the Minister and that the Minister was unaware
of the need for special circumstances
to be found that justify the grant of a
30-year licence. Included in the material the Minister took into account in
making her review
decision were the review applications lodged by each of the
parties and their submissions. The issue of the term of any licence and
for special circumstances to be found justifying a 30-year licence were, as
noted above, prominent issues in the proceedings
before the Review Panel.
[93] In her
reasons for decision, the Minister also stated that she had reviewed and
considered “the relevant legislation”
before making her review
decision. The material before the Minister was replete with references to the
need to find special circumstances.
While the predominant issue raised by MAC
(and other objectors) before the Controller, the Review Panel and the Minister
was whether
licence should be granted to Fortune, it is abundantly
clear that the Minister was aware from the totality of the material before
a) the issue of the term of the licence was an important issue both for Fortune
and MAC (and the other objectors);
b) the Controller had granted a licence for 30 years;
c) special circumstances had to be found in order to justify a licence of 30
years duration;
d) the requirement to find special circumstances was found in
e) special circumstances had been found by the Minister for Environment and had
been communicated to the Controller;
f) the Review Panel was providing her with advice regarding, inter alia, how she
should exercise her powers on review after a hearing
g) the Review Panel, in the context of a challenge to a 30 year lease duration,
expressed the opinion that a lease term in excess
of 10 years was
appropriate; and
h) she was conducting a hearing de novo which involved, amongst other things, a
requirement for her to consider the existence of
the previously identified
special circumstances which would justify a 30 year licence.
[94] In our
opinion, these circumstances strongly support the inference that the Minister
was aware of the need to find special circumstances
which would justify a
licence of 30 years duration. The Minister’s decision was expressed as
I have determined to accept the conclusions of the Review
Panel for the reasons it has given on each of the issues raised by the Reviewing
[95] In our
opinion, the only reasonable interpretation of the Minister’s decision, in
the context to which we have referred,
is that the Minister determined that
there were special circumstances, being those previously identified by the
Minister for Environment,
which justified a 30-year lease. In addition, the
extract from the Minister’s Reasons set out at [42] above makes it
indisputable
that the Minister was aware of the fact that the review related to
a decision to grant a 30-year licence and that the special circumstance
identified by the Review Panel was the large scale of the proposed
development.
[96] In the end
result, while MAC has established error on the part of the primary judge as
alleged in Grounds of Appeal 1 and 2,
the Minister has succeeded on Ground 2 in
the Notice of Contention.
[97] While it is
strictly unnecessary to do so, we will very briefly consider Ground 3 in the
Notice of Contention. In our opinion,
MAC is correct in its submission that
there is nothing in the words of the Act which would support severance of the
term of a licence
where it is purportedly granted for a period longer than that
permitted by law. That must particularly be the case where, as here,
application by Fortune was for a 30-year licence, supported by material
demonstrating that a licence of that term was necessary
to make the proposed
project economic, and there is no indication that Fortune would be interested in
a 10 year licence. In addition,
this is an issue which was not considered by any
of the parties involved in the decision to grant the Licence. Contention 3 in
Notice of Contention fails.
Issue 2: Misconstruction of
(1)(ab) of the
[98] Issue 2
encompasses Grounds of Appeal 3 and 4, and also raises Ground 4 in the Notice of
Contention. This Issue has its provenance
in ALEC’s application for
judicial review before the primary judge. It was not part of MAC’s case
before the primary
judge. In the absence of any appeal by ALEC from the decision
of the primary judge, MAC submits that it should be entitled to raise
matter on appeal. Before addressing whether MAC should be permitted to do so, we
will provide some background to the Issue.
[99] In the
proceedings before the primary judge, ALEC pleaded that the Minister’s
decision involved a jurisdictional error
because the Minister failed to comply
and, further and in the alternative,
s 90(1)(ab)
Act. The Particulars pleaded by ALEC in support of this allegation may be
summarised as follows:
a) At the time of the Minister’s decision to grant the Licence, the WDWAP
was in place and applied to the geographical area
to which the Licence
b) The WDWAP established a “groundwater dependent ecosystem protection
area” (GDE Protection Area) which overlapped with
the bore field approved
by the Minister in granting the Licence.
c) The WDWAP relevantly provided that “proposed extraction should not
result in a change to groundwater conditions beyond”
certain identified
limits within the GDE Protection Area. The following limits were then
extraction does not cause the maximum depth to water table to exceed 15 metres
below ground level;
extraction does not result in the maximum depth to water table declining by more
than 50% below the levels that would be
expected under a natural baseline
scenario (no pumping scenario); and
extraction does not result in a rate of groundwater drawdown that exceeds 0.2
metres/year.
(the WAP GDE criteria)
primary judge identified the error alleged by ALEC to have been committed by the
Minister as
[33] First,
it is said that the Decision failed to accord with specific drawdown limits
identified in the WAP, which were intended
to protect groundwater dependent
ecosystems. Under
s 90(1)(ab)
, the Minister was required to take the WAP into account, while
of the Act required that water resource management (including licensing
decisions) be in accordance with the WAP. Rather than applying
the WAP, the
Minister chose instead to apply a Departmental policy document (the Guideline
referred to in [11] above), developed
in consultation with Fortune, which had no
statutory significance under the
and which was said to be “fundamentally
inconsistent” with the WAP.
[101] Later, the
primary judge said that the issue raised by ALEC “relies on the asserted
fact that the Decision to grant the
Licence was not in accordance with the
WDWAP, in that the Minister did not apply the groundwater dependent ecosystems
(GDE) impact
criteria in the
The issue raised
by ALEC in the proceedings before the primary judge was therefore whether, and
to what extent, the Minister was
bound by the WDWAP in determining whether to
grant the Licence to Fortune.
primary judge found that the Controller, in making the decision to grant the
Original Licence, had regard, inter alia, to
a document titled “Guideline:
Limits of acceptable change to groundwater dependent vegetation in the Western
Davenport Water
Control District” (the Guideline). This was a document
published by the Northern Territory Department of Environment and Natural
Resources on 13 February 2020. As noted by the primary judge, the Guideline
stated that it was “intended to be read subject
to the Western Davenport
Water Allocation Plan 2018-2021” and was not given any express recognition
under the Act.
argument advanced by ALEC before the primary judge was as follows:
Section 90(1)(ab)
of the Act required the Controller (and therefore the
Minister on review) to take into account in making a “water extraction
licence decision” any water allocation plan applying to the area in
of the WDWAP states that “Groundwater extraction licence
applications should demonstrate compliance with the criteria laid
out in this
of the WDWAP, headed “Protection of environmental and
cultural values”, contained the following:
8.2.1 Terrestrial vegetation groundwater dependent ecosystems
Proposed extraction should not result in a change to groundwater conditions
beyond the following limits within the GDE protection
area (Figure 11) unless it
can be shown that the vegetation is not accessing groundwater. Assessment of
compliance with these criteria
should be based on groundwater modelling giving
consideration to the cumulative effect of all approved extraction.
Limits to change in groundwater levels within the GDE protection
extraction does not cause the maximum depth to water table to exceed 15 metres
below ground level
extraction does not result in the maximum depth to water table declining by more
than 50% below the levels that would be
expected under a natural baseline
scenario (no pumping scenario)
extraction does not result in a rate of groundwater drawdown that exceeds 0.2
metres/year.
The Department of Environment and Natural Resources
will monitor groundwater drawdown and the health and condition of a set of GDE
reference sites to monitor the effectiveness of GDE protection approaches and
refine the understanding of GDE groundwater interactions
and dependence. Results
will be reported annually via the integrated annual report on monitoring and
compliance. Where groundwater
drawdown trigger levels are exceeded or
unacceptable impacts from groundwater drawdown on GDE health are observed (i.e.
morphology, composition or loss of function) this will trigger an
adaptive management response. ...
the material before the Controller made it clear that Fortune’s
proposal to extract 40,000 megalitres from the GDE protection
area could not
satisfy those criteria;
(e) instead of assessing Fortune’s application against the WDWAP
criteria, the Minister assessed it against the Guideline
which adopted
“radically less rigorous” standards than the criteria found in the
(f) by doing so, the Minister made a jurisdictional error.
argument advanced by ALEC at first instance was confined to interpretation of
the Act and how
of the Act applied to the evidence that
was before the Controller and the Minister on review. Before turning to the
argument that
MAC now seeks to make on this issue, we will refer to the primary
judge’s treatment of the argument advanced by ALEC.
primary judge accepted that the words “a water licence extraction
decision” in
included a decision to grant a licence from a
bore. In making a water extraction licence decision the Minister was obliged by
s 90(1)(ab)
of the Act to take into account any water allocation plan
applying to the area. The Minister was also obliged to take into account
other factors set out in
, including any other factors the Minister
considered should be taken into account.
primary judge found that the statutory requirement to “take into
account” the factors listed in
“is a requirement to give
consideration to them, that is, to engage in an ’active intellectual
directed at those
primary judge noted that those factors listed in
are not exhaustive
in any given case, since
permits the Minister to take into
account any other factor which the Minister considers should be taken into
account. There was also
nothing in the language of
, his Honour
said, which required the Minister to give primacy or even particular weight to
any factor. As the primary judge observed,
this is “unsurprising given
that the decision to grant a water extraction licence is multifactorial and
involves the balancing
of a range of relevant but possibly disparate
considerations”.
[108] His Honour
went on to say that, in general, absent statutory or contextual indications of
the weight to be given to particular
factors, it is for the decision maker to
determine what weight is to be given to each relevant
regard to the obligation cast on the Minister by
s 90(1)(ab)
to take into
account any water allocation plan applying to the area in question, the primary
judge said, at
In relation to
s 90(1)(ab)
, I accept the submission of counsel for the Minister that the
language employed is very different to a requirement that the decision
“bound by”, “must follow” or “must adopt”
the provisions of an applicable water allocation
plan. I would add that there is
no requirement that a water extraction licence decision must accord with, or not
be inconsistent
with, a water allocation plan applying to the area in question.
The purpose of the statutory requirement that the decision maker
account any applicable water allocation plan (in addition to many other factors)
is to allow the decision maker to be guided
by any such plan but not to be
fettered in a way which would preclude consideration of a water extraction
licence application which
did not meet the criteria set out in the plan.
primary judge noted that the issue raised by ALEC was whether and to what extent
of the Act limited what was otherwise a wide discretionary power
vested in the Minister under
In other words, as his Honour
expressed it, did the requirement that “water resource management”
be in accordance with
the WDWAP oblige the Minister to refuse a water extraction
licence application where the proposal did not accord with the water allocation
[111] As the
primary judge noted, the contentions put on behalf of ALEC depended on whether
the provisions of
of the Act required the Minister not only to
“take into account” the WDWAP (as provided by
s 90(1)(ab))
to give primacy to the WDWAP such that she could not lawfully grant a licence
that was not “in accordance with” the
primary judge rejected this proposition, holding that the term “water
resource management” in
not directed to the weight to be
given to a water allocation plan in a water extraction licence decision, but is
directed towards
the planning and management of a water resource in a water
control district. His Honour found that the interpretation urged by ALEC
supported by the legislative history of
of the Act and was
inconsistent with the wide discretion given to the Minister under that section.
In addition,
of the WDWAP was not mandatory in its terms, but rather
“in the nature of guidance, instruction and recommendation”.
primary judge concluded that, in making the decision to grant the Licence, the
Minister did not have a statutory obligation
to “comply with”
of the Act. In particular, the Minister did not have a statutory
obligation to make a licence decision in strict accordance with
[114] Finally,
with regard to ALEC’s submission that the Minister erred in taking into
account the Guideline and giving that
document greater weight than the WDWAP,
the primary judge found that ALEC had not established that the Minister was not
to take into account the Guideline pursuant to
Act. To the extent that there was any complaint that the Minister had not taken
into account the WDWAP, the primary judge
held such a complaint not viable as
the Guideline set out within it the substance of
of the WDWAP in
relation to limits to change in groundwater levels within the GDE protection
[115] To the
extent that the Guideline adopted different criteria to those in
of the WDWAP, this was based on additional research, modelling based on
satellite imagery, on-ground sampling, and modelling/mapping
on a regional scale
based on field investigations.
[116] Turning to
the submissions made by MAC in the present appeal regarding this Issue, MAC
contended that the primary judge’s
conclusion that the obligation on the
Minister arising from
s 90(1)(ab)
of the Act to “take into
account” any water allocation plan applying to the area in question did
not require that the
licence decision accord with or be consistent with the
terms of the WDWAP was wrong.
submitted that the primary judge misconstrued the meaning of “water
resource management” in
of the Act. Noting that the term
“water resource management” is not defined in the Act, MAC submitted
is “premised on a relationship” between
“water resource management” and “water allocation
As “water resource management” is not defined by the
Act, MAC commenced its argument by addressing the term “water
Section 22B(5)
makes provision for what a “water allocation plan”
must ensure, but does not provide for the content of a water allocation
b) Sub-sections 22B(4) and (5), read together, demonstrate that a water
allocation plan is concerned with attaining a result or outcome;
c) The Oxford English Dictionary definition of a “plan” is a scheme
of action according to which something is to be done;
d) The result to be achieved by a water allocation plan is stated by the Act and
is “water resource management” in a
district, which includes those
matters listed in
including identifying the estimated sustainable yield
of a water resource, allocating the estimated sustainable yield amongst
uses and ensuring total water use is less than the sum of allocation
to each beneficial use;
e) Processes of estimation and allocation are inherently uncertain and involve
making choices. There is a risk of detrimental consequences
to the resource, the
environment and users of the resource if the plan gets it wrong. For these
reasons, the Act (at least impliedly)
requires matters including objectives,
principles, values, risk assessments and risk management to be included within
the plan. It
also requires ongoing monitoring of the use of water, if the
outcome of ensuring total water use stays within the allocated limits
submitted that “water resource management” is a broad phrase that is
apt to include all of the various things
provided for under the Act, including
the making and implementation of the water allocation plan and water extraction
licence decisions.
Water resource management is an ongoing process, implying
that a water allocation plan must be capable of responding accordingly.
described it, a water allocation plan is a “living” document that
acknowledges the uncertainties and risks that
it is seeking to address and
manages them. In support of that submission, MAC referred to the following:
a) The requirement in
section 22B(5)
that water allocation plans are to
the matters thereafter set out in the section suggests, MAC
submitted, that water allocation plans are concerned with
achieving the
of “water resource management”.
b) There is no fixed method to determine an “estimated sustainable
(s 22B(5)(a)).
An estimated sustainable yield is
“estimated” as it is inherently uncertain. There are risks for both
the resource, the
environment and users involved in determining an estimated
sustainable yield. Identifying an estimated sustainable yield involves
just stating a number, it involves identifying objectives, outcomes and values.
Once a method of identifying an estimated
sustainable yield is identified, it
involves assessing the range of values produced by that method against the
objectives, outcomes
and values. It also involves identifying and managing the
risks of getting the estimated sustainable yield sufficiently wrong that
imperils the resource, the environment and users.
c) The task of allocating water within the estimated sustainable yield to
beneficial uses involves making choices between those uses
and prioritising one
over another, which can only be done by reference to objectives and values.
Section 22B(5)(b)
requires a water allocation plan to ensure that the
“total water use” for all beneficial uses, including those provided
under licenses granted under
, is less than the sum of allocation to
each beneficial use. To achieve this, the plan must take into account actual
water use and
must involve ongoing monitoring of water use.
(Italicised as per original)
[120] Once it is
accepted that a water allocation plan is a “living” document, MAC
submitted, it is “nonsense”
to say that “water resource
management” is only planning and management of the water resource and does
not extend to
water extraction licence decisions. If that were correct, MAC
suggested, there would be no reason for the Controller or Minister
to take into
account a water allocation plan when making a water extraction licence decision
as the plan itself would tell the Controller
or Minister nothing relevant for
the purposes of making that decision.
appropriate reconciliation of the operation of
submitted, would recognise that a water allocation plan will include two kinds
of limits or qualifications on use: first, limits
or qualifications based on
objectives, principles or values; second, limits or qualifications expressed in
objectively clear terms.
submitted that
is concerned to ensure the Controller or Minister takes
into account, amongst other things, the objectives, principles or values
water allocation plan while
is concerned to ensure, in the context
of making water extraction licence decisions, that the Controller or Minister
accordance with”, and not inconsistently with, any
objectively expressed qualifications or limits in a water allocation plan.
[123] It is
clear from the above that while there are consistent elements in the submissions
advanced by ALEC and those which MAC
seeks to advance on this general issue in
the present appeal, there are also significant differences. The preliminary
issue of whether
MAC should be permitted to advance these arguments in the
current appeal, not having raised them in the proceedings before the primary
judge, now needs to be addressed.
advanced the following reasons in support of its submission that it should be
permitted to argue this Issue:
a) It is well established that an appeal court may entertain a “new”
question of law or point of construction so long
as it is in the interests of
justice to do so and there is no evidence that could have been given at trial
which could possibly have
prevented the point from succeeding, or the raising of
the point below would have caused a defendant to conduct the case differently
b) Issue 2 is not “new” to the proceeding. It was fully argued in
the proceeding before the primary judge and all evidence
necessary to decide was
before the Court. The respondents were on notice of, and fully responded to, the
Issue. It cannot be said
that the respondents would have run their case
differently had the issue being argued by MAC rather than ALEC.
c) Issue 2 concerns a matter of legal construction. There could be no question
the proceedings before the
primary judge. As ALEC has not pursued its appeal rights, an important question
of construction regarding
the Act will go untested if not determined in the
present proceedings.
d) The primary judge heard and determined the proceedings by MAC and ALEC
together and considered all grounds raised by both parties
in his Honours
consolidated reasons. The primary judge observed that there was some common
ground between the contentions raised
by both MAC and ALEC.
e) There is no discernible prejudice to the respondents in permitting MAC to
argue Issue 2 in this appeal. The Minister agitates
this Issue in the Notice of
Contention, and Fortune has not objected to MAC raising the Issue in the present
f) Refusing to permit MAC to argue Issue 2 in the absence of an appeal by ALEC
would only encourage the unnecessary proliferation
of legal costs, and would not
be in the interests of justice.
application by MAC to be permitted to argue Issue 2 was opposed by the Minister
for the following reasons:
a) Generally, a party is bound by the conduct of its grounds taken in the court
at First instance.
Where all of
the facts have been established beyond controversy or the point is one of
construction or law, and it is in the interests
of justice to entertain the
point, an appellate court may not strictly apply that
b) ALEC commenced its proceedings on 13 January 2022 and MAC commenced
proceedings on 28 January 2022. While there was some common
ground between the
contentions raised by ALEC and MAC, this did not include a contention by MAC the
equivalent of Issue 2 which it
now seeks to argue.
c) MAC sought, and was granted, leave to amend its Originating Motion to include
an additional ground in the first instance proceedings.
MAC did not, however,
adopt the grounds in the application for judicial review brought by ALEC, and it
has not sought to explain
why it did not bring that ground in the first instance
proceedings. This is significant because the point that MAC proposes now to
has its source in Ground 1 of the application for judicial review brought by
d) It cannot be expedient or in the interests of justice for MAC to raise an
issue with provenance in the ALEC proceedings merely
because ALEC has chosen not
to pursue its right of appeal. That is all the more so where the argument MAC
now seeks to advance based
upon the statutory language of the Act was not one
advanced by ALEC before the primary judge.
e) In any event, MAC’s new contention is wrong. The primary judge did not
err in concluding that the obligation on the Minister
to “take into account any water allocation plan applying to the area in
question” meant exactly what those words
mean, and did not require the
Minister to act in accordance with the water allocation plan by reason of
The new distinction sought to be drawn by MAC is not sourced in
the language of the Act and lacks merit.
[126] Fortune
did not raise any objection to MAC being allowed to argue Issue 2 on
[127] In our
opinion, this Court should not permit MAC to pursue Issue 2 in circumstances
where it appears that MAC made a decision
not to pursue this contention before
the primary judge. It is important that parties to litigation understand that
the trial is the
venue where parties are to raise all contentions between them
and support those contentions by all submissions considered by a party
reasonably available.
[128] An appeal
should involve a narrowing of contentions from those raised in the primary
proceeding, or at least not an expansion.
MAC was aware of those grounds relied
upon by ALEC in the primary proceedings, and could have pleaded similar grounds
case had it chosen to do so. MAC did, in fact, amend its pleadings
before the primary judge but chose not to pursue the contention
it now seeks to
[129] There is
no suggestion that there was any agreement between MAC and ALEC to “divide
up” between them the grounds
on which they sought to challenge the
Minister’s decision. In any event, the appropriate course in such a case
would be for
each party to plead the issue, with the parties then deciding
between themselves who would take the running on the issue. While there
similarities at a high level of abstraction, there are significant differences
between the contention raised by ALEC at first
instance and those MAC now seeks
addition, in deciding whether MAC should now be permitted to pursue Issue 2, we
are entitled to take into account the merits
of the arguments that MAC now
wishes to raise. We are satisfied that the interpretation of the provisions of
the Act sought to be
raised by MAC are clearly incorrect, and the approach taken
by the primary judge was equally clearly correct. It is not in the interests
justice to permit MAC to now raise Issue 2.
[131] In the
event that we are wrong in the above, for the sake of completeness we will
briefly outline the reasons why we would have
dismissed MAC’s appeal on
Issue 2 if we had permitted MAC to pursue the Issue.
starting point of MAC’s submission is to postulate a relationship between
the terms “water resource management”
and “water allocation
plan” because they both appear in
of the Act. It may be
accepted that there is a relationship of a type, because the legislature has
chosen to require water resource
management in a district to be in accordance
with any water allocation plan declared in the district. This, however, is
restate the terms of
and tells us nothing of the intended
meaning of the term “water resource management”. All that can be
said is that whatever
“water resource management” is, it is to be
done in accordance with the water allocation plan.
[133] A similar
problem exists with the subsequent steps in the reasoning process engaged in by
MAC as set out at [118]-[119] above.
One may accept the propositions found in
each of the steps of the process as expressed by MAC, but even so the process
does not inevitably
lead to the conclusion urged by MAC.
interpretation of the Act urged by MAC regarding the relationship between
is overly elaborate, and is simply not supported by the terms
of the Act. The unrealistic division in functions between these provisions
set out at [119] above is driven not by the terms of the Act but by a perceived
necessity to read down the provisions of
s 90(1)(ab)
from their ordinary
meaning so as to give the terms of a water allocation plan effective primacy
over the discretionary power of
the Minister in granting a water extraction
interpretation of the term “water resource management” determined by
the primary judge has the benefit of simplicity
in accordance with the terms and
structure of the Act. It leaves with the Minister the ultimate decision whether
to grant a particular
water extraction licence, taking into account the factors
of the Act and giving each factor such weight as the
Minister thinks fit. The Minister is answerable to the legislature and to the
people of the Territory for his or her decisions.
[136] Contrary
to the submission made by MAC, the interpretation determined by the primary
judge would not render irrelevant the terms
of a water allocation plan in the
Controller or Minister making a water extraction licence decision. The terms of
a water allocation
plan will usually provide important information to the
decision maker, but it simply does not dictate the outcome of a water extraction
licence decision.
[137] For these
reasons we would have dismissed MAC’s appeal on Issue 2 if it had been
permitted to argue it. In these circumstances
it is unnecessary to determine
Ground 4 in the Minister’s Notice of Contention.
the impermissible use of conditions (Appeal Grounds 5, 6, and 7)
[138] This Issue
concerns the conditions precedent imposed on the Licence by the Minister. As
previously noted, the Controller imposed
eight conditions precedent on
Fortune’s entitlement to take water under the Original Licence. On review,
the Minister granted
the Licence on the same terms as the Original Licence but
with an additional two conditions precedent, and with some consequential
amendments made to the conditions in the Original Licence. The Licence was also
subject to Staging Conditions (SC).
submitted that the conditions precedent relevantly fall into three groups:
a) Conditions about an adaptive management plan and monitoring program (CP7
b) Conditions about assessing the water resource (CP9).
c) Conditions about Aboriginal cultural values (CP5 & CP10).
accepted that the Act permitted the Controller, and the Minister on review, to
impose conditions on a licence.
MAC submitted, however, that the power to impose conditions was limited as
a) The condition must be related to the purpose for which the
function of the Minister is being
b) A purported decision to grant a licence will not be a decision if a condition
imposed has the effect of significantly altering
the proposal in respect of
which the application was
c) A purported decision to grant a licence will not be a decision if fulfilment
of the condition significantly alters the proposal
in respect of which the
application was made.
d) A purported decision to grant a licence will not be a decision if the effect
of an imposed condition is to leave open the possibility
that the proposal, as
carried out in accordance with the decision and the condition, will be
significantly different from the proposal
that was originally made. Put another
way, where a purported decision leaves for later determination an important
aspect of the proposal
and the determination of that aspect could alter the
proposal in a fundamental respect, that decision cannot be seen as final and
not a decision on the
e) Where the criteria for future assessment are imprecise or unspecified, there
may be an effective, but impermissible, delegation
submitted that the Minister failed to observe these limits in respect of each of
the categories of CP identified by it.
CP7, CP8 and CP9
primary judge summarised the effect of these conditions as
[79] Condition
CP 7 required Fortune to develop and submit for approval by the Controller an
adaptive management plan which had to
include “clear and measurable
objectives” which, inter alia, would achieve or reduce the predicted
impact on groundwater
levels determined under condition CP 5, and which would
also protect 70% or more of the groundwater dependent ecosystems in each
two major landform classes. Fortune was required to prepare the adaptive
management plan in consultation with the Department.
Condition CP 7 was very
detailed in terms of the matters to be dealt with in the proposed adaptive
management plan, and required
that the plan include “quantitative triggers
and limits which can be used to initiate adaptive management actions”
for example, groundwater level response to water taken under the Licence
deviated from the predictions mapped in accordance with
condition CP 5 and/or if
impact on the health of groundwater dependent ecosystems was measured or
predicted to exceed 30% of the
extent of groundwater dependent ecosystems in
each of the two major landform classes as determined under CP 5.
[80] Condition CP 8 required Fortune to develop and submit for approval by
the Controller a monitoring program to assess the impact
of water taken under
the Licence on groundwater levels, on the health of groundwater dependent
ecosystems mapped in accordance with
CP 5, and on other uses of the water
resource. The requirements for the monitoring program were set out in
[82] Condition CP 9 required Fortune to develop and submit for approval by
the Controller a program to assess the water resource
under which, amongst other
things, aquifers were required to be identified, the interconnectivity between
aquifers determined, and
aquifer yields quantified by pumping tests of at least
48 hours of constant discharge with a recovery period of 24 hours or 95%
to initial groundwater levels. The program was required to be
implemented following the Controller’s approval.
(citations omitted)
[143] Regarding
the conditions concerning an adaptive management plan, MAC submitted that CP7
and CP8 provide that Fortune must develop
and submit for approval by the
Controller an adaptive management and monitoring plan prior to the extraction of
any water. Before
referring to MAC’s submissions further, we will touch on
the relevant portions of the Minister’s written decision to
Licence which effectively sets out the Minister’s reasons.
Minister referred to the decision made by the Controller to issue the Original
Licence, and said:
In making her decision the Controller granted the
Licence based on water being available under the Plan; the risk to Groundwater
Ecosystems (GDEs) being within thresholds outlined in the Guideline
which was the most recent scientific knowledge provided to the
Controller and
meet the objectives of the Plan to avoid as far as possible detrimental impacts
to GDEs as a consequence of the proposed
water extraction.
The Controller recognised there were a number of uncertainties associated
with the location and types of GDEs and uncertainties relating
to salinity and
groundwater quality and conditioned the licence to include conditions precedent
requiring the Licence Holder to undertake
GDE mapping and an assessment of
potential salinity impacts of the water taken under the Licence and development
of an adaptive management
plan and monitoring program, which are to be approved
by the Controller. The conditions precedent also require the Licence Holder
obtain approval (or advice from the relevant authority that an approval is not
required) for land clearing; non pastoral use; and
environment protection
approval under the EP Act.
In addition to establishing conditions precedent to the Licence Holder being
able to drawdown any of its entitlement under the Licence,
the Controller
established staging conditions limiting the volume of water that could be taken
in any period to allow for the impacts
of the water taken in the previous
stage/s to be monitored in accordance with the approved monitoring program, to
determine that
the extraction is behaving as predicted and is managed within the
defined thresholds that meet the environmental and cultural objectives
in an approved adaptive management plan.
The staged release of water occurs over 2 yearly intervals over the first 6
years and the Licence Holder must have the approval of
the Controller to proceed
from one stage to the next which will require the Controller being comfortable
that the impacts of the
previous level of extraction are as predicted, or
appropriate responses have been undertaken under an adaptive management
[145] Later in
her reasons, the Minister said:
I have determined to accept the
conclusions of the Review Panel for the reasons it has given on each of the
issues raised by the Reviewing
Persons with the exception of the Review
Panel’s recommendation of an amendment to staging of the licence.
I have determined to adopt the Review Panel’s recommendation to
substitute the decision of the Controller. The licence which
I propose to grant
with additional and amended conditions in my opinion appropriately gives effect
to the Review Panel’s recommendations
with the exception of the amendment
to staging.
I am satisfied that that (sic) the conditions precedent and other conditions
on this licence taken as a whole, including those that
are additional and the
amendments, address the risks, potential impacts, and uncertainty associated
with the proposed extraction
of water. In particular this course allows the
Licence Holder to continue to undertake the works, investigations and other
required to meet the conditions precedent. They will provide
additional information and will inform the development of appropriate
That will not only provide greater certainty but allow the Licence Holder, if
the conditions are satisfied, to ultimately
be able to extract water for
productive activities in the future.
By granting the licence with additional conditions, I accept the view of the
Review Panel for the reasons it has given that further
assessment of the water
resources on Single Station (sic) is required and have established a new
condition precedent CP9 which requires
the Licence Holder to develop and submit
for approval by the Controller a program to assess the water resource on the
is to incorporate a drilling program, including both production and
monitoring bores; verification of the stratigraphy of the subsurface
Land; identify the aquifers; verify their properties and quantify their yields;
and determine
interconnectivity.
[146] In its
submissions on this appeal, MAC contended that CP7 and CP8 were imposed in
circumstances where there had not been any
sufficient assessment of the water
resource throughout the district to adequately inform the Department’s
groundwater model
when considering an unprecedentedly large volume of proposed
extraction. The Review Panel addressed the “merits of adaptive
management” in the following way:
...The challenge here is
that the adaptive management plan will rely on information that will only become
available once extraction
commences, and so it follows that
the volume of
water available for extraction, and the period of the entitlement, should be
commensurate with those risks and uncertainties
around aquifer response and GDE
impact that are regulated through the adaptive management framework
the Panel’s view that these risks and uncertainties need to be better
defined before there can be confidence in the
decision to provide the volumes of
water that the Licence makes available to the proponent.
The Panel’s
view is that the monitoring plan and adaptive management plan could be informed
through an environmental assessment
process as anticipated under the
Environment Protection Act 2019
(Bold emphasis as per original)
[147] Later, the
Review Panel
Panel’s opinion is that in order to better manage the risk and uncertainty
associated with the project,
entitlements beyond Stage 1 should be withheld
until sufficient data has been gathered and analysed to enable more confidence
understanding of long-term aquifer behaviour and GDE response
(Bold emphasis as per original)
submitted that by saying there needs to be a better definition of the risks and
uncertainties before there can be confidence
in the decision to provide the
volumes of water that the Licence makes available to Fortune, the Review Panel
was expressly saying
that it did not have the necessary confidence for the
granting of a right to take the volumes of water permitted beyond Stage 1.
submitted that the Minister accepted the Review Panel’s conclusions and
reasons on this point. In this way, MAC submitted,
the Minister did not make a
decision attended with sufficient certainty beyond Stage 1. MAC submitted that
the Minister was unable
to consider the matters relevant to the decision and
required by
of the Act, in particular, those factors found in
s 90(1)(ab)
, (b), (c), (e), (g), (h), and (k).
[149] We now
turn to CP9 concerning the obligation of Fortune to “develop and submit
for approval by the Controller a program
to assess the Water Resource on the
Land”. In addition to the uncertainties identified by the Review Panel as
set out above,
the Review Panel also accepted, MAC submitted, that there were
uncertainties surrounding the water resource itself. The Review Panel
that the groundwater model utilised in the WDWAP represented the “best
available science at the time of the declaration
of the WAP”.
[150] Underlying
the Controller’s decision was a technical report. The Review Panel adopted
several recommendations made in
the technical report including the need for
ongoing monitoring and testing to determine the effect on the environment,
the aquifer, resulting from Fortune’s water extraction, and to
enable the evaluation of modelled data against observed data.
The Review Panel
Panel’s opinion, the following is also necessary to reduce model
uncertainty
prior to the extraction of water
for horticulture under this
assessment of the water resource on Singleton Station, including hydrogeological
investigations at a local level, with
a program of drilling and aquifer testing
to obtain specific data on aquifer properties.
(Bold emphasis as
per original)
[151] The Review
Panel also acknowledged uncertainty and risk surrounding the estimated
sustainable yield prescribed in the WDWAP.
The term “estimated sustainable
yield” is not defined in the Act, nor does the Act prescribe the manner in
which it is
to be calculated. Section 22B(5)(a) of the Act provides that water
allocation plans for a water control district are to ensure that
allocated within the estimated sustainable yield to beneficial uses. It is
inherent in the term itself that the sustainable
yield cannot be the subject of
exact determination: it must be estimated. In its report, the Review Panel
Panel’s view it is prudent for the Controller to consider uncertainty and
risk in relation to the ESY [estimated sustainable
yield] when making a licence
decision and this may result in a precautionary approach, for example through
conditioning and/or staging
licence entitlements. The WAP identifies that there
are high to extreme risk ratings in relation to the determination of the ESY
its potential downwards revision.
In the Panel’s opinion the staging of
a large-scale water extraction licence should align with management strategies
and activities
that aim to reduce that risk.
(Bold emphasis as per original)
submitted that this confirms that the Review Panel, and the Minister, clearly
considered there was not sufficient data about
the water resource to support the
licence decision beyond Stage 1.
submitted that to purport to issue the Licence for a period extending beyond
Stage 1, in the face of this uncertainty, was
not a valid exercise of the
licensing power. The information available to the Minister, MAC contended, could
not support a finding
that she had taken into account the relevant factors in
of the Act. Granting the Licence in the terms in which it was granted
deferred approval for the extraction of water until critical
matters required to
be factored in could be determined and, as such, failed to take those
considerations into account when granting
the Licence.
critically, MAC submitted, the core of what was required to be determined by the
Minister on review was deferred for further
assessment and approval by the
Controller, because the availability of water in the area had not been
sufficiently determined. This
was an impermissible delegation to the Controller
to undertake the review statutorily given to the Minister. A failure by the
on review to determine the basic issue of the availability of water in
the area provided no basis upon which she could make the assessments
required of
of the Act.
primary judge rejected MAC’s submissions that the Minister’s
decision was “[not] attended with sufficient
certainty beyond stage
1” because the Minister was not able to consider the matters relevant to
the decision required by
of the Act. The primary judge
not accept the submission that the Minister did not make a decision about water
entitlements with sufficient certainty
beyond the first stage. The general
requirements of the staging conditions are explained in [72] above. In my
opinion, the staging
conditions are precise and certain. Any uncertainty is in
relation to whether the staging conditions can be satisfied but, although
is a possible problem for Fortune, it does not invalidate the Minister’s
[170] the Minister either had the power to deal with Fortune’s
application by imposing conditions precedent, or she did not....
I consider that
the Minister had the power and that her utilisation of conditions precedent was
lawful. That is not to deny that,
after taking into account the matters which
the Minister was required to take into account, she might not have refused the
or deferred the decision to grant the licence and required that
specified matters be further investigated, so that there would be
no or fewer
remaining doubts or uncertainties before granting the licence. However, that was
not the way in which the Minister chose
to proceed and...the power in
Water Act 1992
is wide enough to encompass the imposition of conditions
precedent before extraction entitlements come into effect. Any remaining
arguments to the effect that the conditions precedent were inadequate, or that
the Minister did not give sufficient weight to certain
matters, are arguments in
relation to the merits of the Minister’s decision, not the lawfulness of
the decision.
[156] Regarding
MAC’s submission that the decision of the Minister to grant the Licence
was an impermissible delegation to the
Controller to undertake the review, the
primary judge
[172] In my
opinion, there was no impermissible delegation of authority. The Controller of
Water Resources was a person appointed
Water Act 1992
The Controller had a statutory duty pursuant to
of the Act to ensure
as far as possible that a continuous program for the assessment of water
resources within the Northern Territory
was carried out, including the
investigation, collection, collation and analysis of data in relation to,
amongst other things, the
use of water resources. The Controller also had an
independent statutory power to amend or modify the terms and conditions of any
licence pursuant to
of the Act. The power could not be exercised in a
way that would result in an increase in the total quantity of water permitted to
be taken under a licence. Further, if the Controller was satisfied that a
licence holder had contravened or failed to comply with
a term or condition of a
licence, the Controller could revoke or suspend the licence. In making any such
decision, the Controller
was required to have regard to the
factors... If it is accepted that the Minister’s utilisation of conditions
precedent (and staging conditions) was legitimate,
it was appropriate and
arguably desirable for the Controller to be nominated as the relevant officer to
receive, consider and approve
(as the case may be) the reports, maps, plans,
programs and assessments required by the Minister’s reasons, to ensure
the conditions precedent and staging conditions were satisfied.
(Citations omitted)
[157] Fortune
submitted that the primary judge had not committed any of the errors alleged by
MAC. Fortune submitted that the primary
judge correctly addressed the lawful
exercise of the power granted by
of the Act to attach conditions to
the Licence. Fortune submitted that the authorities cited by MAC (see footnotes
35 to 39 above)
are not relevant to the circumstances of the present case.
Fortune submitted that the cases cited by MAC were planning cases and
need for finality and certainty in planning consents and approvals apply in a
different statutory context. The power vested
in the Controller, and the
Minister on review, to impose conditions by the Act is, Fortune submitted, a
wide one. The primary judge
correctly found that the validity of a condition is
determined by deciding whether the condition is authorised by the Act.
[158] A central
complaint by MAC was that the Minister’s decision was not attended with
sufficient certainty beyond Stage 1.
Fortune submitted that there is no
principle in the general law that uncertainty on the exercise of administrative
power necessarily
invalidity.
As Fortune expressed
it, the question is whether a purpose can be discerned in the provisions by
which the administrative power is
created to condition the valid exercise of the
administrative power on the achievement of a particular degree of
[159] Fortune
referred to the comments of Besanko J in
Buzzacott v Minister for Sustainability,
Environment, Water, Population and Communities (No
where his Honour said,
at [43], the “extent or degree of certainty required in conditions for a
lawful exercise of power depends
very much on the statutory context”.
Fortune submitted that a degree of ambiguity or vagueness does not necessarily
with impermissible
uncertainty.
submissions in reply, MAC accepted that the key question for the purposes of the
present Issue is one of statutory construction:
given that substantial
uncertainty about the factual conclusion of the availability of water in the
area in question, was it even
possible for the Minister to carry out her
statutory task? MAC submitted that the Minister’s task is to make a
decision about
the long-term taking of water which means that there must be
water to be taken for the term of the licence. MAC submitted that the
cannot fulfil the statutory task of taking into account “the availability
of water” in granting a licence to
take water in circumstances where she
cannot have confidence there is water to take.
contended that conditions cannot be used to supplant or replace, or defer or
delegate, the Minister’s statutory task.
In truth, MAC submitted the CP
were an admission by the Minister that she did not have adequate material to
properly consider the
availability of water in the area and it was a matter that
required further information and then further
consideration.
Consideration- CP7, CP8, and CP9
[162] It is
obvious that any decision regarding the grant of a licence to take groundwater
is bounded by uncertainty. It can never
be known with absolute certainty what
volume of water is contained in an underground aquifer. Other areas of
uncertainty may include
the rate at which such a resource may replenish if water
is taken from the aquifer. To the extent that replenishment of the aquifer
depends on rainfall, there may be uncertainty about the frequency and level of
rainfall which may actually occur in the catchment
area in any particular year
or period of years. There may be uncertainty about the effect that the taking of
water, or a particular
volume of water, from an aquifer may have on the ongoing
quality of the groundwater. Undoubtedly, many more uncertainties may be
identified.
subject matter of those provisions of the Act dealing with the taking of
groundwater is inherently concerned with the use
of an uncertain resource.
Despite this uncertainty, the legislature has provided for the commercial use of
this resource and, potentially,
for its use over long periods of time. Is it to
be supposed that the legislature intended that in making a decision to grant a
to take groundwater over a period of, say, 10 years, the Controller, or
the Minister on review, must always be satisfied that there
is, and will be,
sufficient water in the aquifer throughout that period to provide a certain
level of access to water to a licence
holder and for all beneficial uses of the
[164] In our
opinion, that is not the intention of the legislature as found in the Act. The
legislative intention found in the Act
is to provide for ongoing, sustainable
use of the resource. To that end, the Act requires the Controller to ensure, as
far as possible,
that a continuous program for the assessment of water resources
of the Territory is carried out.
The Controller also has the power to, amongst other things, shut off the supply
of groundwater from a bore where the Controller is
satisfied that an act or
omission by a person in relation to a bore may result, directly or indirectly,
in wastage or undue depletion
In addition, the
Controller may, during the currency of the licence by notice, amend or modify
its terms and conditions in such a
manner as is specified in the notice subject
to the amendment not resulting in an increase in the total quantity of water
to be taken.
Minister also has power, in times of actual or likely shortage of water, to
regulate, restrict or prohibit the doing of an act
These provisions
demonstrate a legislative intention that there should be an ongoing monitoring
and assessment of the use of groundwater
resources. The provisions of the Act
are inconsistent with a legislative intention that certainty exist as to the
availability of
water for the period of any proposed licence at the time of
making a water extraction decision.
[165] In some
areas of endeavour overseen by government, a high degree of certainty in
imposing and policing licencing conditions
may not only be possible but also
required. Building licencing cases such as
and the cases cited
therein are an example. Those likely to be affected by the construction of a
building have a right to know what
is proposed to be constructed and, if
appropriate, to object to aspects of the proposed design or construction of the
building. Because
the design and construction methods are ascertainable with a
high degree of certainty by means of approved plans, certainty in the
any conditions attached to the planning/construction approval is not only
feasible but also necessary to permit those with
a sufficient legal interest to
exercise their rights of objection.
factors set out in
of the Act are matters which the Controller, and
the Minister on review, must take into account at the time that a licence is
The duration of the licence and uncertainties regarding possible
changes in circumstances over the life of the licence are factors
Controller or Minister are entitled to take into account pursuant to
in determining whether to grant a licence and, if so, on what
conditions. That is what occurred in the present case. The imposition
conditions precedent and staging conditions was not a deferral of consideration
of those matters, but the imposition of conditions
designed to achieve the
legislative intent of balancing use and protection of the resource.
[167] CP7, CP8,
and CP9 are directed towards managing the inherent uncertainties in granting the
Licence. The requirements of those
conditions are sufficiently certain to enable
Fortune and the Controller to know what must be done to demonstrate the
viability of
the water resource so as to justify movement into Stage 1 of the
project. Similarly, the staging conditions are such as to permit
both Fortune
and the Controller to know what is required to move between later stages.
submission by MAC that the imposition of the CP was an admission by the Minister
that she did not have adequate material
to properly consider availability of
water in the area of the project should be rejected. It is clear from the
reasons of both the
Review Panel and the Minister that the availability of water
of the volume which Fortune could potentially take under the Licence
prominent consideration. The approach taken by the Minister was a cautious one
consistent with a proper acknowledgment of the
uncertainties surrounding the
resource going forward. That caution should not be mistaken for an admission
that the Minister proceeded
without the information necessary to grant the
[169] Far from
demonstrating error on the part of the Minister, the imposition of the
conditions precedent and staging conditions
on the Licence demonstrates
compliance by the Minister with the legislative intention of balancing of
commercial use and protection
of the resource. The cautious approach
demonstrated by the Minister, in which the burden of any risk that the project
cannot proceed
as planned due to lack of water falls exclusively on Fortune, is
consistent with the requirements of the Act.
[170] Satisfaction
of the conditions precedent by Fortune before it moves to Stage 1 cannot
leave open the possibility that the proposal
as carried out will be
significantly different to the approved proposal. The only way in which the
imposition of the condition’s
precedent could change the approved proposal
is if Fortune does not satisfy the conditions, at which point the only change
that Fortune will not be able to take water at all.
[171] Similarly,
satisfaction by Fortune of the various staging conditions cannot leave open the
possibility that the development
as carried out will be significantly different
to that which was approved. If Fortune does not satisfy the staging conditions,
result will be a restriction in the volume of water that Fortune is entitled
to take under the Licence.
[172] Once it is
accepted that the Minister, on review of the Controller’s decision, was
entitled to impose conditions on any
grant of a licence, it is obvious that
there would be a need to monitor or confirm compliance by Fortune with the
condition or conditions
imposed. The obvious person to perform that task is the
Controller because:
a) it is consistent with the role assigned to the Controller by the Act; and
b) in making the review decision, the Minister was standing in the shoes of the
Controller and exercising the powers of the Controller.
[173] Where a
condition precedent or staging condition requires that the Controller approve
action taken by Fortune in satisfaction
of the condition, this does not involve
a delegation of decision making power. The power being exercised by the Minister
is the same as, or at least co-extensive with, the power of the
Controller. In addition, the satisfaction of the conditions precedent
conditions is dependent on the existence of circumstances which are readily
ascertained and verifiable. There is nothing
in the decision in
suggest that what has occurred in granting the present Licence was an
impermissible delegation of power.
[174] For these
reasons Grounds of Appeal 5, 6 and 7 fail.
Issue 4- Failure to
consider Aboriginal cultural values (Grounds of Appeal 8 and 9)
[175] There are
similarities between the legal issues raised regarding these Grounds of Appeal
and those raised regarding Grounds
5, 6 and 7.
background to these Grounds, the Review Panel identified protection of
Aboriginal cultural values associated with water as
one of the objects of the
WDWAP. The WDWAP identified a range of steps to be taken in order to achieve
that objective. The Review
clear to the Panel which if any of those activities identified have been
progressed and were therefore available to the
proponents in making their
licence application, or the Controller in making her decision.
[177] After
referring to the material before it, including a report from an anthropologist
engaged by the CLC, the Review Panel
The Panel is
not able to form a view on the significance of the information presented in that
is of the opinion that a comprehensive cultural impact assessment
is required prior to the extraction of any significant volumes of
Singleton Station
(Bold emphasis as per original)
[178] The Panel
expressed concerns regarding the impact that any inadequate protection of GDEs
would have on water dependent cultural
values as an objective of the WDWAP.
[179] Having
accepted the recommendations of the Review Panel, the Minister imposed
conditions precedent requiring Fortune to prepare
a groundwater dependent
Aboriginal cultural values impact assessment (CP10) and also to prepare mapping
and modelling of the predicted
impact of the predicted groundwater levels on
Aboriginal cultural values that were to be identified in that Aboriginal
Cultural values
impact assessment (CP5).
MAC’s submissions
submitted that the terms of CP10 and CP5
require Fortune to develop
and submit to the Controller a groundwater dependent Aboriginal cultural values
impact assessment. They
require only “rudimentary steps”, such as
the identification, mapping and documentation of cultural values which would
impacted by the extraction of water under the Licence.
submitted that the Minister decided to grant the Licence notwithstanding her
adoption of the Review Panel’s opinion
that it could not form a view on
cultural values in the absence of a comprehensive assessment to identify the
impact the Licence
would have on Aboriginal cultural values. MAC submitted that
this was legally wrong for the following reasons.
[182] First,
without a groundwater dependent Aboriginal cultural values impact assessment
having been completed, there is a real possibility
that the “Licence
proposal (as ultimately allowed)” will be different from that set out in
Fortune’s application.
[183] Second,
the Minister failed to take into account a relevant consideration in making her
(1)(k) required the Minister to take into account
other factors that she considered should be taken into account in determining
to grant the Licence. Aboriginal cultural values were identified by the
Review Panel, and accepted by the Minister, as relevant to
the decision to grant
the Licence. Once identified as relevant, the Minister was obliged to take
Aboriginal cultural values into
submitted that in order for Aboriginal cultural values to be taken into account,
they first had to be identified. The Minister
did not have before her, at the
time she granted the licence, a clear articulation of the relevant values or how
the grant of the
Licence was expected to impact them. The imposition of CP10 and
CP5 did not demonstrate that the Minister took Aboriginal cultural
values into
account, it merely demonstrated that those values, and any adverse effects the
grant of the Licence may have on them,
were unknown to the Minister, and were
acknowledged by her to be unknown.
primary judge did not accept MAC’s submission that in the absence of the
Aboriginal cultural values impact assessment
being undertaken there is a real
possibility that the Licence proposal will be different from that set out in
Fortune’s application.
primary judge also did not accept the submission that in the absence of a clear
articulation of Aboriginal cultural values,
the Minister failed to take into
account a relevant consideration. The primary judge said, at
[176]-[177]:
do not accept MAC’s further contention. There was no express statutory
requirement for the Minister to have before her
“a clear articulation of
the relevant Aboriginal cultural values”. I do not agree that such a
requirement can be inferred
from the subject matter, scope and purpose of the
legislation, as MAC contends. The fact that relevant Aboriginal cultural values
may be taken into account pursuant to
does not elevate that discretionary consideration to a
mandatory relevant consideration. In any event, it is clear that the Minister
did consider the WDWAP and Aboriginal cultural values from the fact that the
Minister added condition CP 10.
[177] In my judgment, the requirement for the preparation and submission to
the Controller of a ‘groundwater dependent Aboriginal
cultural values
impact assessment’ did not constitute an impermissible deferral. Moreover,
the requirement was consistent with
the report of the Review Panel which had
recommended the cultural impact assessment prior to the extraction of any
significant volumes
of water. MAC has not established that the condition
precedent was other than a valid exercise of power under
of the Act.
The Minister’s submissions
[187] In the
present appeal, the Minister submitted that at the heart of the
appellant’s complaint regarding this Issue is a
contention that certain
matters identified in the conditions precedent must be known with specificity
prior to the grant of the Licence.
This submission applies not only to
MAC’s contentions on Issue 4, but also to those regarding Issue 3. This
was rejected by
the primary judge.
submissions
[188] In its
submissions, Fortune submitted that it was open to the primary judge to reject
MAC’s proposition that in the absence
of an assessment of Aboriginal
cultural values there is a real possibility that the “Licence proposal (as
ultimately allowed)”
will be different from that set out in
Fortune’s application.
[189] Regarding
MAC’s second submission, Fortune submitted that the primary judge was
correct in finding that while
provided that unspecified factors,
such as Aboriginal cultural values, could be taken into account, that did not
elevate a discretionary
consideration to a mandatory relevant consideration. It
followed from that proposition, Fortune said, that there was no requirement
the Minister to have before her information that permitted the level of
satisfaction regarding Aboriginal cultural values now
suggested by MAC.
[190] To the
extent that MAC’s contentions may raise an allegation of impermissible
deferral of Aboriginal cultural values as
a relevant consideration to the grant
of the Licence, Fortune submitted that the approach taken by the Minister was
consistent with
the view expressed by the Review Panel that the assessment be
undertaken prior to the extraction of any significant volumes of water.
not constitute an impermissible deferral and the power to impose such a
condition is expressly provided for by the Act.
Consideration -
CP10 and CP5
[191] It may be
argued that there is a qualitative difference between the subject matter of CP7,
CP8 and CP9 and that of CP10 and
CP5. A greater level of certainty may be
expected regarding identification of Aboriginal cultural values relevant to the
the Licence than would be expected with regard to the ongoing
availability of sufficient water, or water of sufficient quality, to
Fortune’s entitlement under the Licence. It may be expected that
Aboriginal cultural values may be ascertained with some
certainty by an
appropriate assessment and are unlikely to change significantly over the period
of the Licence. But this of itself
is not determinative of this Issue.
identified by Fortune, the question which needs to be answered is whether the
Minister was obliged to have before her at
the time she made her determination
to grant the Licence sufficient material to enable her to conclude what
Aboriginal cultural values
were relevant, and how they may be affected by the
grant of the Licence. In our opinion, the Minister was not obliged to have
her that material or to have reached that conclusion.
Minister was obliged by
to take into account in determining
whether to grant the Licence, and if so on what terms, any matter that she
considered to be relevant.
How she was to take such a matter into account, and
what weight she may be prepared to give it, was a matter for the Minister. In
our opinion, the primary judge was clearly correct in determining that the
Minister’s decision to require the preparation of
an assessment of
Aboriginal cultural values demonstrates that the Minister turned her mind to the
matter and addressed it by requiring
an assessment be undertaken by Fortune
before any significant water could be extracted under the Licence.
[194] In neither
the proceedings before the primary judge nor the present appeal did MAC
articulate how there was real potential for
Fortune’s proposed development
to change substantively after an assessment is undertaken. Like the primary
judge, we do not
consider this to be a realistic possibility.
legislative requirement that something must be taken into account in making a
decision is not the same as a requirement that
the decision maker must have a
particular level of information available so as to be able to achieve a
particular level of satisfaction
regarding the thing.
[196] The upper
limits of water that may be extracted by Fortune at the various Stages of the
proposal are fixed by the Licence. The
completion of an assessment of Aboriginal
cultural values will not change that fact. In our opinion, the only effect that
the assessment
is reasonably likely to have on the extraction of water under the
Licence is in reducing the amount of water which may be extracted
amendment of the Licence or in determining the placement of bore sites on the
property. For the reasons given earlier, these
are matters which are properly to
be considered by the Controller as part of the adaptive management of the
[197] These
grounds of appeal fail.
Issue 5: procedural fairness (Grounds of
Appeal 10, 11 and 12)
[198] Ground of
Appeal 10 is directed towards whether MAC was afforded procedural fairness
regarding the appropriate requirements
for an Aboriginal cultural values
assessment. Ground of Appeal 11 is expressed in the alternative to Ground of
Appeal 10 and alleges
that the primary judge failed to give reasons to support a
finding that the Minister afforded procedural fairness to MAC regarding
requirements of an Aboriginal cultural values impact assessment.
[199] We will
briefly refer to the history of the decision to include conditions requiring a
cultural values assessment in the Licence.
In its report, the Review Panel
stated that “a comprehensive cultural impact assessment is required prior
to the extraction
of any significant volumes of water on Singleton
Station”. On 2 November 2021, a senior public servant responsible for
coordinating
material to be provided to the Minister for the purpose of making
the Review decision sent an email to the Chair of the Review Panel
In preparing advice for the Minister it would be of
assistance if you could please articulate and provide clarification and further
information regarding what the Review Panel meant by requiring a cultural values
impact assessment to be undertaken as a new condition
precedent. In providing
this additional information it would also assist me to know what the Review
Panel considered should be included
in this assessment; and confirm whose
responsibility it is to undertake this
assessment.
[200] The Chair
of the Review Panel responded on 3 November 2021, stating:
issue here, in the Panel’s opinion, is that there is little in the
Decision, or licence, that specifically addresses
one of the key objectives of
the Water Allocation Plan, i.e. “to protect Aboriginal cultural values
associated with water”.
The implementation activities related to cultural values... were intended to
map and document the water dependent cultural values
of the region, and would
have enabled the development of a set of cultural reference points to be used by
the proponent in their
modelling of impacts and reflected in the adaptive
management framework.
In lieu of this work having been done, the Panel’s view is that it is
now either up to the Department (in partnership with the
CLC) to commit to
undertake the necessary surveys and consultation/assessment described in the
WAP, prior to significant groundwater
extraction, or it is up to the proponent
to facilitate that work. That work, which we have described as a cultural values
assessment, needs to be undertaken as a pre-condition as it will provide
the information that is required (but is not yet available)
to inform our
amended CP5.
The Panel is not equipped to fully define the terms of reference for a
cultural values impact assessment but considers that these
are some of the key
components and work that needs to be done in order to meet the objectives of the
WAP. Appropriate consultation
is required and the Panel acknowledges that this
may be a challenging process for the (sic) either the Department or the
[201] On 10
November 2021, an officer of the Department of Environment, Parks and Water
Security wrote to Fortune advising that the
Review Panel had submitted its
report to the Minister. The letter advised Fortune that as part of the review
process consideration
“has been given to the addition of an amended
Licence condition which may adversely impact
Relevantly for
present purposes, the letter set out the terms of proposed CP10 and the proposal
that SC 1 be amended to extend the
period of Stage 1 to 5 years rather than
the period of 2 years determined by the Controller. The letter invited Fortune
a response to those proposals.
[202] By letter
dated 12 November 2021, Fortune replied. The relevant portion of that letter
regarding proposed CP10 is as follows:
CP 10. Groundwater
Dependent Aboriginal Cultural Values
Fortune Agribusiness recognises the importance of this issue and will work
with the Government and relevant stakeholders to deliver
the required
assessment.
We accept the new CP 10 as written in your
[203] The letter
also set out Fortune’s opposition to any amendment of SC 1 to vary Stage 1
from 2 years to 5 years, in part
because of the asserted impact such a change
would have on “the business plan for the project”. The letter went
It will clearly take us some time to revamp our farm
development plan to accommodate this change. In providing an immediate response
to this proposed change we are therefore relying on our judgements of the
practical and financial impacts rather than detailed planning
and modelling. It
is our judgement that extending the Stage 1 development period from 2 years to 3
years or, with reservations, 4
years could possibly be accommodated, albeit with
consequences as outlined above.
Extending the Stage 1 term to 5 years effectively converts the project into
two largely separate projects, with the viability of the
Project” in serious question. This proposed change to the SC 1 will almost
certainly increase the risks and
uncertainties and likely make raising capital
for the Singleton Horticulture Project more difficult.
Minister decided to amend SC 1 to extend the Stage 1 term from 2 years to 3
years. We have set out the correspondence regarding
the proposed amendment to SC
1 because it is important in understanding certain submissions made by MAC to
the primary judge, to
which we will refer later in these reasons.
[205] Neither
MAC nor any other party who made submissions to the Review Panel were provided
with the same opportunity to comment
on proposed CP10 or the amendment to SC
MAC’s submissions
submitted, both before the primary judge and in the present appeal, that the
requirements of a cultural values impact assessment
was a matter directly
impacting upon its rights as the registered native title body corporate for the
native title holders of the
area of land that includes Singleton Station. By
“requirements”, we understand MAC to refer to what the assessment
entail and who would conduct the assessment.
[207] Before the
primary judge, MAC submitted that there was a failure to provide procedural
fairness because the Minister did not
give it an opportunity to be heard
“in relation to information considered by the Review Panel and the
subsequent clarification
of the requirements of a cultural values impact
assessment”. This submission, MAC submitted, was acknowledged by the
judge in his Honour’s written decision, but was not fully
addressed. MAC submitted that on the face of the published reasons,
the primary
judge failed to consider whether the Minister afforded procedural fairness to
MAC concerning the requirements of a cultural
values impact assessment.
[208] In the
alternative, in Ground of Appeal 11, MAC submitted that, consistent with the
above, the primary judge failed to give
reasons to support the finding that the
Minister afforded procedural fairness to MAC.
[209] Ground of
Appeal 12 alleges that the primary judge erred in finding that the obligation to
afford procedural fairness to MAC
was satisfied in the Review process before the
Minister made the decision to grant the Licence.
regard to Grounds of Appeal 10, 11 and 12 generally, in its submissions in reply
in the present appeal, MAC said:
... Between MAC’s opportunity
to make submissions to the Review Panel and the Minister’s decision, she
came up with an
entirely new (and MAC says legally invalid) approach of using
conditions precedent to address, amongst other things, the cultural
persons represented by MAC. The Minister recognised that something had changed:
she had correspondence with the Review
Panel about their recommendation, that
was not disclosed to MAC. Further, the Minister recognised enough had changed
that she was
required to consult
with Fortune
concerning the cultural values of persons represented by MAC. But she did not
consult with MAC. To this
point, MAC understood the Minister herself was going
to take into account Aboriginal cultural values. Instead, she was proposing
give that task to Fortune and was not proposing to give MAC any say in how it
might be conducted or what might be done with the
assessment, notwithstanding
the evidence before her showed that at least some matters involved sacred sites
and sensitive values.
(Italicised as per original)
[211] It is
appropriate at this point to consider how this Issue was presented to the
primary judge and how it was dealt with by his
Honour, before addressing how the
matter was pursued in this appeal. At first instance, MAC pleaded that the
Minister failed to afford
it procedural fairness by failing to provide it with
all of the material relied upon by the Minister and, in particular, the
groundwater
model provided to the Minister. The particulars pleaded by MAC
The Minister relied upon material not available to [MAC],
particularly “the information considered by the Review Panel, and
subsequent clarification of the requirements of a cultural values impact
assessment”; and “the response by the Licence
Holder to the Notice
of consideration of amended conditions associated with [the
Licence]’’.
Further, [MAC] requested all of the digital files comprising the groundwater
model so it could analyse that model and undertake spatial
uncertainty analysis of the model. [MAC] was denied the opportunity to undertake
this analysis and present the results
to either the Panel or the Minister.
Had the groundwater model been given to [MAC], it would have presented a
report to the Controller, and the Panel, and the Minister
predictive uncertainty of the model and that report would have been directly
relevant to CPs 5 to 10.
Had the “subsequent clarification of the requirements of a cultural
values impact assessment” being given to [MAC], it
would have made
submissions to the Minister about appropriate licence conditions for the process
for, and terms of reference of,
the assessment.
Had the “response by the Licence Holder to the Notice of consideration
of amended conditions” being given to [MAC], it
would have made
submissions to the Minister about the scientific basis for the period of stage
[212] The basis
of MAC’s complaint before the primary judge was neatly summarised in its
written submissions in reply dated
26 August 2022:
identified three specific kinds of material in respect of which it was denied
procedural fairness: (a) the undisclosed files
comprising the groundwater model;
(b) undisclosed material concerning the cultural values assessment; and (c)
undisclosed material
concerning the length of stage 1. In each case, that
material was directly relevant to a ground of review it put to the Minister
denial of the material meant MAC was prevented from putting its full case about
those grounds. That establishes the practical
unfairness.
[213] It is
tolerably clear from the above that, in the proceedings before the primary
judge, MAC’s complaint was that it had
not been provided with documents
relevant to the Minister’s decision and had been denied an opportunity to
make submissions
to the Minister on the issues raised by the documents in the
three areas identified above. In the present appeal, MAC has not pursued
allegation regarding a failure to provide procedural fairness occasioned by a
failure to disclose documents relating to the groundwater
model or material
concerning the length of Stage 1.
[214] While
Ground of Appeal 12 is expressed in general terms, no written or oral
submissions were advanced by MAC in the course of
this appeal contending that
the Minister had denied MAC procedural fairness by failing to disclose documents
relating to the groundwater
model or material concerning the length of Stage 1.
MAC’s case was directed solely towards a failure to provide procedural
fairness around the imposition of the condition precedent requiring Fortune to
develop and submit to the Controller an Aboriginal
cultural values impact
assessment. Ground of Appeal 12 must be addressed on that basis.
[215] Before the
primary judge, MAC’s complaint regarding procedural fairness was confined
to the period after the Minister
received the report of the Review Panel. The
presently relevant written submissions made by MAC were:
content of the correspondence between the Department and the Review Panel
providing “clarification” of the requirements
of a cultural values
impact assessment was clearly a matter directly impacting upon the rights of
MAC. The Department asked the Review
Panel to “articulate and provide
clarification and further information regarding what the Review Panel meant by
requiring a
cultural values impact assessment to be undertaken as a new
condition precedent”. The request was made in order to assist the
Department “to know what the Review Panel considered should be included in
this assessment; and to confirm whose responsibility
it is to undertake this
assessment.” The Review Panel makes clear that the answer to those
questions would need to be informed
by the input of the Central Land Council
(CLC), the representative of MAC. Had MAC been aware of that correspondence it
made detailed submissions on the process required to undertake a
cultural values impact assessment, the necessary entity to conduct
process and the appropriate terms of reference for the cultural values impact
assessment.... By failing to then seek the views
of the MAC, through CLC, prior
to making her decision the Minister denied MAC procedural fairness and made a
material error in her
The primary judge’s decision
addressing MAC’s contentions, the primary judge referred to the following
timeline of relevant events. On 2 September
2020 a delegate of the Controller
wrote to the CLC in its capacity as a representative or potential representative
body for registered
native title holders enclosing a notice of intention to make
a water extraction licence decision (regarding Fortune’s proposed
development). The notice sought comments in relation to Fortune’s
application. The CLC facilitated a meeting on 29 September
2020 with the
directors of MAC and various other Aboriginal persons to inform them of
Fortune’s water extraction proposals.
On 9 October 2020 the
Chief Executive Officer of the CLC provided detailed comments on the
proposed water extraction licence decision
on behalf of MAC and other
[217] After the
Controller granted the Original Licence on 8 April 2021, MAC was one of several
aggrieved parties who sought a review
of the Controller’s decision. The
CLC, acting on behalf of MAC and various other parties, made written submissions
to the Review
Panel. The Review Panel met on seven occasions, including a
meeting on 3 September 2021 at which in person representations were made
of the applicants for review, including the CLC. The Review Panel provided
copies to all parties of the submissions received
by the Panel from each of the
review parties, the Department and Fortune, and then provided further
opportunity for their responses.
The Review Panel then provided its report to
the Minister on 15 October 2021.
primary judge stated that there was no doubt that MAC was entitled to procedural
fairness in the decision making process
which preceded the grant of the Licence.
The content of the obligation to provide procedural fairness, his Honour said,
found in the Act. The primary judge then turned to the provisions of
[219] Pursuant
of the Act, upon lodgement of an application for a water
extraction licence, the Controller must give notice of the Controller’s
intention to make a water extraction licence decision. The notice must be
published in a newspaper circulating in the general locality
to which the
application relates.
[220] The notice
must include an invitation to make written comments about the application to the
Controller.
In the present case,
such comments were made either by MAC or on its behalf by the CLC. These
comments, and further representations
and evidence on behalf of MAC, were the
subject of detailed consideration by the Review Panel. A hearing took place on
3 September
2021, at which the Review Panel received representations from
all parties, including the CLC on behalf of MAC. Included in the material
presented by the CLC to the Review Panel, and which had not been available to
the Controller, was an Aboriginal Cultural Values Assessment
prepared by an
anthropologist engaged by the CLC. The Review Panel stated that it was
“not able to form a view on the significance
of the information presented
in that report but is of the opinion that a comprehensive cultural impact
assessment is required prior
to the extraction of any significant volumes of
water on Singleton
primary judge noted that under s 71E(4)(a) of the Act, the Minister’s
reasons for decision had to state the way in
which the Minister has taken into
account the
comments. The primary judge also noted that the
Minister’s reasons contain multiple references to submissions made by
Persons” (including the CLC on behalf of MAC) in relation
to numerous topics including consideration of cultural values.
primary judge held that the obligation of the Minister under the Act regarding
comments is to take them into account and to state the way in
which they had been taken into account in her reasons. The primary
judge, after
referring to MAC’s submission set out at [215] above,
The flaw in MAC’s submission...is that it seeks to
impose on the Minister an obligation not only to consider the written comments
, but to thereafter oblige the Minister to give the persons
who made such comments the opportunity to continue to comment,
they had made additional written representations to the Review Panel and
then engaged with the Review Panel by making oral representations
and calling
evidence at a formal
(Italicised as per original)
primary judge concluded that MAC’s entitlement to procedural fairness did
not require the Minister to give it the
opportunity to comment after it had made
representations to the Review Panel and engaged in the Review Panel’s
processes as
set out above.
The Ministers’
submissions
[224] In her
submissions on this appeal, the Minister submitted that the process of a review
conducted by the Review Panel, with written
submissions and oral representations
being made on behalf of MAC, was a process which afforded procedural fairness to
MAC. This was
the apparent intention of the Act. The Minister submitted that MAC
did not have a right to recurrent opportunities to further address
raised in the review process.
Fortune’s submissions
[225] Fortune
submitted that the primary judge had not failed to consider MAC’s
submission regarding procedural fairness. The
primary judge specifically
referred to MAC’s submission that it was incumbent on the Minister to
provide it with a further
opportunity to make submissions on any proposed
variation or addition to the terms of the original Licence arising from the
Panel’s report. This demonstrated that the primary judge had
considered MAC’s submission.
[226] Fortune
noted that the Minister’s reasons referred to submissions received by the
Review Panel regarding cultural
It was after considering
those submissions that the Review Panel made its recommendations to the
Minister. The Minister accepted
those recommendations with the exception of the
proposed variation of Stage 1 to 5 years. Fortune submitted that the primary
was correct to conclude that the Minister was not required to give MAC any
further opportunity to make representations after receipt
of the Review Panel
[227] Fortune
submitted that MAC’s complaints could be divided into two categories:
a) it was not given the opportunity to ascertain the relevant issues because it
was not informed of the possibility that steps would
be imposed as conditions
attaching to the Licence was granted; and
b) it was not informed of the nature and content of any adverse material being
further submissions that the Minister received from
[228] Regarding
the first of these complaints, Fortune submitted that it was apparent from the
terms of the Original Licence that
it had been considered appropriate to attach
conditions precedent. There could be no basis upon which MAC could contend that
unaware of the possibility that relevant matters could be dealt with by
the Minister by the imposition of conditions precedent. The
Review Panel had
regard to the submissions made by the CLC on behalf of MAC and recommended, by
way of conditions precedent, that
a cultural values impact assessment be carried
out. The Minister accepted the recommendation of the Review Panel, and in her
I have also considered the issues raised by
Reviewing Persons regarding impact on cultural values from the activities under
the licence
and I accept the views of the Review
[229] Accordingly,
Fortune submitted, the Minister’s reasons for decision expressly had
regard to the impact of the Licence
on cultural values and this matter was
addressed by the imposition of CP10. This plainly reflected a consideration of
submissions. Fortune submitted that the primary judge was
correct to hold that the Minister was not required to provide the appellant
any further procedural fairness with respect to the decision to add the new
[230] Regarding
the second complaint identified by Fortune, it submitted that MAC had failed to
identify what aspects of the correspondence
between the Minister and Fortune was
adverse to MAC’s interests. Fortune submitted that the content of the
correspondence was
not adverse to MAC’s interests and the Minister was not
required to afford MAC a further opportunity to be
Consideration
[231] The law
regarding the obligation to provide procedural fairness is well settled. The
obligation to afford procedural fairness
is a flexible obligation to adopt fair
procedures which are appropriate and adapted to the circumstances of the case.
The statutory
framework within which a decisionmaker exercises statutory power
is of critical importance when considering what procedural fairness
The content to be
given to the requirement to afford procedural fairness will depend upon the
facts and circumstances of the case
and is informed by the legislative purpose
and context, and the nature of the power or function being
[232] It is
accepted by all parties that the Minister had an obligation to provide
procedural fairness to MAC in considering its application
for review of the
Controller’s decision. The point of contention between MAC and the other
parties is as to what was required
to satisfy that obligation in the
circumstances of the present case.
[233] There can
be no doubt that the Review Panel and the Minister took into account the
submissions made by the CLC regarding the
potential impact of the Licence on
Aboriginal cultural values. The correspondence between the Minister and the
Review Panel (see
[199]-[203] above) was clearly designed to give the Minister a
clear understanding of the recommendations made by the Review Panel.
point in time, the Minister was still considering the report of the Review
Panel. Correspondence between the Minister and
the Review Panel for the purpose
of clarifying the recommendations of the Review Panel was not an occasion for
further submissions
by MAC on the requirements for a cultural values impact
assessment, even assuming MAC had a right to be heard on those
requirements.
[234] We are
unable to accept MAC’s assertion that it was effectively taken by surprise
by the Minister’s decision to
address the need for a cultural values
impact assessment by means of a condition precedent. In CLC’s submissions
to the Review
Panel, it referred to the report prepared by the consultant
anthropologist on its behalf and submitted that the report shows there
significant and numerous cultural values associated with multiple sites in the
“drawdown area”. It was submitted
that the report identified the
cultural values of the extraction and drawdown area. The submissions went on to
There is no question substantial further work needs to be done.
This work goes beyond what is presently required by CP5. Further,
appropriate to relegate the significant matter to a licence condition; it should
be addressed as part of the application
itself so that specific and considered
conditions can be imposed, or the licence refused, if effective conditions are
not possible.
[235] In the
above, the CLC clearly alludes to the possibility that the requirement for a
cultural values impact assessment may be
addressed by way of a condition
precedent, but submits that this approach would be inappropriate. The CLC had
the opportunity at
this point to make submissions regarding the requirements for
an appropriate cultural values impact assessment had it chosen to do
[236] In any
event, it is beyond doubt that the CLC, at that time representing MAC, was aware
that the Original Licence addressed
multiple matters relevant to the taking of
water by means of conditions precedent. The CLC was alive to the possibility
Minister may decide to take the same approach regarding a cultural
values impact assessment. The CLC chose to simply submit that
appropriate that the matter be addressed by a condition precedent. While the CLC
undoubtedly hoped that the Minister would
accept that submission, it had no
legitimate expectation that she would do so, nor did it have a right to make
further representations
to the Minister on this issue before the Minister
granted the Licence.
[237] For the
reasons that we have already given, the Minister was entitled to impose
conditions precedent to the Licence, which Fortune
was required to satisfy
before it could commence extracting any significant water under the Licence. The
Minister was therefore entitled
to address the need for a cultural values impact
assessment by way of a condition precedent. As the Minister was standing in the
shoes of the Controller in deciding the review it was appropriate that the
Controller would be the person responsible for ensuring
that an appropriate
assessment was conducted.
[238] It is
important to consider the legitimate means employed by the Minister to address
areas of uncertainty surrounding Fortune’s
proposal while at the same time
giving in-principle approval to the project. The means chosen by the Minister
was to grant the Licence
subject to conditions precedent. In making the decision
to impose CP10, the Minister was not purporting to make a decision as to
would be required for an appropriate cultural values impact assessment. For the
reasons that follow, we are satisfied that the
decision as to what was required
for such an assessment was left to the Controller.
[239] It is
important to consider the terms of the Licence. Many of the conditions precedent
require Fortune, as the licence holder,
to “develop and submit for
approval” by the Controller specified programs, plans or other documents.
As MAC pointed out,
a different approach is adopted with regard to CP10. It is
worthwhile setting out CP10 in its entirety at this point:
The licence holder must develop and submit to the Controller a groundwater
dependent Aboriginal cultural values impact assessment.
The assessment must:
(a) be prepared by a suitably qualified professional;
(b) identify, map and document (as appropriate) the cultural values of
Aboriginal people that will be impacted by groundwater extraction
(c) identify reference points to be used in modelling the impacts of
groundwater extraction under this licence on the identified
Aboriginal cultural
values; and
(d) specify monitoring parameters, trigger values and limits for the reference
points which can be used to initiate actions under
an adaptive management
[240] The terms
of CP10 require Fortune to “develop and submit to the Controller” a
cultural values impact assessment.
The Licence does not identify what is
required for a “groundwater dependent Aboriginal cultural values impact
assessment”.
That term is not defined in any way in the Licence. Nor does
the Licence identify the characteristics of “a suitably qualified
professional” to prepare the assessment. This, however, does not mean that
Fortune can simply proceed as it pleases in satisfying
that condition or that
the Minister has abrogated the decision on these matters to Fortune.
[241] It is
important to note that CP2 provides that the “licence holder must seek and
obtain approval in writing from the Controller
that the Conditions Precedent
have been fulfilled”. That means that, regarding the requirements of CP10,
Fortune must obtain
the Controller’s approval that the requirements of
that condition have been satisfied. That, in turn, will require the Controller
to be satisfied (amongst other things) that what Fortune has submitted:
a) is a groundwater dependent Aboriginal cultural values impact assessment; and
b) was prepared by a suitably qualified professional.
submission of an assessment by Fortune may, at that point, require the
Controller to provide procedural fairness to MAC
before the Controller decides
whether the requirements of CP10 have been satisfied. It may be argued that
procedural fairness may
require MAC to be consulted as to these matters before
an assessment is undertaken so that the Controller may give directions to
Fortune regarding what will be required as to these matters if the Controller is
to be satisfied that the requirements of CP10 are
met. This was accepted by
Fortune in its letter of 12 November
[243] As an
aside, and on a more practical note, it is obvious that it would be in
Fortune’s commercial interests to consult
with government and other
stakeholders such as MAC regarding the requirements for an assessment and an
appropriately qualified person
to undertake the assessment. It is Fortune which
accepts the commercial risk that the Controller may ultimately not be satisfied
that the requirements of CP10 have been met. That risk may be reduced by
appropriate consultation.
[244] It is
sufficient for present purposes to note that, as a result of the means adopted
by the Minister to address the need for
a cultural values impact assessment, in
granting the Licence the Minister was not purporting to determine what was
required as part
of a cultural values impact assessment or who would be the
appropriate person to undertake the assessment. As such, no occasion arose
for the Minister to provide MAC with an opportunity to address those matters.
The Minister made two determinations regarding these
matters: (a) that there was
a need for a cultural values impact assessment before Fortune could take any
volume of water under the
Licence other than that permitted in Stage 1; and (b)
that this would be addressed by a condition precedent. MAC was given the
opportunity
to be heard on both.
[245] In our
opinion, the primary judge was correct to hold that the Minister was not
required to provide MAC with a further opportunity
to make representations
before granting the Licence.
[246] Grounds of
Appeal 10, 11 and 12 fail.
appeal should be dismissed.
application for costs is to be filed within 21 days of the delivery of these
-------------------
[2009] HCA 51
(2009) 240 CLR 140.
Section 30(4)
of the Act.
Section 22B(1)
of the Act.
Mpwerempwer Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC v
Minister for Territory Families & Urban Planning as Delegate of the Minister
for Environment
& Anor; Arid Lands Environment Centre Inc v Minister for
Environment & Anor
[2024] NTSC 4
Section 9(2)
of the Act.
Section 90(1)(ab)
of the Act.
[1980] HCA 13
(1980) 144 CLR 13.
Section 30(3)(a)(ii)
Shi v Migration Agents Registration
[2008] HCA 31
(2008) 235 CLR 286
– [38], [40] (Kirby J); [100]
(Hayne and Heydon JJ) [143] (Kiefel J, with whom Crennan J agreed) (
Canberra Tradesmen’s Union Club Inc v
Commissioner for Land and Planning
[1999] FCA 262
(1999) 86 FCR 266
Kavvadias v Commonwealth Ombudsman
[1984] FCA 55
Re Costello and Secretary,
Department of Transport
[1979] AATA 184
(1979) 2 ALD 934
at 943-945.
[2015] NTSC 30
(2015) 35 NTLR 140.
(NSW) (1978) 1 ALD 167 at [175]
[2004] SASC 415
[1992] HCA 20
(1992) 174 CLR 430
[2024] HCA 12
(2024) 98 ALJR 610
Gageler CJ, Gordon, Edelman, Steward, Gleeson and Jagot JJ).
See [38] above.
Section 30(4)
of the Act.
[2021] HCA 17.
AB 105-106.
Supra at [39].
DVO16 v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection and Anor
NTSC 4 at [45]. .
Minister for Aboriginal
Affairs v Peko Wallsend Ltd
(1986) 162 CLR 24
at 41, per Mason J.
Suttor v Gundowda Pty Ltd
[1950] HCA 35
(1950) 81 CLR
JB & Ors v Northern Territory of Australia
[2019] NTCA 1
University of Wollongong v Metwally (No
(1985) 59 ALJR 481 at 483;
[1986] HCA 33
1986) 162 CLR 1
Water Board v Moustakas
(1988) 180 CLR
Multicon Engineering Pty Ltd v
Federal Airports Corp
(1997) NSWLR 631
Section 60(2)
of the Act.
Mison v Randwick Municipal Council
(1991) 23 NSWLR 734
Buzzacott v Minister for Sustainability,
Environment, Water, Population and Communities
[2013] FCAFC 111
(2013) 215 FCR 301
Queensland v Humane
Society International (Australia) Inc
[2019] FCAFC 163
(2019) 272 FCR 310
at 739-740;
GPT RE Ltd v Belmorgan Property Development
[2008] NSWCA 256
(2008) 72 NSWLR 647
AB 1707-1708.
AB 104-105.
King Gee Clothing Co Pty Ltd v The
Commonwealth
[1945] HCA 23
(1945) 71 CLR 184
at 194 and 195-196;
Television Corporation Ltd v Commonwealth;
Amalgamated Television Services Pty Ltd v Postmaster-General (Cth)
[1963] HCA 30
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian
Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
TAB Ltd v Racing Victoria Ltd
[2009] VSC 338
[2012] FCA 403
(2012) 187 LGERA 161.
Fraser Henleins Pty Ltd v Cody
[1945] HCA 49
at 113-114 and 128.
of the Act.
of the Act.
of the Act.
Section 96(2)(a)
AB 1701-1702.
MAC’s Outline of
Submissions in Reply dated 13.08.24 at [51].
AB 2204-2205 (Amended
Originating Motion Between Parties dated 10.05.22).
Section 71B(4)
of the Act.
NTSC 4 at [211].
See [220] above.
SZBEL v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
Moriarty v Independent Commissioner Against
Corruption (NT)
[2022] NTSC 46
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
AB 1724-1725.
See [202] above.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (775 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter