URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCA/2023/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:16:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Heffernan v Law Society Northern Territory [2023] NTCA 10 (2 November 2023)
Heffernan v Law Society Northern Territory
[2023] NTCA
PARTIES: HEFFERNAN, Felicity Ellen
LAW SOCIETY NORTHERN TERRITORY
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: AP 14 of 2022 (22300348)
DELIVERED: 2 November 2023
HEARING DATE: 24 May 2023
JUDGMENT OF: Grant CJ, Blokland & Brownhill JJ
CATCHWORDS:
APPEALS – Legal practitioners – Cancellation of unrestricted
practising certificate – Whether appellant fit and
proper person –
Where appellant subject of disciplinary process and adverse findings –
Failure to disclose suitability
matters – Subject of disciplinary action
– Good fame and character – Where no necessity to find improper
– Where findings raise issues of honesty and integrity – Not
a fit and proper person to hold a practising certificate
– No failure to
consider other possible orders – Appeal dismissed
Corruption, Crime and Misconduct Act 2003
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
Legal Profession Act 2006
Public Sector Management Act 1994
Sentencing Act 1995
Supreme Court Act 1979
Bara v Blackwell
(2022) 374 FLR 150
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Commission for the Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation
of Commonwealth Employees v Chenhall
[1992] FCA 535
(1992) 37 FCR 75
Connop v Law
Society Northern Territory
[2016] NTSC 38
Heffernan v Law Society
Northern Territory
[2022] NTSC 90
Hilton v Legal Profession Admission
[2017] NSWCA 232
Murphy v Bar Association of New South Wales
[2001] NSWSC 1191
New South Wales Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
New South Wales Bar Association v Murphy
[2002] NSWCA 138
(2002) 55 NSWLR 23
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South Wales v Da Rocha
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South Wales v
[2015] NSWCA 409
Re Application by Saunders
[2011] NTSC 63
[2005] NTSC 58
(2005) 16 NTLR 102
Re Joy Onyeledo
[2015] NTSC
Singer v Berghouse
(1994) 181 CLR 201;
Stanford v Stanford
(2012) 247 CLR 108;
Stanoevski v The Council of the Law Society of New South
[2008] NSWCA 93
Warren v Coombes
[1979] HCA 9
(1978-79) 142 CLR 531
referred to
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: D Stewart with A Flick
Respondent: T Liveris
Solicitors:
Appellant: Long Saad Woodbridge Lawyers
Respondent: Law Society Northern Territory
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 80
IN THE COURT OF APPEAL
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Heffernan v Law Society Northern Territory
[2023] NTCA
No. AP 14 of 2022 (22300348)
FELICITY ELLEN HEFFERNAN
LAW SOCIETY NORTHERN TERRITORY
CORAM: GRANT CJ, BLOKLAND and BROWNHILL JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 2 November 2023)
[1] This is an
appeal against a decision of the Supreme Court to affirm the decision of the
respondent (‘Law Society’)
of 31 October 2019 to cancel the
unrestricted practising certificate granted to the appellant
(‘Heffernan’) under
Legal Profession Act
following facts are not in dispute.
[3] Between 16
January 2016 and 4 July 2018, Heffernan was employed by the Department of
Primary Industries and Regional Development
of Western Australia (‘the
Department’) as the Director, Legal and Commercial, Agriculture and Food
Division. She did
not practise as a lawyer in that role.
[4] On 19 July
2017, the Director-General of the Department (‘Addis’) notified the
Corruption and Crime Commission of
Western Australia (‘the CCC’) of
‘suspected serious misconduct’ by Heffernan.
[5] The CCC
referred the notification to the Public Sector Commission, which referred the
notification back to the Department. The
result was that Addis was to deal with
the matter.
[6] On 28 August
2017, Addis wrote to Heffernan stating she may have committed acts constituting
a breach of discipline under
Public Sector Management Act
(WA) (‘the PSMA’). Five allegations were made, namely that:
(1) she failed to comply with policies and procedures for
entry into a contract
for services arrangement with Peter Evans (for example, she lacked delegated
authority to enter the contract,
the contract terms were non-compliant, she
intended to pay Mr Evans in full before his services were rendered, and the
reasons given
for urgently procuring the services were not valid); (2) she
offered a transfer to the Department to Amber Russell for which Heffernan
delegated authority; (3) she committed funds for the engagement of Mr Evans and
Ms Russell without appropriate authorisation
and in breach of a Department
decision; (4) she circumvented and misused a memorandum of understanding with
the University of Western
Australia for unpaid work experience by engaging
interns as paid casual employees, one of whom did not meet the criteria for
engagement;
and (5) she provided misleading information and/or responses about
the Potato Marketing Corporation to the Minister’s office,
Departmental
officers and the State Solicitor’s Office. Addis invited Heffernan to
provide a written response which would be
taken into consideration in
determining what, if any, further action would be taken. Addis said that if she
was found to be in breach
of discipline, she may be subject to disciplinary
action, ranging from a reprimand to termination of her employment.
21 September 2017, Addis emailed Heffernan because she had approached other
parties seeking copies of correspondence between
the Department and the CCC. He
told her that he had notified the CCC of her suspected misconduct and provided
Heffernan with a copy
of his notification. He refused to provide her with the
correspondence to him from the CCC (stating it was the CCC’s preference
that such correspondence not be shared). Addis informed Heffernan
...the CCC considered the matter falls outside its
Commission (PSC). The CCC did not, to my knowledge, conduct any further
investigation and I have received no further correspondence
from the CCC on this
matter. The PSC subsequently responded on 22 August 2017 by referring the
matter to this Department for my attention
and appropriate action. Accordingly,
I initiated the current process with my letter to you on 28 August 2017.
[8] On 3 October
2017, Addis wrote to Heffernan in response to her solicitor’s request for
further particulars about allegations
(4) and (5) and an extension of time to
provide a written response. Addis provided further particulars and granted an
extension of
time to 31 October 2017.
November 2017, Addis wrote to Heffernan noting that no response had been
received to the allegations in his letter of 28
August 2017, and informing
Heffernan that he had determined there was sufficient evidence to ‘treat
this as a disciplinary
matter’ under
of the PSMA. He
stated he would now initiate a ‘discipline investigation’ pursuant
of the PSMA. He also proposed that Heffernan be suspended from
duty on full pay under
of the PSMA, commencing from 15 November
2017 until she was further advised. Heffernan was given the opportunity to
comment on the
proposal to suspend her. She was again informed of the possible
action that may be taken, including adverse findings against her
disciplinary action. Addis stated he would appoint an independent investigator
to undertake the investigation.
November 2017, the acting Deputy Director-General wrote to Heffernan noting that
no comment had been received from her
regarding the proposal to suspend her, and
advising that the suspension was confirmed with effect from 15 November
December 2017, Addis wrote to Heffernan confirming the appointment of an
investigator to undertake the investigation.
January 2018, Heffernan was interviewed by the investigator and sought to
provide information and documents that she contended
answered the allegations
against her and vindicated her of any wrongdoing.
[13] On 23 April
2018, Addis wrote to Heffernan informing her that the independent investigation
had concluded, he had reviewed the
investigator’s report and all available
information, including Heffernan’s responses to the allegations, and had
the allegations to be substantiated. Addis informed Heffernan, pursuant to
s 82A(3)(b)
of the PSMA, that based on those findings, he proposed to
terminate her employment with notice. He stated as follows:
senior officer within the legal area, who can and is expected to act
autonomously for the most part, I need to have total trust
in you to do so. This
involves recognition on the limits of your authority and compliance with those
instruments that regulate the
Public Sector. I am not satisfied that you are
prepared to do either. The findings reflect more than a momentary lapse.
My proposal to terminate your contract of employment has not been taken
lightly. In your role as the Director Legal & Commercial,
leadership position within the department, it is incumbent on you to have the
highest standards of probity, and a responsibility
to be familiar with and
observe relevant process requirements and standards of conduct. ... I consider
the pattern of behaviour reflected
in the five allegations to be very
concerning. It is also noted that in your responses to the allegations you
appear to have not
taken responsibility or accountability for your decisions and
actions, which is also of concern. I have lost confidence in you and
feel I will be able to regain it.
[14] Heffernan
was provided the opportunity to respond to the proposed termination by 7 May
2018. Her suspension from duty on full
pay was confirmed until further advised.
Heffernan’s solicitor subsequently sought an extension of time within
which to provide
a response, citing medical reasons.
[15] On 22 May
2018, Addis wrote to Heffernan’s solicitor advising that her suspension
was lifted with immediate effect in order
to accommodate her ill-health and
enable her to access sick leave entitlements. Addis advised further that
Heffernan was required
to apply for sick leave up to 1 June 2018 (the date her
GP had certified she was unfit for work), and informed her she would be required
to attend a medical examination if she sought sick leave beyond that period.
Addis also granted Heffernan an extension to 18 June
2018 to respond to the
proposal that she be dismissed.
[16] On 4 July
2018, Heffernan tendered her resignation from her employment effective from 4
August 2018. She sought a waiver of the
Department’s entitlement to
notice. That waiver was ultimately granted, and Heffernan’s employment was
considered by
the Department to have terminated on 4 July 2018.
[17] On 25 July
2018, the Department emailed Heffernan’s solicitor stating that the
Department would continue to handle the
disciplinary matter pending further
information from Heffernan.
[18] On 25 July
2018, Heffernan’s solicitor emailed the Department as
You can continue with the disciplinary process as you see
fit. Felicity is not well enough to participate in it.
[19] On 7 August
2018, Heffernan signed an application to the Law Society for an unrestricted
practising certificate.
Section 8.3
of the application form read as
8.3 Fit and proper person, suitability matters
I understand that the Society must not grant a PC unless satisfied that I
am a ‘fit and proper person’ to hold the PC.
I understand that I must disclose to the Society any matter which is
material to the question of whether I am a fit and proper person
‘suitability matters’.
lists matters that can be taken
into account in determining if an applicant is a ‘fit and proper
person’. Suitability
matters are defined in
By way of example,
suitability matters include unresolved complaints or investigations in this or
other jurisdictions, insolvency,
or a material inability to practice, such as
ill health.
There is further information relevant to the question of whether I am a fit
and proper person:
□ NO □ YES –
previously provided to the Society, or
□ Details: ................................................
response, Heffernan ticked the ‘NO’ box.
of the application form, Heffernan signed the declaration that the
information contained in the application was true and correct,
and there was no
further information relevant to the consideration of the application which had
not previously been disclosed to
the Law Society.
August 2018, Heffernan lodged the application form and supporting documents with
the Law Society.
September 2018, the Law Society granted Heffernan an unrestricted practising
certificate pursuant to
of the Act.
October 2018, the CCC issued to Heffernan a witness summons to give oral
evidence (No S 02121/2017 04483) pursuant to
Corruption, Crime and Misconduct Act 2003
(WA) (‘CCMA’). The
summons required Heffernan to attend in Perth to give evidence in an examination
before the CCC at
9.30am on 5 December 2018. The summons stated as
The scope and purpose of these examinations is to determine
whether any public officers at the [Department] engaged in ... serious
misconduct by corruptly using their position, between December 2015 to June
2018, to benefit others.
[25] The CCC
summons prohibited Heffernan from disclosing any information about the summons
or any official matter connected with
it to any person, except: (i) to a legal
practitioner for the purpose of obtaining legal advice or representation
relating to the
summons; (ii) to a person for the purpose of obtaining legal aid
in relation to the summons; or (iii) if there were special circumstances
supported disclosure about it, she made a request to the CCC officer for
variation of the non-disclosure notation, and that
request was granted. The CCC
summons was served on Heffernan on 8 November 2018 in Alice Springs.
November 2018, the CCC issued to Heffernan a second witness summons to give oral
evidence (No S 02121/2017 04507) in the
same terms as the first summons. This
second summons was served on Heffernan on 5 December 2018 in Perth.
[27] On 5 and 6
December 2018, Heffernan attended the examination and gave evidence. The
transcript of that evidence was not available
at the hearing before the Supreme
Court because the CCC refused to release it.
December 2018, Heffernan sought permission from the CCC to share information
with a counsellor about ‘her experiences
and circumstances arising during
her employment at [the Department], including information about her recent
appearance in the [CCC]’.
December 2018, the CCC granted Heffernan permission to disclose a restricted
matter arising from her examination before
the CCC to a counsellor for the
purpose of receiving counselling.
[30] On 4 April
2019, Heffernan signed an application to the Law Society for renewal of her
practising certificate for the practice
year 1 July 2019 to 30 June 2020.
Section 4.3
of the application form read as follows:
4.3 FIT AND
PROPER PERSON, SUITABILITY MATTERS
I understand that the Society must not grant a PC unless satisfied that I
am a ‘fit and proper person’ to hold the PC.
I understand that I must disclose to the Society any matter which is
material to the question of whether I am a fit and proper person
‘suitability matters’.
lists matters that can be taken
into account in determining if an applicant is a ‘fit and proper
person’. Suitability
matters are defined in
There is further information relevant to the question of whether I am a
fit and proper person:
□ Details previously provided to the
□ Details attached – see note
response, Heffernan crossed the ‘No’ box.
of the application form, Heffernan signed the declaration that the information
contained in the application was true and correct,
and there was no further
information relevant to the consideration of the application which had not
previously been disclosed to
the Law Society.
[33] On 4 April
2019, Heffernan lodged the application form with the Law Society.
[34] On about 20
May 2019, Heffernan received a letter from the CCC dated 10 May 2019
informing her that the CCC had prepared a draft
report about its investigation
into whether public officers engaged in serious misconduct by corruptly using
their position, that
the final report may include comments or evidence that she
may consider reflects adversely on her, and that she was invited to make
representations about such matters by 24 May 2019. The draft report referred to
‘sham arrangements’ entered into by Heffernan
to pay Howard Carr and
Peter Evans for services. The draft report contained the following proposed
[Heffernan] was
afforded great discretion in view of her legal experience but she abused the
trust placed in her on at least two matters.
In relation
Ms Heffernan
entered into an arrangement with a partner at Herbert Smith Freehills solicitors
to circumvent the requirements of a
government ordered public sector recruitment
freeze in order to allow Dr Carr, whose employment contract had expired, to
to benefit by doing work for [the Department]. Thereafter to facilitate
payment to Dr Carr, she falsified a letter of engagement.
Dr Carr was a
public officer who knowingly participated in a scheme to continue his employment
in contravention of the recruitment
freeze. The participation included
backdating a crucial engagement letter which effectively misled auditors and
senior members of
[the Department].
What is clear is
that Ms Heffernan implemented a dishonest solution to resolve the issue of Dr
Carr’s non-payment.
Ms Heffernan
drafted a new engagement letter for Dr Carr. [She] signed the engagement letter
on or shortly before 13 December 2016
... She directed Dr Carr to sign the
document and to falsely backdate it to 9 June 2016. He acquiesced.
Ms Heffernan
used the engagement letter as the basis to authorise payments to Dr Carr
totalling approximately $106,000.
[CCC’s] opinion, both Ms Heffernan and Dr Carr engaged in serious
misconduct by falsifying the engagement letter of 9
relation to Mr Evans
Between them, Ms
Heffernan and Mr Evans brought about a situation where Mr Evans was, in effect,
paid a full redundancy (close to
$400,000) then immediately hired as a
consultant to assist in the ongoing litigation ... (at a cost of just under
Ms Heffernan was
bound by professional rules of conduct as well as her obligations as a public
servant. She breached these in a manner
that transcends mere carelessness.
A carefully
worded closeout note was signed by Mr Evans on 15 May 2017 stating that he
had carried out 400 hours work at $200 per
hour, plus GST. Mr Evans was however
paid for 432 hours, the original amount he was to be prepaid. The
discrepancy was picked up
by internal auditors. Ms Heffernan was under pressure
to explain matters.
Both Mr Evans
and Ms Heffernan misled internal auditors about the additional 32 hours.
The explanations
provided by Ms Heffernan and Mr Evans in the context of the evidence about the
additional hours are implausible.
In the [CCC’s] opinion, Ms Heffernan and
Mr Evans engaged in serious misconduct by misleading internal auditors and
preparing false records to justify payment for a portion of hours Mr
Evans never worked.
[CCC’s] opinion, both Ms Heffernan and Mr Evans intentionally misled
auditors. They did so for an ulterior purpose, to
justify the previous
expenditure of public money in May 2017 for work which had never been carried
out, nor could be supported by
contemporaneous records or other evidence.
Mr Evans used
his position as a senior public officer to enrich himself at the State’s
The [CCC] has
formed an opinion of serious misconduct over the actions of each of them.
[Heffernan]
ought to have epitomised honesty and integrity and acted in [the
Department’s] best interests, not least because
she was in a position of
trust and given greater autonomy. Instead, she dishonestly put the interests of
others ahead of [the Department]
and the State.
[35] On 20 May
2019, Heffernan sought permission from the CCC to inform her professional
indemnity insurer about the substance of
the draft CCC report that impacted on
her and was relevant to determining whether the insurance policy would respond
to those matters.
[36] On 21 May
2019, the CCC granted Heffernan permission to disclose the CCC’s letter
dated 10 May 2019 and the draft CCC report
to her professional insurer for the
purpose of ascertaining to what extent a policy may respond to matters
concerning her that arose
from the CCC’s investigation and draft
[37] On around
30 May 2019, Heffernan informed her professional indemnity insurer of the
substance of the draft CCC report, saying
that she disputed the draft findings
and had documents that proved the draft findings were wrong.
[38] On 14 and
20 June 2019, Heffernan provided her extensive responses to the CCC’s
draft report, putting her position that
the draft findings were wrong.
[39] On 25 June
2019, the Law Society granted Heffernan an unrestricted practising certificate
pursuant to
of the Act.
[40] On 5 July
2019, the CCC released its final report. The final report contained the same
adverse findings regarding Heffernan as
the draft report, and added
Ms Heffernan made extensive submissions regarding all matters,
with detailed reference to many documents. She did not however address
behaviour which forms the basis of the [CCC’s] opinion of serious
misconduct. That is the creation of the purported letters
of engagement for Dr
Carr and Mr Evans when each was false. The letters were used as authority to
expend State funds.
The CCC’s investigation revealed that Ms Heffernan demonstrated
reckless non-compliance with procedure resulting in significant
unauthorised
expenditure of public funds in defiance of Cabinet decisions.
In doing so, she showed a preparedness to act dishonestly by falsifying
records and deceit. In the [CCC’s] opinion, Ms Heffernan
serious misconduct.
The [CCC] recommends that an appropriate authority or independent agency
gives consideration to prosecuting Ms Heffernan for her conduct
in preparing
false letters of engagement of Dr Carr and Mr Evans and for her conduct
misleading internal auditors.
[41] On 5 July
2019, Heffernan notified the Western Australian Parliamentary Inspector of
errors and omissions in the final CCC report
and instructed her lawyers to seek
a review of the final CCC report. She also issued a press release to the media
denying the findings
in the final CCC report. She also notified her employer of
the final CCC report and her views on it.
[42] On 27 July
2021, the CCC informed Heffernan that she was no longer bound by the
non-disclosure requirement in the CCC summonses.
[43] Heffernan
did not at any time disclose to the Law Society the Department’s
disciplinary process and adverse findings, the
CCC summonses or examination, the
CCC draft report or the CCC final report. The Law Society became aware of the
contents of the final
CCC report from another source. On 1 October 2019,
the Law Society gave Heffernan notice that it believed she was no longer a fit
and proper person to hold a practising certificate, and that it proposed to take
action to cancel her unrestricted practising certificate.
Reference was made to
Heffernan’s failures to disclose either the Department’s
investigation, or the final CCC report,
either in her applications for a
practising certificate or its renewal, or at any time. Heffernan was given 21
days to provide a
written response. Despite a letter from Heffernan’s
solicitor saying a response would be provided within that timeframe, none
October 2019, the Law Society wrote to Heffernan informing her that the Council
of the Law Society would be considering
the matter on 31 October 2019.
Again, despite a letter from Heffernan’s solicitor saying a response would
be provided before
that time, none was.
October 2019, the Law Society decided to cancel Heffernan’s practising
certificate pursuant to
of the Act on the ground in s 56(a)
that she was no longer a fit and proper person to hold an unrestricted
practising certificate.
That decision took effect from 5 November 2019.
December 2019, Heffernan filed in the Supreme Court an appeal from the Law
Society’s decision pursuant to
of the Act.
Nature of the appeal to the Supreme Court
appeal from the Law Society’s decision was an appeal de novo. The Supreme
Court ‘stands in the shoes of’
the Law Society, exercising original
practising certificate
should have been
The Law Society bore the
onus of establishing the ultimate issue in the proceedings, namely that
Heffernan is not a fit and proper
person to hold or continue to hold a
practising certificate.
standard of proof was on the balance of probabilities and the
had application to the proof
of allegations about Heffernan’s alleged
misconduct.
[48] Pursuant to
of the Act, the Supreme Court was able to make the order it
considered appropriate. The dispositions available to the Law Society
of the Act were: (i) to cancel the practising certificate;
(ii) to suspend the practising certificate for a period; or (iii) to amend
practising certificate as the Law Society considered appropriate. The grounds
for amending, suspending or cancelling a practising
certificate are set out in
s 56 of the Act. The ground relied on by the Law Society to cancel
Heffernan’s practising certificate
was that she was no longer a fit and
proper person to hold the practising certificate within the meaning of
s 56(a) of the Act.
The decision of the Supreme
[49] The Supreme
Court held (at [70]) that, from 7 August 2018 to 31 October 2019, Heffernan was
not a fit and proper person to hold
an unrestricted practising certificate.
The Court was satisfied (at [55]), on the balance of
probabilities, that Heffernan had engaged in a series of serious
non-disclosures,
(a) failing to disclose the Department’s investigation and the adverse
findings made by Addis when she made her application
for an unrestricted
practising certificate on 7 August
(b) failing to disclose the Department’s investigation and the adverse
findings made by Addis, the summons to appear and be
examined at the CCC, and
the examination at the CCC when she made her application for the renewal of her
practising certificate on
(c) failing to disclose that she had been provided with the draft CCC report on
or about 20 May 2019;
(d) failing to disclose the release of the final CCC report on 5 July
[50] The Court
held (at [66]) that the Law Society had established that the cancellation of
Heffernan’s practising certificate
was justified, both at the time and
viewed in retrospect, and Heffernan had failed to persuade the Court that the
proven non-disclosures
should not have resulted in the cancellation of her
unrestricted practising certificate.
[51] The Supreme
Court ordered (at [71]) that the decision of the Law Society made on
31 October 2019 to cancel Heffernan’s
unrestricted practising
certificate was affirmed, the appeal was otherwise dismissed and costs were
The nature of this appeal
[52] This is an
appeal pursuant to
Supreme Court Act 1979
and (2) of that Act, the Court may affirm, reverse or vary the
judgment appealed from in whole or part, set aside the judgment and
its own judgment, remit the proceeding or order a new trial. Such appeals are by
way of rehearing, which means the appeal
is a general appeal conducted on the
transcript of the evidence taken at the trial rather than calling witnesses to
give their evidence
afresh, and this Court has the powers and duties of the
Supreme Court, including those of drawing inferences and making findings
The powers of the Court
are exercisable only where the appellant can demonstrate that, having regard to
all the evidence before the
Court, the order that is the subject of the appeal
is the result of some legal, factual or discretionary
Hilton v Legal Profession Admission Board
[2017] NSWCA 232
, the New South
Wales Court of Appeal held (at [49]) that the principles in
set out immediately above applied to an appeal against a decision of
the Supreme Court to affirm a determination that the appellant
was not a fit and
proper person to be re-admitted as a lawyer. The Court added (at [49]) the
following related considerations which
combined to constrain the exercise of
appellate jurisdiction:
(a) The test posited by the statute of whether the appellant is a ‘fit and
proper person’ is one which is ‘peculiarly
evaluative and which
accordingly warrants a measure of deference to the trial
The expression
‘fit and proper’ is ‘a qualitative description of a conclusion
reached after examination of a range
of potentially competing
considerations’.
(b) When dealing with questions such as the weight to be given to the
testimonial evidence from the appellant as to why he engaged
in the relevant
conduct and to what extent there is any likelihood of further reprehensible
conduct in the future, the primary judge
enjoyed a considerable advantage in
appreciating the tone, nuances, pauses and other aspects of his demeanour, which
cannot be discerned
from the transcript alone. Seeing the appellant give that
explanation was described as a ‘very considerable advantage’.
(c) Specific findings of fact, even by the most meticulous judge, are inherently
an incomplete statement of the impression which
was made upon them by the
primary evidence. The expressed findings are always surrounded by a penumbra of
imprecision as to emphasis,
relative weight, minor qualification and nuance of
which time and language do not permit exact expression, but which may play an
important part in the judge’s overall evaluation.
The grounds of this appeal and relief sought
[54] The grounds
of this appeal are as follows:
(a) The primary Judge erred in the interpretation and application of
of the Act by failing to interpret
as a whole and in
accordance with the main purposes of the Act, and approaching the question as
one of general discretion, rather
than confining
to suitability
matters as to good fame and character by reference to: (i) what facts
existed at each relevant time in the inquiry;
and (ii) whether Heffernan
was subject to disciplinary action in another profession or occupation at those
relevant times (Ground
(b) The primary Judge erred in finding that Heffernan’s explanations were
contrived to explain the inexplicable where
permits such an
explanation (Ground 2).
(c) The primary Judge erred in treating the CCC findings inconsistently with
s 217A(3) of the CCMA, which provides that a finding
or opinion that
misconduct has occurred is not, and is not to be taken as, a finding or opinion
that a person is guilty of or has
committed a criminal offence or a disciplinary
offence (Ground 3).
(d) The primary Judge erred in interpreting and applying s 47(2) of the Act
by finding Heffernan had obtained a practising certificate
because of incorrect
or misleading information (Ground 4).
(e) The primary Judge erred in failing to consider a sanction less than the
cancellation of Heffernan’s practising certificate,
thereby resulting in
manifest injustice to Heffernan (Ground 5).
[55] In oral
submissions, the relief sought by Heffernan was amended to: (a) an order that
the orders of the Supreme Court and the
decision of the Law Society be set
aside; (b) a declaration that Heffernan was, at the time of the hearing before
the Supreme Court:
(i) a fit and proper person to hold an unrestricted
practising certificate; or (ii) alternatively, a fit and proper person to hold
an unrestricted practising certificate subject to such conditions as this Court
thinks fit; or (iii) alternatively, a fit and proper
person to hold a restricted
practising certificate, subject to such conditions and restrictions as this
Court thinks fit; and (c)
orders for costs of the appeal and the proceedings in
the Supreme Court.
The assessment of fitness and
Relevant provisions of the Act
of the Act provides that the Law Society must not grant a local
practising certificate unless it is satisfied the applicant is a
fit and proper
person to hold the certificate.
Section 54(5)(b)
of the Act provides that the
Law Society must not renew a local practising certificate if it is satisfied the
applicant is not a
fit and proper person to continue to hold the certificate.
[57] Section
47(2) of the Act provides that in determining whether or not a person is a fit
and proper person to hold a local practising
certificate for the purposes of
of the Act, the Law Society may take into account any suitability
matter relating to the person and (relevantly) whether the person
obtained an
Australian practising certificate because of incorrect or misleading information
(s 47(2)(a)).
overarching question for the Court below was whether Heffernan was a fit and
proper person to hold an unrestricted practising
certificate. Having regard to
the nature of the appeal, that required an assessment of her fitness and
propriety both at the time
the Law Society cancelled her practising certificate
and at the time of the appeal, taking into account events occurring or not
between the time of cancellation and the hearing of the appeal,
including her evidence and submissions made on her behalf in the
Consideration of this
question required taking into account relevant matters in s 47 of the Act,
which include the suitability matters
integrity and the duty of candour
[59] Refusal,
cancellation or suspension of a practising certificate upon determination of
unfitness to hold a practising certificate
is not punitive of the legal
practitioner. Rather, it is protective of the
Fitness and propriety
are to be assessed having in mind the high standards required of legal
practitioners in the practice of their
profession. Those standards are required
because the relationships between legal practitioner and client, between legal
practitioners,
and between legal practitioner and the Court, are ones of trust
in the performance of professional functions, and because there must
confidence in the public and those engaged in the administration of justice that
legal practitioners will properly perform those
To be a fit and
proper person to hold a practising certificate requires demonstrated honesty and
competence in dealing with clients,
other practitioners and the Court. The
determination of fitness and propriety extends to the assessment of a
practitioner’s
character in order to maintain the continuing confidence of
the public in the performance of the duties of legal practitioners, given
central role the profession plays in the administration of
[60] A member of
the legal profession is required to be honest and frank in their relations with
the Court, and otherwise in their
professional conduct and in representations
made by them before the Court, so that the Court and other members of the
can deal with them with confidence relying on their
Qualities of honesty and integrity and a
preparedness to comply with the law are essential requirements for being a fit
importance of these qualities has been explained as
Honesty and
integrity are important in many spheres of conduct. However, in some spheres
significant public interests are involved
in the conduct of particular persons
and the state regulates and restricts those who are entitled to engage in those
activities and
acquire the privileges associated with a particular status. The
legal profession has long required the highest standards of integrity.
There are four interrelated interests involved. Clients must feel secure in
confiding their secrets and entrusting their most personal
affairs to lawyers.
Fellow practitioners must be able to depend implicitly on the word and the
behaviour of their colleagues. The
judiciary must have confidence in those who
appear before the courts. The public must have confidence in the legal
profession by
reason of the central role the profession plays in the
administration of justice. Many aspects of the administration of justice depend
on the trust by the judiciary and/or the public in the performance of
professional obligations by professional people.
[61] The above
principles give rise to a requirement, described as ‘the duty of
candour’, of proper disclosure of matters
which may relate to the fitness
and propriety of a legal practitioner to
A practitioner’s
duty of candour necessarily requires that an applicant for admission to legal
practice or a practising certificate
comprehensively discloses any matter which
may reasonably be taken to bear on an assessment of fitness for
The obligation is to
make candid and comprehensive disclosure regarding anything which may reflect
adversely on the fitness and propriety
of the applicant to be admitted to
practice or granted a practising
certificate.
A practitioner is
not excused from their obligations of disclosure and candour merely because the
information that should have been
disclosed is ultimately determined by the
relevant tribunal not to be such as to render the person unfit to practice
is a matter for the tribunal to determine, having been provided
with all the relevant
information.
[62] In some
circumstances, the failure of an applicant to disclose relevant material might
be excused on the basis of an erroneous
but understandable error of
circumstances, it may be assessed that, strictly speaking, disclosure of the
particular information was not required. In
those situations, of particular
importance is the applicant’s motivation for not making the disclosure,
and particularly whether
or not they were motivated by a desire or intention to
conceal or minimise adverse information which may bear on the grant of their
application.
duty of candour – when does the obligation to disclose arise and
[63] Counsel for
Heffernan submitted that the relevant times at which obligations to disclose the
relevant matters to the Law Society
may have arisen were: (a) on
7 August 2018, when she applied for an unrestricted practising certificate;
(b) on 4 April 2019, when
she applied for a renewal of her practising
certificate; and (c) any time between 7 August 2018 and 31 October 2019,
when her practising
certificate was determined to be cancelled. So much may be
application for a local practising certificate in the Northern Territory gave
rise to the duty of candour. That duty subsists
from the time an application for
a practising certificate is provided to the Law Society and for the duration of
the time that practising
certificate is held. Heffernan’s application for
renewal of the practising certificate was an obvious juncture at which relevant
matters were required to be disclosed, but the duty of candour was continuous.
In fact, the duty of candour continued beyond the
date the Law Society cancelled
her practising certificate, and into the Supreme Court proceedings, including
when giving evidence
by affidavit and
[65] We reject
Heffernan’s submission that the Supreme Court did not consider
Heffernan’s obligations to make disclosures
at those relevant times. The
reasons below (at [55]) identified the ‘series of serious
non-disclosures’ found by reference
to earlier paragraphs in the reasons
which in turn identified the points in time at which the non-disclosures found
took place.
Suitability matters:
is relevantly in the following terms:
Suitability
(1) Each of the following is a suitability matter in relation to an individual:
(a) whether the person is currently of good fame and character;
(b) whether the person is or has been an insolvent under administration;
(c) whether the person has been convicted of an offence in Australia or a
foreign country, and if so:
(i) the nature of the offence; and
(ii) how long ago the offence was committed; and
(iii) the person’s age when the offence was committed;
(d) whether the person engaged in legal practice in Australia:
(i) when not admitted, or not holding a practising certificate, as required
under this Act or a previous law of this jurisdiction
that corresponds to this
Act or under a corresponding law; or
(ii) if admitted, in contravention of a condition on which admission was
granted; or
(iii) if holding an Australian practising certificate, in contravention of a
condition of the certificate or while the certificate
was suspended;
(e) whether the person has practised law in a foreign country:
(i) when not permitted by or under a law of that country to do so; or
(ii) if permitted to do so, in contravention of a condition of the permission;
(f) whether the person is currently subject to an unresolved complaint,
investigation, charge or order under any of the following:
(i) this Act or a previous law of this jurisdiction that corresponds to this
(ii) a corresponding law or corresponding foreign law;
(g) whether the person:
(i) is the subject of current disciplinary action, however expressed, in another
profession or occupation in Australia or a foreign
country; or
(ii) has been the subject of disciplinary action, however expressed, relating to
another profession or occupation that involved a
finding of guilt.
(ga) whether the person has been found to have engaged in academic dishonesty
(including, for example, plagiarism);
(h) whether the person’s name has been removed from:
(i) a local roll, and has not since been restored to or entered on a local roll;
(ii) an interstate roll, and has not since been restored to or entered on an
interstate roll; or
(iii) a foreign roll;
(i) whether the person’s right to engage in legal practice has been
suspended or cancelled in Australia or a foreign country;
(j) whether the person has contravened, in Australia or a foreign country, a law
(k) whether, under this Act, a law of the Commonwealth or a corresponding law, a
supervisor, manager or receiver, however described,
is or has been appointed in
relation to any legal practice engaged in by the person;
(l) whether the person is or has been subject to an order, under this Act, a law
of the Commonwealth or a corresponding law, disqualifying
the person from being
employed by, or a partner of, an Australian legal practitioner or from managing
a corporation that is an incorporated
legal practice;
(m) whether the person currently has a material inability to engage in legal
[67] The duty of
candour applies to each of the suitability matters in
those suitability matters applies to an applicant for a practising certificate,
or the holder of a practising certificate,
the duty of candour obliges them to
disclose it to the Law Society in comprehensive fashion. That, however, is not
the limit of the
duty of candour. It also obliges such a person to disclose to
the Law Society any circumstances which might reasonably be considered
such a person within one of those suitability matters or otherwise to bear or
reflect adversely on an assessment of fitness.
It is then for the Law Society to
determine, with all of the relevant information, whether the person is a fit and
proper person
to hold a practising certificate.
approach in cases of non-disclosure
[68] It follows
from all of the above that, in an appeal from a decision of the Law Society
cancelling a practising certificate for
failure to disclose relevant matters,
the Supreme Court will need to consider and determine whether:
(a) one or more of the suitability matters in
applies to the
practitioner;
(b) there were at the material times any circumstances which might reasonably be
considered to bring the practitioner within one
of those suitability matters in
(c) there were at the material times any circumstances which could otherwise
reasonably be taken to bear or reflect adversely on
an assessment of the
practitioner’s fitness to hold a practising certificate.
involves the construction of the relevant provisions of
making of findings of fact on the evidence before the Court. The facts that must
be determined in any particular case will
depend on the particular suitability
matter or matters in issue and the circumstances of the case. For example, if
the particular
suitability matter is whether the person is of good fame and
character within
, the Court may, if the practitioner disputes
it, be required to determine whether the practitioner has engaged in dishonest,
or other conduct which renders them not of good character. On the other
hand, if the particular suitability matter is whether the
person has been
convicted of an offence within
, the Court need only make
findings about whether the practitioner has been convicted, and need not make
any findings about whether
the practitioner committed a criminal offence. The
determination also requires an assessment of the nature of the matter and its
degree of connection to one of the suitability matters and/or its capacity to
reflect adversely on an assessment of that fitness.
[70] If the
Court is satisfied (on the balance of probabilities to the
standard) that a suitability matter in
applies to the practitioner,
or could reasonably be taken to apply, or that a matter could otherwise
reasonably be taken to bear
on the assessment of the person’s fitness,
then the practitioner was obliged to disclose the matter to the Law
[71] If the
Court is satisfied the practitioner was obliged to disclose the matter but
failed to do so, the Court must then determine
whether the applicant is not a
fit and proper person to hold a practising certificate by reason of that
non-disclosure. This determination
must take into account the findings already
made concerning the materiality of the information. It must also take into
account the
practitioner’s evidence in explanation for the non-disclosure,
which will raise credibility issues. The Court will need to
consider the
practitioner’s motivation for the non-disclosure, such as whether the
non-disclosure was an innocent error of
judgement, a deliberate effort to
conceal the truth or an attempt to minimise information adverse to the
assessment of fitness. The
Court will also need to consider, if relevant, the
other matters in s 47(2) of the Act, such as whether the person obtained an
practising certificate because of incorrect or misleading
information.
[72] Contrary to
the submissions made by counsel for Heffernan, we consider that the Supreme
Court took the proper approach as described
above. We reject the submission
that, by doing so, the Supreme Court made findings about honesty and candour
which amounted to the
exercise of a general, unstructured discretion. The
reasons for that conclusion are addressed further in the following
paragraphs.
No necessity to find improper conduct
[73] In written
submissions, counsel for Heffernan submitted that an assessment of compliance
with the duty of candour requires a
two-step process in which the first step is
to determine whether the undisclosed matter goes to the question of fitness and
and that this involves an assessment of ‘proven improper
conduct’. That is, it is a ‘necessary element to ascertain
the conduct actually occurred’. In writing at least, counsel for Heffernan
appeared to submit that the Supreme Court,
and this Court, were required to
determine whether or not the Department’s allegations and findings, and
the CCC’s findings,
were true and correct.
[74] Reliance
was placed on the decision of
Re Joy Onyeledo
[2015] NTSC 60
Re Joy Onyeledo
’), in which an applicant for admission to
legal practice had disclosed to the Admissions Board that she had been found on
occasions to have engaged in academic dishonesty whilst a student. She
initially disclosed that, on one occasion, she had been found
by the academic
disciplinary board to have made an honest mistake and, on the other occasion,
she was awarded a mark of zero for
an assignment because she had extensively
taken directly from an author’s work without using quotation marks and
without properly
referencing the work. After documents were provided by the
academic institution, she disclosed that the first occasion was not a
the academic disciplinary board, but a meeting with lecturers which concluded
she had made an error. Before the Supreme
Court, the applicant argued that she
had not engaged in plagiarism. It was not disputed that the first occasion was
not plagiarism,
but the Law Society argued that the second occasion was. The
Court held (at [30]) that there were two issues to be determined: first,
the applicant intended to pass off the work of others as her own (that being the
legal test for plagiarism); and second,
whether she made full and frank
disclosure to the Board of the circumstances surrounding the finding of academic
misconduct made
against her. Properly understood, the central issue in the case
was not whether the applicant should have disclosed that she had
been found to
have engaged in academic dishonesty (the suitability matter in
s 11(1)(ga))
, but whether she had so engaged (a matter falling within the
suitability matter in
s 11(1)(a)).
The other issue in the case was whether
the disclosure she had made about being found to have engaged in academic
dishonesty complied
with her duty of candour. Those two issues then fed into the
determination of whether she was a fit and proper person. The decision
stand for the proposition that, in all cases raising suitability matters,
particularly cases involving non-disclosure of
a relevant matter, the Court must
determine whether improper conduct occurred.
[75] In the
present case, Heffernan did not make
disclosure to the Law Society of
allegations or findings having been made against her (either in the Department
disciplinary process
or the CCC processes). Unlike the case of
, the question here is not whether disclosed adverse findings
bearing on fitness were established or true. The question here is whether
making of the Department’s or the CCC’s allegations or findings
meant Heffernan fell within a suitability matter
, or constituted
circumstances which might reasonably be considered to bring her within one of
those suitability matters, or otherwise
bore or reflected adversely on an
assessment of her fitness to hold a practising certificate, such that they
should have been disclosed.
relevant facts for that determination are not whether the allegations made or
found against Heffernan are true and correct.
The relevant facts are whether
adverse allegations or findings were made which brought Heffernan within a
suitability matter in
or could reasonably be taken to do so or
otherwise bore or reflected adversely on an assessment of her fitness to hold a
certificate, such that they should have been disclosed.
explains why, at the hearing below, Heffernan did not press many of hundreds of
paragraphs of affidavits and many hundreds
of pages of documents going to what
she said in response to the Department’s allegations and the findings in
the draft CCC
report. That position was adopted on the understanding that the
Law Society did not rely on the truth of those allegations and adverse
as any basis for a finding that Heffernan was not a fit and proper person to
hold a practising certificate. The only issue
was whether the allegations or
findings should have been disclosed, and whether the failure to disclose them,
and her explanations
therefor, demonstrated she was not a fit and proper
[78] In the
Supreme Court, when Heffernan was cross-examined about why she did not disclose
the draft CCC report, the primary Judge
received the draft CCC report and the
final CCC report only for the purpose of assisting the Court to understand
Heffernan’s
cross-examination. There was no suggestion that the primary
Judge was receiving those reports for any other purpose, and certainly
the purpose of accepting or otherwise determining the truth of what they
[79] However, on
this appeal, counsel for Heffernan applied pursuant to
Supreme Court Act 1979
(NT) for this Court to receive, initially, some
513 pages of further evidence, essentially comprising Heffernan’s
to the allegations the subject of the Department’s investigation
and the draft CCC report. The purpose of the further evidence
was to establish
that Heffernan had ‘a clear counter case’ to the allegations, which
should be considered when assessing
the Supreme Court’s findings about her
credibility (specifically, her explanations for not disclosing the findings made
the Department’s investigation, or having been summoned to give, and
having given, evidence before the CCC).
[80] Counsel for
Heffernan also made some criticism that the Supreme Court had quoted the
allegations or findings at length in the
reasons, and had been influenced by the
seriousness of the allegations and findings to make adverse findings against
Heffernan’s
credibility. By consent, this Court determined to consider the
application on a ‘document by document’ basis to the extent
reliance was placed on any particular document in the course of
Heffernan’s oral submissions. Ultimately, Heffernan’s
confined to 14 documents (plus attachments) comprising some 276 pages. Those
documents were received provisionally pursuant
(National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
(NT), with relevance to be
determined.
[81] We have
determined that the documents are not relevant and will not be received because
this Court is also not determining the
truth of the allegations or findings in
the Department’s investigation or the CCC reports, for the reasons set out
the extent necessary, when considering Heffernan’s evidence
explaining her failures to disclose, this Court is prepared to
accept that,
in her mind
, she had a credible counter-case to those allegations and
findings. For the reasons already stated, there is no need to assess the
strength of that counter-case.
allowing for the limited scope of the inquiry on appeal, the nature and
seriousness of the allegations and findings against
Heffernan are relevant to
both whether they should have been disclosed and the assessment of
Heffernan’s evidence explaining
why she did not disclose them. That
relevance runs counter to the submission made by Heffernan’s counsel,
which we reject,
that setting out the allegations or findings in the decision
below is indicative of the Supreme Court proceeding, to Heffernan’s
detriment, on the basis that ‘where there is smoke, there is fire’.
‘Disciplinary action’:
The Department’s disciplinary process
[83] The Law
Society contends that Heffernan was obliged to disclose the findings made by
Addis on 23 April 2018 in the Department’s
disciplinary process, as they
fell within
of the Act.
[84] Heffernan
contends that these were ‘proposed findings’ or ‘possible
findings’ and were not ‘concluded
or formal findings’ made
against Heffernan by the Department. That submission is rejected. Addis’s
letter states that
he had considered the investigator’s report and the
response provided by Heffernan, and found that the allegations were
substantiated.
He set out the substantiated findings. It is clear from his
letter that the only question remaining was whether Heffernan’s
should be terminated. There was no expressed intention that his finding that the
allegations were substantiated would
or could be revisited, or that they were
proposed or possible findings. Such a characterisation is inconsistent with his
of 28 August and 8 November 2017. It is also inconsistent with the
disciplinary process in
-82A of the PSMA, which provide that an
employer aware that an employee may have committed a breach of discipline may
decide to deal
with the matter as a disciplinary matter
after dealing with a matter as a disciplinary matter, if the employer finds the
employee has committed a breach of discipline,
they must decide to take
disciplinary action, improvement action or no further action (s 82A(3)).
[85] Addis’s
letter of 23 April 2018 clearly notified his finding that Heffernan had
committed a breach of discipline, and all
that remained was the decision to take
disciplinary action (and if so, what disciplinary action), improvement action or
action. Before that decision was to be made, Addis provided Heffernan
with an opportunity to be heard about it, not about the finding
allegations were substantiated. The findings set out in Addis’s letter of
23 April 2018 were findings that had been
made in the course of a formal
disciplinary process. They were not proposed or possible findings.
[86] Counsel for
Heffernan contended that when Heffernan applied for an unrestricted practising
certificate on 7 August 2018, she
was not the subject of ‘current
disciplinary action’ and had not ‘been the subject of disciplinary
of the Act, because the Department’s
investigation and Addis’s findings that the allegations had been
substantiated did
not constitute ‘disciplinary action’. Essentially,
the argument was that the phrase ‘disciplinary action’
refers only
to a sanction or penalty imposed at the end of a finalised disciplinary process
in which adverse allegations have been
found substantiated. Reliance was placed
in that respect on the definition of the term ‘disciplinary action’
of the PSMA. There, the term is defined, in relation to a breach
of discipline by an employee, to mean any one or more of a reprimand,
imposition of a fine, transfer, reduction in remuneration, reduction in level of
classification or dismissal. In that definition,
‘disciplinary
action’ is the sanction or consequence that may be imposed in response to
a finding of a breach of discipline
following an investigation.
definition of the same term in a different Act with a different purpose in a
different jurisdiction says virtually nothing
attributed to the term as it appears in the Act. This is particularly so where
refers to ‘disciplinary action,
’. Those words make it clear that
concerned with the labels or definitions adopted in the specific context or
statute in or under which the ‘disciplinary
action’ is taken.
Rather, the term ‘disciplinary action’ in the Act takes its ordinary
meaning. In their ordinary
sense, the words ‘disciplinary action’
are apt to encompass a disciplinary process that begins with formal notification
of adverse allegations of a breach of discipline.
[88] Counsel for
Heffernan also placed reliance on the definition of the term ‘disciplinary
action’ in s 540 of the Act.
The argument was that this definition,
albeit in a different context in the Act, was informative because it shows that
as used in the Act, means the action taken as a result of an adverse
finding, and not the investigation which may lead to a finding.
[89] Section 540
defines ‘disciplinary action’ as: (a) the making of an order by a
court or tribunal
or following
a finding of professional
by a legal practitioner under the Act or a corresponding law;
(b) any of a number of listed actions taken under the Act or a
corresponding law
following a finding of professional misconduct
legal practitioner. That definition of ‘disciplinary action’ clearly
extends in its terms to include the adverse
finding of professional misconduct.
So understood, this definition of ‘disciplinary action’ does not
assist Heffernan’s
argument. Rather, it supports the conclusion that a
process in which there was both an investigation
adverse findings
made against Heffernan, with the only remaining step being the sanction which
was to be imposed, falls within the
term ‘disciplinary action’.
[90] Counsel for
Heffernan also placed reliance on the definition of ‘disciplinary
action’ in the
Butterworths Australian Legal Dictionary
as follows:
Reasonable lawful action taken against an employee in
the nature of, or promoting, discipline ... Generally, disciplinary action
a decision by an employer to defer paying an increment to the employee,
or to reduce the rank, classification, position, grade, or
pay of the employee;
to impose a fine or forfeit pay; to annul the appointment of an employee on
probation; or to suspend or dismiss
an employee ...
definition was adopted by the primary Judge (at [23]) as the ordinary meaning of
the term. Counsel for Heffernan argued
that this definition does not refer to
the employer’s investigation, and only refers to the sanction imposed or
as a result of an adverse finding. Two things should be noted in that
[92] First, the
examples of disciplinary action given by the definition are not exhaustive.
Second, and more importantly, the definition
is drawn from the decision of the
Federal Court in
Commission for the Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation
of Commonwealth Employees v Chenhall
[1992] FCA 535
(1992) 37 FCR 75
’). The question in that case was whether the
respondent had suffered an ‘injury’ which was compensable under the
Commonwealth Employees’ Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
(Cth). That term was defined to exclude ‘any such disease or injury
suffered by an employee as a result of reasonable disciplinary
action taken
against the employee’. Justice Cooper held (at 83-84) that, in that
context, ‘disciplinary action’
referred to action taken against an
employee in the nature of or to promote discipline, and it was the disciplinary
action itself,
and not the steps anterior to the decision to take such action,
which was covered by the definition. His Honour held that, therefore,
taken to determine whether or not disciplinary action would be taken against an
employee, although it might be characterised
as part of a system or process to
maintain discipline, was not disciplinary action.
[93] However,
Cooper J went on to consider at length (at 86-89) the disciplinary process
applicable to the respondent in that case.
His Honour held (at 89) that the
relevant regime provided for an investigation and report, followed by the making
of a decision as
to whether to offer a caution or admonition or to charge the
member with a breach of discipline, which charge was then heard by a
disciplinary tribunal or the Commissioner to determine whether the member was
guilty of a disciplinary offence, and if so, the Tribunal
or Commissioner could
impose prescribed penalties. Consequently, his Honour held, ‘disciplinary
action’ is not lawfully
taken against a member of the Australian Federal
Police until such time as the Commissioner determines, in accordance with that
to take some action against a member in respect of a defined
disciplinary offence and takes one of the steps outlined in the regime
charging the member with a breach of discipline). It is clear that his Honour
rejected (at 85-86) the submission that ‘disciplinary
confined to the imposition of a sanction. His Honour clearly accepted that
‘disciplinary action’ in
that statute included the steps taken after
an investigation, a report and a decision to charge a member with a breach of
discipline.
The charge, the hearing and determination of that charge, as well as
the sanction, were all considered to fall within ‘disciplinary
action’, but the interview of the respondent which occurred before any
decision to charge the respondent with breaches of discipline
was not within the
term ‘disciplinary action’.
[94] It follows
does not stand for the proposition that the term
‘disciplinary action’ (in legislation relating to workplace
refers only to the imposition of a sanction.
for the proposition that ‘disciplinary action’ can include adverse
findings that a breach of discipline has occurred
by the statutory body tasked
with making those findings. That is what occurred in the Department’s
disciplinary process relating
to Heffernan.
[95] Counsel for
Heffernan argued further that investigations should not be considered to be
‘disciplinary action’ because
such investigations may not lead to
the imposition of any disciplinary sanction, and Heffernan had a clear
counter-case to the allegations.
Even if the existence of a counter-case were
accepted, it is consistent with the Act’s purposes of promoting the
administration
of justice and providing for the protection of consumers of legal
services and the public generally
and (b)), that suitability
matters to be taken into account in deciding whether to grant or renew, or
cancel, a practising certificate
include the fact that adverse findings have
been made against the applicant in a disciplinary process in another profession
or occupation.
informative to consider the other suitability matters in
considering the scope of
s 11(1)(g).
, a suitability
matter is whether the person has been convicted of an offence. By
s 11(1)(ga)
, a suitability matter is whether the person has been found to
have engaged in academic dishonesty. These suitability matters do not
reference to the imposition of a sanction or penalty. The academic dishonesty
matter focuses on an adverse finding. Even
though a criminal conviction is,
strictly speaking, a sanction imposed after a finding of guilt, it is also the
usual consequence
of a finding of guilt for most adult
with some other
penalty also usually imposed.
and (i), a suitability matter is whether the person’s
right to engage in legal practice has been suspended or cancelled, or
has been removed from the roll and not restored. By
suitability matter is whether the person is currently subject to an unresolved
complaint, investigation, charge or order under
the Act or a corresponding law.
These provisions disclose that suitability matters extend to both the sanction
for legal disciplinary
matters (paragraphs (h) and (i)) and current but
unresolved allegations or investigations of legal disciplinary matters
[98] The Law
Society argued that the same approach is reflected in
relation to disciplinary matters in non-legal professions or occupations, where
paragraph (i) is intended to capture ‘current’
(ie ongoing and
incomplete) disciplinary processes, and paragraph (ii) is intended to capture
completed disciplinary processes in
which the adverse allegations were found to
have been established (as captured by the phrase ‘that involved a finding
of guilt’).
Conversely, counsel for Heffernan argued that the word
‘current’ in
s 11(1)(g)(i)
refers to a disciplinary sanction
which is operative at the relevant time, such as a demotion or a suspension from
duty. The submission
followed that the distinction between legal disciplinary
matters (where both ongoing and incomplete, and completed, matters are a
suitability matter) and non-legal disciplinary matters (where only completed
matters where a sanction has been imposed are a suitability
intentional because legal disciplinary matters are far more significant for a
person seeking to practise as a lawyer.
[99] We do not
accept that submission. First, it is inconsistent with the use of the word
‘currently’ in
in relation to an unresolved
complaint, investigation, charge or other order in the legal profession context.
Second, an allegation
in some formal process which is being investigated or is
otherwise unresolved in a non-legal professional or occupational context
less important
for suitability than an allegation in some formal
process which is being investigated or is otherwise unresolved in a legal
context. Complaints, investigations, charges or orders in a legal
professional context may be found unsubstantiated, or may be trivial,
lead to a very minor sanction. Allegations in a formal process in a non-legal
professional or occupational context may be
very serious, may involve issues of
dishonesty, breach of trust or breach of duty, and may lead to serious
sanctions. There is no
purposive basis for a legislative approach which would
distinguish between the two in the manner contended.
[100] In support
of this argument, counsel for Heffernan also pointed to the different language
of the Act. An examination of that
language is informative. If the words ‘disciplinary action’ were
confined to a sanction
imposed at the end of a disciplinary process, the words
‘that involved a finding of guilt’ in
s 11(1)(g)(ii)
otiose, because a sanction would only be imposed if there was a finding of
guilt. The presence of those words is a further
indication that the words
‘disciplinary action’ in
s 11(1)(g)(ii)
are not limited to the
sanction imposed, but refer to a disciplinary process. That understanding of the
words ‘disciplinary
action’ then explains the reference to
‘current disciplinary action’ in
s 11(1)(g)(i)
distinction in paragraphs (i) and (ii) between a current disciplinary process
and a concluded disciplinary process. So understood,
those paragraphs are
consistent with the approach to ‘currently’ ‘unresolved’
complaints, investigations,
etc in relation to the legal profession, and other
professions or occupations.
[101] In our
opinion, the proper construction is that ‘disciplinary action’ in
refers to a formal disciplinary process taken in relation to
another profession or occupation. Accordingly, the primary Judge’s
conclusion on this point (at [57]) was correct.
primary Judge held (at [25]) that the Department’s investigation remained
open on 7 August 2018, as Heffernan ‘now
concedes’. That concession
was contained in closing written submissions, where it was put as a relevant
fact that, on 4 July
2018, Heffernan resigned without responding to the notice
of intention to terminate her employment, ‘leaving the investigation
[103] In any
event, the Supreme Court did not make a finding that the Department’s
investigation and adverse findings were ‘current
disciplinary
action’ within
s 11(1)(g)(i)
of the Act. The Supreme Court held (at
[25]) that the adverse findings made by Addis should have been disclosed by
Heffernan because
they were matters material to the question of whether she was
a fit and proper person, and (at [26]) that the finding that the alleged
breaches of discipline were substantiated was, ‘for practical
purposes’, a finding of guilt within the meaning of
s 11(1)(g)(ii)
if the Department’s disciplinary process (the ‘disciplinary
action’) relating to Heffernan had ceased
sometime after 25 July 2018
(when the Department informed her solicitor that it was ongoing), and was not
‘current’ on
7 August 2018 because she had resigned with effect from
4 July 2018, such that
s 11(1)(g)(i)
was not applicable (as the Supreme
Court effectively found), it is clear that, as at 7 August 2018, she had been
the subject of a
disciplinary action ‘that involved a finding of
guilt’ within
s 11(1)(g)(ii).
That is because on 23 April 2018, Addis
had found the allegations against Heffernan substantiated.
[105] The fact
that Heffernan disputed that finding and considered herself to have a clear
counter-case is irrelevant to the application
s 11(1)(g)(ii).
relevant facts are that the Department had undertaken a disciplinary process in
relation to Heffernan’s employment in an
occupation that did not involve
the practise of law comprising an investigation into allegations of possible
breaches of discipline
(ie, a ‘disciplinary action’), and had made
findings against her that the allegations were substantiated (ie, the
disciplinary
action ‘involved a finding of guilt’).
[106] Similarly,
it is irrelevant to the application of
s 11(1)(g)(ii)
(i) Heffernan had resigned before any termination of her employment;
(ii) the Department waived the notice period; (iii) she
was paid overtime
or back pay to which she was entitled before her resignation took effect; and
(iv) to the extent such a finding
of fact might be made, that Addis had offered
her another job (a fact disputed by the Law Society). Heffernan was obliged to
disclosed the relevant facts in her application of 7 August 2018 because
they constituted a suitability matter within the meaning
s 11(1)(g)(ii)
of the Act, and she failed to do so. Again, the Supreme Court was correct.
[107] We reject
the submission by counsel for Heffernan that the Supreme Court adopted an
‘inapt analogy’ by equating
the Department’s findings to a
criminal finding of guilt. As we have found, the Supreme Court correctly held
that the Department’s
findings fell within
s 11(1)(g)(ii)
of the Act,
which uses the term ‘finding of guilt’. The Supreme Court’s
observation that, ‘In crude terms,
she had been found guilty and was
awaiting sentence at the time she resigned’, does no more than convey that
at the time she
resigned, Heffernan had been the subject of disciplinary action
that ‘involved a finding of guilt’ within
s 11(1)(g)(ii)
had not, at the time she tendered her resignation, been punished or sanctioned
for that breach. We do not accept that the analogy
was ‘inapt’ given
that it reflects the wording of
s 11(1)(g)(ii)
of the Act, nor that it
‘renders the decision unsafe’ because it equates ‘draft
findings of an internal civil investigation’
with a criminal finding of
[108] Before
the Supreme Court, Heffernan conceded that she was obliged to disclose to the
Law Society the facts that the CCC had
prepared its draft report containing
adverse findings against her and that the CCC had released its final report
containing adverse
findings against her. These were submitted to be the only
failures to disclose suitability matters which should have been found by
Supreme Court. The concession was maintained in this Court, on the basis that
the adverse findings in the CCC’s two reports
fell within
of the Act. In our view, the adverse findings made by Addis that the allegations
in the Department’s disciplinary process were
substantiated equally fell
, for similar reasons. Namely, they were findings made in
a formal process relating to her employment that seriously impugned her
and integrity. The application of
to the Department’s
disciplinary process is addressed further in the following paragraphs.
[109] Counsel
for Heffernan argued that the Supreme Court found (at [57]), without giving
reasons for that finding, that Heffernan’s
suspension from duty on full
pay pending the investigation into the allegations comprised ‘disciplinary
action’ within
of the Act. The Supreme Court made no such
finding. The Supreme Court referred (at [57]) to Heffernan’s contention
had no legal obligation to disclose to the Law Society the findings of
the Department’s investigation or her suspension because
neither was a
‘current disciplinary action’. The Supreme Court rejected
Heffernan’s argument that the term ‘disciplinary
refers only to the final stage or act, or the ultimate outcome, and held that
the institution of an investigation is
‘disciplinary action’ and
that ‘current disciplinary action’ refers to an ongoing process
which has not been
finalised. There was no finding that the suspension was a
current disciplinary action. Given that the suspension ended with effect
May 2018 and Heffernan’s employment ceased with effect from 4 July
2018, it is unsurprising that there was no finding
below that, on 7 August 2018,
the suspension was ‘current’.
foregoing conclusions regarding the application of
s 11(1)(g)(ii)
to the Department’s disciplinary process and findings on
7 August 2018 apply equally to Heffernan’s application for renewal
her practising certificate on 4 April 2019. Again, she was obliged to disclose
the process and the findings in that application
and she did not do so.
[111] Ground 1
of the appeal is not made out.
‘Good fame and
character’:
and/or the duty of candour
expression ‘good fame and character’ in
is not defined. The word ‘fame’ refers to a person’s
reputation in the relevant community and the word
‘character’ refers
to a person’s actual
Determining whether a
person is of good fame and character requires consideration of matters affecting
the moral standards, attitudes
and qualities of the person, not merely their
general reputation, relevant to the person’s practice as a legal
practitioner.
For the purposes
of this case, it is unnecessary to consider the meaning of the term ‘good
fame and character’ further
than to state that it encapsulates the legal
practitioner’s attributes of honesty and integrity which form the
foundation for
the duty of candour, and which have already been described
Department’s disciplinary process
[113] Given the
conclusion reached above, it is strictly unnecessary to consider the
Department’s disciplinary process under
and/or the general
duty of candour. Nevertheless, we will deal with the matter briefly.
allegations against Heffernan contained in Addis’s letter of 28 August
2017 clearly raised serious issues about Heffernan’s
honesty and integrity
in the context of her employment with the Department, including a breach of
trust, failure to comply with the
Department’s authorisations, policies or
decisions, and misleading government officers or officials. The finding
in Addis’s letter of 23 April 2018 that those allegations had
been substantiated also clearly raised serious issues about Heffernan’s
honesty and integrity. As a result of those findings,
or could reasonably be taken to apply, to Heffernan, or they could otherwise
reasonably be taken to bear or reflect adversely
on an assessment of her fitness
to hold a practising certificate. Again, it is irrelevant here that Heffernan
asserts she had a clear
counter-case because the relevant facts are the making
of the allegations and the making of the findings and their content, not the
truth or correctness thereof.
[115] Heffernan
was obliged to have disclosed, in her application of 7 August 2018 and in her
application of 4 April 2019, the relevant
facts, and she failed to do so. The
Supreme Court’s findings (at [25] and [26]) that the Department’s
investigation and
the findings made by Addis should have been disclosed were
CCC summonses and examination
relevant facts are that:
(a) On 8 November 2018, Heffernan was served with the first CCC summons to
attend personally and give evidence in examination before
the CCC. On its face,
the summons stated that failure to attend could result in the issue of a warrant
for her apprehension.
(b) On 5 December 2018, Heffernan was served with the second CCC summons in the
same terms as the first summons.
(b) The CCC summonses stated that the scope and purpose of the examination was
to determine whether any public officers at the Department
engaged in serious
misconduct by corruptly using their position between December 2015 and June 2018
to benefit others.
(c) Heffernan had been a public officer at the Department between January 2016
and 4 July 2018, and was suspended from duty from
(d) On 5 and 6 December 2018, Heffernan attended the CCC examination and was
examined by the CCC.
(e) On around 20 May 2019, the CCC provided its draft report to Heffernan, which
made adverse findings against Heffernan regarding
serious misconduct in her
position as a public officer with the Department, including in relation to her
engagement of Peter Evans
and Howard Carr.
[117] From the
expressed scope and purpose of the CCC summonses and the findings made in the
CCC’s draft report and the CCC’s
final report, the clear inference
is that the CCC were investigating, amongst other matters, Heffernan’s
misconduct in her
employment with the Department related to her engagement of
Peter Evans and Howard Carr. The only available inference from those
findings is
that the examination of Heffernan before the CCC was directed, to some degree,
to that investigation. The primary Judge
correctly drew that inference. As his
Honour held (at [39]), support for it was found in Heffernan’s evidence
that she was
questioned at the CCC examination about ‘commercialisation
matters, including Dr Carr’ and ‘commercialisation and
procurement’ in the Department, and that documents were shown to her
including some she had signed. Heffernan accepted (in
written submissions to
this Court) that she was asked questions about the matters Addis had raised in
his ‘report’ (ie
his letter of 23 April 2018). That also supports
the inference just referred to.
[118] Counsel
for Heffernan argued that the draft CCC report contained adverse findings
against her ‘without any warning or
any such allegations being put to her
during her attendance as a witness’. Given the only inference reasonably
available, this
submission is rejected.
[119] Counsel
for Heffernan argued further that she was summoned as a witness for an
examination under
of the CCMA, which provides that an examination is
for the purposes of an investigation. As a consequence, Heffernan was not
necessarily
being investigated for, let alone charged with, criminal conduct,
corrupt conduct or misconduct. It was submitted that the protections
witnesses given by ss 142 to 145 of the CCMA show that the examination
process is a fact-finding exercise which may culminate
in a report by the CCC.
All of that may be accepted, but it ignores the readily available inference
referred to above that Heffernan
was, as a matter of fact, being investigated by
the CCC for serious misconduct in her employment with the Department.
[120] It follows
from that inference that the CCC summonses and the CCC examination of Heffernan
raised serious issues about Heffernan’s
honesty and integrity in the
context of her employment with the Department. As a result,
applied, or could reasonably be taken to apply, to Heffernan, or the CCC
summonses and examination could otherwise reasonably be
taken to bear or reflect
adversely on an assessment of her fitness to hold a practising certificate.
Again, it is irrelevant here
that Heffernan asserts a clear counter-case because
the relevant facts are the CCC’s investigation into Heffernan’s
misconduct and the scope and content of that investigation, not the
truth of the allegations made against her. Heffernan was obliged
disclosed the relevant facts in her application of 4 April 2019, and she failed
CCC’s draft report and CCC’s final
relevant facts are the findings made against Heffernan in the CCC’s draft
report and final report. Those findings
clearly raised serious issues about
Heffernan’s honesty and integrity in the context of her employment with
the Department.
As a result,
applied, or could reasonably be
taken to apply, to Heffernan, or the proposed or final findings in both reports
could otherwise reasonably
be taken to bear or reflect adversely on an
assessment of her fitness to hold a practising certificate. Again, it is
irrelevant here
that Heffernan asserts a clear counter-case. That is because the
relevant facts are the findings made against Heffernan in the CCC’s
reports, not the truth or correctness thereof. As part of her ongoing duty of
candour Heffernan was obliged to have disclosed the
relevant facts to the Law
Society, and she failed to do so. In the Court below, as in this Court, she
accepts that.
[122] Counsel
for Heffernan argued that the Supreme Court relied on the findings in the
CCC’s reports as proof of improper conduct
without ‘performing the
necessary task of enquiring into the basis of those findings’, contrary to
s 217A(3) of the CCMA,
which provides that a finding or opinion that
misconduct has occurred is not, and is not to be taken as, a finding or opinion
a person is guilty of or has committed, a criminal offence or a
disciplinary offence.
[123] We reject
the submission that the primary Judge relied on the findings in the CCC’s
reports as proof of improper conduct.
There is no express finding in the reasons
below that Heffernan committed the things attributed to her by the CCC. His
acknowledgement (at [69]) that a proper consideration of
Heffernan’s current fitness could not take place without a court or
tribunal inquiring into the basis for the adverse findings made against her in
the CCC’s final report supports the conclusion
that no such finding was
made. As referred to above, it was necessary to understand and set out in the
reasons the nature and content
of the findings made by the CCC because that
bears on the determination of whether or not they are findings which brought
or could reasonably be taken to have brought Heffernan, within
of the Act, or otherwise bear or reflect adversely on an
assessment of her fitness to hold a practising certificate. That preliminary
determination is required in order to determine in turn whether or not the
findings should have been disclosed. That is all the Supreme
Court did. In
particular, the Supreme Court did not, at [38], [40] and [69] of the reasons
below, rely on the findings in the CCC’s
draft or final reports as proof
Heffernan had committed the improper conduct there found. Ground 3 is not made
No longer a fit and proper person to hold a practising
certificate
[124] For the
reasons we have given, we are satisfied that the Supreme Court did not err in
concluding that Heffernan was obliged
to disclose to the Law Society each of:
(i) the Department’s investigation and Addis’s findings;
(ii) the CCC summons
and examination; and (iii) the CCC’s draft and
final reports. We must now consider the Supreme Court’s determination
to whether Heffernan was not or no longer a fit and proper person to hold a
practising certificate because of her failures to
disclose those
Heffernan’s credibility
[125] This calls
for an assessment of Heffernan’s explanations for her failures to disclose
those matters and of her credibility
in that regard. We bear in mind the
considerations we have described above concerning the primary Judge’s
considerable advantage
in hearing Heffernan’s evidence and making
assessments about her credibility.
Some background facts about
following facts are relevant to the assessment of Heffernan’s explanations
for her failures to disclose those matters
and her credibility. They are not in
[127] At the
time of the hearing in the Supreme Court, Heffernan had over
20 years’ experience as a legal practitioner. She
was awarded a
Bachelor of Laws in New Zealand in June 1990 and admitted as a barrister and
solicitor in New Zealand in July 1990.
In 2001, she was awarded a Master’s
Degree in resource management law. In 2008, she was awarded a Graduate Diploma
in International
Law. In 1992, she worked for a regional council as a Regulatory
Legal Advisor in New Zealand. From 2000 to 2008, she worked as a
solicitor for
the Department of Conservation in New Zealand. In January 2002, she was admitted
as a legal practitioner in New South
Wales. In 2011, she moved to Australia and
worked for a Western Australian department on a parliamentary inquiry. She held
Australian practising certificate from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2018.
She commenced working for the Department on 16 January 2016.
She undertook much
work and was awarded various awards in recognition of that
work. She also provided a number of character references attesting to
Department’s investigation and adverse findings
[128] In an
affidavit, Heffernan deposed that on 7 August 2018 it did not occur to her that
her disclosure obligations included an
obligation to disclose anything that
arose out of her employment with the Department. She said she was not subject to
any ongoing
disciplinary sanctions (such as suspension), her resignation and
payment of unpaid entitlements concluded all matters relating to
her employment,
on her resignation it could not be said to mean that the disciplinary action
remained current, no disciplinary action
was continued against her after her
resignation, and if the disciplinary action was not finalised or appealed from,
she would forever
be considered to be subject to current disciplinary action.
cross-examination, Heffernan said that when she was completing her application
for a practising certificate around 7 August
2018, she read
the Act, she believed that the Department’s disciplinary process
‘was resolved’, she read in
that there had to be a finding
of guilt ‘which is a criminal court’ and it was her understanding
that the Department’s
process ‘was finished’. She said,
‘I’ve never been disciplined. I’ve never been sacked and I
my face didn’t fit and it was finished’. She said she did
reflect back on the Departmental matters and decided they did
not need to be
disclosed. She said she understood that when she resigned on 4 July 2018, that
was the end of all matters with the
Department. She denied that she did not
disclose information about the Department’s disciplinary process in her
application
form because she knew it might bear against her application.
Supreme Court found (at [25]) that Heffernan’s assessment that the
suitability ground in
s 11(1)(g)(i)
of the Act did not apply to her
‘may have been reasonable’ based on a belief that her resignation,
submitted before Addis
made good the foreshadowed dismissal, had brought the
disciplinary process to an end and Addis had taken no further steps after her
resignation was accepted, giving her reason to believe that the disciplinary
action was no longer current.
primary Judge found (at [26]) that Heffernan’s belief that the suitability
s 11(1)(g)(ii)
did not apply to her was
‘questionable’ because the fact that the breaches were found proven
was, for practical purposes,
a ‘finding of guilt’, and
Heffernan’s belief that the finding of guilt in that context had to be
made by a criminal
court was ‘doubly questionable’ because the
reference to ‘disciplinary action’ in another profession or
was clearly a reference to proceedings which were civil in nature.
His Honour said ‘it beggars belief’ that an experienced
lawyer truly
believed that
s 11(1)(g)(ii)
did not apply to her because she had not been
found guilty by a criminal court, and the finding that the allegations were
substantiated
was not a ‘finding of guilt’ within the meaning of the
primary Judge rejected (at [60]) Heffernan’s alternative submission that,
if she was required to disclose the Department’s
disciplinary action when
she applied for a practising certificate and its renewal, her failure to make
the relevant disclosures was
on the basis of an erroneous but understandable
error of judgement. The Supreme Court found that Heffernan’s explanations
contrived in order to explain the inexplicable’, namely that
it did not occur to a lawyer of her standing and experience to
disclosure of adverse matters in relation to her suitability: as to whether she
was currently of good fame and character,
and as to whether she was a fit and
proper person to hold an unrestricted practising certificate.
[133] Counsel
for Heffernan criticised these findings on a number of bases, each of which we
reject. It was argued that the Supreme
Court had concluded that Heffernan made a
conscious decision not to disclose the Department’s disciplinary action to
Society on the basis of a question to her in cross-examination about the
part of the application form that refers to ‘unresolved
complaints or
investigations in this or other jurisdictions’, which was a question that
did not arise in relation to a suitability
s 11(1)(g).
that submission because the conclusion about Heffernan’s conscious
decision is entirely consistent with, and was
therefore clearly founded on,
Heffernan’s evidence that she did reflect back on the disciplinary action
and decide that it
did not need to be disclosed.
[134] Counsel
for Heffernan argued that she was ‘criticised’ for her evidence that
she did not think about the disciplinary
action beyond that it was not a finding
of guilt. The submission was that Heffernan was criticised because the
investigation remained
open. We reject that submission because there was no
‘criticism’ of Heffernan related to the investigation being open.
The primary Judge simply recorded the fact that the investigation did remain
open, a matter Heffernan conceded in the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court found
that, in the circumstances of Heffernan’s resignation, her belief that the
suitability ground in
s 11(1)(g)(i)
did not apply to her may have been
reasonable.
[135] Counsel
for Heffernan argued that the Supreme Court erred in finding that Heffernan was
‘very aware’ that she had
been the subject of the Department’s
investigation and findings because that awareness does not ‘translate into
that she was very aware that the investigation was a matter that was
required to be disclosed’. We reject that submission.
The primary Judge
did not make any such finding. As already stated, his Honour found that her
belief that the suitability ground
s 11(1)(g)(i)
did not apply to her
may have been reasonable.
[136] Counsel
for Heffernan argued that the Supreme Court’s criticism of
Heffernan’s belief that the words ‘finding
of guilt’ in
s 11(1)(g)(ii)
only applied to a finding made by a criminal court was
unsustainable given that the Department’s process ‘was only at
stage of an investigation with possible findings’. We have already
rejected that characterisation of Addis’s letter
of 23 April 2018.
[137] Counsel
for Heffernan argued that the Supreme Court erred in not making any finding that
the Department’s allegations
were substantiated on the balance of
probabilities, which was a necessary precursor to a finding that the
Department’s disciplinary
action should have been disclosed. We have
already rejected that submission.
[138] Counsel
for Heffernan argued that her construction of
was either correct
or ‘more than sensibly arguable’. We have already rejected the
argument that
s 11(1)(g)(ii)
did not apply to Heffernan. We also reject the
submission that her view was ‘more than sensibly arguable’,
specifically
in relation to
s 11(1)(g)(ii)
, as it is founded on the
proposition (which we have rejected) that the Department’s findings in
Addis’s letter of 23
April 2018 were merely ‘proposed
therefore reject the submission that the primary Judge erred in finding that
Heffernan’s explanations were contrived
in order to explain the
inexplicable. None of the asserted errors in the primary Judge’s rejection
of Heffernan’s explanations
for her failure to disclose the
Department’s disciplinary action have been established, and Ground 2 is
not made out.
CCC summonses and examination
[140] In an
affidavit, Heffernan deposed that she did not believe the description of the
scope and purpose of the examinations, which
referred to officers of the
Department engaged in serious misconduct by corruptly using their position
between December 2015 to June
2018, was a reference to her having engaged in
serious misconduct. She said this was because she did not work for the
in December 2015.
In cross-examination,
she gave the following evidence after the scope and purpose of the first CCC
summons was read to her:
You must have immediately thought that that
included you?---I did not immediately think that. That is false.
You were a public officer at the department during that time frame
weren’t you?---I was not. ... I did not work there in December
any time in 2015.
You commenced employment at the department in January 2016 and you remained
there through to ... July 2018, didn’t you?---July
Yes. So you are squarely within the period of this summons are you not?---No,
I’m not because I didn’t work there in December
Ms Heffernan, you understand – you’ve had prosecutorial
experience haven’t you?---20 years ago.
You understand what the scope of between dates is and what that means,
don’t you, in a summons like this?---I am summoned as
Is it your evidence, Ms Heffernan, that because you didn’t work there
in December 2015 in the department, that this summons
did not apply to you at
all?---My evidence is that I received a letter from [Addis] telling me that the
[CCC] had no interest and
has reported you earlier and that when I received this
I was summoned as a witness.
I just, Ms Heffernan, want to understand your remark about what the
importance of December 2015 is. Putting aside what [Addis] may
or may not have
said, when you received this summons and you read it, it applies during almost
the entire period of your employment
in the department, doesn’t
it?---That’s not how I read it. ...
... you were employed at the department during almost the entire period of
the scope of this summons weren’t you?---I was employed
from 16 January to
4 July was my understanding.
Yes, ... January 2016 to July 2018?---Yes.
So, Ms Heffernan ... [w]hen you read the summons you immediately thought that
you were ... clearly within its scope?---I was summoned
as a witness.
You knew that the alleged breach of discipline and the matters which [Addis]
had found substantiated, although you disagreed with
it, covered this exact type
of issue, didn’t you?---I did not.
The initial alleged breach of discipline and opportunity to respond that was
provided to you gave notice of conduct that you ... failed
to comply with
procurement policies. Do you remember responding to that allegation?---Yes.
That you offered transfer of funds to which you had no delegated authority,
do you remember responding to that allegation?---Yes.
That you gave incorrect information in a letter? Do you remember that?---I
didn’t give incorrect information in a letter.
Do you remember the allegation?---Yes.
The allegation that you committed funds to engage Mr Evans and [Ms] Russell
without appropriate authorisation. Do you remember that
allegation?---Yes.
And that you provided misleading information and responses to [the]
ministerial office, the PMC and the Office of the Minister for
Development. Do you remember that allegation?---Yes.
And there is another [allegation] that you circumvented and misused a
Memorandum of Understanding between the department and the UWA
for unpaid work.
Do you remember that allegation?---Yes.
So, returning back to the summons, which is requiring you to attend to be
examined as to whether any public officers of the department
engaged in serious
misconduct by corruptly using their position, when you received the summons you
must have known that that was
squarely directed at the matters you had been
alleged to have been involved in and found to have been involved in?---I did
[141] Heffernan
gave the following evidence in cross-examination in relation to her application
for renewal of her practising certificate
lodged on 4 April 2019:
this stage, in addition to the departmental matters that we spoke about earlier,
you had received the summons, and attended the
examination before the CCC,
hadn’t you?---Correct.
Did you turn your mind to those matters when you typed in the ‘X’
against the answer ‘No’, to the question
in 4.3?---I believed I have
[sic] already addressed the departmental issue. I believed it was at [an] end by
that time. I had been
paid $18,000 by [Addis] for my overtime. When I turned my
mind to the witness summons, I appeared. I gave evidence, answering questions,
and I believed the matter was at an end as to my part.
And is that belief about the summons based upon the fact that you considered
yourself out of scope of that summons from the outset?---I
was summonsed as a
witness. I had also received a communication in writing from [Addis], that
stated that the [CCC] had no interest
what so ever, and neither did the Public
Sector Commission in relation to his allegations.
When you say Ms Heffernan, that you were summonsed as a witness, is that to
mean that you did not interpret the scope and purpose
of the examination to
potentially include you at all, other than someone who could add evidence to
it?---I had no idea what it was
You didn’t think to yourself that the scope and purpose of the
examination expressed as it was by the CCC included you?---Because
[Addis] had
put in writing to me in September of 2017, they had absolutely no interest in
the issues that he raised.
But this summons is dated 24 October 2018, and it’s under the hand of
the Commissioner?---And by that time, [Addis] had paid
me $18,000 and I had
nothing to do with the department after I left on the fourth.
No, you had nothing to do with the department, but that didn’t mean
that you had nothing to do with the [CCC] did it?---He paid
me $18,000 for my
flexitime, overtime. I had no idea what I was being summonsed for, as a
Ms Heffernan, you crossed ‘No’ to the answer at 4.3, because you
knew that if you disclosed information about the summons
and the examination,
that it might bear against the consideration of whether you are a fit and proper
person for the renewal of the
practising certificate, didn’t you?---That
is not correct.
In May 2019, you made a notification about the summons to – in the PI
– in the insurance application?---Yes, that’s
At that stage, Mr Heathcote was advising you, wasn’t he?---Yes, late
You made a notification of the summons to your professional indemnity
application, but not to the Law Society?---Is that a question?
Yes?---I did not know in 2019 that it was a requirement, outside of serious
offences, or suitability matters, things that weren’t
listed on the actual
form that were required to be disclosed. I now know that, in 2022, with the
assistance of senior counsel, if
I had known that at the time, I would have
declared it. I didn’t know that.
[142] As regards
the CCC examination, Heffernan deposed in an affidavit that she flew at her own
cost to attend the examination in
Perth. At the start of her examination, she
asked the Commissioner whether the examination was about a payment of $1 million
Department to a government corporation. She was told that she does not
ask the questions. She was first questioned about ‘commercialisation
matters, including Dr Carr’. She had never been questioned about Dr Carr
by anyone. Documents were shown to her during her
examination ‘and
questioning on commercialisation and procurement’ in the Department,
including documents signed by herself.
She answered questions on the second day
and tendered a large number of documents ‘that substantiated’ her
answers, including
copies of Cabinet Decision records and a Premier’s
instruction that a case in which the Department was involved was to be mediated.
At the end of the examination, the Commissioner thanked her for her attendance
and assistance. She deposed:
I did not believe that any allegation
of misconduct was made against me specifically, or that I was the subject or
target of any CCC
investigation.
primary Judge held (at [30]) that Heffernan’s evidence as extracted above
‘raises significant concerns’
character and fitness, both in the past and currently. She did not answer the
question about her
understanding of ‘between dates’ in the CCC
summons, instead ‘obstinately replying’ that she was summoned
witness. Her asserted understanding that the summons did not apply to her
because she had not started work at the Department
in December 2015 was found to
be inconsistent not only with her many years of experience in the law but also
the fact that she is
‘an educated adult of presumably normal or above
normal intelligence’.
primary Judge found (at [31]) that Heffernan’s evidence about Addis
telling her the CCC had ‘no interest’
in her was a reference to the
email from Addis of 21 September 2017, in which Addis told Heffernan that the
CCC considered the matter
to fall outside its jurisdiction. The primary Judge
found that, while that reason was not ‘as fanciful’ as the first
reason Heffernan gave for her belief that the scope and purpose of the summons
did not apply to her, he did not accept that Addis’
email of 21 September
2017 was still operating on Heffernan’s mind to cause her to believe that
her conduct was not of interest
to the CCC after the adverse findings which had
subsequently been made by Addis. The primary Judge found that Heffernan’s
to the effect that she did not make any connection between the subject
matter of the CCC summons and the subject matter of the Department’s
disciplinary action was not credible. The primary Judge rejected
Heffernan’s evidence that, when she received the CCC summons,
she thought
her conduct was not within the scope of the CCC investigation.
primary Judge ultimately rejected (at [62]) Heffernan’s submission that,
on 4 April 2019, she was entitled to believe,
on reasonable grounds, that
she was not the target of the CCC investigation, and rejected that she had that
belief. The Supreme Court
described her explanations for her claimed beliefs as
‘spurious’ and her affidavit evidence about the subject matter
the CCC examination as ‘vague’.
[146] Counsel
for Heffernan criticised these findings on a number of bases. It was argued
that the erroneous credibility findings
regarding Heffernan’s evidence
intertwined’
with the primary Judge’s assessment of
Heffernan’s credibility on other matters, making the entire credibility
‘fatally flawed’. We have rejected that there were
erroneous credibility findings about Heffernan’s evidence about
Department’s disciplinary action, and so reject this submission as
[147] Counsel
for Heffernan argued that the Supreme Court’s finding at [30] that her
evidence in cross-examination raised significant
concerns about her credit,
character and fitness was ‘without explanation’. We reject that
submission. The explanation
is plainly set out in the remainder of that
paragraph of the reasons.
[148] Counsel
for Heffernan argued that the findings in the draft CCC report were used as a
basis for disbelieving Heffernan’s
evidence about the CCC summons even
though the latter was first in time. We reject that submission. The primary
Judge did not refer
to the findings in the draft CCC report in making the
findings about Heffernan’s beliefs about the CCC summons. The findings
the draft CCC report were only used (at [39]) to draw the inference that the CCC
examination of Heffernan was directed at her
[149] Counsel
for Heffernan argued that the fact that she did not, during the CCC examination,
seek to exercise her right to silence
on the ground of self-incrimination was a
fact that supported her claim that she did not consider herself to be a target
investigation. We reject that submission. First, s 160(2) of the
CCMA provides that a person required by the CCC to answer a question
relevant to
an investigation is not excused from the requirement to answer on the ground
that the answer might incriminate or tend
to incriminate them or render them
liable to a penalty. Second, Heffernan’s evidence was that she tendered in
the CCC a large
number of documents that substantiated her answers to
questioning. That act supports the inference that she was a target of the
investigation and, at least by the second day of the examination, if
not before, she knew it.
CCC draft report and CCC final
[150] In an
affidavit, Heffernan deposed that, after receiving the draft CCC report, her
genuinely held belief was that her responses
to the draft report proved that
what the CCC was claiming was incorrect. She believed her responses addressed
the ‘significant
inaccuracies and errors’ in the draft CCC report
which resulted in her ‘being seen in a negative and inaccurate
[151] Heffernan’s
evidence in cross-examination was as follows:
Did you turn your mind
to whether you might need to alert the Law Society to the draft report that you
had received from the CCC?---I
didn’t, but I now know, in 2022, that it
doesn’t matter what you get, you should give it to the Law Society, err on
side of caution. So, at the time in 2019, I didn’t have that
HIS HONOUR: And so, did you or did you not turn your mind to it? I assume
you’re saying, no I didn’t turn my mind?---No,
didn’t have the paperwork in front of me. I wasn’t filling it
Yes?---And I didn’t know there was any ongoing requirement, and I now
do know that in 2022.
MR LIVERIS: You have not given evidence in your affidavit to the effect that
you’ve just given now. Why?---I disagree. I stated
in my second affidavit
that had I known I was required to state about the final report, which would be
the same as the draft or the
summons, I would have done so. I did state that.
And that’s my lack of knowledge and I apologise for that.
I just – I want to understand, when you said to us now, that had you
... known about the requirement to disclose, you would
have disclosed them. Why
– why do you hold that view now?---Because when I read the paperwork in
2018 and 2019, I looked at
the matters that were documented. It didn’t
cover matters that were outside of that. I didn’t know I had an obligation
to disclose. Had I known I had an obligation to disclose the summons, the draft
report, or that I had attended an examination as
a witness, I would have
disclosed. And in my second affidavit, I made it clear, had I known, when I got
the final report that I should
have again, communicated with the Law Society,
that I would have. But at that time in 2018 and 2019, I did not know that that
a requirement. Now I do know in 2022, that is a requirement.
primary Judge held (at [40]) that whether or not Heffernan truly believed that
she had not been a subject or target of the
CCC investigation, she must have
realised that she was a target as soon as she read the draft CCC report in late
May 2019. She must
have realised that the CCC was intending to make a finding of
serious misconduct concerning her dishonesty in the creation of false
The primary Judge held (at [64]) that, although her evidence as to lack of
awareness that her obligations of disclosure
were ongoing is not inherently
improbable, it was ‘damning in terms of lack of understanding of the
professional ethical obligations
of disclosure and candour’, and
Heffernan’s evidence generally was so unsatisfactory that the Supreme
Court did not accept
her evidence on this issue.
[153] Counsel
for Heffernan criticised these findings on a number of bases. It was argued
that the Supreme Court’s rejection
of Heffernan’s evidence on this
point was infected by the other errors made in assessing her credibility. We
have rejected
the submissions about other errors, so we reject this submission
[154] Counsel
for Heffernan argued that the Supreme Court’s findings were
‘severe’ and ‘emphatic’ by
virtue of the use of
descriptors such as ‘fanciful’ and ‘spurious’. Such
descriptors do not, of themselves,
bespeak error. In the absence of any
demonstrated error in the primary Judge’s assessment of Heffernan’s
credibility,
and bearing in mind the primary Judge’s considerable
advantages in seeing Heffernan give her evidence, no error is shown. We
that such findings were warranted, noting also:
(a) the inconsistency between Heffernan’s evidence that she read
of the Act before completing her application forms and her
evidence that she did not know that it was a requirement for things not
on the application forms to be disclosed;
(b) the latter evidence given in the face of the forms expressly stating that
list matters that can be taken into account, and expressly
stating that the things referred to in the forms are by way of example;
(c) Heffernan’s consistent failures to disclose any of the
Department’s disciplinary process and findings, the CCC summonses,
examination, the CCC draft report and, quite incredibly, the CCC final report.
Obtained a practising certificate because of incorrect or misleading
information
primary Judge held (at [25]) that Heffernan’s negative answers on the
application forms to the question whether there
was any further information
relevant to the question of whether she was a fit and proper person, and the
declaration that there was
no further relevant information not previously
disclosed, were untrue and (at [58]) revealed at best a lack of awareness of
professional
standards and at worst a deliberate false statement.
[156] Counsel
for Heffernan argued that the Supreme Court found that Heffernan’s
practising certificate had been obtained as
a result of incorrect or misleading
information. Heffernan’s ground of appeal (Ground 4) refers to the reasons
below at [62]
to [64]. There is no express finding to that effect, either in
those paragraphs or elsewhere in the reasons.
[157] Counsel
for Heffernan argued that the matter in
is not a matter which
enlivens the Law Society’s power in
to amend, suspend or cancel
a practising certificate, because the only applicable ground in this matter
which enlivens the power
is whether Heffernan is no longer a fit
and proper person to hold a practising certificate. It was argued that
only applies when the Law Society is considering whether to grant or
renew a practising certificate.
[158] We reject
that argument.
of the Act sets out three grounds for amending,
suspending or cancelling a practising certificate. The first is that the holder
no longer a fit and proper person to hold the certificate
Section 47(1)
provides that
has effect for
(which deals with
the grant or renewal of a practising certificate)
or another provision of the
if the question of whether or not a person is a fit and proper person to
hold a practising certificate is relevant. Heffernan’s
argument completely
ignores the italicised words, which clearly capture
There is no
is applicable when the Law Society is exercising the
power to cancel a practising certificate.
[159] Counsel
for Heffernan argued that it is a manifest error to conclude that an applicant
is not a fit and proper person to hold
a practising certificate and then to say
that, because she considered herself fit and proper, her application involved
or misleading information. It was also put that there could be no
finding that the information which was not disclosed resulted in
the application
being incorrect or misleading without first making a positive finding that the
allegations concerned were substantiated.
[160] Both of
those submissions miss the point entirely. In considering the matter in
, it is patently clear that, if an applicant for a practising
certificate or a renewal of a practising certificate indicates on the
application form that there is no further information relevant to the question
of whether they are a fit and proper person, and signs
the declaration at the
end of the form which says that there is no further information relevant to the
consideration of this application
which has not previously been disclosed to the
Law Society, in circumstances where they have failed to comply with their duty
candour and not disclosed a matter required by that duty to be disclosed, it
is axiomatic that their practising certificate (once
granted) was obtained
because of incorrect or misleading information. Such an application is, in the
respects just stated, certainly
incorrect or misleading. There is no necessity
to make a finding that the allegations made against Heffernan were true.
[161] Counsel
for Heffernan argued that the finding that Heffernan ‘had erred in
disclosure in relation’ to
could not be supported. We have
already rejected the submission that
did not apply.
[162] Counsel
for Heffernan argued that the Supreme Court placed reliance on Heffernan’s
failure to disclose the CCC final report
in concluding the application was
incorrect or misleading. No such finding was made.
[163] Ground 4
is not made out.
‘Manifest injustice’ in failing to
consider other sanctions?
[164] Counsel
for Heffernan argued that the Supreme Court failed to consider any other
sanction less than the cancellation of her
unrestricted practising certificate.
In this regard, the determination to be made by the Supreme Court was whether,
at the time the
Law Society cancelled Heffernan’s practising certificate,
she was no longer a fit and proper person to hold it. If so satisfied,
Supreme Court was required to determine whether to confirm the Law
Society’s cancellation of the certificate or make other
orders. The other
options available to the Court were to suspend the certificate for a period or
amend the certificate to add conditions.
primary Judge referred (at [67]) to the wide power of the Supreme Court under
of the Act to make any order it considers appropriate on the
appeal. As set out above, that power draws in the Law Society’s
dispositive powers under
s 57(2)(c).
The primary Judge held (at [70]) that
from 7 August 2018 to 31 October 2019, Heffernan was not a fit and proper
person to hold an
unrestricted practising certificate. The primary Judge held
(at [66]) that the Law Society’s cancellation of Heffernan’s
practising certificate was ‘fully justified’ both at the time and
viewed in retrospect, and that Heffernan had failed
to persuade the Court that
the proven non-disclosures should not have resulted in the cancellation of her
practising certificate.
In other words, given the finding that Heffernan was not
a fit and proper person to hold a practising certificate at the time the
Society cancelled hers, there was no need to consider the other options
available to the Supreme Court under
(2)(c) of the Act. That
is because the only appropriate outcome on the basis of the findings made by the
Supreme Court was that Heffernan’s
practising certificate should have been
cancelled as she was not a fit and proper person to hold it.
[166] There was
no ‘failure’ to consider other possible orders. The Court was
clearly cognisant of the other possible
dispositions available to it. Even if
there was a failure to expressly address suspension or imposition of conditions,
the ‘failure’
was, in the circumstances, no more than a failure to
mention and then dismiss them given the finding that Heffernan was not a fit
proper person to hold a practising certificate. No error has been shown. Ground
5 is not made out.
[167] Counsel
for Heffernan also put various arguments about the Supreme Court’s refusal
to make a declaration that she was,
at the time of the hearing, a fit and proper
person to hold a practising certificate, asserting a number of errors said to
fall within
Ground 5. We do not accept that those asserted errors fall within
Ground 5, which related to the asserted failure of the Supreme
Court to consider
suspension or imposition of conditions on Heffernan’s practising
certificate. Further, the relief sought
by Heffernan on the appeal to the
Supreme Court was a declaration that she was a fit and proper person to hold an
unrestricted practising
certificate for the 2019/2020 year. No declaration was
sought that Heffernan was a fit and proper person at the time of the hearing
the appeal.
[168] In any
event, the primary Judge held (at [68]) that, in the circumstances of this case,
where Heffernan’s 2019/2020 practising
certificate would have long expired
before the appeal was heard, she had not sought to have the appeal listed before
its expiry or
to stay the cancellation of the practising certificate, and had
not applied for a practising certificate for the years after 30 June
was not appropriate to consider whether Heffernan was a fit and proper person at
the time of the hearing of the appeal.
We agree. The Court would not have all of
the necessary information before it to make that determination, including what
had happened
in relation to Heffernan, if anything, since the publication of the
CCC final report, and the information required to be provided
to the Law Society
by an applicant for a practising certificate. Moreover, as the primary Judge
held (at [69]), the determination
of whether Heffernan was a fit and proper
person to hold a practising certificate would require determination of the truth
adverse findings made against Heffernan in the CCC’s final report
because findings by the CCC that serious misconduct has occurred
is not, and is
not to be taken as, a finding or opinion that a person is guilty of or has
committed a criminal offence or a disciplinary
offence (s 217A(3) of the
CCMA). Whether or not that provision would preclude a decision by the Law
Society that Heffernan had committed
serious misconduct of that nature when
determining whether to grant her another practising certificate is not a matter
which falls
within the ambit of this appeal.
[169] Counsel
for Heffernan argued that the Supreme Court’s approach was incorrect
because the correct test is to consider fitness
and propriety at the time of the
hearing of the appeal, citing
New South Wales Bar Association v Murphy
[2002] NSWCA 138
(2002) 55 NSWLR 23
. That case was an appeal to the Court of Appeal from
a decision of the Supreme Court allowing an appeal from a decision of a law
council to cancel the respondent’s practising certificate because he
committed an act of bankruptcy in circumstances which
showed he was not a fit
and proper person to hold a practising certificate. The Supreme Court ordered
that a practising certificate
be issued for the period up to the end of the year
the cancelled certificate would have run (which was shortly after the decision
was handed down). The appeal to the Court of Appeal was dismissed. Counsel for
Heffernan relied on the following passage from the
reasons of Giles JA (Ipp AJA
agreeing) (at [171]):
The determination is of fitness to hold a
practising certificate at the time of the determination –
s 38FC(1)(b) refers to circumstances
that show that the applicant or holder
not a fit and proper person to hold a practising certificate.
McClellan J accepted as genuine the respondent’s acknowledgement
was wrong to delay lodgement of his taxation returns and that he should have
addressed his problems at an earlier time. If
the respondent were to be judged
unfit to hold a practising certificate, it would be because his failings so
reflected upon his ability
to act in the affairs of his clients that protection
of the public warranted cancellation of his practising certificate. [emphasis
passage does not support the proposition that, in all appeals against
cancellations of practising certificates, a Supreme
Court is obliged to
determine a person’s fitness and propriety to hold a practising
certificate at the time of the hearing
of the appeal. Indeed, the editor of the
law report summarises the proposition for which the case stands in the headnote
[28], [105], [107], [171] and [174]) as follows:
The test to
be applied when determining fitness to hold a practising certificate in the
context of an act of bankruptcy, is not whether
the indebtedness which led to
the bankruptcy was brought about or associated with dishonest conduct ... but
whether the circumstances
in which the act of bankruptcy was committed
are such as to persuade a Council that, at the time of its determination, such
person is not a fit and proper person to hold a practising
certificate.
[emphasis added]
[171] In any
event, the Supreme Court in that case found that the respondent’s conduct
was wholly different to those who have
deliberately and dishonestly avoided
their taxation obligations or resorted to bankruptcy in order to minimise their
financial obligations
to their financial benefit, and so his conduct did not
disentitle him to continue to
In that case, the
practitioner’s conduct did
mean that he was not a fit and
proper person to hold a practising certificate. That conclusion was upheld by
the Court of Appeal.
[172] That is
not the case here. Heffernan’s conduct was such as to render her not a fit
and proper person to hold a practising
certificate up to the time the Law
Society cancelled it, and there were valid reasons why the Supreme Court should
not determine
her fitness at the time the appeal was heard, including that there
was no practising certificate or application therefor on foot.
[173] Counsel
for Heffernan argued that, given the primary Judge’s finding (at [64])
that Heffernan ‘now has insight’
into the need to make appropriate
disclosures and as to the consequences for failing to do so, there was no
protective necessity
at the time of the hearing to cancel her practising
certificate. We reject that argument, as it was founded on the submissions that
Heffernan’s only relevant failure was her failure to disclose the
CCC’s final report, and that her failure to disclose
was the result of an
innocent error of judgement, both of which submissions we have
Onus of proof
[174] As part of
the submissions about Grounds 1 and 3, counsel for Heffernan complained about
the Supreme Court’s approach
to the burden of proof. None of the grounds
of appeal expressly raise the issue of burden of proof.
[175] In any
event, we find no error in the Supreme Court’s approach to the burden of
proof. The primary Judge held (at [4]
and [55]) that the Law Society was
required to establish that Heffernan is not a fit and proper person to hold (or
continue to hold)
a practising certificate, and bore the onus of proof on the
balance of probabilities in relation to that ultimate issue in the appeal.
primary Judge held (at [66]) that the Law Society had established that the
cancellation of Heffernan’s practising certificate
was fully justified,
both at the time and in retrospect, and that Heffernan had failed to persuade
the Court that the proven non-disclosures
should not have resulted in the
cancellation of her practising certificate. The latter point was made, to the
extent that the evidentiary
burden shifted to Heffernan, citing
Stanoevski v
The Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
[2008] NSWCA 93
In that case, it was held that once the regulatory authority had established
misconduct by the practitioner, the evidentiary burden
of proof shifted to her
to adduce evidence in relation to the ultimate issue, namely whether she was a
fit and proper person (in
that case, to remain on the roll of practitioners).
[176] Counsel
for Heffernan argued that reliance on that case was misplaced because there was
no obligation on Heffernan to disclose
the Department’s process and
findings, the CCC summons and examination, or the draft CCC report, and the
findings in the final
CCC report could not be taken as proof of guilt of a
criminal offence or a disciplinary offence. Again, that submission rested on
submissions we have rejected.
Disposition
[177] None of
the grounds in the appeal have been made out. We order that the appeal be
dismissed. We will hear the parties as to
costs if need be.
_____________________
Heffernan v Law
Society Northern Territory
[2022] NTSC 90.
Connop v Law Society Northern
[2016] NTSC 38
per Hiley J and the authorities there
Ibid at [19].
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
Connop v Law Society Northern
[2016] NTSC 38
per Hiley J.
Heffernan v Law Society
Northern Territory
[2022] NTSC 90
, [24]-[26]. The findings made by
Addis are described at [7]-[13] of the decision.
Heffernan v Law Society
Northern Territory
[2022] NTSC 90
. The first summons to appear
and be examined at the CCC is described at [28]-[32] of the decision, and the
examination at the CCC
is described at [28]-[32] of the decision.
Heffernan v Law Society
Northern Territory
[2022] NTSC 90
. The provision of the draft CCC
report is described at [38]-[39] of the decision.
Heffernan v Law Society
Northern Territory
[2022] NTSC 90
. The release of the final CCC
report is described at [44]-[45] of the decision.
Warren v Coombes
[1979] HCA 9
(1978-79) 142 CLR 531
Warren v Coombes
’) at 537 per Gibbs
ACJ, Jacobs and Murphy JJ.
Bara v Blackwell
374 FLR 150
at [12] per Kelly, Barr and Brownhill JJ and the authorities there
(1994) 181 CLR 201 at 211-212 and
Stanford v Stanford
(2012) 247 CLR 108 at [36].
Connop v Law Society
Northern Territory
[2016] NTSC 38
per Hiley J.
New South Wales Bar
Association v Murphy
[2002] NSWCA 138
(2002) 55 NSWLR 23
per Giles JA.
Connop v Law Society
Northern Territory
[2016] NTSC 38
per Hiley J, and the authorities
there cited.
Ibid at [29].
Prothonotary of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales v Montenegro
[2015] NSWCA 409
per Meagher
and Leeming JJA and Emmett AJA).
New South Wales Bar
Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
(2001) 52 NSWLR 279
per Spigelman CJ
(Mason P and Handley JA agreeing), cited in
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court
of New South Wales v Montenegro
[2015] NSWCA 409
Connop v Law Society
Northern Territory
[2016] NTSC 38
per Hiley J, and the authorities
there cited.
Ibid at [34]-[35].
Ibid, citing
Re Application
by Saunders
[2011] NTSC 63
(2011) 29 NTLR 204
per Riley CJ.
Ibid at [36].
[2005] NTSC 58
(2005) 16 NTLR
per Martin (BR) CJ.
See Footnotes 6-9 above.
See, for example,
Prothonotary of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales v Da Rocha
[2013] NSWCA 151
per Basten,
Meagher and Ward JJA.
Ibid at [18]-[19].
Murphy v Bar Association of
New South Wales
[2001] NSWSC 1191
per McClellan J.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (478 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter