URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTLC/2023/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:20:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Development Consent Authority v Malcolm Henness [2023] NTLC 5 (17 March 2023)
Development Consent Authority v Malcolm Henness
[2023] NTLC
PARTIES: Development Consent Authority
Malcolm Henness
TITLE OF COURT: LOCAL COURT
FILE NO(s): 22029968
DELIVERED ON: 17 March 2023
DELIVERED AT: Darwin
HEARING DATE(s): 3 June 2021 to 22 August 2022
DECISION OF: Macdonald LCJ
CATCHWORDS:
Planning Act 1999
- NT Planning Scheme –
use or develop land in contravention of Planning Scheme.
Planning Act
Interpretation Act 1978
Evidence (National
Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
Criminal Code
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant: Mr J Bortoli
Defendant: Self
Solicitors:
Complainant: Self instructed
Defendant: Self
Decision category classification: B
Decision ID number:
2023 NTLC 5
Number of paragraphs: 18
IN THE LOCAL COURT
AT DARWIN IN THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY OF
No. 22029968
Development Consent Authority
Complainant
Malcolm Henness
REASONS FOR DECISION
(Delivered 17 March 2023)
JUDGE MACDONALD
The Proceeding
22 September 2020, the Development Consent Authority (DCA) commenced a
prosecution by Complaint against Mr Malcolm Henness (the
Defendant) in relation
to the use or development of Lot 26 (40) Wells Creek Road, Hundred of
Strangways, Virginia (the Premises).
The Premises is zoned “RL”,
being rural living.
proceeding alleges contraventions of the
Planning Act 1999
Act), which must be read and applied in conjunction with the Northern Territory
Planning Scheme (the Scheme) provided by
section 7 of the
The Scheme is a statutory
instrument, such that the
Interpretation Act 1978
Complaint alleges three counts (including particulars), essentially that the
(i) from 26 February 2020 to 30 July 2020, used or developed the Premises in
contravention of the Scheme without holding a permit
to do so, contrary to s
75(1) of the Act; and
(ii) from 31 July 2020 (and continuing), used or developed the Premises in
contravention of the Scheme and was reckless in doing
so, contrary to s 75(2) of
the Act; and
(iii) from 18 June 2020 (and continuing), having been issued a notice to cease
developing or using the Premises (Notice) in contravention
of the Scheme,
continued to operate the Premises as a hostel in contravention of the Scheme and
the Notice, contrary to s 76(5) of
proceeding was first heard before the Local Court on 3 June 2021, having been
listed for a contested hearing that date. At that
time the Defendant was
self-represented and agreed a precis of facts with the prosecution, rendering a
fully contested hearing unnecessary.
The agreed facts became Exhibit P1, and the
Notice relied on in relation to count 3 together with a covering letter of
service became
Exhibit P2.
Defendant also sought to tender an Inspection/Investigation Report (the Report)
dated 8 May 2020 and apparently authored by an
employee of the Environmental
Health area of the Northern Territory Government who attended and inspected the
Premises on that date.
That Report was originally marked as MFI, but is now
admitted as Exhibit P3.
screenshots from accommodation websites Booking.com, Trivago, Wander and Cycle,
apparently from July 2020 and relating to
a “Buffalo Beach hostel”
at 26 Wells Creek Road were marked as MFI, now admitted as Exhibit
proceeding was then adjourned to 9 July 2021 for further hearing, including to
enable the Defendant to obtain legal advice concerning
the possibility of giving
oral evidence and conducting any other aspect of the proceeding in his defence.
The proceeding was also
adjourned on various other occasions for a range of
reasons, many of which revolved around the Defendant’s incapacity or
to properly deal with the proceedings. The Defendant did engage law
firm Ward Keller following the first day of hearing, however
leave was then
granted on 10 November 2021 to that firm to withdraw.
to the facts of the allegations being agreed and becoming Exhibit P1, the
contest resolved to questions of whether the agreed
facts established one or
more of the contraventions alleged by the Complaint made 17 September 2020
beyond reasonable doubt. Associated
with those questions is whether the
Defendant had any defence to the charges.
Defendant gave evidence in the proceeding, much of which was chaotic in its
content. That evidence canvassed the way in which
the various accommodation,
which comprised mostly of demountables, at the Premises evolved over time. The
Defendant also spoke about
the type and circumstances of people staying at the
Premises, and of his aspirations and goals for the Premises and the purpose to
which the accommodations there were put. The contents of the Environmental
Health Report comprising Exhibit P3 were relevant to
The Defendant’s
substantive and repeated position and evidence in relation to the Premises was
that the accommodation was not
”, had never been a
” and that it was in fact a “
”. However, there was no doubt that the Defendant always intended
to, amongst other things, offer accommodation to guests in
remuneration.
The Act and the Scheme
dichotomy between the counts exists due to amendments made to the Act effective
31 July 2020. The operation and effect of
Interpretation Act 1978
in relation to prosecutions in respect of
repealed rather than extant provisions, is accepted. The Act in force until 30
relevant to counts 1 and 3 included:
75 Use or development to comply with permit or order
(1) A person
must not use or develop land in contravention of the planning scheme that
applies to the land, except in accordance with
Maximum penalty: In the case of a natural person – 200 penalty
units and 4 penalty units default penalty.
76 Notice to cease if contravention
(a) land is being used or developed in contravention of the planning scheme that
applies to the land; and
(b) the development is not otherwise permitted by or under this Act,
the consent authority in respect of the planning scheme may, by notice in
writing, require:
(c) the owner or occupier of the land; or
(d) the person apparently using or developing the land in contravention of the
planning scheme or interim development control order,
to cease using or developing the land in contravention of the planning
(4) A notice under this section may be served on:
(a) the owner of the land;
(b) an occupier of the land;
(c) a person apparently in charge of premises on the land; or
(d) a person apparently in charge of an activity being carried out on the land.
(5) A person specified in a notice under this section must not contravene,
or fail to comply with, the notice.
Maximum penalty: In the case of a natural person – 200 penalty
than the reference to “
authorised or permitted
” provided by s
81 of that iteration of the Act, there is no relevant reference to any possible
defence in relation to counts
1 and 3. However, ss 26, 30 and 32 of the
Criminal Code
(the Code) are generally available, with
the intent addressed in s 31 also having to be proven beyond reasonable
In relation to s 81, I
consider that provision simply elevates the standard of proof imposed on a
defendant from an evidential level
to that of balance of probability. The DCA is
nonetheless obliged to prove any alleged offence under either Act to the
standard of
beyond reasonable doubt.
relation to count 2, the Act as at 31 July 2020 relevantly
75 Use or development contravenes planning
(1) Land must
not be used or developed in contravention of the planning scheme that applies to
the land, except in accordance with
(2) A person
commits an offence if:
(a) the person intentionally uses or develops land; and
(b) the use or development contravenes the planning scheme that applies to the
land and the person is reckless in relation to that
Maximum penalty: 500 penalty units.
Default penalty: 4 penalty units.
(3) It is a
defence to a prosecution for an offence against subsection (2) if the use
or development is in accordance with a permit.
there is no specific reference to any possible defence in the Act which applied
from 31 July 2020, so to count 2. However,
s 5A of that Act provides
that Part IIAA of the Code applies. Section 75 contains no express reference to
the nature of liability
to be proven under Part IIAA. Resort to s 43AM of the
Code is necessary, which prescribes “
” as the fault
element for any physical element constituted solely of
recklessness
” where the
physical element consists of “
a result or circumstance
Consistent with count 2 contained in the Complaint, the prosecution position in
relation to that alleged contravention was
that recklessness rather than intent
was a relevant fault element. I am not convinced that “
” does not amount to the physical element of
” rather than simply “
a result or
circumstance
”, so consider intent should be the necessary fault
operation and application of the relevant provisions of the Act rely heavily on
the Scheme earlier referred to, as in force from
time to time. That includes
having regard to assessment or zoning tables published as part of the Schemes.
Extracts of the two Schemes
which applied in respect of counts 1 and 3, and then
count 2, together with the tables, were provided to the Court at
However, it is of concern
that the zoning maps to which the Schemes expressly refer are not included as
part of the document comprising
the Scheme and are not plainly accessible on the
relevant website.
“definitions” of various categories of use provide quite generic
descriptions of what operation or use falls within
any particular category and
there is potential for overlap.
some respects a process of definition by exclusion or default appears required.
Complainant’s prosecution on counts 1 and 3 rely on a finding that the
Premises was operated as a “
” at the relevant time. It
was perhaps arguable that the Premises constituted “
accommodation
However the
first alternative relies upon the premises being “
simpliciter and would also require an “
approved form
been lodged with the relevant Department. The second possibility is conditioned
on support or assistance from a benevolent,
educative or religious
organisation.
relation to count 3, Exhibit P3 was issued to the Defendant on 8 May 2020 the
Notice comprising Exhibit P2 was served on the Defendant
on 19 May 2020. The
commencement date for the alleged contravention in count 3 is 18 June 2020.
Despite the possibility that s 43AW
might otherwise provide some defence to the
Defendant, the chronology of the provision of Exhibits P3 and P2 to the
Defendant negate
any suggestion that his mistaken understanding of his conduct
(or the regulatory processes and requirements) could be found to be
” as required by s 43AW (2) of the Code, or within
s 43AY (or that s 26 or 32 could apply to counts 1 or 3).
relation to count 2, the prosecution relies on a finding that the Premises
operated as “
rooming accommodation
”, which on the basis of
the definition of that use in the Scheme, they could certainly be. The Scheme
which came into effect
on 31 July 2020 renders “
accommodation
” to be a prohibited use of land zoned “RL”.
It was perhaps arguable that the premises was being operated as a
dwelling-community residence
temporary visitor
accommodation
the first possibility is conditioned on support or assistance from a benevolent,
educative or religious organisation. In
relation to the second possibility, the
Defendant’s evidence was that in excess of six persons resided at the
Premises from
time to time. The configuration of the premises would also
constitute something more than simply a “
features apparently exclude “
temporary visitor accommodation
as a possibility.
to the exclusions and interpretations through definitions provided in each
Scheme, and service and content of the notice comprising
Exhibit P2, I find that
the Defendant is proven to the necessary standard to have contravened sections
75(1), 75(2), and 76(5) of
Which enacts each
“zone” then ascribes levels of use, which are conditioned on four
processes. Prior to 31 July 2020
those were “
Self-Assessable, Discretionary or Prohibited
”, and following are
Permitted, Merit Assessable, Impact Assessable and
by the relevant Minister, so an “
instrument of administrative
”. See sections 4, 17, 20, 43, 51, 61 and Division 2 of Part
Interpretation Act 1978
Paragraph 13 of the Agreed
Facts read: "At no time has the Defendant applied for or obtained, any
development permit or any other
authorisations under the
Planning Act
The Report,
which contained relevant evidence, may be admissible under
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
(NT), or as a business
record under
(noting that section does not appear to be conditioned on the
witness through which the document is tendered being part of the business).
The last substantive
paragraph of the report reads: "
Advised Malcolm that when he has
rooms/accommodation ready for seven people he will call environmental health for
further advice
Nancy Bird (08) 8922
aside, the Report comprising Exhibit P3 had potential to raise issues under
defensive sections of the Code.
Which did not include the “
” for the previous
Scheme or the “
” and 5.4.14 portions of the current
Clause 2.1 of the
first Scheme states "
The zones referred to in this planning scheme of those
shown on the zoning maps
", and page (i) of the
makes clear
” identified by the maps for any land is a
fundamental starting point. However, the Guide simply states that the maps are
on the internet or from NTG offices. Paragraphs 1.5 and 1.6 of the
” publication for the current Scheme are less
illuminating. In practice it is necessary to navigate through the website to
the ‘NT Atlas’ in the hope of accurately identifying the
relevant zone applicable to any particular portion of land.
Such difficulties
could give rise to a defence under
Clause 3.0 of the
first Scheme and Schedule 2 to the second
It is accepted
that the category of “
supporting accommodation
” cannot apply,
including because no relevant “
” was adduced in
I consider the
drafting of the Act and clause 7.10.1 of the Scheme displace the presumption
Interpretation Act 1978
(NT) establishes concerning
singular and plural.
Each being “
” uses, with the latter being one of the
species permitted within the category of “
”; clause 5.4.10 of the Scheme refers.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (171 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter