URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTADComm/2005/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:16:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Wall, Neville v Northern Territory Police [2005] NTADComm 1 (22 April 2005)
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION COMMISSION
LOCATION: DARWIN
TRIBUNAL: TONY FITZGERALD
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION COMMISSIONER
DATE OF HEARING: 14 MARCH 2005
HEARING NO: 1 of 2005
BETWEEN: NEVILLE KENNETH WALL
Complainant
NORTHERN TERRITORY POLICE
COUNSEL: Peter Barr QC for the Complainant
Sally Gearin for the Respondent
DATE OF DECISION: Written Decision given on 22 April 2005
REASONS FOR DECISION
1.1 By Application dated 23/9/03 (Exhibit 3) (“the Application”)
Complainant Neville Kenneth Wall sought appointment as
a member of the
Northern Territory Police (the Respondent).
1.2 By letters dated 19 December 2003 and 31 March 2004 (Exhibits 5 and 6
respectively) the Application was rejected by the Respondent
because the
Complainant possesses a spent criminal record.
1.3 The letters of rejection described in paragraph 1.2 refer to the
deliberations of an “Integrity Committee”, presided
over by the
Respondent, which
considers and makes determinations on
the merit of applicants for employment in the police force
(Exhibit 5).
1.4 The Integrity Committee is allowed “some leeway” (Exhibit 6)
in the consideration of an Applicant’s criminal
history, however
that leeway does not apply in circumstances relating to
offences of dishonesty where the offence was committed as an adult
” (Exhibit 6).
1.5 On 3 July 1978, at East Perth Court of Petty Sessions in
Australia, the Complainant was convicted of stealing (“the
conviction”) and sentenced to a six month good behaviour
bond in the sum
of $100. The Complainant was 19 years old at the time of the conviction.
1.6 At the time of the Application the conviction was 25 (twenty-five) years
1.7 By operation of the Northern Territory
Criminal Records (Spent
Convictions) Act 2004
(“SCA”) (infra, paragraph 3.2) the
conviction and the Complainant’s criminal record had become
for the purposes of the SCA and the Northern Territory
Anti-Discrimination Act 2004
(“ADA”) at the time of the
Application.
SUMMARY OF COMPLAINT
2.1 By written complaint dated 27 May 2004 the Complainant alleged that:
his criminal record was
a spent record within the meaning of the SCA and the
his criminal record was therefore
an “irrelevant criminal record” within the meaning of the
his rejection from appointment to
the police force as a police officer by the Respondent was on account of his
irrelevant criminal
“irrelevant criminal
record” is one of fifteen attributes listed under
Part 3 Division 1 of the ADA;
unlawful to discriminate against a person on the ground of an attribute listed
under the ADA.
2.2 Accordingly the Complainant
alleged that the Respondent’s decision to reject his application to join
the NT Police on account
of his irrelevant criminal record amounted to unlawful
discrimination under the ADA.
2.3 By way of remedy the Complainant sought reinstatement of his application
for employment “
for consideration along with other applicants
(Points of Claim 11 January 2005).
2.4 The Respondent (Defence filed 28 February 2005) denies that
discrimination has taken place in that the Complainant’s criminal
is not an irrelevant criminal record under the ADA. In the alternative the
Respondent says that if the Complainant was discriminated
against (which it
denies), such discrimination is exempted under the ADA because it is based on a
genuine occupational qualification.
2.5 The Respondent seeks dismissal of the complaint, and, unusually for this
STATUTORY PROVISIONS
The complaint involves sections 4, 19, 20, 28, 31, 35, 53 and 88 of the ADA,
and sections 3, 5, 6, 11, 13, 15 and 16 of the SCA.
These sections are set out
Anti-Discrimination Act 2004
4. Interpretation (extract of relevant definitions)
(1) In this Act, unless the contrary intention appears –
"attribute" means an attribute referred to in section 19;
"irrelevant criminal record", in relation to a person, means
(a) a spent record within the meaning of the
Criminal Records (Spent
Convictions) Act
(b) a record relating to arrest, interrogation or criminal proceedings where
(i) no further action was taken in relation to the
arrest, interrogation or charge of the person;
(ii) no charge has been laid;
(iii) the charge was dismissed;
(iv) the prosecution was withdrawn;
(v) the person was discharged, whether or not on conviction;
(vi) the person was found not guilty;
(vii) the person's finding of guilt was quashed or set aside;
(viii) the person was granted a pardon; or
(ix) the circumstances relating to the offence for which the person was found
guilty are not directly relevant to the situation in
which the discrimination
19. Prohibition of
discrimination
(1) Subject to subsection (2), a person shall not discriminate against another
person on the ground of any of the following
attributes:
(q) irrelevant criminal record;
(2) It is not unlawful for a person to discriminate against another person on
any of the attributes referred to in subsection (1)
if an exemption under Part 4
or 5 applies.
20. Discrimination
(1) For the purposes of this Act, discrimination includes
(a) any distinction, restriction, exclusion or preference made on the basis of
an attribute that has the effect of nullifying or
impairing equality of
opportunity; and
(b) harassment on the basis of an attribute,
in an area of activity referred to in Part 4.
(2) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), discrimination takes
place if a person treats or proposes to treat another
person who has or had, or
is believed to have or had
(a) an attribute;
(b) a characteristic imputed to appertain to an attribute; or
(c) a characteristic imputed to appertain generally to persons with an
less favourably than a person who has not, or is believed not to have, such an
(3) For discrimination to take place, it is not necessary that
(a) the attribute is the sole or dominant ground for the less favourable
treatment; or
(b) the person who discriminates regards the treatment as less
favourable.
(4) The motive of a person alleged to have discriminated against another person
is, for the purposes of this Act,
irrelevant.
28. Areas of activities
This Act applies to prohibited conduct in the areas of –
(a) education;
(c) accommodation;
(d) goods, services and facilities;
(e) clubs; and
(f) insurance and
superannuation.
31. Discrimination in work area
(1) A person shall not discriminate –
(a) in deciding who should be offered work;
(b) in the terms and conditions of work that is offered;
(c) in failing or refusing to offer work;
(d) by failing or refusing to grant a person seeking work access to a guidance
program, vocational training program or other occupational
training or
retraining program; or
(e) in developing the scope or range of a program referred to in
(2) A person shall not discriminate
(a) in any variation of the terms and conditions of work;
(b) in failing or refusing to grant, or limiting, access to opportunities for
promotion, transfer, training or other benefit to a
(c) in dismissing a worker; or
(d) by treating a worker less favourably in any way in connection with
(3) A person shall not discriminate against a worker on the grounds of the
worker's religious belief or activity by refusing the
worker permission to carry
out a religious activity during working hours being an activity
(a) of a kind recognized as necessary or desirable by persons of the same
religious belief as that of the worker;
(b) the performance of which during working hours is reasonable having regard to
the circumstances of the work; and
(c) that does not subject the employer to any
35. Exemptions – work
(1) A person may discriminate against another person in the area of work
(a) by fixing reasonable terms and conditions if that other person, because of
age or impairment, has a restricted capacity to do
the work; or
(b) if the discrimination is based –
(i) on a genuine
occupational qualification which the other person is required to fill; or
(ii) on the other person's inability to adequately perform the inherent
requirements of the work even where the special need of the
other person has
been or were to be accommodated.
(2) A person may discriminate in offering work where the work is to be performed
in the person's home.
53. Acts done in compliance with legislation, &c.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Act, a person may do an act
that is necessary to comply with, or is specifically
authorised by –
(a) an Act or regulation of the Territory;
(b) an Act or regulation of the Commonwealth;
(c) an order of a court or tribunal;
(d) an order or award of a court or tribunal having power to fix minimum wages
and other terms and conditions of employment;
(e) an industrial agreement in existence at the commencement of this Act;
(f) an order of the Commissioner under this Act;
(g) a guideline or code of practice prepared and published by the Commissioner
under this Act; or
(h) advice given by the Commissioner under this
88. Orders after Hearing
(1) If, after the hearing of a complaint, the Commissioner finds the prohibited
conduct alleged in the complaint is substantiated,
the Commissioner may make one
or more of the following
(a) an order requiring the respondent not to repeat or continue the prohibited
(b) an order requiring the respondent to pay to the complainant or another
person, within a specified period, an amount, being an
amount not more than that
prescribed, that the Commissioner considers appropriate as compensation for loss
or damage caused by the
prohibited conduct;
(c) an order requiring the respondent to do specified things to redress loss or
damage suffered by the complainant or any other person
because of the prohibited
(d) an order declaring void all or part of an agreement made in connection with
the prohibited conduct, either from the time the
agreement was made or
subsequently.
(2) In this section, the specified things a respondent may be required to do,
include, but are not limited to the
(a) employing, reinstating or re-employing a person;
(b) promoting a person;
(c) moving a person to a specified position within a specified
(3) In this section, "damage", in relation to a person, includes the offence,
embarrassment, humiliation, and intimidation suffered
by the person.
(4) If, after the hearing of a complaint, the Commissioner finds the prohibited
conduct alleged in the complaint is not substantiated
the Commissioner shall
make an order dismissing the
Records (Spent Convictions) Act 2004
3. Interpretation (extract of relevant definitions)
(1) In this Act, unless the contrary intention appears –
"criminal record" means a record of –
(a) a conviction;
(b) a finding that an offence is proved (and any order in relation to the
finding) without the court proceeding to conviction;
(c) a conviction and the making of an order under section 5 of the
Law (Conditional Release of Offenders) Act
(d) a finding or order made under section 53 of the
Juvenile Justice Act
(e) a quashed conviction;
(f) a pardon, including a conditional pardon;
(g) a charge in respect of which a finding or order referred to in paragraphs
(a) to (f), inclusive, is made by a court;
(h) action taken in respect of a breach of prison discipline committed during a
period of imprisonment; or
(j) disciplinary action taken while a juvenile offender is in a detention
and includes such a record of a conviction, finding, order, quashed conviction,
pardon, charge or action in a State or another Territory
Commonwealth;
"spent conviction" means a criminal record which is spent in accordance with
Part 2 – Spent Convictions;
"spent record" means –
(a) a spent conviction;
(b) a criminal record in respect of –
(i) a quashed conviction; or
(ii) an offence in respect of which an unconditional pardon has been
(c) a charge not proceeded with; or
(d) a charge that has been
Part 2 – Spent Convictions
5. Interpretation
In this Part "criminal record" does not include a criminal record of –
(a) a sexual offence;
(b) an offence by a body corporate; or
(c) a prescribed
6. Convictions
may be spent
(1) In this section "criminal record" does not include a record of a conviction
of an offence in respect of which a sentence of imprisonment
for more than 6
months was imposed, whether or not the sentence was suspended.
(2) Subject to this Part, a criminal record is a spent conviction on the
expiration of a period, immediately after the date of conviction
of the offence,
(a) where the offender was convicted in the Juvenile Court within the meaning of
Juvenile Justice Act
– 5 years; and
(b) in any other case – 10 years,
during which period the offender has not –
(c) been convicted of an offence punishable by imprisonment; or
(d) served all or any part of a sentence of
imprisonment.
(2A) If the offender was convicted in a court other than the Juvenile Court
(within the meaning of the
Juvenile Justice Act
) for an offence that the
offender committed before attaining 18 years of age, his or her criminal record
is, subject to this section
and section 6A, a spent conviction on the expiration
of the period specified in subsection (2)(b).
(3) A conviction for a subsequent traffic offence and any period of imprisonment
served in respect of the offence shall be taken
into account in calculating a
period referred to in subsection (2) only in respect of a conviction relating to
a traffic offence.
(4) A conviction for a subsequent non-traffic offence and any period of
imprisonment served in respect of the offence shall be taken
into account in
calculating a period referred to in subsection (2) only in respect of a
conviction relating to a non-traffic offence.
11. Person not required to disclose spent record
Subject to this Part, where a record is a spent record –
(a) the person to whom it relates is not required to disclose to another person
that spent record;
(b) a question concerning a person's convictions, criminal history or criminal
record or a record of a similar kind shall be taken
to refer only to a record
which is not a spent record; and
(c) in the application to a person of a provision of an Act or instrument of a
legislative or administrative character –
(i) a reference to a conviction, criminal history or criminal record or record
of a similar kind shall be taken to be a reference
only to a record which is not
a spent record; and
(ii) a reference to a person's character or fitness shall not be taken as
permitting or requiring a spent record to be taken into
13. Spent records not to be taken into account for unauthorised purpose
A person who takes into account a spent record for a purpose not authorised
by or under an Act is guilty of an offence.
Penalty: $5,000.
15. Exclusions in relation to spent convictions
Sections 11 and 13 do not apply in respect of a spent conviction –
(a) in relation to an application for appointment to or employment as a Judge,
magistrate, justice of the peace, member of the Police
Force, prison officer,
parole officer, probation officer, supervising officer or surveillance officer;
16. Act does not authorise
contravention of other laws
Nothing in this Act authorises a person to
disclose a charge, finding, order or conviction, or to take a charge, finding,
conviction into account, if to do so would contravene any other law in
force in the Territory.
THE HEARING
4.1 The Complaint was heard in Darwin on 14 March 2005 and argument concluded
on that day. Both parties were represented by legal
counsel. Save for the
formal tender of various documents by the Respondent there was no evidence
called at hearing and no cross
examination.
4.2 Argument in this case was largely confined to an analysis of the
construction of various provisions of the statutes (described
3) in the context of the agreed facts.
4.3 An outline of the Complainant’s case is contained in paragraphs 2.1
to 2.3 herein. The Complainant contends that the Respondent’s
of his application for employment is discrimination because it amounts to a
distinction, restriction, exclusion, or preference made on
the basis of an attribute
” [s.20(1) ADA], and that the
discrimination is unlawful because the Respondent’s decision was based on
the Complainant’s
“irrelevant criminal record” – which
is an attribute against which discrimination is prohibited under s.19(1)(9)
4.4 The Complainant also points out that s.31 of the ADA describes what may
amount to prohibited discrimination in the area of work
and includes
deciding who should be offered work”
[s.31(1)(a)].
4.5 The Complainant says that his criminal record is an “irrelevant
criminal record” because that term, as defined under
s.4 of the ADA,
includes a “spent record” within the meaning of the SCA. S.3 of the
SCA says that a spent record includes
a “spent conviction” which is
defined under s.3 as a criminal record which is spent in accordance with Part 2
SCA. Part 2 of the SCA contains s.6(2) which provides that a criminal
record is “spent” in the adult jurisdiction upon
the expiration of
10 years after the date of conviction provided the offender has not been
sentenced to, or served, a term of imprisonment
during that time.
4.6 Therefore, as the Complainant’s criminal record was acquired in
1978 – some 25 years prior to the Application (supra
paragraph 1.5)
– and the Complainant otherwise meets the requirements of s.6(2), the
Complainant’s criminal record is
“spent” for the purposes of
the SCA and accordingly “irrelevant” for the purposes of the
4.7 The effect of s.15 SCA
4.7.1 A significant issue in the determination of this case is the
interpretation of s.15 of the SCA.
S.15 sets out circumstances in which the operation of s.11 and s.13 of the
SCA is excluded in respect of a spent conviction. One
of the circumstances
[s.15(a)] is relevant to this case in that it relates to
an application for appointment to or employment as a
the police force
S.11 says in summary that where a record is “spent” the person
to whom it relates is not required to disclose that spent
record to another
person, and that questions concerning a person’s “criminal
record” shall be taken to refer only
to that part of the record which is
not a spent record. S.13 says that spent records are not to be taken into
account for an unauthorised
purpose and provides penalties for doing so.
The effect of s.15 is to remove the exclusion in s.11 so that applicants for
certain types of employment, including applicants for
appointment to the police
force, are required to disclose their full criminal record including any spent
record, in order to give
full and proper disclosure. The effect of s.15 is to
remove the operation of s.13 so as to allow employers to take spent records
account without penalty.
4.8 After hearing argument from the parties I am convinced that I must
consider the purpose of s.15 of the SCA before I can decide
whether or not the
Complainant has succeeded in discharging his onus of proof in this claim.
4.9 Complainant’s Submissions
4.9.1 In the Complainant’s submission the “exclusions”
contained in s.15 of the SCA do not weaken the Complainant’s
Complainant argues that all s.15 allows a decision maker to do is consider
material (that is, a spent conviction and/or
a spent record for the purposes of
this case) which the decision maker would not ordinarily be entitled to
consider. For example,
according to the Complainant, this means that a member
of the class of prospective employers contemplated by s.15 can check to see
an applicant for appointment has correctly and fully and properly disclosed the
full criminal record – including any spent
conviction or spent record.
Counsel for the Complainant offered this example on the basis that it may
not necessarily be clear to a layman applicant for appointment
that a criminal
record has become spent and s.15 allows the decision maker to carry out a
“check”. Of additional importance
is that s.15 provides the
decision maker with an opportunity to consider whether the applicant has been
honest in disclosing the
full criminal record.
The Complainant submits that the foregoing is as far as s.15 goes. He
submits that s.15 does not in some way make a “spent
conviction”
“unspent”, and that s.15 does not make lawful discrimination which
is otherwise prohibited under the
4.9.2 In order to assist in determining the construction of the SCA and the
purpose of s.15 therein, Counsel for the Complainant drew
my attention to the
Hansard record of the second reading speech on
The Criminal Records (Spent
Convictions) Bill
on 13 August 1992. At p.5359 the then Attorney General Mr
Manzie says:
“It is acknowledged that, in some particularly sensitive occupations,
such as child-care, teaching and the police force, it
will be necessary for
employers to have all of the available information about certain types of
offences. It is therefore proposed
that a disclosure of spent convictions is
required and the taking into account of the spent convictions is allowed in
relation to
applications for appointment or employment of police, prison
officers, and other specified correctional services staff, the judiciary
appointment on a jury. The same principles apply in relation to teachers,
teacher’s aides or child-care workers but only
in relation to violent or
other specified offences. Therefore, it is not shutting off entirely the
concerns that the community has
expressed in this area.”
From this extract (‘the Hansard Extract’) it is fairly clear
that the government of the day intended the SCA to include
a mechanism
(undoubtedly s.15) for providing employers within “sensitive
occupations” (including police) with information
so that the employers could take “into account” spent convictions
when considering applications
for employment. What is not clear however is the
extent to which the legislature intended employers to take this information into
account. Some guidance however is given by the former Attorney General where he
says (Hansard Extract at pages 5357-9) that:
“Punishment for minor offences, obviously, should not be
indefinite“, and “After an appropriate period, an old
record loses validity as a reliable indicator that a person may reoffend and,
should not have any prejudicial effect, The discrimination
which often follows a revelation of an old criminal record impedes the
successful rehabilitation of offenders at a time when they have proved they
represent no risk to society.”
4.9.3 In the Complainant’s submission the legislature did not intend
the exclusion of s.11 and s.13 of the SCA by s.15 of the
SCA to enable employers
to discriminate within the meaning of the ADA when “taking into
account” spent convictions.
In other words whilst it might affect the
manner in which spent convictions are considered, s.15 does not specifically
discrimination on the basis of irrelevant criminal record.
4.9.4 The critical question then is:
Does the learned former Attorney General’s stated aim of
not shutting off
(my italics) the concerns
that the community has expressed in this area.” (see final line of above
Hansard extract) mean that
government wanted ‘sensitive-occupation’
employers to have power to conclusively reject an employment application solely
on account of a spent conviction, or; does it mean that government wanted to
enable this class of employer to have the ability to
consider an
applicant’s spent conviction(s) in conjunction with other factors (such as
merit, experience, personal circumstances,
references etc) when considering an
application for employment?
4.10 The Complainant also argues that the existence of s.16 of the SCA (supra
paragraph 3.2) assists his case. S.16 stipulates that
the SCA does not operate
so as to authorise the contravention of any other NT Legislation. According to
the Complainant the effect
of s.16 is to ensure:
firstly, that nothing in the SCA authorises contravention of the ADA when
taking a conviction into account,
secondly, that the SCA and the later enacted ADA may be read together with
consistency, and
thirdly, s.15 SCA by virtue of s.16 SCA is subject to other
Legislation including the ADA.
The Complainant concludes that whilst s.16 may not prevent disclosure of a
spent criminal record under s.15, it certainly prevents
discrimination in breach
of the ADA.
4.11 Respondent’s Submissions
4.11.1 The Respondent argues that the exclusions under s.15 SCA have the
clear purpose and effect of excluding a spent record as defined
under the SCA
from exemption under s.11 and s.13 of the SCA in applications for employment as
a police officer and the other members
of the class of job recruits named under
s.15(a) of the SCA.
According to the Respondent this means that an employer of the class of
recruits listed under s.15(a) is at liberty to consider an
applicant’s
full criminal record, including any spent record, after disclosure by the
Moreover, the Respondent submits that a prospective employer contemplated by
s.15 SCA may, because of the operation of that section,
not only lawfully
account for spent convictions but may also lawfully discriminate against an
applicant on the basis of irrelevant
criminal record – a type of
discrimination prohibited under the ADA.
It is the Respondent’s contention that once the prospective employer
takes the spent record into account it is no longer “spent”
purposes of the SCA. This is turn means that the spent portion of an
Applicant’s full criminal record is no longer
an irrelevant criminal
record for the purposes of the ADA so that accounting for spent convictions
cannot amount to unlawful discrimination
as defined by the ADA.
4.11.2 In other words the Respondent’s position is that s.15 SCA
operates to make the full criminal record, including all spent
convictions, of
an applicant to join the police force “relevant” for the purposes of
the ADA. Once the full criminal
record is lawfully available to be taken into
account then the Respondent says that the weight given to the spent portion of
criminal record is a matter entirely in the discretion of the prospective
employer. According to the Respondent this means that
if the discretion
miscarries – so that too little or too much weight is attached to the
criminal record – then the remedy
of an aggrieved recruit is via
prerogative writ for administrative error and not (because there has been no
discrimination) via discrimination
4.11.3 In the Respondent’s view a plain reading of s.15 of the SCA
reveals that its clear purpose is to allow a prospective
employer in the
“listed” occupations to consider and account for spent convictions
even to the extent of discriminating
against a recruit in a manner ordinarily
prohibited under the ADA. The Respondent also favours a plain reading of the
Hansard extract
to conclude that the purpose of the s.15 exclusions is to
provide a prospective employer with an unfettered discretion to reject
applicant solely after “
the taking into account
” of a spent conviction.
4.11.4 Counsel for the Respondent concludes this part of her argument by
posing the rhetorical question –
“What point is there in having a provision such as
s.15 SCA which
excludes a spent record from exemption if a prospective employer does not have
an unfettered discretion to take the
spent record into account?”
The Respondent submits that it would be an absurd consequence if a
prospective employer was permitted to access a spent record but
not possessed of
sufficient discretion to take the spent record into account.
4.11.5 The Respondent did not offer a submission on the purpose and effect of
4.11.6 The Respondent’s final submission is that if the Complainant is
found to be the subject of unlawful discrimination by
the Respondent (which is
not admitted), then the Respondent is exempted pursuant to s.35(1)(b)(i) of the
ADA. This section (supra
paragraph 3.1) permits discrimination in the area of
work if the discrimination is based “on a genuine occupational
qualification”
which an employee or recruit is required to possess.
The essence of this submission is that:-
to maintain the
integrity of the NT Police Force, a “genuine occupational
qualification” required of all police recruits
is that they are free of
any adult criminal conviction.
above “genuine occupational qualification” is contained in the
“Integrity Assessment of
Police Recruit Applications Policy and Procedures” (“the
Integrity Policy”) which was operating at the time of the
Complainant’s application for
employment.
in its determination dated
19 December 2003
(Exhibit 5) a Police “Integrity Committee” ruled that the
Complainant’s adult criminal conviction meant that he
failed to meet the
standard set by the
Integrity Policy.
the Respondent is
both entitled to introduce the Integrity Policy to assess recruits, and;
entitled to the protection of the exemption
from unlawful discrimination offered
by s.35(1)(b)(i) of the ADA because the Complainant’s criminal record
means that he is
unable to meet a genuine occupational
qualification.
4.11.7 The Complainant’s
response to the Respondent’s final submission is that the s.35(1)(b)(i)
exemption does not apply
to the Respondent because:
4.11.7.1 The occupational qualification demanded by the Integrity Policy of
the Respondent is not “genuine”, as required
by s.35(10(b)(i), in
that it is not universally applied. The Integrity Policy appears to be a
relatively recent innovation (see
Exhibit 5) and applies only to recruits and
not serving members of the police force.
4.11.7.2 The Complainant’s allegation of unlawful discrimination is not
answered by the Respondent’s assertion that the
requirement for no adult
criminal conviction is in the Integrity Policy. In the Complainant’s view
this answer begs the question
because the Integrity Policy itself, or aspects
thereof, may be unlawfully discriminatory.
5.1 The parties agree on the mechanism by which a criminal record becomes
“spent” under the SCA so as to fall within the
definition of
“irrelevant criminal record” under the ADA except in circumstances
where the sensitive occupations covered
by s.15 SCA are involved. The mechanism
is described at paragraphs 4.5 and 4.6.
5.2 The parties are unable to agree on the purpose of exclusions under s.15
of the SCA and the effect of that section on the mechanism
referred to in
paragraph 5.1. The Respondent (paragraphs 4.11.1 to 4.11.3) says that the
purpose of s.15 SCA is to exclude a spent
record from exemption under s.11 and
s.13 SCA so that a sensitive-occupation employer may lawfully account for the
spent record to
lawfully discriminate against a recruit on the basis of the
recruit’s criminal record. The Complainant (paragraph 4.9.1) says
s.15 only allows an employer to consider material which the employer would not
normally be entitled to consider – it does
not make lawful discrimination
which is otherwise prohibited under the ADA.
5.3 After careful consideration of the thoughtful submissions of Counsel I
find for the Complainant for the following reasons:-
5.3.1 Part of the Respondent’s argument (paragraph 4.11.1) is that the
effect of s.15 SCA is to in some way change the character
of a spent record so
that once it is taken into account by the prospective employer it is no longer
spent for the purposes of the
SCA. According to the Respondent this in turn
means that within the sensitive occupations contemplated by s.15, the spent
of a criminal record is no longer ‘irrelevant’ for the
purposes of the ADA so that discrimination on the basis of the
spent record does
not infringe the ADA.
This is an ingenious argument, but in my opinion it is not supported by a
plain reading of sections.15, 11 and 13 SCA. There is
nothing in the SCA to
explicitly suggest a spent record in some way becomes “unspent” by
reason of its disclosure. A
plain reading of the SCA dictates that a spent
record remains a spent record at all times; the SCA does not contain a process
converting a spent record into something else.
In the absence of any specific legislative provision authorising a change in
the very nature of a spent conviction after it has been
accounted for by a
prospective employer I am unable to accept the Respondent’s submission in
that regard. In other words I
am unable to accept that s.15 SCA exerts by mere
implication the effect contended by the Respondent.
This means that the Complainant’s criminal record is a spent record
and therefore an irrelevant criminal record under the ADA.
5.3.2 The purported change in character of a spent record effected by the
s.15 SCA exclusion has another effect according to the Respondent
paragraph 4.11.2). Should an unsuccessful recruit seek to review a decision not
to employ that recruit, then the review is
by way of prerogative writ for
administrative error rather than by way of discrimination law. Administrative
review is necessitated
because in the Respondent’s submission accounting
for a spent record does not breach discrimination law.
I am not persuaded by this argument. I have already found (paragraph 5.3.1)
that s.15 SCA does not effect a change in character
of a spent record so the
argument is of no consequence. Also, whether or not another remedy is available
to the Complainant is not
the point. The Complainant seeks redress under the
5.3.3 S.16 SCA is a major stumbling block for the Respondent. A plain
reading of the heading and content of s.16 indicates that its
purpose and effect
is to ensure that nothing in the SCA authorises contravention of any other law
in the NT, including the ADA.
S.16 would appear to ensure that the SCA and the ADA do not contradict one
another, and that in the event of any conflict between
the two the ADA is
Accordingly I am persuaded by the Complainant’s argument at paragraph
4.10 that s.16 prevents discrimination in breach of the
5.3.4 Unfortunately consideration of the Hansard Extract does not
conclusively assist me in ascertaining the extent to which
sections 11, 13
and 15 SCA combine to enable the Respondent to take into account spent
convictions. (See discussion at
paragraph 4.9)
I have no doubt that Parliament intended spent records and convictions to be
taken into account in the case of sensitive occupations’.
It is not clear
from Hansard whether spent records and convictions were intended to be taken
into account to the extent of permitting
discrimination under the ADA, or only
to provide prospective employers with more information about recruits (see
discussion at paragraph
In my view it is more likely that Parliament intended the latter. Such an
intention accords with my foregoing findings, and sits
more comfortably with the
following excerpts from the Hansard Extract:
the former Attorney
General indicated (p.5359.5) his aim of “
not shutting of
” (my emphasis) community concerns (Hansard
Extract p.5359.5). If the
Attorney General was minded to completely eliminate community concerns he
could have explicitly done so.
former Attorney General also indicated (p.5357.9) that “Punishment for
minor offences, obviously should not be indefinite”
and that (also
p.5357.9) “After an appropriate period, an old criminal record loses
validity as a reliable indicator that a
person may re-offend and, therefore,
should not have any prejudicial effects. The discrimination which often follows
a revelation
of an old criminal record impedes the successful rehabilitation of
offenders at a time when they have proved they represent no risk
Neither of these excerpts appear to
indicate an intention to allow prospective employers to account for spent
convictions to the extent
of discriminating by refusing an application for
employment.
5.3.5 The Respondent’s “fallback” argument is that, if it
unlawfully discriminated under the ADA, it is exempted
from compliance under
s.35(1)(b)(i) of the ADA because the discrimination only arises due to a genuine
occupational qualification
which recruits are required to fulfil to maintain the
integrity of the police force (paragraph 4.11.6).
In my view a genuine occupational qualification equates to an ‘inherent
requirement’ of a position. An inherent requirement
is something that is
‘essential’ to the position rather than incidental, peripheral or
accidental (See for example
X v The Commonwealth
[1999] HCA 63
December 1999) (X’s Case),
Qantas Airways v Christie
(1998) 193 CLR
280 (Christie
’s Case) or Mark Hall v NSW Thoroughbred Racing Board, HREOC
Report No 19 p32, 34). The burden is on the employer to identify
the inherent
requirements of the
position and consider their application to
employee before the inherent requirements exception may be
invoked (Hall’s Case p 36,
Zraika v Commissioner of Police, NSW
[2004] NSWADT 67).
There must be a ‘tight correlation’
between the inherent requirements of the particular job and an
individual’s
criminal record and there must be more than a ‘logical
link’ between the job and a criminal record (Hall’s case
The inherent requirements exception should be interpreted strictly so as not to
defeat the purpose of the anti-discrimination
provisions (Hall’s case p
I am not satisfied however that the occupational qualification required of
recruits by police is sufficiently “genuine”
to qualify as an
exemption under section 35. This is because the Respondent has not demonstrated
a ‘tight correlation’
between the purported inherent integrity
requirement and the Complainant’s spent criminal record.
Also, as noted by the Complainant (paragraph 4.11.7), the genuine
occupational qualification is not universally applied. A
occupational qualification would apply to all
members of the police force – not just recruits. There is no evidence
me of an “integrity audit” carried out by police to ascertain
whether existing members are free of any adult criminal
conviction which would
fall foul of the Integrity Policy.
The uneven application of the Integrity Policy is another reason I am unable
to conclude that the requirement to have no adult convictions
for dishonesty is
‘essential’ to the position and/or that there is a ‘tight
correlation’ between the criminal
record requirement and the inherent
duties of a Northern Territory Police officer.
Furthermore, as suggested by the Complainant, I find that
implementing an ‘adult-criminal-conviction-free rule’ in the
Integrity Policy (the full version of which the Respondent
has not put in
evidence) does not of itself create a genuine occupational qualification,
especially as the policy itself is in breach
of the prohibition against
discrimination under s.19 of the ADA because it permits discrimination on the
basis of (irrelevant) criminal
5.3.6 In view of the foregoing, I formally find that the Respondent’s
decision to reject the Complainant’s application
to join the
Force on the basis of his irrelevant criminal record, amounts to unlawful
discrimination under the ADA.
I also formally find that the Complainant has satisfactorily discharged his
onus of substantiating the complaint
(supra paragraphs 2.1 and 2.2 for
summary of complaint).
Accordingly I propose to order that the Complainant be reinstated into the
recruitment process for consideration alongside other
applicants for appointment
to the NT Police, but for the precise form of the proposed order see discussion
at paragraph 6.4.
5.3.7 In finding for the Complainant I am mindful that my finding should
accord with the aims and objectives of the ADA. Object (a)
of the ADA is
reproduced below:
The objects of this Act are –
(a) to promote recognition and acceptance within the community of the
principle of the right to equality of opportunity of persons
regardless of an
attribute;...”
At times I have been urged by the Respondent to accept a construction of the
SCA which may be at odds with what the former Attorney
General said in his
second reading speech is the purpose of the Criminal Records (Spent Convictions)
Bill (Hansard p5357 on 13/8/92,
lines 2 and 3):
“The purpose of the Criminal Records (Spent Convictions) Bill and the
Juvenile Justice Amendment Bill is to facilitate the
more effective
rehabilitation of certain offenders by providing that, in certain circumstances,
their criminal records relating to
relatively minor offences may be spent and
not form part of their criminal history.
I have endeavoured to prefer a construction that promotes the purpose and
objectives of the SCA – namely to facilitate rehabilitation
“spending” certain convictions.
5.3.8 I am also mindful that my finding should accord with what I believe to
be the actual aim and objective of the Integrity Policy.
From what we know about the Integrity Policy
(supra paragraph 4.11.6) it
is designed to maintain the “integrity” of the NT Police Force and
its members at an acceptable
level. It follows that the focus of such a policy
should be upon whether employees and recruits meet pre-determined standards of
integrity and honesty.
In the case at hand the employment record of the Complainant for 20 years
prior to this application for employment (see Exhibit 3
– prison officer 5
years, police officer 5 years, RAAF technician
10 years) is evidence that
the Complainant is possessed of an appropriate level of honesty and integrity.
The Respondent rejected
the Complainant’s application for employment
because of a conviction for dishonesty 25 years earlier (Exhibit 5 –
of Rejection dated 19/12/03). The Letter of Rejection reveals that an
Integrity Committee “makes determinations” when
the integrity of an
applicant is “called into question”, but makes no mention of any
allowance for the “integrity
and honesty” of an applicant.
Also, and unfortunately, the Respondent’s rigid application of the
Integrity Policy in this case through focus on spent criminal
history, is not
only discriminatory, but increases the possibility that worthy candidates may be
overlooked because the Integrity
Committee does not have the ability to consider
their positive characteristics.
It is not possible to adequately assess the integrity and honesty, or lack
thereof, of a candidate for employment without considering
a whole range of
factors and characteristics – some of which are discussed above at
paragraphs 4.9.1 and 4.9.4 – not
just criminal history (spent or
otherwise).
The Respondent’s task of enhancing the integrity of the force is not
assisted by an Integrity Policy which must be rigidly
applied to exclude
recruits on the basis of irrelevant criminal record. The Respondent would be
better served in my view by an Integrity
Policy which may, in the discretion of
the employer, be applied with sufficient flexibility to enable thorough
assessment of each
member or recruit on merit.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
6.1 Intent of the Legislature
Notwithstanding my finding that the actions of the Respondent towards the
Complainant amount to unlawful discrimination, I am troubled
by the rhetorical
question posed by Counsel for the Respondent (at
paragraph 4.11.4).
The Respondent’s concern is that the effect of the combined operation
of s.16 SCA and the relevant provisions of the ADA may
be to prevent police from
ever taking spent records into account in the manner contemplated by s.15
I accept the Respondent’s submission that in some instances it may be
unsafe to disregard spent records. For example where
there is concern about the
integrity of a recruit or serving member because the spent record reveals
convictions for lesser offences
due to lack of evidence, or where, as discussed
at paragraph 4.9.1, a check reveals that a spent record has been deliberately
Also, as discussed at paragraph 4.9.1, it may be of importance to check that
a criminal record has been correctly disclosed.
This complaint arose because of the rigid application by the Integrity
Committee of an Integrity Policy which provides that adult
convictions for
dishonesty automatically disqualify job applicants. I have already indicated
(paragraphs 4.9, 5.3.4) that in my
view it is unlikely that Parliament intended
s.15 SCA to allow sensitive-occupation employers to reject recruits solely on
of a spent conviction. If this situation occurs, as has happened in the
Complainant’s case, then in my view an employer (the
Respondent in this
exceeded the object of
the SCA which is:
“An Act to facilitate that more effective rehabilitation of certain
offenders by providing that, in certain circumstances,
their criminal records
relating to relatively minor offences may be spent and not form part of their
criminal history”; and
has breached s.16 SCA which prohibits
the taking into account of a conviction if to do so contravenes any other law in
force in the
NT (in this case the ADA).
6.2 Exemptions and Advices Available Under the ADA
In this case I believe that if the Respondent had sought and taken into
account the Complainant’s spent record, as is its right
under s.15 SCA,
and then had the ability and flexibility under its Integrity Policy to consider
whether or not that record was ‘irrelevant’
under the ADA and
whether or not that record was relevant for its (the Respondent’s)
purposes, I would have been less certain
that the Respondent had breached the
SCA and the ADA.
I raise this point because the ADA gives me power (s.59 ADA) to grant
exemptions for conduct which would otherwise be discriminatory
under the ADA,
and to provide advices which have the effect of an exemption under the ADA (s.53
Bearing in mind the Respondent’s foregoing concerns (paragraph 6.1), I
presume that it wishes in the future to operate its
Integrity Policy as
described immediately above. If it does so, and discriminates on the basis of
irrelevant criminal record then
it will breach the ADA. If however the
Respondent develops a new, more flexible, policy which allows spent convictions
to be taken
into account but also gives discretion to the Integrity Committee to
consider individual applicants on their merits and provides
for disqualification
of an applicant only where it is legitimately necessary to protect police
integrity, then the ADA provides a
way to alleviate the Respondent’s
That is to say, if such an Integrity Policy was developed and submitted to
me I may be inclined under the ADA to grant an exemption
or provide an
appropriate advice which would permit the Respondent to lawfully discriminate on
the basis of spent records where it
is reasonable to do so.
Pursuant to s.96 ADA each party to a complaint shall pay his or her own
costs in respect of proceedings under the ADA. Although
the section does give
me the power to make an order as to costs, it is generally understood that the
Commission is a ‘no-costs’
forum, and that I would only make an
order as to costs in exceptional circumstances.
I find that there are no exceptional circumstances in this case and
accordingly I propose to make no order as to costs.
6.4 Proposed Orders
I have given careful thought to the final form of the orders I should
The Complainant seeks that his “application for employment be
reinstated forthwith and be included for consideration
merit based system
While this appears to be fair and
reasonable, I am concerned that an order to this effect may not return the
Complainant to the
same position he would have enjoyed had he not been
discriminated against in his first application in September 2003.
I raise this concern because I am informed by my staff that in
2003 the Respondent was engaged in a recruitment drive with a view to
significantly increasing the numbers of Northern Territory
Police. At that time
of high demand, the Complainant, even though he was already a mature applicant,
would nevertheless have been
justifiably entitled to be very confident about his
chances of selection on merit – especially in view of his experience as
police officer in another state, and his other related work history.
My staff also inform me that the recruitment drive was successful, so that
there will not be another intake of recruits until early
2006. My information
is that a standard number of recruits for each intake is approximately
My concern is that the Complainant, who is now two years older and competing
in a field that may be inflated in number due to the
reduction in intakes, may
no longer be in the same position on merit that he would have been when he
initially applied.
Having found that the Respondent engaged in unlawful discrimination, I must
endeavour to return the Complainant as nearly as possible
to the position he
would have been in had he not suffered the discrimination. For this reason I am
minded to order that the Complainant’s
application to join the Police be
accepted, and: that he be permitted to participate in the initial phase of the
recruitment process,
which according to my information is physical,
psychological and aptitude testing, and: that if the Complainant attains the
set for these tests at the level required for his age, he be accepted
into the Police in the next intake.
Pursuant to s.90 ADA I am not bound by the rules of evidence and entitled to
inform myself as I see fit. However I invite further
submissions from the
parties as to the accuracy of the “information” I have received from
my staff, because my proposed
orders are based thereon. Also I invite
submissions from counsel as to why I should not make the proposed orders, and
the form that
such orders should take.
6.5 Final Orders
As a consequence of my finding in paragraph 5.3.6 that the
Complainant’s complaint is substantiated, I make the following orders:
6.5.1 The Respondent shall not repeat or continue the prohibited conduct,
namely discriminate against the Complainant on the ground
“irrelevant criminal record”.
6.5.2 The Respondent shall allow the Complainant to participate in the
recruitment process in the manner proposed under paragraph
6.5.3 In accordance with the usual practice of the Commission I make no order
as to costs.
TONY FITZGERALD
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION
COMMISSIONER
22 April 2005
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (471 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter