URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTSC/2025/58.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:22:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
RP v Northern Territory of Australia [2025] NTSC 58 (18 August 2025)
RP v Northern Territory of Australia
[2025] NTSC 58
PARTIES: RP
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
TITLE OF COURT: SUPREME COURT OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: 2025-00989-SC
DELIVERED: 18 August 2025
HEARING DATE: 29 July 2025
JUDGMENT OF: Smyth A/AsJ
CATCHWORDS:
Discovery – Application for pre-action discovery – Principles
applicable to an order for pre-action discovery –
application granted in
Supreme Court Rules
Practice Direction 6 of 2009
Information Act 2002
Groote Eylandt Aboriginal Trust Inc v Skycity Darwin Pty Ltd
BCI Media Group Pty Ltd v Corelogic Australia Pty Ltd
Vestas - Australian Wind Technology Pty Ltd v Lal Wind Farm Nom Co Pty
[2020] VSC 554
LG v Brian Brock as executor of the estate of the
late Leo Clarke
[2016] NSWSC 323
Stephensen v The Salesian Society Inc;
Easton v The Salesian Society Inc
[2018] VSC 602
Stephensen v The
Salesian Society Inc & Ors
Easton v The Salesian Society Inc. &
[2018] VSC 602
Lenscak v Trustees of the Marist Brothers & Ors
[2021] VSC 49
Gibson v ANZ Banking Group Ltd
(VSC, Gobbo J,
No 10670/91, 30 August 1991, unreported);
JCB v Bishop Paul Bird for the
Diocese of Ballarat & Anor
[2019] VSC 348
Paxus Services v People
[1990] FCA 500
(1990) 99 ALR 728
St. George Bank Ltd v Rabo Australia Ltd
[2004] FCA 1360
; referred to.
Williams Civil Procedure, paragraph 32.05.0, “Discretion”.
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: C Phillips
Respondent: T Cramp
Solicitors:
Applicant: Maurice Blackburn Lawyers
Respondent: Solicitor for the Northern Territory
Judgment category classification: B
Judgment ID Number: Smy2509
Number of pages: 25
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
RP v Northern Territory of Australia
[2025] NTSC 58
No. 2025-00989-SC
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
CORAM: SMYTH A/AsJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 18 August 2025)
Applicant makes application by amended summons on originating motion filed 13
June 2025 seeking preliminary discovery pursuant
to Rule 32.05 of
Court Rules 1987
. Additionally, the Applicant seeks its costs of the
application on an indemnity basis.
[2] After some
agreement between the parties following the commencement of proceedings and
prior to the hearing of this application,
the application for preliminary
discovery was narrowed down to three categories of documents as outlined in the
amended summons.
Those categories are as follows:
(1) The Plaintiff's complete and unredacted youth detention file including any
medical, educational, disciplinary, housing, case
management, movement,
admission discharge, incident and social work records, including photographs
(the Youth Detention File).
(2) Personnel files including details of on-boarding (including resumes,
criminal history searches, reference checks), offer letter,
performance/competency reviews, complaints, disciplinary actions, training
records, etc. for Youth Justice Officers TH,
SS ad SH (the Personnel Files).
(3) All formal complaints and notifications regarding child abuse at Don Dale
perpetrated by any employee of Don Dale that occurred
from 5 July 2006 to the
conclusion of the relevant period (1 July 2009) inclusive held by (All Formal
Complaints):
relevant Minister for Corrections (or the Minister with responsibility for the
Don Dale Youth Detention Centre (Detention Centre)
from time to time);
Superintendent of the Detention Centre;
person with delegation from the Superintendent;
appropriate Ministry with control of the Detention Centre from time to
Northern Territory Police;
Detention Centre;
predecessors or successors of the above.
Pre-Discovery Process
[3] The need for
a pre-discovery process, and applications such as this, have diminished since
the operation of Supreme Court Practice
Direction 6 of 2009 (PD6) and its recent
incorporation by amendment to the
Supreme Court Rules
inserting Order 1A
in respect to pre-action conduct. Nonetheless, where, as in this case, there
has been a dispute or a purported
refusal to provide copies of alleged essential
documents (as envisaged by
or PD6) there is scope for this type of
application.
requires three criteria to be met, namely:
(a) there is reasonable cause to believe that the applicant has or may have the
right to obtain relief in the Court from a person
whose description he has
ascertained;
(b) after making all reasonable enquiries (first limb), the applicant has not
sufficient information to enable him to decide whether
to commence a proceeding
in the Court to obtain that relief (second limb); and
(c) there is reasonable cause to believe that the person has or is likely to
have or has had or is likely to have had in his possession
a document relating
to the question whether the applicant has the right to obtain the relief (first
limb) and that inspection of
the document by the applicant would assist him to
make the decision (second limb).
[5] However,
even if those criteria are met the Court retains a discretion to refuse relief,
although there may usually be little
scope for refusal. One recognised ground
is whether discovery would be
principles in respect to the application of
are well established and
were set out by Luppino M (as he was) in
Groote Eylandt Aboriginal Trust Inc
v Skycity Darwin Pty Ltd
requirements for a successful application for an order for pre-action discovery
were succinctly summarised by Hely J in
George Bank Ltd v Rabo
Australia Ltd & Anor
. That case dealt with the equivalent of
in New South Wales, which was then sufficiently similar to
validate comparison. Adopting the summary made by Hely J, the principles
The rule is to be beneficially construed;
Each of the elements in the subparagraphs must be established;
The test to determine whether an applicant has “reasonable cause to
believe” as required by subparagraph (a) is an objective
one. Further, the
words “or may have” cannot be ignored and an applicant does not have
to make out a prima facie case;
Belief requires more than mere assertion and more than suspicion or
conjecture;
While uncertainty as to only one element of a cause of action might be
compatible with the “reasonable cause to believe”
required by
subparagraph (a), uncertainty as to a number of such elements may be sufficient
to undermine the reasonableness of the
cause to believe;
The question posed by subparagraph (b) is not whether an applicant has
sufficient information to decide if a cause of action is
available but whether
the applicant has sufficient information to make a decision whether to commence
proceedings and therefore documents
relevant to defences and quantum are also
discoverable;
Determining whether an applicant has sufficient information for the purposes of
subparagraph (b) also requires an objective assessment
to be made and the
subparagraph contemplates that an applicant is lacking information reasonably
necessary to decide whether to commence
proceedings;
documents which would be considered to be a “fishing expedition” in
a regular discovery application is not prohibited
in pre-action discovery
applications.
[7] Relevantly,
in respect to subparagraph (b) of
the principles applying were well
expressed in
Vestas - Australian Wind Technology Pty Ltd v Lal Lal Wind Farm
Nom Co Pty Ltd
criterion is governed by the following principles:
(a) the requirement is primarily concerned with whether, as an objective fact,
an applicant has sufficient information to determine
whether to commence
proceedings. The fact that an applicant for preliminary discovery already has
enough evidence to establish a
prima facie case against a proposed defendant
does not mean that the applicant has sufficient information to enable it to
whether to commence a proceeding. An applicant in that position may
nevertheless ‘need information to know whether the cost
and risk of
litigation is worthwhile.’ For example, an applicant with sufficient
information to plead a prima facie case may
prudently wish to obtain preliminary
discovery about ‘what defences are available to the respondent and the
possible strength
of those defences, or to determine the extent of the
respondent’s breach and the likely quantum of any damages award’;
(b) it is for the court to determine whether an applicant has sufficient
information available to it; the applicant’s own assertion
that it does
not is neither determinative nor strictly necessary;
(c) accordingly, an application cannot succeed if the applicant has sufficient
information (objectively assessed) but is unable to
determine whether to
commence proceedings due to subjective factors, for example, an overly cautious
(d) courts have, however, approved litigants taking a cautious, conservative or
prudent approach by applying for preliminary discovery
under the rule. This
approach is consistent with the policy underlying the rule. It is also
consistent with the policy underlying
Civil Procedure Act 2010
(’CPA’) generally, and the ‘proper basis certification’
requirements in
of the CPA in particular;
(e) if there is evidence that an applicant has in fact decided to commence
proceedings, the application must fail. In determining
whether an applicant
has in fact already decided to commence a proceeding, irrespective of the
outcome of the application, the Court
should not give too much weight to
posturing in correspondence prior to the making of the application, particularly
correspondence
alleging the existence of a strong case but nevertheless seeking
preliminary discovery by letter prior to making a formal application
(f) what constitutes ‘reasonable inquiries’ is a question of fact,
to be considered in all the circumstances of the particular
Applicant relied on the affidavits of Clarissa Phillips made 8 April 2025
(Phillips’ First Affidavit) and 3 June 2025
(Phillips’ Second
Affidavit), and the Respondent relied on the affidavit of Ms Pikoulos made 29
May 2025 (Pikoulos Affidavit).
All affidavits were taken as read for the purpose
of the application.
[9] The First
Phillips Affidavit deposes to the Applicant’s attempts to request
documents from the Respondent, including an
Information Act 2002
request (FOI request) made to the Department of Territory Families, Housing and
Communities.
The documents sought
are part of a suite of documents (including those now subject to this amended
application) which are said to
be required by the Applicant because “he
has insufficient information to enable him to decide whether to commence
substantive
proceedings”.
The basis of the requested documents is set out in Phillips’ First
Affidavit, and relates to abuse the Applicant can recall
from three identified
(or semi identified) youth justice officers which is alleged to have occurred at
the Don Dale Detention Centre
(the Detention Centre). Phillips’ First
Affidavit concludes that the Applicant does not know or cannot remember
(a) How the perpetrators were employed or engaged by the Detention Centre;
(b) Whether the Detention Centre had received previous complaints about the
perpetrators;
(c) Whether the Detention Centre undertook appropriate on-boarding, supervision
and discipline of the perpetrators;
(d) Whether the staff of the Detention Centre ever received training in
relation to the prevention, identification and reporting
of sexual abuse;
(e) Whether there were policies or procedures in place relevant to the risk of
sexual abuse or similar, and whether these polices
were complied with.
[10] I note that
of the five categories above, the first three relate to the specific
perpetrators, and the last two relate to training,
prevention and adherence to
[11] The First
Phillips Affidavit concludes “The requested Documents are required so the
Applicant can decide whether to commence
substantive
proceedings”.
Phillips Affidavit annexes the PD6 letter to the Respondent’s
The PD6 letter, some 29
pages long:
Sets out a time
period in relation to a civil damages claim on behalf of the Applicant arising
as a result of alleged sexual abuse
at the Detention Centre during the relevant
period (defined as various periods between 5 July 2008 to 1 July 2009).
Confirms that
the Applicant intends to bring proceedings in the Supreme Court of the Northern
Territory in relation to the alleged
abuse and proposes to bring the proceedings
against the Northern Territory of Australia as a representative of the former
of Correctional Services.
allegations against at least three named officers and other unnamed officers
supervising the Applicant, and outlines instances
of abuse which the Applicant
says occurred in the shower and in his room, by the named officers and others
Sets out the
Applicant’s reasons for failing to report the assaults to police and his
belief that similar abuse may have been
perpetrated against two other detainees
as they had made similar disclosures to each other.
Alleges a duty
of care owed to the Applicant, namely a non-delegable duty of care for his
safety whilst in the care of the Centre
and that the risk of the Applicant being
sexually abused by Youth Justice Officers was reasonably foreseeable and not
insignificant.
Alleges a breach
of the duty, causation of harm and that the Northern Territory would be held
vicariously liable for the acts of its
Sets out by way
of disclosure what information the Applicant has including: affidavit of RP
dated 21 February 2023, Youth Justice
File as at 19 May 2023, Custodial Episode
History as at 8 February 2023, and various other documents including police
of 25 July 2023.
Ends with a
request for disclosure of a large category of documents, including the documents
required under this application. Specifically,
all records of Don Dale
complaints against officers for the period 1 July 2004 to 1 July 2009
(regardless of when the complaint or
allegation was actually made) were
requested on the basis they went to the matter of prior knowledge and
foreseeable risk on behalf
of the Northern Territory.
[12] For the
purposes of this application the Respondent did not take issue with the fact
that the grounds for Rule 32.05(a) and the
first limb of Rule 32.05(b) had been
made out. It was the Applicant’s case that, as set out in PD6
correspondence
the Applicant
believes that he may have a cause of action in negligence, and the documents
requested are to assist in determining
whether he ought to commence a proceeding
against the Respondent. On the basis of the evidence and submissions made, I
accept that
the requirement of Rule 32.05(a) is made out. That is, the
Applicant has reasonable cause to believe that he has or may have the
obtain relief from the Court. The remaining argument centred on the second limb
of Rule 32.05(b) (whether the Applicant
had sufficient information to commence a
proceeding to obtain relief) and the two limbs of Rule
The Applicant’s Submissions
(A) Youth Detention Files
Applicant has in his possession a redacted copy of his entire youth detention
file (including custodial episode/movement
history). However, the Applicant
submits that it is not clear if all of the documents that relate to his
detention have been provided,
and because he does not have all of the documents, it follows that he cannot
make a decision to commence a proceeding. There is
no doubt that the Respondent
has this document or documents in its possession.
Applicant submits that the documents would allow for a decision whether to
commence proceedings on the basis of staff that
he was in contact with at the
relevant time and will assist with the potential identification of perpetrators
together with the Applicant’s
movements in the Centre. The documentation
will assist with a timeline of historical events, evidence of changes in the
Applicant’s
behaviour which may assist in establishing a timeline of abuse
including in reports and also assists to determine whether there were
observations or management plans in place pertaining to behaviour or concerns,
going to matters of foreseeability and knowledge.
Personnel Files
[15] Unlike the
youth detention file, the Applicant does not have any personnel files, and it is
not controversial that the Respondent
possesses the relevant personnel
Applicant submits that the personnel files will be essential to assessing
prospects of success. It is submitted that on-boarding
processes will give an
understanding of how staff were assessed when commencing employment and whether
regard was had to their suitability
to interact with vulnerable children. It is
submitted that performance/competency reports would speak to the issue of
continued supervision,
training and may indicate patterns of concerning
behaviour, complaints/specific investigations being clearly relevant. The
concedes that some documents may be irrelevant to the making of a
decision (payroll, leave and other related documents) and would
be amenable to
the Respondent discovering documents but indicating what documents were excluded
in a schedule.
(C) All Formal Complaints
Applicant does not have any information regarding complaints over the required
Applicant submits that discovery of such documents would go towards establishing
tendency and culture in the Detention Centre,
a question of occasion and
opportunity for youth justice officers to abuse children, the question of
foreseeability of child abuse
(presumably in respect to its prevalence as
indicated by complaints), the protocols adopted by investigating said complaints
with enforcement. The Applicant says that if there are such documents
they will be of significant probative value and essential
Applicant’s decision whether to commence proceedings. In support, the
Applicant submitted that the relevance of previous
complaints in determining
foreseeability has been well established in child abuse cases across
[19] In respect
to the onerous obligation which may be imposed by discovering such documents,
the Applicant submitted that he had
limited his request to a three year period,
that the number of complaints would not be unmanageable, and if there is no
centralised
register then he would agree to a time frame for provision of
documents in tranches to minimise any burden.
Applicant seeks his costs of and incidental to this application to be taxed on
an indemnity basis. The basis of that application
is the alleged non-compliance
by the Respondent with PD6 over an extended period of time, which the Applicant
says precipitated this
application for discovery. The Applicant submitted that
it was only upon the making of this application that the Respondent was
to provide discovery of other categories of documents, leaving just three
remaining categories the subject of this application.
On the evidence tendered,
the Applicant submits that there has been a disregard for the spirit of PD6 and
the obligations to provide
prompt pre-trial disclosure.
Respondent’s Submissions
(A) Youth Detention Files
Respondent submits that the Applicant has received his entire youth detention
file, all 625 pages of it, and submits that
the only information which was
redacted were the names of detainees and some mobile phone numbers. The
Respondent submits that it
cannot understand how the information is insufficient
save and except that it has minor matters redacted. Notwithstanding, the
indicated that it would be willing to make available all essential
documents relevant to the Applicant’s claim from the Applicant’s
physical detainee and case management files.
(B) The Personnel
Respondent submits that the information that the Applicant believes is in the
personnel files is in fact not and therefore
those files are unlikely to assist
him. Notwithstanding this the Respondent indicated that it is willing to
discover “essential
documents in the youth detention files relating to
resumes, criminal history results, reference checks, offer letters, contracts,
complaints, disciplinary action, training records” for the named youth
justice officers.
(C) All Formal Detention Centre
Respondent submits that the Applicant does no more than raise an assertion or
suspicion that the Respondent knew or should
have known about unspecified child
abuse in the Detention Centre and may have failed to take reasonable steps in
response. No submission
was made in relation to how the suspicion bears upon
the Applicant’s belief that he may have a right to obtain relief. The
Respondent says that the Applicant does not address the alleged insufficiency of
information possessed by him nor does he articulate
why the prior complaints are
said to be necessary in order to enable him to determine the question of whether
to commence proceedings.
The Respondent objects to documents beyond complaints
relating to the named officers on the basis that it constitutes a fishing
expedition, beyond that which is permitted even in these types of applications.
The Applicant submits that Respondent has not established
the criteria required
in Rule 32.05 to enliven the Court’s discretion. In the event that
discretion has been enlivened, the
Respondent points to evidence of the onerous
obligation which would be imposed on it should discovery be ordered, given there
no single repository of
, and that relief
should be denied on that discretionary basis.
Respondent concedes that a costs order in the Applicant’s favour on the
standard basis is appropriate up to and including
29 May 2025 due to its delay
in responding to the Applicant’s PD6 letter. However, the Respondent
opposes a costs order on
an indemnity basis, pointing to the Pikoulos Affidavit
which sets out the various inquiries and work undertaken behind the scenes
find the information requested by the Applicant. The Respondent opposes any
costs order in favour of the Applicant from 30 May
2025 onwards, if it is
successful in opposing this application.
Disposition
[25] In respect
to the application for access to the youth detention file, as I understood the
oral submissions, the Applicant sought
only access to unredacted names of
officers, and was not interested in names of other detainees or other
information such as phone
numbers, from the records already received. What the
Applicant had received in terms of the 625 pages of the youth detention file,
provided following his FOI request, was not in evidence. I accept that the
Applicant has received a copy of his entire youth detention
file, with certain
parts redacted. What parts of that file is redacted, and what particular
documents with redactions cause issues
for the Applicant in terms of preventing
a decision to commence proceedings, is not in evidence. It seems to be the
Applicant’s
position that he does not know what is missing so he cannot
make a decision whether to commence proceedings, whereas the test is
after making all reasonable enquiries, the Applicant does not have sufficient
information to enable him to make that decision.
As noted above, it is for the
Court to determine whether an applicant has sufficient information available to
it; the applicant’s
own assertion that it does not is neither
determinative nor strictly necessary. Additionally, it needs to be determined
as an objective
fact whether the Applicant has sufficient information to
determine whether to commence proceedings. As part of that process, it
necessary to determine if the information that the Applicant possesses is still
relevantly insufficient.
[26] This is a
different situation to where an applicant does not have any information at all
and therefore may make more general
submissions as to what documents he does not
have, what those documents may reveal and how they may assist the decision
making process.
Here, the Applicant has documents, and in fact those documents
likely form the whole youth detention file with certain parts redacted.
onus is on the Applicant to show, by reference to what material the Applicant
has in terms of that information, what is lacking
and why that information would
assist. That may or may not be difficult to do in terms of documents which have
been redacted. However,
where an Applicant has received information via other
reasonable enquiries, the Applicant bears the onus and needs to do more. The
Applicant does not state why what he has already been provided with is
insufficient to make a decision to commence proceedings.
I am unable to find
that the second limb of Rule 32.05(b) has been satisfied. That is, I am not
objectively satisfied that in respect
to the class of documents sought, the
Applicant has insufficient information to enable him to decide whether to
commence a proceeding.
[27] If I have
misconstrued the Applicant’s position such that he says that
notwithstanding the provision of the youth detention
file (following the FOI
request) there are other documents relating to his detention that he has not
received which do not strictly
form part of his youth detention file, and were
therefore not provided in the FOI request, then I cannot see why he could not
made further reasonable enquiries for them via the FOI process. If the
Applicant claims that there are more documents relating to
his youth detention
outside of those received under FOI request (ie. the request for a complete copy
of his youth detention file,
including a custodial episode history (movement
there is no evidence
that he has made reasonable enquiries for that information. If that is the
case, the Applicant has failed to
satisfy the first limb of Rule 32.05(a).
[28] I would
decline to make this part of the discovery order sought. However, having said
that it would not preclude the Applicant
from seeking another order in more
specific terms with reference to what he has received and what is missing from
those documents
in terms of being able to make a decision whether to commence
proceedings.
[29] In respect
to the personnel files, that they may be essential to assessing the prospects of
success in pursuing a negligence
claim is not the
However, I am prepared to
accept that information relating to the on-boarding process,
competence/performance reviews and complaints/specific
investigations in respect
to the named officers are of a class of documents which would assist the
Applicant make a decision in respect
to commencing proceedings. I would be
prepared to order discovery of such documents, however I also accept that
certain documents
in personnel files would have no bearing on a relevant
decision (payroll, superannuation, leave records, records relevant to employment
in other Agencies) and would be prepared to order that the Respondent need not
discover such documents other than to identify (by
reference to type or name of
document in a schedule) which documents were not discovered.
[30] In respect
to discovery of all previous complaints within the Centre, in support of this
aspect of the application, the Applicant
cited numerous authorities in which
previous complaints of child abuse were found relevant to allegations that
defendants ought to
have known abuse was occurring, and to foreseeability and
implementation of duty of care.
[31] The cases
LG v Brian Brock as executor of the estate of the late Leo
Stephensen v
The Salesian Society Inc; Easton v The Salesian Society
, involved a subpoena in
respect to documents relating to complaints of child sexual assault by named
individuals. The case of
Lenscak v Trustees of the Marist Brothers
, and cases cited
is more insightful. In
, Ierodiaconou AsJ
these factors, the proceeding is one of alleged institutional abuse. The
documents evidencing abuse allegations by other
complainants may be significant
in respect of issues such as foreseeability and damages.
[32] Additionally,
JCB v Bishop Paul Bird for the Diocese of Ballarat & Anor
evidence of widespread sexual abuse of minors within the Diocese during the
period preceding the sexual abuse of the plaintiff
by Ridsdale [a priest] may
bear upon the defendants’ duty of care to have taken steps to prevent
Ridsdale from sexually abusing
the plaintiff. Secondly, evidence of widespread
sexual abuse of minors prior to March/April 1982 may be relevant to the
plaintiff’s
claim for aggravated and/or exemplary damages. I reject the
defendants’ contention that the plaintiff should be precluded from
pleading the particulars of knowledge regarding the offending of other
[33] On the
basis of authorities such as
Paxus Services v People
St. George Bank
Ltd v Rabo Australia Ltd
am prepared to accept that the third category of documents does not constitute
impermissible fishing (even in the context of the
Rule which generally allows
it) and that, on the evidence, the Applicant does not have sufficient
information to enable a decision
to be made to commence a proceeding and
further, that inspection of the relevant documents would assist in making that
However, as stated in
, although the rule should be given
the fullest scope that language will reasonably allow, the proper brake on any
excesses in its
use is the discretion of the Court.
[34] In respect
to the exercise of the discretion, the Pikoulos Affidavit deposes that there is
not one single repository of complaints
of child abuse, and I accept that one
does not exist. The Pikoulos Affidavit deposes as to what would be required in
terms of discovery
in respect to the documents which were sought prior to
amendment of the summons in this proceeding. Previously, the request for
documents was relatively unconstrained. Through the amended summons the
Applicant has sought to narrow the field to formal complaints
held by a class of
persons or agencies. Notwithstanding that, I am still prepared to accept that
undertaking the searches for documents
would still impose an onerous obligation
on the Respondent. Any search for formal complaints over a three-year period,
particularly
somewhat historical, would require an onerous manual search of the
multitude of records as set out in paragraph [8] of the Pikoulos
Affidavit. It
is unlike the situation in
, where there was a digital database,
and the Court held that “the defendants ought be able to conduct the
ease and convenience”.
[35] It would
seem to me that the onerous effect of discovery could be reduced by discovery of
formal complaints received or held
by those primarily in authority and
responsible for the Detention Centre, who would, in the normal course of
business of a youth
detention centre, be expected to receive, and act on such
complaints. Thus, in the exercise of my discretion, balancing the needs
Applicant and the Respondent, I would be prepared to order discovery in the
following terms:
All formal complaints and notifications regarding
child abuse at the Don Dale Youth Detention Centre perpetrated by any employee
the Centre that occurred from 5 July 2006 to the conclusion of the relevant
period being 1 July 2009 inclusive, received or held
by (All Formal
Complaints):
Superintendent/General Manager of the Detention Centre (or Acting
Superintendent/General Manager);
person with delegation from the Superintendent/General Manager;
Commissioner for Correctional Services (or the Acting Commissioner for
Correctional Services);
appropriate Division/Unit or Workgroup, who would in the ordinary course of
business receive such complaints/notifications (ie.
what would be colloquially
referred as the Professional Standards Unit) within the Department with control
of the Detention Centre
from time to time;
[36] In the
absence of a central register for complaints, the above would appear to strike a
balance between ordering the documents
the Applicant says he needs to make a
relevant decision and the onerous obligations which may extend to locating them,
lack of any formal recording system and their age.
[37] In respect
to the application for costs, I agree that the Applicant should have its costs
awarded up to and including 29 May
2025. In respect to this application, I note
that the Applicant has been partially successful in respect to discovery of the
Detention Centre complaints, with the Respondent successful in respect
to opposing discovery of the Applicant’s youth detention
centre file, and
the outcome neutral in respect to the discovery of personnel records. In those
circumstances, in the exercise of
my discretion, and given that is it generally
not the approach to order costs to be “in the proceeding” in respect
pre-proceeding discovery applications, each party should bear their own costs
post 30 May 2025.
remaining issue is whether costs should be awarded on an indemnity basis or the
standard basis. Whilst I accept on the face
of the Pikoulos Affidavit that
significant work was being undertaken behind the scenes in respect to locating
records relating to
the Applicant, the relevant part of this proceeding, for
which costs are being awarded, could have been avoided by more transparent
communication from the Respondent in respect to the delays and difficulties
faced around locating records. PD6 recognises that a
defendant may not be in a
position to respond to a plaintiff within the suggested timeframe and provides
that such things should
be communicated. That would normally require an
explanation as to what the defendant was doing to comply and what compromises
be made in the circumstance of a delay, such as the release of documents
in tranches. That process was largely absent and precipitated
this application.
Costs awarded on an indemnity basis are not designed to be punitive but are
simply intended to more adequately
compensate a receiving party for their legal
costs incurred. In my opinion, this would be an appropriate case for an award of
to be taxed on an indemnity basis.
[39] I therefore
make the following orders:
(1) The Respondent is to provide discovery to the Applicant of the following:
(a) “Personnel files”, including details of on-boarding (including
resumes, criminal history results, reference checks),
offer letters, contracts,
performance/competency reviews, complaints, disciplinary actions, training
records) for the Youth Justice
Officers TH, SS and SH except for documents
falling under the categories of payroll records, leave records, superannuation
rostering issues and the like. Upon discovery, the Respondent is to
provide the Applicant with a schedule of those documents not
discovered (ie. the
excepted documents), describing the document, or class of documents where
appropriate, with sufficient particularly
to enable the Applicant to gain an
understanding as to its nature.
(b) All formal complaints and notifications regarding child abuse at Don Dale
Youth Detention Centre perpetrated by any employee
at the Detention Centre that
occurred from 5 July 2006 to the conclusion of the relevant period being 1 July
2009 inclusive, received
or held by (All Formal Complaints):
Superintendent/General Manager of the Detention Centre (or Acting
Superintendent/General Manager);
person with delegation from the Superintendent / General Manager;
Commissioner for Correctional Services (or the Acting Commissioner for
Correctional Services);
appropriate Division/Unit or Workgroup who would in the ordinary course of
business receive such complaints/notifications (ie.
what would be colloquially
referred as the Professional Standards Unit) within the Department with control
of the Detention Centre
from time to time;
(2) Paragraph 2 of the Amended Summons filed 13 June 2025 is dismissed.
(3) The Applicant is awarded his costs of and incidental to this application up
to and including 29 May 2025, such costs to be agreed
or in default of agreement
to be taxed on an indemnity basis.
(4) Each party is to bear their own costs post 30 May 2025.
-------------------------------------
The names of the
Plaintiff and the relevant youth justice officers, have been anonymised in this
decision pursuant to a request by
the parties for a suppression order in respect
to the publication of their names.
BCI Media Group Pty Ltd v
Corelogic Australia Pty Ltd
[2020] FCA 1556
. For other examples see
Williams Civil Procedure, 32.05.0 “Discretion”.
[2014] NTSC 28
[2020] VSC 554
per Delany J at
Phillps’ First Affidavit
paragraphs [7-10]. A copy of the application decision letter is Annexure CP2 to
the Phillips’
First Affidavit. The application requested “a
complete copy of our Client’s Youth Justice file, including a custodial
episode history (movement history)”. In response, 625 pages held relevant
information and was released in full subject to
exemptions. The decision letter
simply discloses that some information was redacted on certain grounds including
(confidentiality),
(unreasonable interference with a person’s
individuals, including notifiers and individuals not named in the
scope of the request. No schedule of documents or the redacted
documents were
Phillips’ First Affidavit
paragraph [5]. There is no specific reference to what aspect of the proceeding
may cause issue with
a decision, whether it is with a cause of action, defence
or quantum.
Phillips’ First Affidavit
paragraph [22].
Phillips’ First Affidavit
Annexure CP3.
Annexure CP3 affidavit of
Phillips’ First Affidavit.
Applicant’s submissions
paragraph [16].
LG v Brian Brock as
executor of the estate of the late Leo Clarke
[2016] NSWSC 323
Stephensen v The Salesian Society Inc
Easton v The Salesian Society
[2018] VSC 602
Stephensen v The Salesian Society Inc & Ors
Easton v The Salesian Society Inc & Ord
[2018] VSC 602
Lenscak v Trustees of the Marist Brothers & Ors (No .2
[2021] VSC 49
Pikoulos Affidavit paragraph
That is, if outside the youth
detention file there are other documents relating to the Applicant such as
medical, educational, disciplinary,
housing, case management, movement,
admission, discharge, incident and social work records, as referred to in
paragraph 2 of the
Applicant’s amended summons filed 13 June 2025.
Gibson v ANZ Banking Group
(VSC, Gobbo J, No 10670/91, 30 August 1991, unreported, BC9102880.
[2016] NSWSC 323.
[2018] VSC 602.
[2021] VSC 49
JCB v Bishop Paul Bird for
the Diocese of Ballarat & Anor
[2019] VSC 348
[2019] VSC 348
[1990] FCA 500
(1990) 99 ALR 728
[2004] FCA 1360
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (246 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter