URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTRTCmr/2015/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:22:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Watt -v- Whittaker [2015] NTRTCmr 9 (21 April 2015)
REASONS FOR THE ORDER OF THE COMMISSIONER OF TENANCIES
GREGORY WATT (TENANT) v MICHELLE WHITTAKER(LANDLORD)
RT1415-0377
Introduction
is a determination of an application by the tenant dated 4 January 2015 in
respect of premises being 9 Parkside Crescent, Leanyer
in the Northern Territory
of Australia (‘the premises’), seeking an order under s 113 of
the Residential Tenancies Act
(NT) (‘the Act’) for the repayment of
the full amount of the security deposit.
Inquiry was conducted on 8 April 2015. The tenant and the landlord each
appeared on their own behalf at the Inquiry.
evidence before the Inquiry consisted of the following materials:
documents submitted by the tenant in support of the application and kept under
the tab ‘Applicant’s Materials’
on the Commissioner of
Tenancies file numbered RT1415-0377 (‘the file’);
documents submitted by the landlord in response to the application and kept
under the tab ‘Respondent’s Materials’
on the file;
copy of an email exchange between the landlord and tenant dated 7 -10 November
2014 (being a replacement for a partially obscured
version of the same document
included with the landlord’s documents);
following documents received from the tenant and landlord respectively after the
hearing on 8 April 2015: copy of an email from
Regina’s Cleaning Services
to the tenant dated 23 October 2104; copy of an invoice from Regina’s
Commercial Cleaning
Services to the landlord dated 24 October 2014; and
oral evidence of the tenant and landlord.
the basis of the above evidence I find there was a tenancy agreement between the
landlord and the tenant in respect of the premises
within the meaning of and
subject to the provisions of the Act. The key details of the tenancy agreement
are as follows:
Duration: fixed term commencing 14 September
2013 and ending 13 September 2014, periodical thereafter until approximately 19
Rent: $ 540 per week payable fortnightly in advance
Security Deposit $ 2160
The tenant’s application under s 113
tenancy ended in October 2014. The landlord has retained the full amount of the
security deposit in the sum of $2160.
tenant applies under section 113 of the Act for the return of that sum.
question whether the landlord was entitled to retain the full amount of the
security deposit, or any of it, turns on two issues.
The first is whether the
landlord complied with section 112(5) of the Act, which establishes a procedure
landlords must follow if
they wish to retain any part of a security deposit.
The second is whether the amount retained related to one or more of the
of loss or expense identified in section 112(3) in respect of which
retention of security deposit monies is permissible.
112 relevantly provides as follows:
landlord may keep security deposit
(1) Subject to this
section, a tenant is entitled to have his or her security deposit reimbursed at
the end of the tenancy agreement.
(2) The landlord must, within 7 business days after the tenant gave up vacant
possession of the premises or has, in the opinion of
the landlord, apparently
abandoned the premises, reimburse to the tenant the amount of the security
deposit, other than an amount
that the landlord is entitled to retain, or to
continue to hold, under this section.
Maximum penalty: 20 penalty units.
(3) At the end of a tenancy agreement the landlord is entitled to retain so
much of the security deposit paid by the tenant as is
necessary to:
(a) make good damage (other than reasonable wear and tear) to the premises or
to ancillary property that occurred during the tenancy
and that was caused by a
tenant or a person for whose actions a tenant is liable under section 12; or
(b) replace ancillary property lost or destroyed by the tenant or by a person
for whose actions the tenant is liable under section
(c) clean the premises or ancillary property left unreasonably dirty by the
tenant or by a person for whose actions the tenant is
liable under section 12;
(d) replace locks altered, removed or added by the tenant without the consent
of the landlord; or
(e) pay for unpaid rent or for unpaid charges for electricity, gas or water
payable by the tenant under section 118; or
(f) pay an amount required to be paid under section 121; or
(g) pay money ordered by the Commissioner or a court to be paid by a tenant
but not paid.
(5) Subject to section 113(2), the landlord is not entitled to retain, or to
continue to hold under subsection (6), part or all of
a security deposit unless,
within 7 business days after the tenant gave up vacant possession of the
premises or has, in the opinion
of the landlord, apparently abandoned the
premises, the landlord has:
(a) given written notice in the prescribed form, if any, of his or her
intention to retain or continue holding so much of the security
deposit as is
specified in the notice for the purpose specified in the notice; and
(b) attached a copy of a statutory declaration in the prescribed form, if
any, attesting to the truth of the claim that the retention
or continued
holding of the security deposit is required for the purpose specified in the
notice; and
(c) attached a copy of a statutory declaration attesting that the receipts,
invoices or other documents attached to the declaration
(i) the matters in respect of which part or all of the security deposit is
being withheld from the tenant; or
(ii) the amount of unpaid rent owing under the agreement or money owing under
section 121; and
(d) in the case of damage or unreasonably dirty premises or ancillary
property – attached copies of receipts, invoices or other
including orders of the Commissioner or a court, specifying the amount required
to make good the damage or clean the premises
or ancillary property; and
(e) returned to the tenant the proportion of security not claimed by the
landlord or not to be held under subsection (6).
is logical and convenient to first consider whether the landlord has complied
with section 112(5). As that section makes clear
(with a limited exception,
irrelevant to this matter, where section 113(2) applies) a landlord's
entitlement to retain any part of
a security deposit depends upon compliance
with the several requirements in paragraphs (a) to (e).
finding that the landlord has failed to comply with section 112(5) will mean
that the tenant is entitled to an order for the return
of security deposit.
There will be no need in those circumstances for consideration of whether the
amount retained was otherwise
permitted to be retained under section 112(3).
noted at the hearing that there appeared to me to be several bases upon which it
might be found that the landlord had not complied
with section 112(5). In light
of that possibility, I adjourned the hearing on 8 April 2015 so that that
question could be decided.
I made orders at the time permitting the parties to
deliver further materials and submissions relevant to the question. [*I note
that the timetable was extended upon the landlord's application on 10 April
should finally be stressed here that there is no application by the landlord for
an order for compensation under section 122 in
respect of the amounts she
retained. As I indicated to the parties at the hearing, if there is an order
that the landlord return
the security deposit owing to non-compliance with
section 112(5), that will not mean that the landlord is precluded from bringing
an application for compensation.
The RT08 notice and attachments
3 November 2014 the landlord completed a form RT08, which is the standard form
prepared by the office of the Commissioner of Tenancies
for providing notice of
a landlord's intention of retaining a security deposit. Her evidence is that at
she mailed the notice to the tenant at the
address of the premises. She was aware that the tenant had by then vacated the
however, she had not by that time heard back from the tenant regarding
a request she'd made by email earlier that day for a forwarding
Accepting that evidence for present purposes, the notice was sent to the
tenant's "last-known place of business or residence"
within the meaning of
section 154(a) of the Act.
landlord's evidence as to the precise form of the RT08 notice sent on 3 November
2014 was not completely satisfactory. The materials
submitted by her prior to
the hearing in response to the tenant's application included two, slightly
different, forms and it is not
entirely clear which of the two is the version
that was mailed to the tenant.
was also not clear, having regard to the form of materials provided by the
landlord, what, if any, documents may have been included
with the form RT08 when
it was mailed to the tenant.
attempting to clarify this at the hearing, I am far from persuaded that the
landlord has a reliable recollection of what she
sent to the tenant.
Nevertheless, for the purposes of this decision, I am prepared to assume that
they comprised the following documents,
copies of which (in the unsatisfactory
form they were provided by the landlord) are reproduced as an appendix to these
versions of a form RT08 dated 3 November 2014 (appendix pp12-15);
a statutory
declaration completed by the landlord (appendix p16);
a Big W receipt
for $55.16 (appendix p17); and
ledger-type documents listing various maintenance and repair items (appendix pp
18-19 & 20).
regard to my findings below, nothing turns upon the question of which
combination of the documents in the appendix was the
one mailed by the landlord.
Section 112(5)(e)
versions of the RT08 include at item 3 an entry beside the words "The amount of
security deposit which is not being retained
or continuing to be held by the
landlord is:". On one version of the RT08 the entry is "$
, 398.31”. On the second version the entry is
partly obscured; however, comparing it with the other version, it is clear to
that the entry is as follows: "
, 186.11". In addition, on
the second version, there appear the following additional entries "Excess Water
212.00" and "$398.31 Refund
was clarified at the hearing that the sum of $186.11 was intended to represent
the balance of the security deposit money ($2160)
after deduction of the other
figures claimed on the RT 08 notice, which total $1973.69 (- in fact the figure
should be $186.31 but
nothing turns on that). The other sum of $212 was an
amount paid by the tenant in respect of water charges which the landlord was
apparently prepared to refund to the tenant; however, it was not part of the
security deposit money.
landlord openly acknowledged at the hearing that no part of the security deposit
had been returned to the tenant - in other words
that she retained the sum of
$186.11 (or, to be accurate, $186.31) even though that sum was not part of what
she claimed. This was
also despite the fact that the RT 08 notice included under
item 3 the following words "(This amount is enclosed with this notice.)".
asked the landlord why the amount had not been returned to the tenant. She
responded that her understanding of the usual practice
was that the entire
security deposit was to be retained in circumstances such as this case.
or not that might once have been the practice, it most certainly is not what the
Act requires.
section 112(2) of the Act:
The landlord must, within 7 business days after the tenant gave up
vacant possession of the premises or has, in the opinion of the
apparently abandoned the premises, reimburse to the tenant the amount of the
security deposit, other than an amount that
the landlord is entitled to retain,
or to continue to hold, under this section.
Maximum penalty: 20 penalty units
addition, and importantly for present purposes, section 112(5)(e) - reproduced
at paragraph [
] above - provides that a
landlord's entitlement to retain any part of a security deposit is conditional
upon the landlord returning
to the tenant the undisputed part within the same
period – 7 business days – as applies to providing the notice
by sections 112(5)(a)–(d). (This explains the inclusion of item 3
in the RT08 notice and the reference to the non-retained
amount being returned
to the tenant with the notice.)
the hearing on 8 April 2015 I had not noticed section 112(5)(e) and did not
specifically draw the parties' attention to it. In
the circumstances, I had an
email sent to the parties on 9 April 2015 as follows:
At the hearing yesterday it was noted that according to the RT08
notice there was an amount of $186.11 that represented the part of
the security
deposit not required to defray the various amounts claimed by the
landlord. The landlord confirmed that that amount
was included in the
$2160 she had retained.
Although Mr Bruxner raised with the landlord why that sum had not been
returned to the tenant, he did not draw the parties’
attention to section
112(5)(e) of the Act. That section appears to have the effect that a
landlord’s entitlement to retain
any part of the security deposit depends
upon the return of the unclaimed sum at the time of delivering the RT08
In the circumstances, Mr Bruxner asks that the parties include in their
further submissions regarding the validity of the RT08 notice
(due close of
business tomorrow 10 April 2015) anything they may wish to say regarding the
effect of section 112(5)(e).
extension granted on 10 April 2015 to the timetable for submissions meant that
the last submissions were due by close of business
Wednesday 15 April 2015, by
which time the landlord had provided her submissions regarding section
substance the landlord submitted that she was 'unable' to comply with section
112(5)(e) and that she had 'no way of returning the
$186 to [the tenant]'. She
relied upon the fact that she did not have bank details for the tenant. She
said she had asked the tenant
for his bank details in an email dated 6 December
2014 but that he had failed to provide them. She also referred to the fact that
the tenant ‘would not provide me with his residential address’.
the extent the landlord's submissions are intended to convey that she had any
intention at any time to return the $186.11 to the
tenant in compliance with her
obligations under section 112(5)(e) they are disingenuous.
has already been noted above, the landlord's evidence at the hearing was that
she retained the undisputed balance of the security
deposit believing that it
was permissible and acceptable for her to do so. Such a belief, which plainly
remained her state of mind
at the time of the hearing, is very difficult to
reconcile with the existence at any relevant time of an intention to return that
balance to the tenant.
is true that the landlord did request the tenant's bank details in an email of 6
December 2014; however, that email does not reflect
any intention or wish on the
part of the landlord to comply with section 112(5)(e). On the contrary, the
email is in the nature of
an ultimatum from the landlord to the tenant - in the
context of what appears to have been a contentious exchange relating to who
what to whom in the aftermath of the tenant's departure from the premises - that
unless he accepted from her "the proposed refund"
of $398.31 (which, it will be
recalled is a sum that appeared on both versions of the RT08 notice) she would
make application to
the "tenancy board" by which she presumably meant the
Commissioner of Tenancies. That is a far cry from a genuine attempt by the
landlord to bring to the tenant's attention a wish on her part to discharge an
unqualified obligation under the Act to return to
the tenant the undisputed part
of the security deposit.
whilst it is true that the landlord did not have a residential address for the
tenant she did have his email address and
mobile phone number. Had she ever
wanted to make arrangements with the tenant to return the sum of $186.11 to him
she could easily
have done so.
in support of the retention of the sum of sum of $186.11 the landlord also
submits "In accordance with section 112(3)(e)
I seek compensation for unpaid
water on 3 occasions thus probably negating the requirement to return this
money". Whether or not
she has or has ever had such an entitlement - no
evidence is offered - the landlord made no such claim at the time she retained
security deposit and gave no notice to the tenant that any part of the
security deposit was being retained on that account. As such,
the obligation in
s 112(5)(e) was unaffected.
my view, the effect of section 112(5)(e) is clear and unambiguous. Return of
any undisputed part of a security deposit within
the timeframe specified is a
pre-requisite to a landlord's entitlement to retain any part of the security
deposit. The fundamental
importance attached by the Act to the return of the
undisputed part of a security deposit (see also the offence in s 112(2)) is
surprising - unless the landlord has a claim or entitlement recognised by
the Act, a security deposit at all times remains what it
was when first paid by
a tenant: the tenant's money.
would add that the obligation in section 112(5)(e) is expressed in such clear
terms that it is doubtful that anything short of strict
compliance with the
obligation will suffice. Questions might arise in particular cases as to
whether a sum has been 'returned' in
the sense that word is used in s 112(5)(e)
but there is no need in this case to consider that issue.
consequence in the present case is that the landlord was not entitled to retain
any part of the security deposit paid.
will accordingly be an order under s 113(1) of the Act that the landlord pay the
full amount of the security deposit, namely
$2160, to the tenant at the earliest
opportunity.
Other issues
conclusion that the landlord has failed to comply with section 112(5)(e) means
that it is strictly unnecessary to consider other
issues that potentially
affected the landlord's entitlement to retain the security deposit.
will nevertheless make some brief comments relating to those issues, because
they were the subject of attention at the hearing and
in submissions.
Date of vacant possession
as noted at paragraph [
] above, the
landlord's evidence is that on 3 November 2014 she mailed the RT08 notice to the
tenant at the address of the premises.
Assuming that occurred, and further
assuming that the letter was delivered in the ordinary course of the mail, the
earliest the
notice would have arrived at the premises was 4 November 2014.
That date is therefore the earliest date upon which the notice required
section 112(5) was 'given' to the tenant (see generally Brown & Lemmers v
Elenis & Elenis
[2007] NTMC 004).
date is potentially significant, because section 112(5) requires that the notice
is to be given "within 7 business days after
the tenant gave up vacant
possession of the premises or has, in the opinion of the landlord, apparently
abandoned the premises".
For a notice 'given' on 4 November 2014 to be within
the timeframe contemplated by section 112(5), the date of vacant possession
abandonment must have been no earlier than 24 October 2014.
to the landlord, the date of vacant possession was 24 October 2014. That was the
date upon which, according to the landlord,
the tenant returned to her a second
set of keys to the premises. The landlord relies in this regard upon clause 37
of the tenancy
agreement which relevantly includes the following: "The Tenant
remains in possession of the Property until all keys have been returned
to the tenant, the date the second set of keys was returned was 23 October 2014,
the first set having been returned on 21
October 2014. The tenant further
contends that in any event that the date of vacant possession was 19 October
2014, which was the
day after he vacated the premises.
it is unnecessary, I will not seek to resolve the factual dispute regarding the
date the second set of keys was returned.
do note, however, that I am not persuaded that in the circumstances of this case
clause 37 has the effect contended for by the landlord.
The relevant inquiry
for the purposes of s 112(5) is: when did the tenant give up vacant possession?
That is ultimately a question
of fact. Undoubtedly a clause such as clause 37
might be relevant to the factual inquiry; however, in a case where (as here) the
tenant has plainly vacated the premises, but remains in possession of the keys
or some of them, there would need to be consideration
of why the tenant has the
keys. If, for example, the landlord has re-entered possession but has permitted
the tenant to retain a
set of keys for a particular purpose (for example
cleaning) there might be questions as to whether a contractual provision such as
clause 37 could be invoked.
Attachments to RT08 notice
issue that arose at the hearing was whether the RT08 notice and attachments
relied upon by the landlord complied with the
requirements of
section 112(5)(a)-(d) of the Act.
have already noted (at [
]) that there
was uncertainty at the hearing regarding the precise form of the materials the
landlord says she mailed to the tenant
with the RT08 notice.
thing that is clear is that the attachments included only one document matching
the description of an invoice or receipt (a Big
W receipt totalling $55.16 for
some cleaning products and pesticide).
is also clear that a substantial part of what was claimed by the landlord in
support of her asserted entitlement to retain monies
from the security deposit
consisted of her own labour in attending to cleaning, maintenance and repair
works at the premises, for
which she claimed $35 per hour. It appears that the
total amount claimed on this basis was $845.25 (24.15 hours).
section 112(5)(d), in cases where a landlord retains security deposit monies on
account of damage, or unreasonably dirty premises
or ancillary property, the
notice under section 112(5) is to be accompanied by 'receipts, invoices or other
documents... specifying
the amount required to make good the damage or clean the
premises...’.
purpose of the notice requirement in s 112(5) is to ensure that the tenant
is made aware: 1) that the landlord proposes retaining
part or all of the
security deposit; 2) how much the landlord proposes retaining; and 3) upon what
precise basis. This allows the
tenant to make a judgment as to the
reasonableness of what the landlord proposes and, in turn, to make an informed
decision whether
to challenge the retention of part or all of the security
deposit. Again, the critical underlying consideration is that, except
extent the Act says otherwise, the security deposit is the tenant's money.
the circumstances, had it been necessary to decide the point, I would not have
been satisfied that either of the two ledger-type
documents that may have been
mailed with the RT08 notice was sufficient for the purposes of section
assuming in the landlord's favour that she sent to the tenant the two page
version (which was the more intelligible of the two
– see appendix
pp18-19) there is the difficulty that the itemised labour costs have no obvious
relationship to the items listed
in the RT08 notice.
addition - and this time assuming that a landlord can properly claim under s
112(3) for the notional cost of his or her own labour,
as opposed to expenses
actually incurred or losses actually suffered - the material provided by the
landlord gave the tenant no objective
basis upon which to judge either whether
the rate of $35 per hour, or the number of hours claimed, were fair and
reasonable.
I accordingly order that the landlord is to pay to the tenant the full amount
of the security deposit, in the sum of $2160, as soon
as practicable and in any
case by no later than close of business Friday 1 May 2015.
Dated: 21 April 2015
Richard Bruxner
Delegate of the Commissioner of Tenancies
APPENDIX (pp 12-20)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (85 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter