URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTADComm/2006/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:16:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Harbour v Scollay & Nyangatjatjara College [2006] NTADComm 1 (28 June 2006)
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION COMMISSION
LOCATIONS: YULARA AND ALICE SPRINGS
TRIBUNAL: TONY FITZGERALD
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION COMMISSIONER
DATES OF HEARING: 2 - 5 MAY 2005 YULARA
20 & 21 SEPTEMBER 2005 ALICE SPRINGS
HEARING NO: 2 of 2005
BETWEEN: TRACEY HARBOUR
Complainant
CLIVE SCOLLAY
NYANGATJATJARA COLLEGE
COUNSEL: Graham Harbord authorized pursuant to
Anti-Discrimination Act
to represent the Respondents
Travis Harbour authorized pursuant to
Anti-Discrimination Act
to represent the Complainant
DATE OF DECISION: Written Decision given on 28 June 2006
REASONS FOR DECISION
1.1 By letter of appointment dated 7/11/2003 (exhibit R1) (“the letter
of appointment”) the Complainant, a woman of indigenous
descent, was
appointed Principal of Nyangatjatjara College (the Second Respondent) by the
Nyangatjatjara Aboriginal Corporation (“the
corporation”).
1.2 The Complainant’s appointment was subject to the
“satisfactory completion of a six month probation period” from
commencement of employment (cl.7, letter of appointment).
1.3 The Second Respondent is an educational institution comprising four
campuses situated within the Pitjantjatjara lands in the south-west
Northern Territory, established in 1997 to teach and train indigenous (known in
south-west Northern Territory as “Anangu”)
students. The Second
Respondent is an unincorporated body managed by the corporation. The
corporation is an incorporated public
benevolent institution established to
provide and manage education, development and employment programs for
Pitjantjatjara people
in the south-west of the NT.
1.4 The First Respondent, Clive Scollay, is the CEO of the corporation and
his primary role is to inform the executive and carry out
the wishes of the
executive, in relation to all the activities, programs and enterprises of the
corporation including the Second
Respondent. This includes, among other things,
management of the affairs of the corporation on a day to day basis.
1.5 The Complainant commenced employment with the Second Respondent on 19
January 2004 pursuant to terms and conditions agreed upon
by the parties and
contained in the letter of appointment and also pursuant to the Nyangatjatjara
College Principal’s job specification
(exhibit C3) (“the job
specification”).
1.6 The executive of the corporation decided to terminate the
Complainant’s employment at an executive meeting on 3 June 2004
R29, minutes of meeting).
1.7 The Complainant’s appointment as principal of the Second Respondent
was terminated before the expiration of her probation
period by letter dated 4
June 2004 from the corporation to the Complainant (exhibit R25).
1.8 Prior to the said termination of her employment, that is by written
complaint dated 19 May 2004, the Complainant alleged that
the Respondents
unlawfully discriminated against her in the workplace on the basis of her sex
1.9 The Complainant alleges that unlawful discrimination was committed by the
First Respondent as Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of
the Second Respondent, and
by the Second Respondent because of its alleged vicarious liability for the acts
of the First Respondent.
1.10 The Respondents deny discriminating against the Complainant, and
maintain that any action taken by them was necessitated by the
Complainant’s poor work performance.
1.11 By way of remedy the Complainant seeks an apology, anti-discrimination
training for staff of the corporation, and damages. The
Respondents seek
dismissal of the complaint.
STATUTORY PROVISIONS
The complaint involves
Anti-Discrimination Act 2004
(“the Act”). These sections
are set out below.
“4. Interpretation
In this Act, unless the
contrary intention appears –
"attribute" means an attribute referred to in section 19;
"Commissioner" means the person appointed under section 6 to be the
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner and includes a person appointed
under section
11 to act as the Commissioner, when so acting;
"Complainant" means the person making a complaint and includes a person
joined as a Complainant under section 73;
"complaint" means a complaint made under Part 6;
"document" includes –
(a) paper or other material on which there is writing;
(b) paper or other material on which there are marks, figures, symbols or
perforations having a meaning for persons qualified to
interpret them; and
(c) an article or material from which sounds, images or writings are capable of
being reproduced with or without the aid of any other
"educational authority" means
the body or person administering an educational institution;
"educational institution" means a school, college, university or other
institution at which any form of training or instruction is
provided and
(a) a training institution within the meaning of the
Training Guarantee
(Administration) Act 1990
of the Commonwealth; and
(b) a place at which training or instruction is provided by an
"prohibited conduct" means –
(a) discrimination, other than discrimination exempted from the application of
(b) sexual harassment;
(c) victimisation;
(d) discriminatory advertising;
(e) seeking unnecessary information;
(f) failure to accommodate a special need; or
(g) aiding a contravention of this Act;
"race" includes –
(a) the nationality, ethnic or national origin, colour, descent or ancestry of a
person; and
(b) that a person is or has
been an immigrant;
"Respondent", in relation to a complaint, means the person alleged in the
complaint to have engaged in prohibited conduct and includes
a person joined as
a Respondent under section 73;
"work" includes work –
(a) in a relationship of employment (including full-time, part-time, casual,
permanent and temporary
employment);
(b) under a contract for
(c) remunerated in whole or in part on a commission
(d) under a statutory
appointment;
(e) by a person with an impairment in a sheltered workshop; and
(f) under a guidance program, vocational training program or other occupational
training or retraining program.
the purposes of this Act, a person may be discriminated against on the ground of
race even if the person is, in addition to
that race, of one or more other
19. Prohibition of discrimination
(1) Subject to subsection (2), a person shall not discriminate against
another person on the ground of any of the following attributes:
(2) It is not unlawful for a
person to discriminate against another person on any of the attributes referred
to in subsection (1)
if an exemption under Part 4 or 5 applies.
20. Discrimination
(1) For the purposes of this Act, discrimination includes –
(a) any distinction, restriction, exclusion or preference made on the basis of
an attribute that has the effect of nullifying or
impairing equality of
opportunity; and
(b) harassment on the basis of an attribute,
in an area of activity referred to in Part
(2) Without limiting the generality
of subsection (1), discrimination takes place if a person treats or proposes to
treat another
person who has or had, or is believed to have or had –
(a) an attribute;
(b) a characteristic imputed to appertain to an attribute; or
(c) a characteristic imputed to appertain generally to persons with an
less favourably than a
person who has not, or is believed not to have, such an attribute.
(3) For discrimination to take place, it is not necessary that –
(a) the attribute is the sole or dominant ground for the less favourable
treatment; or
(b) the person who discriminates regards the treatment as less
favourable.
(4) The motive of a person
alleged to have discriminated against another person is, for the purposes of
this Act, irrelevant.
28. Areas of activities
This Act applies to prohibited conduct in the areas of –
31. Discrimination in work area
(1) A person shall not discriminate –
(a) in deciding who should be offered work;
(b) in the terms and conditions of work that is offered;
(c) in failing or refusing to offer work;
(d) by failing or refusing to grant a person seeking work access to a guidance
program, vocational training program or other occupational
training or
retraining program; or
(e) in developing the scope or range of a program referred to in paragraph
(2) A person shall not
discriminate –
(a) in any variation of the terms and conditions of work;
(b) in failing or refusing to grant, or limiting, access to opportunities for
promotion, transfer, training or other benefit to a
(c) in dismissing a worker; or
(d) by treating a worker less favourably in any way in connection with
62. Authorisation to act for Complainant or Respondent
(1) The Commissioner may authorise a person nominated by a Complainant or
Respondent to act on behalf of the Complainant or Respondent
in any proceedings
under this Act in respect of the complaint, and the person may act
accordingly.
(2) The Commissioner may authorise a person nominated by a Complainant or
Respondent to accompany the Complainant or Respondent in
any proceedings under
this Act in respect of the complaint and the person may assist the Complainant
or Respondent in the proceedings.
(3) The Commissioner may withdraw an authorisation under this section if the
Commissioner considers it appropriate to do so.
91. Burden and standard of proof
(1) Subject to this section, it is for the Complainant to prove, on the
balance of probabilities, that the prohibited conduct alleged
in the complaint
is substantiated.
(2) Where a Respondent wishes to rely on an exemption, it is for the
Respondent to raise and prove, on the balance of probabilities,
exemption applies.
105. Vicarious liability
(a) a worker of a person does an act in connection with his or her work that is
unlawful under this Act; or
(b) an agent of a person does an act in connection with his or her duties as an
agent that is unlawful under this
this Act applies in relation to
the person as if the person had also done the act.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if the person shows that he or she took all
reasonable steps to prevent the worker or agent from
doing the act referred to
in that subsection.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2) and without limiting the matters that
may be taken into account in determining whether the
person has taken all
reasonable steps, the following matters are to be considered:
(a) the provision of anti-discrimination training by the person;
(b) the development and implementation of an equal employment opportunity
management plan by the person;
(c) the publication of an anti-discrimination policy by the person;
(d) the financial circumstances of the person;
(e) the number of workers and agents of the
(4) If, after the hearing of a
complaint, the Commissioner finds that prohibited conduct alleged in the
complaint is substantiated
in respect of an act that a person is taken to have
done under subsection (1), the Commissioner must, before making an order that
amount be paid to the Complainant for loss or damage caused by the prohibited
(a) consider the extent of steps taken by the person to prevent the prohibited
conduct; and
(b) take those steps into consideration in determining the proportion of the
amount to be paid to the Complainant by the
3.1 The complaint was heard at Yulara NT between 2 May and 5 May 2005
inclusive and in Alice Springs on 20 and 21 September 2005.
3.2 The Complainant was represented by her husband Travis Harbour who was
authorised to act on her behalf pursuant to section 62 of
the Act. The
Respondents were represented by Graham Harbord a legal practitioner from
Adelaide, who was authorised to act on their
behalf pursuant to section 95 of
the Act.. During the hearing both parties called witnesses who were subjected
to cross examination,
and both parties tendered documentary evidence by
THE COMPLAINT
4.1 A brief outline of the Complainant’s case is contained in
paragraphs 1.8, 1.9 and 1.11 above.
4.2 The Complainant alleges that because of her sex and race she was treated
less favourably by the Respondents than a white male
would have been treated in
the same circumstances. The Complainant provides the previous white male
principal of the Second Respondent
as her comparator.
4.3 In support of her complaint the Complainant alleges that the Respondents
inter alia expressed negative and/or insulting opinions
believed that Aboriginal women were poor managers (in an organisational sense),
did not trust or have confidence
in her, believed that the Complainant was
unpopular with local Aboriginal (Anangu) people because of her mixed descent,
to undermine her position and status, (sic) set her up to fail, and
failed to recognise or acknowledge her qualifications as an educator.
4.4 Pursuant to ss 19 and 31 of the Act it is unlawful for an employer or any
other person to discriminate against another person
on the ground of the
latter’s sex and/or race in employment.
4.5 The complaint is primarily about the behaviour of the First Respondent,
Clive Scollay, in his capacity as CEO of the corporation.
The corporation
“controls” the Second Respondent. However if the Complainant
successfully proves her case then the
Second Respondent is vicariously liable
pursuant to section 105 of the Act unless it is able to establish that it took
all reasonable
steps to prevent the alleged unlawful discrimination.
4.6 At the commencement of proceedings submissions were heard from the
parties in relation to four matters raised by the Respondents.
The first concerned the grounds of complaint. In her original application
the Complainant alleged age discrimination – a ground
which was not raised
further in subsequent discussion or documentation. The Respondents sought an
assurance from the Complainant
that she would not proceed with the age-related
complaint. Such an assurance was forthcoming.
Secondly, the Respondents sought further assurances from the Complainant
that she did not seek redress for any act taken separately
by the corporation
and/or the Second Respondent, and that the Complainant’s claim against the
Second Respondent was restricted
to one in vicarious liability. Those
assurances were also forthcoming.
Thirdly, the Respondents sought to restrict the ambit of the complaint to
those issues raised by the Complainant in her initial complaint
of June 2004.
Such a restriction would have excluded issues raised in the Complainant’s
“Summary of Complaint”
of July 2004, and the Complainant’s
“Points of Claim” filed February 2005. After hearing submissions
parties I was satisfied both that the Respondents suffered no
disadvantage from the retention of all the material, and that in any
material filed subsequent to the initial June 2004 complaint was in effect
illustrative of the initial complaint rather
than additional to it.
Accordingly, all the material was allowed into evidence.
Fourthly, the Respondents contended that the Complainant was precluded from
claiming damages at hearing for termination of employment
because no claim was
made during the interlocutory proceedings that the termination of employment was
discriminatory or unlawful
or compensable in damages. After some discussion the
Complainant conceded that she did not dispute the authority of the
council” of the corporation to terminate her employment
during her 6-month probation period and conceded that she sought no
remedy from
the corporation or the Second Respondent for her actual termination.
Accordingly I ruled that the actual termination
of employment was not part of
the Complainant’s unlawful discrimination claim and that even though the
termination was effected
by the corporation and not the CEO, the Complainant may
lead evidence to support her contention that the CEO influenced the corporation
in a discriminatory manner to effect the termination.
THE EVIDENCE
5.1 The Complainant
5.1.1 Evidence was given by the Complainant, Tracey Harbour, of her Mt Isa
origins, her family ties to Central Australia through
her grandmother, her
extensive qualifications in the fields of teaching and education, her previous
employment, and her desire to
contribute through education to Anangu
communities.
Ms Harbour then gave extensive evidence (transcript 5.1.2 to 5.1.13) about her
treatment by the First Respondent
Clive Scollay (“Scollay”)
which she described as racist and sexist because it was based on Scollay’s
negative views
5.1.2 Ms Harbour first spoke to Scollay in November 2003 when the latter rang
her to offer the position of principal of the Second
Respondent, Nyangatjatjara
College (“the College”). She said Scollay commented then that she
not resign from her federal
government position but take leave without pay
“because you may not last longer than six months”. Scollay rang
later that month to arrange a meeting in Melbourne to sign the contract of
employment. At this time he said she should not have
resigned from her current
position and he advised her not to bring all her possessions to Yulara because
she “may not like
5.1.3 Ms Harbour gave evidence that on her arrival in Yulara in January 2004
Scollay told her that there was “a perception
here that Aboriginal women
can’t manage”. She believed Scollay meant a perception within the
corporation (transcript
3/5/05, 16.11). She gave further evidence that Scollay
then shocked her by saying that Anangu do not like “yella people”.
She told Scollay at the time that she would prove “them” (the
doubters, my brackets) wrong because there are many Aboriginal
women who are
successfully managing organisations.
5.1.4 Ms Harbour referred to exhibit C1, an email from Scollay dated 18/4/04
affirming her engagement of a principal of the Imanpa
Campus but questioning the
membership of the selection panel because, although Ms Harbour was a member, the
panel did not involve
a qualified member of the teaching staff. Ms Harbour
found it offensive that Scollay, who had no qualifications as an educator,
determined that she was unqualified to sit on the panel when she was chosen on
merit for the position of principal and met the selection
5.1.5 The Complainant was shown the Nyangatjatjara College Enterprise Bargaining
Agreement (exhibit C4). She said that the Nyangatjatjara
Corporation was not a
party to the agreement and that the agreement, in particular clause 16.1 and
appendix 2 thereof, states clearly
that she is the CEO of the college and a
representative on the college board. She further stated (transcript 3/5/05,
22.29) that
her understanding was that the agreement (especially the sections
referred to above) dictated that she, not Scollay, had decision
making authority
on any issues affecting the college and that the powers vested in her as
principal meant that she had no supervisor
other than the executive of the
corporation.
5.1.6 The Complainant was also shown her job specification (exhibit C3). Her
evidence was that the document does not contemplate
involvement by the CEO of
the corporation (ie Scollay) in college decision making, and that the document
does not vest power in Scollay
as her manager, mentor or supervisor.
5.1.7 Ms Harbour stated that Scollay interfered with her role as principal by
denying her the right to seek independent legal advice
issues and that as principal she should have been able to obtain legal advice
without permission from Scollay.
For example (transcript 3/5/05, 27) when there
was an allegation of bullying and harassment by one staff member against
when Ms Harbour “dismissed” a member of staff for alleged
ill-treatment of students (transcript 3/5/05, 78-79) and when
the executive
wished to deal with a member of college non-teaching staff charged with criminal
offences (infra para 5.1.17), she
should have been able to obtain independent
legal advice.
5.1.8 Ms Harbour confirmed that an email received from Scollay on behalf of the
board on 19 May 2004 (exhibit C9) directed her to
seek authorisation from him
concerning all responsibilities within her duty statement. Prior to that date
all emailed instructions
came direct from Scollay and she did not consider
herself bound by them. Also prior to that date she received no advice that the
board wished her to take instructions from the CEO (transcript 3/5/05, 38.30).
She also gave evidence that the board had ample opportunity
instructions in exhibit C9 verbally, but the board did not approach her. She
believed the directions contained in exhibit
C9 to be in breach of the
Enterprise Bargaining Agreement (exhibit C4) and her contract of employment
(exhibit R1).
5.1.9 Ms Harbour complained in evidence that she was not personally notified
corporation, or about
results of the elections, nor was she invited to meet the newly elected
executive. She said she learned of
the election results when they were posted
on a college notice board 10 days after the event in or about late April/early
5.1.10 The Complainant deposed that the election of office bearers for the new
executive took place at the corporation AGM on 11
May 2004, but she did not
learn of that election result until 3 June because she only attended the AGM for
long enough to present
her principal’s report. She claimed in evidence
that she was unfairly given only one day’s email notice by Scollay of
AGM. She said this was an attempt by Scollay to prevent her providing an
adequate report to the meeting so that she could be
portrayed as an incompetent
Aboriginal woman.
5.1.11 In her evidence Ms Harbour gave further examples of her unfavourable
treatment by Scollay, namely:
not invited to executive meetings especially a meeting between the executive and
federal government officials about college
failing to provide her with minutes of executive meetings – despite
several requests
failing (as distinct from refusing) to provide monthly financial statements
for the college – even though the previous (white
male) principal was
given said statements
failing to provide a schedule of, or information about, capital works
intended for the college
deliberately misleading the executive by advising it that federal funding was
in jeopardy if it didn’t take action against her
meeting college staff without her permission – even though (according
to Ms Harbour) Scollay had no responsibility for college
matters, and even
though Ms Harbour requested that he refer staff back to her if they approach him
at first instance. The Complainant
believed this behaviour by Scollay to be in
breach of the Enterprise Bargaining Agreement (exhibit C4).
According to the Complainant, Scollay’s interference in college business
took place because of his belief that Aboriginal women
can’t manage, and
his failure to include her or provide her with relevant written materials was a
deliberate attempt to bring
5.1.12 Ms Harbour found Scollay’s remarks about Anangu people not trusting
‘yella fellas’ offensive. In her view
her ancestry was irrelevant
to her ability to perform the job. Also in her view the remarks further exposed
Scollay’s belief
that Aboriginal women, particularly the Complainant,
could not manage.
5.1.13 Ms Harbour complained that Scollay undermined her authority in May 2004
by reinstating a staff member after she had, in what
the Respondents allege was
a breach of the EBA grievance procedure, suspended him for misconduct without
affording him an opportunity
to be heard. The misconduct involved corporal
punishment of students. She also complained that Scollay further undermined her
by refusing to allow her to seek independent legal advice about the
whole affair. (transcript 3/3/05 at 77, and exhibits C7 and
C8 [emails]
5.1.14 Under cross examination Ms Harbour said that she did not take
Scollay’s suggestion in November 2003 not to resign her
full-time job as
“advice” but as a “statement”. She agreed that in her
letter of appointment (exhibit R1)
her employer was the corporation, her long
term employment was subject to the satisfactory completion of a six month
probation period,
and that Clive Scollay was the signatory of the “offer
and acceptance” section of the said letter as CEO of the corporation.
5.1.15 She was shown her job specification (exhibit C3) and she agreed that the
executive of the corporation was her employer, that
the college was not a
separate entity to the corporation, and that pursuant to clause 2 of her job
specification (exhibit C3) she
was responsible to the executive. She did not
agree that the words “through the executive officer” in clause 2 of
job specification meant that she was responsible to, answerable to or
supervised by chief executive officer Scollay. She could not
particular members of the executive were her supervisors. She said that prior
to receiving the emailed direction from
the executive on 19 May (exhibit C9,
supra paragraph 5.1.8) all her directions came from Scollay, and the only reason
she accepted
them was because her job was under threat (transcript 3/5/05,
93.3). She said that her interpretation of exhibit C9 was that henceforth
was to accept direction from the board but that prior to C9 she
“didn’t have to” (transcript 3/5/05, 92.37).
Prior to C9 she
didn’t complain to the board about having to suffer directions from
Scollay because she thought she could
deal with his interference herself.
5.1.16 The Complainant confirmed that at her meeting with Scollay on 15 January
2004 (supra paragraph 5.1.3) she received information
from Scollay about some of
the problems that he thought she might face in a cultural context because of
Anangu suspicion about outsiders.
She also confirmed that she did not complain
to the executive about any of the information conveyed at this time by Scollay
(transcript
3/5/05, 108) but simply said to Scollay at the time that she had
better prove wrong Anangu perceptions that Aboriginal women can’t
5.1.17 Ms Harbour stated that in February 2004 she was asked by Scollay to sign
and send a “please explain” letter on
college letterhead to a
non-teaching staff member who had been charged with criminal offences.
According to Scollay the letter had
been drafted by the corporation’s
lawyers, but Ms Harbour was not provided with proof of this. She did not agree
content of the letter and had no proof of its source, so without
telling Scollay she sought separate advice from the Chamber of Commerce.
5.1.18 The Complainant agreed that she’d met at least weekly with Scollay
during January, February, March and April. At those
meetings she received
information rather than advice from Scollay about staffing issues. Also at some
of those meetings Scollay
told her he expressed to staff his support for her.
She emailed the executive (exhibit R2) complaining about two members of staff
who were allegedly attempting to undermine her, and seeking a meeting with the
5.1.19 Ms Harbour also agreed that she sought independent advice about her
sacking of a teacher in contravention of an instruction
from Scollay not to do
so, that she failed to advise the CEO despite his requests about events during
an Anangu staff walkout on
14 May 2004 and about what transpired at an Anangu
staff meeting at the college on the same day, that three teachers offered to
in the week commencing 14 May, that there were complaints at about that
time from the Teachers Union about Ms Harbour’s treatment
member and complaints from a different staff member about mistreatment at the
hands of two other staff members.
5.1.20 She confirmed receiving the email from the executive described supra
paragraph 5.1.8 and another email from the executive
on 19 May (exhibit R19)
asking her to refrain from activities designed to establish a separate college
council. She also confirmed
attending a community meeting at the college on
19 May, one of the agenda items of which was separation of the college from
the corporation, despite an executive directive not to
attend. She admitted
failing to respond to emails from Scollay on 14 May and 28 May concerning
payment to absentee Anangu staff
and staffing levels. She denied circulating a
petition to students and staff advocating a separate college.
5.1.21 The Complainant also confirmed receiving a letter from the Independent
Education Union dated 17 May (exhibit R23) proposing
steps to restore the
college “to normal and productive educational operations”, although
she disagreed that the college
was operating at below normal level.
5.1.22 Ms Harbour conceded that she was invited to executive meetings
“from time to time” when the executive discussed
college business,
but she was never given formal written notification and sometimes only received
10 to 20 minutes notice –
which in her view was not good enough.
5.1.23 During re-examination Ms Harbour confirmed that she failed to respond to
many emails sent by Scollay, especially after the
walk-out by staff on 19 May
2004, but said she didn’t have time because of pressing college business;
the college was in crisis;
six or seven staff members were on sick leave; she
re-organise staff; she had to arrange care for students who remained
on campus; and she had to ensure students and staff on communities,
Imampa, were cared for. She was not ignoring Scollay by her failure to
5.1.24 When Ms Harbour met Scollay she did not seek his approval but accessed
him in his role as CEO so he could pass things on to
the executive. He was a
“communication
5.2 The Respondent
5.2.1 The First Respondent, Clive Scollay, gave evidence of his role as CEO of
the corporation, which incorporates the college.
The college is not a separate
legal entity.
5.2.2 Mr Scollay gave evidence of his broad management experience and his long
involvement with indigenous people in the NT and South
Australia. He described
the challenges facing the CEO of the corporation as arising from cross-cultural
issues (eg indigenous students
and families, and non-indigenous teachers); the
expectations of parents; the distance between the four college campuses; college
funding being based on attendance in the early part of the year which clashes
with cultural “business”; health and poverty
issues; and substance
5.2.3 Mr Scollay considered that the CEO is responsible for all staff, and for
all of the various enterprises within the corporation
– including the
college. The CEO is obliged to keep the executive informed, provide advice to
the executive and carry out
the wishes of the executive, attend meetings of the
executive, and supervise the college principal. According to Mr Scollay the
latter is accountable to the executive through the CEO in accordance with the
college principal’s job specification (exhibit
C3) clause 2 of which
states that the principal is responsible to the board (that is, the executive)
through the executive officer
(that is, the CEO).
Mr Scollay’s evidence was that, even though clause 2 of C3 also states
that the principal is responsible for all staff employed
by the college, the
staff become accountable to him as CEO because the principal is accountable to
5.2.4 Mr Scollay referred to his own job specification and read into the
evidence sections thereof which in his view clearly and
specifically
demonstrated that the CEO of the corporation is responsible for management and
administration of the corporation and
all its programmes, and for the
recruitment, supervision, direction and training of all the corporation’s
5.2.5 The corporation’s recruitment of the Complainant was described by
the First Respondent in his evidence. The CEO supported
her being interviewed
for the position – even though he had reservations about her lack of
secondary school teaching and administrative
experience (transcript 19/9/05,
Mr Scollay admitted that after the first telephone interview of the Complainant
in September 2003 he commented to other interview
panel members that he was
aware of instances in NT organisations where conflict between indigenous and
non-indigenous staff had arisen
after the appointment of an indigenous manager.
He was conscious of the possibility that some staff members may not support an
principal and wanted to ensure that the college provided appropriate
support to Ms Harbour if she were successful.
At the end of the interview process Tracey Harbour was
Mr Scollay’s
preferred choice and he expressed that view to the interview panel and the
When the Complainant was appointed Mr Scollay expected she would be a
“successful principal and a good role mode for Anangu
– even though
she lacked teaching or administrative experience in a secondary
The position of principal was offered to Ms Harbour by
Mr Scollay by
telephone in November 2003. At that time Scollay advised that accommodation was
scarce in Yulara and he predicted that
the Complainant and her family would be
allocated with only a small furnished flat. In the circumstances Scollay
suggested that
the Complainant store her furniture elsewhere because Yulara had
no storage facilities, and that the Complainant not bring her dogs
because the
Yulara Resort had a “no dogs” policy.
Mr Scollay also suggested to the Complainant that she retain her current
position and benefits with the Commonwealth Public Service
by taking leave
without pay for as long as she could. According to Scollay this is common
practice and has been so for college employees
before and after the Complainant
(eg the current college principal).
When the Complainant and Mr Scollay met in Melbourne in November 2003 to confirm
the appointment of the former they each signed the
letter of appointment
(Exhibit R1) and they discussed Mr Scollay’s role as supervisor of the
principal and his role in supervising
her 6 month probation period.
On 15 January 2004, shortly after the Complainant arrived in Central Australia
to take up her appointment, the Complainant met the
First Respondent and during
the meeting the latter admits he uttered words to the effect
“there is a perception here
that Aboriginal women can’t manage and anything they manage will fall into
Mr Scollay said the perception was not his but had been recounted to him by
indigenous women attendees at a 12 month management course
for indigenous
leaders which he
co-ordinated on behalf of the Institute of Aboriginal
Development in Alice Springs in the early 1990s. Scollay’s intention
making the comment was to provide the Complainant with as much local knowledge
as possible, to support her in her role, and to
see her succeed.
Scollay denied using the term “yella fellas”, but admitted saying at
the same 15 January meeting that “apercarchers”
(local word for half
caste), or people of mixed descent, were regarded with suspicion by Anangu
(local indigenous people). Again
this was not Scollay’s own perception
– he was trying to acquaint the Complainant with the difficult local
cross-cultural
environment.
5.2.6 In his evidence the First Respondent explained his emailed comment to the
Complainant upon the appointment of the Imampa Campus
Principal (infra paragraph
5.1.4) on 18 April 2004 that “peers should be involved in the selection
process”. Mr Scollay
said the comment was not intended to adversely
reflect upon Ms Harbour’s qualifications, or her indigenous descent, or
gender. The comment reflected college practice at the time that the
selection panel include a currently practising teacher from
Complainant did not fall within that category.
5.2.7 According to Mr Scollay, he refused the Complainant permission to seek
independent legal advice because it had always been
the practice for the CEO to
be the point of contact with the corporation’s lawyers. For the same
reason he refused to provide
the Complainant with the name and address of the
corporation’s lawyers. Mr Scollay adopted this position on three
– in February 2004 when the college “senior management
team” which included the Complainant resolved that a “please
explain” letter drafted by the corporation’s lawyers and signed by
the Complainant issue to a non-teaching staff member
charged with multiple
criminal offences (supra paragraph 5.1.17, and transcript 19/9/05, 64). At the
time Scollay was “taken-a-back”
to learn that the Complainant had,
without notice to himself or the management team, obtained alternative advice
and substituted
a different letter to that drafted by corporation lawyers; in
May 2004 when he prevailed upon the Complainant to reinstate a teaching
member who had been suspended for misconduct by the Complainant, and then
refused permission for the Complainant to obtain
independent legal advice
(transcript 3/5/05, 77). On that occasion the Complainant, according to
Scollay, suspended the teacher
in breach of the college grievance procedure by
failing to hear the teacher’s version of events and; in May 2004 when
was an allegation of bullying by one staff member against another
(transcript 3/5/05, 27-29).
5.2.8 Rather than meeting with staff without the Complainant’s knowledge
or approval Mr Scollay’s evidence was that when
he was approached directly
by college staff over college staffing issues he informed them that the
Complainant had his unqualified
support, directed them to deal with the
Complainant at first instance, told them he would inform the Complainant about
the conversation,
and then informed the Complainant.
5.2.9 Mr Scollay deposed that the notice of the corporation AGM was posted to
all the communities and circulated via pigeonholes
and noticeboards throughout
the college and the corporation. In response to the Complainant’s
allegation that he failed to
inform her of the result of the corporation
elections, Scollay said that the poll was declared verbally on 11 May 04 at the
was attended by the Complainant, and that poll results were announced
to communities, corporation members, and the college community
in the manner
described earlier in this paragraph.
5.2.10 Mr Scollay denied influencing or manipulating the executive in its
deliberations over whether to continue the Complainant’s
employment beyond
her probation period. Scollay said that the decision to terminate was unanimous
and that he had no vote. Also
Scollay denied misleading the executive by
advising it that Federal funding was in jeopardy unless the Complainant’s
was terminated (infra paragraph 5.2.15, 5.3.1, 5.3.4, 5.3.9,
5.2.11 In answer to the Complainant’s charge that Scollay excluded her
from executive meetings, Scollay said she was not an
elected member of the
executive but attended executive meetings where issues of relevance to the
college were discussed.
Mr Scollay agreed that she was not invited to meet
Commonwealth Department of Education, Science and Training (DEST) officials on
June 2004 – but that was because the officials requested a meeting with
the executive. Also, Scollay recalled that the Complainant
accompanied him to
Canberra for a meeting with DEST on one occasion.
5.2.12 Mr Scollay said in evidence that the Complainant was notified of, and
invited to, the portion of executive meetings that applied
to her. As for the
failure to provide the Complainant with minutes of executive meetings, Mr
Scollay said this practice was not
directed at the Complainant in particular but
it was a corporation decision for reasons of confidentiality that no staff
received minutes. On occasion excerpts of the minutes were
distributed.
5.2.13 Mr Scollay said he was unaware that monthly college financial statements
were not automatically distributed to the Complainant
by “the accountants
in Alice Springs”. According to Scollay that was always the practice and
he presumed it was continuing.
He had never received a complaint from Ms
Harbour about non-receipt of the statements, and as the accounts were on target
no reason to raise the issue with Ms Harbour.
5.2.14 Mr Scollay denied a failure to provide a schedule of capital works to the
Complainant because no such schedule existed. Scollay
said he regularly
reported verbally to Ms Harbour during their (sixteen) meetings about his
frustrations with the lack of progress
in dealings with DEST over the only
college capital works programme in contemplation – student
accommodation.
5.2.15 In his evidence Mr Scollay raised a number of concerns held by himself
and the executive about Ms Harbour’s management
style – all of which
were set out in a letter from CEO Scollay to the Complainant dated 1 June 2004
(exhibit R24). The concerns
arise mainly from the Complainant’s behaviour
consistent with her belief that she was not answerable to the CEO, but also
to alleged communication failures and acting against the best interests
of the corporation. Examples of executive and CEO concerns
5.2.15.1 “Walk-out”
by Anangu college staff and students on 14 May 2004.
The CEO gave evidence that the Complainant was aware of the walk-out prior to
its occurrence but failed to alert him or the executive
and made no attempt to
prevent the walk-out. Furthermore the Complainant failed to respond to a series
of emails between 14 and
18 May 2004 from the CEO seeking reports about a staff
meeting held prior to the walk-out, remaining staff and student levels,
staff resignations and intra-staff harassment allegations.
Public meeting at the college 19 May 2004.
The CEO’s evidence was that the public meeting (comprising staff,
community members and students) was scheduled to discuss separation
of the staff
from the college. Also the CEO deposed that at a special meeting of the
corporation executive (see minutes exhibit
R28) attended by the Complainant on
18 May 2004, she was advised that the executive opposed the separation of the
college at that
time. The Complainant was also instructed by the executive to
terminate the services of a consultant retained to facilitate the
separation of
college from corporation, to take steps to prevent the public meeting the next
day, and (despite the Complainant’s
minuted protestations to the executive
at the meeting) to report directly to the CEO acting on behalf of the executive
all her responsibilities.
The CEO’s evidence was that, early on the morning of 19 May 2004, he
emailed the Complainant to remind her of the corporation’s
opposition to a
separate college, and of the executive’s instruction that she was to
report to him, and to seek an assurance
that she did not support the community
The CEO gave further evidence that he attended the public meeting and
witnessed an address to the meeting by Ms Harbour during which
she urged the
creation of a separate college and complained that “no other principal in
the country had to answer to a CEO”.
(Transcript 19/9/05, 88).
College Staff and Student Instability.
The CEO stated in evidence that during her 6 month tenure Ms Harbour presided
over unprecedented levels of staff resignations, sick
leave, workers
compensation claims and staff/student unrest.
Exceeding Terms of Appointment (as outlined in Principal’s Job
Specification [exhibit C3]).
The CEO’s evidence was that Ms Harbour engaged consultants without
notifying, or seeking permission from, the executive through
the CEO; sought
independent legal advice without permission, and; participated in a public
meeting of the college community against
executive wishes.
Communication failure.
The CEO deposed to Ms Harbour’s failure to communicate with the CEO and
executive, and her failure to respond to numerous emails
from the CEO seeking
information and explanation.
Funding implications of Ms Harbour’s management style.
According to Mr Scollay senior officials of DEST requested a meeting with the
executive because they were concerned at reported unrest
within the college.
The meeting took place on 3 June 2004 in the absence of Ms Harbour and in the
presence of Scollay. Scollay’s
clear evidence (transcript 19/9/05 at 100)
is that the executive was advised by the senior DEST official that the decision
works funding for the college was with the Minister and funding
prospects would be enhanced if stability was restored to the college.
5.2.16 Mr Scollay gave further evidence that the executive met on
2004, after the meeting described immediately above, to consider whether the
Complainant had satisfactorily completed her six
month probation period.
Scollay’s evidence (transcript 19/9/05 at 106) was that the executive
considered the issues raised
in exhibit R24 (paragraph 5.2.15), allowed the
Complainant the opportunity to give her version of the issues raised therein,
unanimously decided (in the absence of the Complainant) to terminate the
Complainant’s appointment.
5.2.17 Mr Scollay testified that concerns expressed by himself and the executive
were not grounded in her race
or sex, but in her performance and ability as a manager.
5.2.18 Under cross examination Mr Scollay confirmed that in his view he had the
power as delegate of the executive to direct the
college principal, and the
principal had the power – in consultation with the CEO – to hire and
fire college staff members.
He agreed that the college EBA (exhibit C4) referred to a board of the college,
rather than the executive, at the top of the Complainant’s
command, and that no such Board existed during the Complainant’s tenure.
He said that during her tenure the executive
acted as the college board and that
the Complainant understood this.
Scollay also gave the following evidence during cross
examination:
upon her appointment Ms
Harbour was not provided by her employer with a raft of procedural information
including contact details of
executive members, college misconduct and grievance
procedures, protocols for dealing with external stakeholders, and staff
recruitment
minutes of executive meetings were incomplete and the status of all those
present was not specified. Specifically the minutes of
the executive meeting of
30 March 2004 (exhibit R27) were a summary, inaccurate in some respects, not
distributed, did not obey “minute”
conventions - so did not include
page numbers, a record of people coming and going, passages in Pitjantjatara, or
a faithful record
of resolutions passed;
the Complainant was only given one day’s notice to prepare her annual
report to the AGM on 11 May 2004;
the Complainant constantly raised the separation of the college from the
corporation as an issue during her many meetings with Scollay,
and that he
(Scollay) continually advised her that it would be unwise to follow that
there was considerable support for the Complainant from the school community
– namely individual leaders, students, parents
– as evidenced by
several petitions circulated and signed at the public meeting on 19 May (supra
paragraph 5.2.15) by school
community members;
the college staff resignation rate was lower during the Complainant’s
term of office;
he (Scollay) did not manipulate the executive against the Complainant. He
presented Exhibit R24 (supra para 5.2.15) to the executive,
and the DEST
officials, not he, told the executive about the potential impact on funding of
college instability;
Scollay denied judging the Complainant’s performance on the basis she
was indigenous, but solely on her competence as a manager.
5.3 Other Witnesses
5.3.1 Howard Smith, an executive member called by the Respondent, said that the
DEST officials who met with the executive in his
presence on 3 June suggested
that funding for the college would not be forthcoming until the
“trouble” at the college
was overcome. The officials told the
executive to “sort out properly” according to Smith (transcript
4/5/05, 71.09,
5.3.2 Mary Burns, who taught at the college for 3.5 months of the
claimant’s term, was called by the Complainant and attested
Complainant’s attributes as college principal.
5.3.3 Dina Knowles, who was a member of teaching staff during the
Complainant’s term of office, gave a glowing account of the
Complainant’s attributes as a principal. During that time she was herself
embroiled in various conflicts with four other members
of staff. She confirmed
the existence of intra staff conflicts prior to the Complainant’s arrival
and thought that CEO Scollay
was more visible at the college during the
Complainant’s term of office than during the term of the previous
(non-indigenous
male) principal.
5.3.4 Graeme Calma, another executive member called by the Respondent, recalled
as a member of the Complainant’s interview
panel that she was advised at
interview of her obligation to report through the CEO to the executive. Calma,
whilst confirming concerns
at executive level about the Complainant’s
management style, also said that she inherited “a mess” (transcript
5/5/05, 16) at the college and that it was difficult to terminate her employment
because she was supported at community level. Calma
was satisfied that the DEST
officials did not say they would withhold college funding, but he ventured that
Scollay might have said
they would.
5.3.5 Yami Lester, a former board member called by the Respondent, said that the
executive was against a separation of the college
from the corporation.
5.3.6 Michael Ellis, a teaching staff member called by the Respondent, tendered
his resignation during Ms Harbour’s tenure.
He opposed the
Complainant’s attempts to “aboriginalise the college at any
cost”. His negative views about the
Complainant were compounded by her
failure to include him in her strategic planning.
5.3.7 Ian White, a former college principal (prior to the Complainant) called by
the Complainant, gave evidence that he enjoyed a
good relationship with CEO
Scollay whilst principal. White kept Scollay fully informed and the latter did
not interfere. He said
staff problems existed before Ms Harbour’s
arrival, and that if he was required to accord staff “due process”
sought independent advice from the Chamber of Commerce with the encouragement
of the CEO. White’s evidence was that Ms Harbour
was popular and that he,
whilst employed as “principal” of the Imampa campus, supported her.
During his term as overall
college principal White did not receive copies of all
executive meeting minutes, but he did receive financial statements (because
approached the accountants himself and made the necessary arrangements).
5.3.8 Jorge Gonzalez, who taught at the college during the Complainant’s
term of office, was called by the Complainant. Gonzalez
gave evidence that the
corporation and the CEO involved themselves in college business to a greater
extent during Ms Harbour’s
tenure than during the five years preceding her
5.3.9 Rodney Baird, Regional Manager DEST called by the Complainant, gave
evidence that he and his superior Mark Wridgeway met with
the executive on 3
June 2004 during a time of unrest at the college. He said the visit and meeting
was a DEST initiative in response
to information about staff unrest at the
college (transcript 19/9/05, 7.45). He said that DEST was not concerned with
staffing matters,
and that at no stage did he or Wridgeway tell the executive or
anyone that unrest at the college would jeopardise college funding.
funding, said Baird, was not a matter he or Wridgeway could comment upon because
it was not their decision. Baird said
that Howard Smith was mistaken when he
gave evidence about being told by DEST officials at the 3 June meeting that DEST
would “close
out” on the money if “trouble” at the
college continued.
5.3.10 Mark Wridgeway, assistant state manager DEST called by the Complainant,
also denied saying that college unrest would jeopardise
college funding. He did
admit that the corporation’s application for $4.5 million for college
funding was discussed at the
3 June meeting. He said his only function was to
report to DEST on the state of affairs at the college, and that he had no
to withdraw or withhold
6.1 Tracey Harbour’s complaint is
that she was discriminated against directly by the First Respondent and
vicariously by the
Second Respondent in her employment on the basis of her sex
and race contrary to ss. 19 and 20 of the Act, and in an area of activity
provided by section 28 of the Act.
6.2 The onus of proof of the complaint lies on the Complainant who must prove
her complaint on the balance of probabilities.
6.3 In considering all of the events described by the parties in evidence,
and the behaviour attributed to each other by the parties,
I have endeavoured to
bear in mind two important factors firstly: the demanding cross cultural desert
environment in which the workplace
is situated, and secondly, whether the
Complainant was treated less favourably than a person who was not aboriginal
and/or who was
not female (eg. a non-aboriginal male principal similarly
circumstanced).
6.4 After having listened to, and closely considered, all the evidence I find
that the Complainant has not been able to prove on the
balance of probabilities
that she was treated less favourably than a person who was not aboriginal or who
was not a female would
have been in the same or similar circumstances. That is,
the Respondents’ treatment of the Complainant resulted from their
that she was not adequately managing the demands and requirements of the
position of college principal and had nothing to
do with her race or sex.
6.5 The determination of the complaint turns upon the lengthy evidence of the
Complainant and the First Respondent. Evidence given
by the witnesses called by
each party added little to that provided by the parties themselves, and was of
little assistance in the
final determination of the matter.
6.6 The First Respondent admitted that most of the events giving rise to the
Complainant’s allegations of unfair treatment took
place, but provided an
explanation in defence of his actions. In relation to every allegation of
unfair treatment raised by the
Complainant to illustrate racial or sexual bias,
I prefer and accept the explanation given by the First Respondent, as
Ms Harbour’s allegation commenced after Scollay’s initial statements
women can’t
manage, that she should not resign from her Commonwealth Government employment,
that she should keep the majority
of her possessions in storage, and that people
of mixed descent were regarded with suspicion by Anangu (paras 5.1.2, 5.1.3). I
Mr Scollay’s evidence (5.2.5) that his comments were made in the
genuine belief that there may be opposition to Ms Harbour’s
appointment,
and as a warning to a person with no central Australian experience about the
difficult cross cultural environment she
had entered. I accept that
Scollay’s remarks about “management” and “descent”
were not his personal
opinion. I accept that Scollay supported Ms
Harbour’s appointment from the outset (see paras 5.2.5, 5.2.8 exh. R27
of the executive meeting 30.3.04) and accordingly I am unable to accept
the construction of his remarks advanced by the Complainant.
I believe it was
Scollay’s duty to warn Ms Harbour about the perils of the job. He may
have attracted criticism had he not
A fundamental platform of the Complainant’s case was her insistence that
as college principal she was directly and only supervised
by the executive of
the corporation, rather than CEO Scollay, and not answerable in any way or
liable to report to CEO Scollay in
relation to “college business”
(paras 5.1.5, 5.1.6). Mr Scollay and the executive contended otherwise
inclusive (paras
5.2.3 to 5.2.5).
A finding for the Complainant on this “chain-of-command” issue
would overcome the strong argument by the Respondents
that a major shortcoming
of the Complainant as manager was her failure to report to the CEO. In other
words, if the Complainant
can establish that she is not required to report to
the CEO, then failure to report cannot count against her.
Nevertheless I have no hesitation in finding that, whilst the Complainant is
ultimately answerable to the executive, she must account
to the latter by
reporting to the CEO.
The Complainant contends that the Nyangatjatjara College EBA (Exh C4) and her
own job specification (Exh C3) provide documentary
support for her independence
from the CEO. The Complainant argues that Exh C4 does not include the
corporation as a party and therefore
the college principal is independent from
it. Leaving aside the fact that the EBA expired on 27 January 2004 (that is
after commencement of the Complainant’s term of appointment)
the problem with the Complainant’s argument is that the
agreement between the corporation and a trade union principally designed to
promote the care and well being of college
staff in the context of the aims and
philosophy of the college; the EBA does not purport to describe the relative
positions of the
CEO and the college principal in the corporation
chain-of-command. As such the EBA does not support the Complainant’s
Also the Complainant’s evidence (para 5.1.6) that her job
specification does not provide for CEO involvement in college affairs
contradicted by clause 2 thereof which under the heading of
“Reporting/Making Relationships” refers to the principal’s
responsibility to the Board [executive] “through the Executive
Officer” [CEO].
The requirement that the Complainant report to the CEO, and the
Complainant’s awareness of this requirement, is supported
evidence, namely:
Graeme Calma (transcript 5/5/05, 3.6) and Scollay(transcript 19/9/05, 60)
respectively gave evidence that at the Complainant’s
personal job
interview in Yulara in October 2003 and at a meeting between the Complainant
and the CEO in Melbourne in January 2004
the Complainant was told about the
requirement to report to the CEO.
Scollay, as representative of the executive, and the Complainant signed the
Complainant’s letter of appointment (Exh R1), or
contract of employment,
in November 2003.
Ian White, the Complainant’s predecessor as college principal, and a man
with whom on the Complainant’s evidence she
conferred both prior to and
during her term of appointment, reported to the CEO whilst serving as
If the Complainant was not required to report to the CEO, she was unable to
nominate which member of the executive to whom she should
The Complainant was unconvincing under cross examination (paras 5.1.14, 5.1.15)
was not convinced that she
need not report to the CEO. Her protestations about lack of independence did
not alter the requirement
to report to him.
In fact in my view the Complainant was generally an unconvincing and
unimpressive witness in chief and under cross examination.
She was guarded in
her answers, responsible for very long delays in answering even the most simple
of questions, and appeared to
contrive her answers to suit her claim. Mr
Scollay in the other hand made prompt and spontaneous responses to questions and
a much more impressive and credible witness.
During the Complainant’s tenure she was “on probation”.
Scollay’s evidence is that he was her “supervisor”
probation and he so informed her at their Melbourne meeting in January 2004.
The Complainant denied that she had been so
informed, and denied that Scollay
was her supervisor, yet was unable to nominate a supervisor for probation
At an “extraordinary meeting” of the executive on 18 May 2004, (the
minutes of which are exhibit R28), called by the
Complainant to clarify her
relationship with the CEO, the plaintiff was unequivocally instructed by the
executive of the requirement
that she report directly to the CEO concerning all
her responsibilities as college
The CEO‘s direction to the Complainant that future teaching staff
recruitment panels include teaching staff “peers”
(Exh C1; paras
5.1.4, 5.2.6) was reasonable, reflected long standing college practice, did not
seek to exclude the Complainant from
the recruitment process, supported the
decision of the recruitment panel (even though in the CEO’s opinion the
process was
flawed), was not designed to demean the Complainant or diminish her
qualifications, and did not subject the Complainant to unfair
The Complainant believed the CEO’s refusal to permit her to obtain
independent legal advice, and his refusal to provide the
name and address of the
corporation’s lawyers, was unfair (supra paras 5.1.7, and 5.2.7). The
“legal advice” policy
applied to every corporation employee. In
Scollay’s view it is unreasonable to expect the corporation to fund
independent
legal advice for disgruntled employees and reasonable in a
management sense for the corporation to refuse requests from its various
divisions for separate and potentially conflicting legal advice.
I accept Scollay’s position and I am not persuaded that the Complainant
was treated unfairly in this instance. It was open
to her to discuss her
misgivings about legal advice policy with the CEO. It is clear on the evidence
that she chose not to do so.
In a least one instance she obtained independent
advice, and acted upon that advice despite direction from the CEO to refrain
doing so (supra para 5.2.7).
Ms Harbour claimed several instances of unfavourable treatment by Mr Scollay
were calculated to undermine her, or procure her failure
as college principal.
After hearing Scollay’s responses I am unable to accept that he had
sinister motives, but some instances
in my view clearly indicate administrative
deficiencies by Scollay and the executive, which affected not only the
Complainant but
many college staff members, and which reflect poorly on the
corporation.
Ms Harbour’s grievances were:
personal notification of the occurrence or result of executive elections.
According to Scollay the information was disseminated
by notices posted at
various locations, or placed in pigeon holes. In my view the college community,
and especially the principal,
is deserving of more courtesy.
No formal notification of, or invitation to, executive meetings; no formal
agenda ever produced for executive meetings. According
“accepted practice” dictated that the principal was only invited to
attend when items of interest to the college
were discussed. The Complainant
agreed that she was invited from time to time, but informally and at short
Failure to provide minutes of meetings. According to Scollay this omission
was not reserved for the principal alone – minutes
were never circulated
to anyone in the college community for, in my view dubious, confidentiality
Failure to automatically provide monthly financial statements. Scollay
assumed statements were supplied by the external college accountants,
failure to ensure supply reveals poor administrative process and poor
communication between the CEO and the Complainant (supra
Failure to provide a schedule of capital works. I accept Scollay’s
evidence that no such schedule existed, and that he reported
verbally to Ms
Harbour on delays in government funding (papa 5.2.14).
Manipulated the executive so as to ensure it terminated the
Complainant’s employment. According to the Complainant the most
manipulation concerned the supply of federal government funding (through DEST)
to the college. The Complainant alleged that
Scollay told the executive at its
meeting on 3 June 2004 to decide the Complainant’s fate that federal
funding would be imperilled
unless unrest at the college was quelled. The
evidence on this issue is unclear because Scollay denied the allegation and
that doubts over funding were raised by DEST officials Baird and
Wridgeway during their meeting with the executive (attended by Scollay)
on 3 June. Baird and Wridgeway strenuously denied that college funding was in
jeopardy or that they raised the issue (supra
5.3.9, 5.3.10), whilst executive
member Howard Smith (5.3.1) confirmed Scollay’s recollection of events and
executive member
Graeme Calma (5.3.4) supported the Complainant’s version.
Wherever the truth lies the evidence is clear that DEST officials
not Scollay
requested a meeting with the executive. The fact that the meeting took place
during a period of considerable college
unrest, and whilst an application for
funding was pending, is likely of itself to have influenced the executive - no
matter what
(if anything) Scollay said.
It is also likely that the executive was influenced in its unanimous
decision to terminate the Complainant’s employment by
“management issues” described in paras 5.2.15 and 5.2.16, and the
manner in which the Complainant personally
responded to those issues during her
attendance at the executive meeting on 3 June 2004.
In the event I am not persuaded, that Mr Scollay manipulated the executive
against the Complainant. After perusing the eight-page
extract from the Minutes
of executive meeting of 3 June 2004 (Exh R29) I am satisfied that the executive
properly discharged its
duty to carefully consider all of the evidence
(summarised at 5.2.15 and 5.2.16) before arriving at its own unanimous decision
terminate Ms Harbour’s appointment.
The CEO’s denial of Ms Harbour’s allegation that he contributed
to college disharmony by meeting college staff in her
absence is contained in
para 5.2.8. I accept Mr Scollay’s evidence on this point. He could not
prevent staff approaching
him, but when approached I accept that his dealings
with staff appropriately acknowledged the Complainant’s relationship to
college staff.
6.7 If the Complainant had been able to prove that she was subjected to
unlawful discrimination then I would have proceeded to consider
whether or not
the Second Respondent was vicariously liable. However, in view of my finding
(supra para 6.4) that the Complainant
was not subjected to prohibited conduct I
am not required to consider the latter question.
6.8 However the concerns held by Mr Scollay and the executive about Ms
Harbour’s management style (supra para 5.2.15) are worthy
of consideration
because, according to the minutes of the 3 June executive meeting they, and not
the Complainant’s race or
sex, prompted the executive to dismiss the
Complainant.
I do not accept that the Complainant should be held solely responsible for
staff unrest, and allegedly unprecedented levels of staff
resignations, sick
leave and workers compensation claims. The evidence is clear that the
Complainant (in the words of executive
member Calma) “inherited a
mess” and the likelihood is that college principals with far more
experience than the Complainant
would have experienced difficulty resolving long
standing staffing conflicts (and would have been sorely tested by many other
conflicts) in the difficult Nyangatjatjara College remote cross cultural
environment.
Nonetheless, it is clear on the evidence that the CEO and the executive were
justified in having misgivings about the Complainant’s
management style.
For example:
The Complainant, despite abundant evidence to the contrary, refused to
acknowledge her obligation to report to the CEO.
The Complainant had ample opportunity to clarify the nature of her formal
relationship with the CEO but failed to do so until approximately
four months of
her tenure had expired. When she finally sought clarification at the executive
meeting of 18 May 2004, the minutes
of that meeting show that she was directed
in unequivocal terms about her obligation to report to the CEO and that she
to argue the point after receiving the direction.
The Complainant repeatedly failed to report to the CEO or the executive about
the impact on college activity of the walk-out staged
by Anangu staff and
students on 14 May 2004(5.1.19, 5.2.15)
The Complainant not only attended a meeting of the “college
community” at the college on 19 May 2004 against the express
wishes of the
executive and the CEO, but (also against the express wishes of the CEO and
executive) failed to take steps to prevent
the meeting, and then during a
personal address to the meeting urged the creation of a separate college and
complained about her
obligation to report to the CEO. (5.1.20, 5.2.15).
Under cross examination Scollay stated that the Complainant was advised many
times during the many meetings of the pair that the climate
for college
separation was not favourable (5.2.18).
The Complainant continually failed to provide management reports to CEO or
executive, despite requests to do so, about a range of
staffing issues
(transcript 19/9/05 pp 91-3; exh R24 – list of unanswered emails up until
28 May 2004).
The Complainant engaged several consultants without notifying the CEO,
seeking his permission, or revealing any consultancy terms
of reference.
The Complainant sought independent legal advice without the permission, and
against the wishes of the CEO without explanation (5.1.19,
6.9 In view of my foregoing finding (supra para 6.4) that the Complainant was
not treated less favourably than a person who was not
aboriginal or female would
have been in the same or similar circumstances, and therefore was not
discriminated against in contravention
of the Act, I find for the Respondent and
the complaint is dismissed.
6.10 I make no order for costs.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
The evidence is clear that the unanimous decision of the executive to
terminate Ms Harbour’s employment was firmly grounded
in her managerial
and administrative shortcomings as college principal rather than in any other
consideration such as her race or
The evidence is also clear that, with the exception of some staff members,
Ms Harbour was popular with students, staff and parents,
and a hard working
principal who was genuine and determined in her desire to progress the college
through various reforms.
Unfortunately Ms Harbour’s popularity within the school community
appears to have been attained at the expense of a satisfactory
relationship with her employer.
Ms Harbour felt constrained by the lack of independence of the college from
the corporation and by her obligation to report to the
CEO. Perhaps Ms
Harbour’s frustration at her inability to change the organisational
structure of the corporation soured her
relationship with the CEO, or perhaps
she was ahead of her time (definitely well ahead of the executive) in advocating
agenda. Certainly Mr Scollay’s administrative oversights and
the confident, strong-willed demeanour of both Ms Harbour and
Mr Scollay also
contributed to the clash between the two.
The end result however was that Ms Harbour’s failure or inability to
communicate with the CEO, the executive and some staff,
and her failure to
adequately discharge the management side of her duties, developed into a major
“college management problem”
which the executive was unwilling to
tolerate beyond Ms Harbour’s probation period.
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION COMMISSIONER
28 June 2006
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.32 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter