URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTSCFC/2023/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:23:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rigby v TH [2023] NTSCFC 2 (27 July 2023)
[2023] NTSCFC 2
PARTIES: RIGBY, Kerry Leanne
TITLE OF COURT: FULL COURT OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: 3 of 2023 (22315957) and
4 of 2023 (22315959)
DELIVERED: 27 July 2023
HEARING DATES: 29 June 2023
JUDGMENT OF: Kelly J, Barr J and Hiley AJ
CATCHWORDS:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE – whether Youth Justice Court has an implied
statutory power to stay preliminary examination proceedings
being conducted in
accordance with Part V, Division 1 of the
Local Court (Criminal Procedure)
(NT) pursuant to
Youth Justice Act 2005
(NT), before the examination is completed, as an abuse of process, as
oppressive or for unfairness – held no such implied power
Criminal Code Act 1983
(NT) s 211(2), s 297A, s 298, s 300, s 302,
s 336(1), s 336(2)
Criminal Code Amendment (Age of Criminal Responsibility) Act 2022
Justices Act 1902
Local Court (Criminal Procedure) Act 1928
s 109(3)(c)
s 112A(2)(a)
, Division 1
Youth Justice Act 2005
, s 112A(2)(a),
Grassby v The Queen
[1989] HCA 45
(1989) 168 CLR 1
Atkinson v Government of the United States of America
[1971] A.C.
, Connelly v Director of Public Prosecutions
[1964] A.C. 1254
Consolidated Press Holdings Limited v Wheeler
(1992) 84 NTR 42
, Higgins v
[2005] QCA 234
(2005) 153 A Crim R 565
, Jackson v Sterling Industries Ltd
[1987] HCA 23
(1987) 162 CLR 612
, Migration Agents Registration Authority v Frugniet
[2018] FCAFC 5
(2018) 259 FCR 219
, Miller v Ryan
(1980) 1 NSWLR 93
, Parsons v Martin
[1984] FCA 408
(1984) 5 FCR 235
, R v Hush; Ex parte Devanny
[1932] HCA 64
(1932) 48 CLR 487
[2001] NSWCCA 201
Rolfe v The Territory Coroner &
[2023] NTCA 8
, referred to
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: L Babb SC with L Auld
Respondent: J Murphy with R Barwick
Solicitors:
Applicant: Director of Public Prosecutions
Respondent: North Australian Aboriginal Justice Agency
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 15
IN THE FULL COURT OF THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
[2023] NTSCFC 2
No. 3 of 2023 (22315957) and 4 of 2023 (22315959)
KERRY LEANNE RIGBY
CORAM: KELLY ACJ, BARR J AND HILEY JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 27 July 2023)
[1] The respondent is a youth (the
“youth”) being prosecuted for serious criminal offences allegedly
committed on 3 July
2022 and 19 August 2022 at which time he was 11 years of
age. As a “youth”, the matters are currently before the Youth
Justice Court. Given the serious nature of the alleged offences, including
aggravated robbery contrary to
of Schedule 1 of the
Code Act 1983
(NT), (“the
Criminal Code
”) which carries a
maximum penalty of life imprisonment, the Youth Justice Court must deal with the
charges by way of “preliminary
examination” in accordance with the
procedure under Part V (“Indictable offences”), Division 1
(“Procedure
on committal”) of the
Local Court (Criminal
Procedure) Act 1928
[2] On 9 November 2022 the Northern Territory Legislative Assembly enacted
Criminal Code Amendment (Age of Criminal Responsibility) Act 2022
(NT) (“the Amending Act”) which will have the effect of raising the
age of criminal responsibility to 12 years. The Amending
Act also introduces a
new s 469(1) into the
Criminal Code
which reads: “Any charge or
conviction against a person for an offence committed or alleged to have been
committed when the
person was under 12 years of age is expunged.” Although
the Amending Act has not yet commenced, it contains a self-executing
such that it will commence (at the latest) on 7 October
[3] On 16 February and again on 3 March 2023, the youth indicated an
intention to apply to the Youth Justice Court for:
(a) an adjournment of proceedings until 7 October 2024; or
(b) a stay of proceedings in light of the legislated commencement of the
Amending Act no later than 7 October 2024.
[4] The second of those applications raises the question as to whether the
Youth Justice Court has the power to stay the proceedings.
[5] The Youth Justice Court reserved that question of law and stated a
special case for the consideration of the Supreme Court, pursuant
Youth Justice Act
(NT). The question stated was:
[W]hether, upon a proper construction of the Act, the Youth Justice Court has
an implied power to stay proceedings in circumstances
not specified in sections
62 and 137 of the Act.
[6] Following discussions with counsel at the hearing we have re-formulated
the question as follows:
Does the Youth Justice Court have an implied statutory power to stay
preliminary examination proceedings being conducted in accordance
with Part V,
Division 1 of the
Local Court (Criminal Procedure) Act 1928
(NT) pursuant
Youth Justice Act 2005
(NT), before the examination is
completed, as an abuse of process, as oppressive or for unfairness?
Preliminary examination proceedings
, Division 1 of the
Local Court (Criminal Procedure) Act 1928
(NT) provides for the conduct of preliminary examinations (previously known
as committal proceedings).
[8] The Court is given various powers including power to give leave for a
defendant to cross examine a witness
, power to remand the defendant or
grant the defendant bail
), power to adjourn the preliminary
examination from time to time
(s 112A(2)(a))
, and powers to order the prosecutor
or defendant to do anything the Court considers will or may facilitate the
preliminary examination
being conducted fairly, efficiently, and economically
and expeditiously
(s 112A(2)(c)).
[9] In exercising the committal function under the
Local Court (Criminal
Procedure) Act
, the Court receives evidence offered by the prosecution in
the manner broadly regulated by
. It then forms an opinion as to
whether the evidence is sufficient to “put the defendant on
If the Court is of
the opinion that there is not sufficient evidence, it
dismiss the
prosecution.
If it is of the
opinion that there is sufficient evidence, the Court
nature of the charges in this case) “proceed with the
examination”,
by giving the
defendant an opportunity to give or call
then consider whether the evidence is sufficient “to put the defendant
upon his trial for any indicatable
Section 109
provides for the procedure on completion of the evidence for
the prosecution:
(1) When all the evidence offered upon the part of the prosecution has been
taken, the Court must consider whether it is sufficient
to put the defendant on
trial for any indictable offence.
(2) If the Court is of the opinion that the evidence is not so sufficient, it
shall forthwith order the defendant, if in custody,
to be discharged as to the
information then under inquiry.
(3) If the Court is of opinion that the evidence is so sufficient, the Court
(a) if the charge is one that may be heard and determined summarily under
Division 2 – proceed in the manner directed and under
the provisions in
that behalf contained in Division 2; or
(b) unless the defendant is charged with an offence punishable by imprisonment
for life, ask the defendant whether the defendant
wishes to plead to the charge
as provided in Division 3, and proceed as thereby directed; or
(c) proceed with the examination as provided in the next succeeding sections.
Section 112
provides for the procedure on completion of the preliminary
examination:
(1) When the examination is completed the Court must consider whether the
evidence is sufficient to put the defendant upon his trial
for any indictable
(2) If, in the opinion of the Court, it is not so sufficient, the Court must
forthwith order the defendant, if in custody, to be discharged
information then under inquiry.
(3) If, in the opinion of the Court, the evidence is sufficient, the Court
(a) direct the defendant to be tried at the first sitting of the Supreme Court
exercising its criminal jurisdiction next held after
a period of 14 days after a
date and at a place specified by the Court; and
(b) either commit the defendant by warrant into the custody of the Commissioner
of Correctional Services until the trial or grant
the defendant bail under the
Bail Act 1982
(c) cause a record of the direction and the committal or admission to bail to be
made in writing.
(4) Where the defendant is so directed, he shall, subject to any order made
by the Supreme Court, be tried accordingly.
[12] If the defendant is discharged the Crown may still charge the offender
by signing an
indictment.
If a defendant is
committed, the Crown then must determine whether to indict the defendant and put
him/her to trial,
or determine
not to do so and issue and serve a certificate following which the defendant is
discharged.
The Crown can
subsequently decide not to further proceed by filing a
Statutory courts and implied powers
[13] Although the Youth Justice Court, as an
inferior court, does not have the inherent powers possessed by a superior court,
Parsons v Martin
Full Court of the Federal Court said:
In our opinion a court exercising jurisdiction conferred by statute has
powers expressly or by implication conferred by the legislation
which governs
it. This is a matter of statutory construction. We are of the opinion also that
it has in addition such powers as are
incidental and necessary to the
exercise of the jurisdiction or powers
so conferred.
(underlining ours)
[14] The question as to whether a magistrate exercising powers in committal
proceedings in New South Wales had an implied power to
stay such a proceeding
was the subject of the High Court’s consideration in
Grassby v The
”). The relevant parts of the judgment are those of
Dawson J, with Mason CJ, Brennan and Toohey JJ agreeing, and Deane J
subject to a qualification.
[15] After referring to the inherent jurisdiction of superior courts,
Dawson J said at pp 16-17:
On the other hand, a magistrate’s court is an inferior court with a
limited jurisdiction which does not involve any general
responsibility for the
administration of justice beyond the confines of its constitution. ... However,
notwithstanding that its powers
may be defined, every court undoubtedly
possesses jurisdiction arising by implication upon the principle that a grant of
power carries
everything necessary for its exercise
implied powers may in many instances serve a function similar to that served by
the inherent powers exercised by a superior
court but they are derived from a
different source and are limited in their extent.
(underlining ours)
[16] Dawson J later said, at p 17:
It would be unprofitable to attempt to generalize in speaking of the powers
which an inferior court must possess by way of necessary
implication.
Recognition of the existence of such powers will be called for whenever they are
required for the effective exercise
of a jurisdiction which is expressly
conferred but will be confined to so much as can be “derived by
implication from statutory
provisions conferring particular jurisdiction”.
There is in my view no reason why, where appropriate, they may not extend to
ordering a stay of proceedings: cf.
R. v. Hush; Ex parte
Power to stay committal proceedings
[17] Dawson J then turned to the question at hand and said, at p 17:
The fact that in the conduct of committal proceedings a magistrate is
performing a ministerial or administrative function is, of course,
no bar to the
existence of implied powers, if such are necessary for the effective exercise of
the powers which are expressly conferred
upon him. The latter are now to be
Justices Act
. But the scheme of that section, far
from requiring the implication of a general power to stay proceedings, is such
as to impose
an obligation upon the magistrate to dispose of the information
which brings the defendant before him by discharging the defendant
as to it or
by committing him for trial. If the defendant is committed for trial and
subsequently indicted, the charge contained
in the indictment will take the
place of the charge upon the information.
[18] Dawson J then referred to
Justices Act
(NSW), and in particular to
which required the magistrate to do one
of two things after taking and considering all the evidence adduced during the
proceeding: (i) order the defendant to be discharged; or (ii) commit
the defendant for trial.
[19] His Honour then said, at pp 18-19:
There is no room in the face of these statutory obligations, couched as they
are in mandatory terms, for the implication of a discretionary
terminate the proceedings in a manner other than that provided. Nor is this
surprising. True it is that a person committed
for trial is exposed to trial in
a way in which he would otherwise not be, but the ultimate determination whether
he does in fact
stand trial does not rest with the magistrate. The power to
order a stay where there is an abuse of the process of the trial court
be found in the committing magistrate and the considerations which would guide
the exercise of that power have little relevance
to the function which the
magistrate is required to perform.
[20] Dawson J concluded this discussion by saying, at p 19:
... The fact remains that in committal proceedings a magistrate is performing
an administrative or ministerial function which is governed
by statute and the
terms of the statute afford no basis for the implication of any power to dispose
of those proceedings by the imposition
of a permanent stay.
[21] We see no material difference between the statutory provisions in
Justices Act 1902
(NSW) in force as at 1989 (as
considered in
Local Court (Criminal
Procedure) Act 1928
is therefore binding authority that
the Youth Justice Court conducting preliminary examination proceedings in
accordance with
, Division 1 of the
Local Court (Criminal Procedure)
(NT), pursuant to
Youth Justice Act 2005
(NT) does not have implied power to order a permanent stay of such
preliminary examination
proceedings.
distinguishable?
[22] Counsel for the youth contended that
is distinguishable
because it only applied after completion of the examination and it did not apply
to temporary or conditional stays.
[23] As to the first point, counsel for the youth relied upon the (pre
decision in
Rath J said that a stay power might be available at an earlier stage of
committal proceedings. Counsel contended that the High
Court’s criticism
of that reasoning in
was not essential to the decision and thus
must be considered
obiter dicta.
[24] We disagree. This Court cannot distinguish
purpose of the present question on the basis that the ratio in
only referable to the power to grant a stay “when all the evidence for the
prosecution and any evidence for the defence
[25] In relation to this point, Dawson J referred to some United Kingdom
decisions, including
Connelly v Director of Public
Prosecutions
to the effect
that every court has a right to decline to hear proceedings on the ground that
they are oppressive and an abuse of
the process of the court. However his Honour
added that “it is clear that [those decisions] do not extend to a
magistrate hearing
proceedings.”
then quoted from comments about
case made by Lord Reid
Atkinson v Government of the United States of
Lordship said that he could “not regard [
any authority for the proposition that magistrates have power to refuse to
commit an accused for trial on the ground that
it would be unjust or oppressive
to require him to be tried.”
[26] Dawson J then said, at pp 10-11:
Miller v. Ryan
(1980) 1 NSWLR 93
, at p 107, Rath J. read these
passages as referring only to the case where the magistrate has heard all the
evidence and not as denying
generally the power of a magistrate to stay
committal proceedings as an abuse of process. Rath J. went on to hold (at p 109)
a magistrate otherwise does have power to stay committal proceedings upon
the ground that they are oppressive and vexatious.
The present case is, of
course, one in which the magistrate had heard all the evidence before he
purported to stay proceedings, but
I am unable to read Lord Reid's remarks as
confined to that situation. Nor is there any logical reason for doing so. If
proceedings are an abuse of process justifying a stay, they do not
cease to be so merely because the evidence is closed and there
is no reason why
a power otherwise existing to order a stay should cease at that point. The
question is more fundamental than that
and the answer lies in the nature of
committal proceedings and of the function of the magistrate in hearing
(underlining ours)
[27] This Court should follow considered dicta of the High
[28] As to the second point, counsel for the youth referred to
where the New
South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal said that a conditional stay “may be
granted until such time as the prejudice
to which the defendant would otherwise
be subjected if the proceeding were to continue has been removed”. Counsel
that “given a conditional stay does not necessarily finally
terminate the proceedings, different considerations apply in determining
such a lesser power ought be implied (noting that the youth in this case only
requires the implication of such a lesser power,
allowing for a stay until
7 October 2024).”
[29] Although
related to permanent stays, the principles
concerning the implication of powers discussed by Dawson J at pages 16 to 19 and
above are applicable in relation to the power of the Youth Justice
Court to order a temporary or conditional stay of proceedings
when conducting a
preliminary examination.
[30] The question is whether the implication of such a power is
“necessary for the effective exercise of the powers which are
conferred” by the statute on the Youth Justice Court conducting a
preliminary examination.
[31] In our view it is not necessary for the effective exercise of the power
to conduct a preliminary examination that the Youth Justice
Court should have
the power to grant a temporary or conditional stay of those proceedings.
[32] As we have noted, the Youth Justice Court conducting a preliminary
examination has the power to adjourn proceedings from time
The use and exercise of
this power would seem to provide a remedy no different in effect than that which
might be available if there
were a power to grant a temporary stay of the
preliminary examination. Further, the circumstances which might exist in order
to persuade
the Youth Justice Court to exercise a discretionary power to order a
temporary stay, particularly in a matter such as this, would
be similar if not
the same as those that would support an application for the preliminary
examination to be adjourned. This remark
should not be taken as any indication
that we are of the view that an adjournment should be granted in the present
circumstances;
we are merely stating that the power undoubtedly exists and
express no opinion as to how it should be exercised in the present case.
[33] A power to grant a temporary stay would not be necessary for the
effective exercise of the Youth Justice Court’s power
to conduct a
preliminary examination.
[34] Further, even if a temporary stay did have a different purpose from an
adjournment, the fact that there is no implied power to
grant a permanent stay
would seem to argue against the necessity of there being an implied power to
grant a temporary stay instead
of an adjournment.
[35] Counsel for the youth also referred to two provisions in the
Justice Act
which expressly confer a power on the Youth Justice Court to
stay a proceeding:
empowering the Youth Justice Court to “stay the
proceedings until satisfactory arrangements are made for the representation
the youth”; and
s 138(1)(a)
empowering the Youth Justice Court to order a
stay of the proceedings if it becomes apparent that proceedings should have been
in the Local Court because the accused was an adult. Whilst
acknowledging that neither provision is applicable in the present case
referred to them in order to answer a possible contention by the Crown to the
effect that by expressly including those powers
Parliament intended to exclude
any general power:
expressio unius est exclusio alterius
submitted, correctly, that that principle would not operate to prevent the
implication of any other powers, for example
the power of the Youth Justice
Court to permanently stay a trial for abuse of process, unfairness or
oppression.
[36] That contention, however, does not assist in circumstances such as the
present where the implication of such a power is not necessary.
[37] We answer the question: No.
------------
Youth Justice Act
Amending Act s 2(2)
Local Court (Criminal
Procedure) Act 1928
Local Court (Criminal
Procedure) Act 1928
Local Court (Criminal
Procedure) Act 1928
s 109(3)(c).
Local Court (Criminal
Procedure) Act 1928
Local Court (Criminal
Procedure) Act 1928
Here “may” means
“must”. It does not appear that the Court has any choice but to do
one of the three things
listed in (a), (b) and (c) depending on which of the
pre-conditions in the three paragraphs are present.
Criminal Code
Criminal Code
336(1)-(2).
Criminal Code
Criminal Code
[1984] FCA 408
(1984) 5 FCR 235
, 241. This
passage was quoted with approval by Toohey J in
Jackson v Sterling
Industries Ltd
[1987] HCA 23
(1987) 162 CLR 612
The relevant
principles were discussed and the authorities reviewed by Mildren J in
Consolidated Press Holdings Limited
(1992) 84 NTR 42.
[1989] HCA 45
(1989) 168 CLR 1.
[1932] HCA 64
(1932) 48 CLR 487
We note that the Queensland
Court of Appeal reached the same conclusion, also applying
relation to committal proceedings in Queensland, in
Higgins v Comans
[2005] QCA 234
(2005) 153 A Crim R 565.
(1980) 1 NSWLR 93.
Section 41(6)
Justices Act 1902
[1964] A.C. 1254.
[1971] A.C. 197
Migration Agents
Registration Authority v Frugtniet
[2018] FCAFC 5
(2018) 259 FCR 219
recently acknowledged
by the Northern Territory Court of Appeal in
Rolfe v The Territory Coroner
[2023] NTCA 8
[2001] NSWCCA 201
Youth’s Outline of
Submissions on Question Reserved dated 14 June 2023 [48].
Youth Justice Act 2005
s 112A(2)(a).
Youth’s Outline of
Submissions on Question Reserved dated 14 June 2023 [60] – [63].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (187 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter