URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTSCFC/2021/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:23:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Queen v JHW [2021] NTSCFC 1 (8 April 2021)
The Queen v JHW
[2021] NTSCFC 1
PARTIES: THE QUEEN
TITLE OF COURT: FULL COURT OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: 21946870
DELIVERED: 8 April 2021
HEARING DATE: 23 April 2020
JUDGMENT OF: Grant CJ, Southwood and Kelly JJ
CATCHWORDS:
SENTENCING – Juvenile offenders – Evidence or mention of prior
Question of law reserved for Full Court – If a court finds a youth
under the age of 15 guilty of an offence but does not record
a conviction, does
s 136 of the
Youth Justice Act
preclude the Supreme Court from
taking into account the commission of that offence when sentencing that person
at a later date.
Youth Justice Act 2005
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue (Northern
[2009] HCA 41
(2009) 239 CLR 27
Comcare v Martin
[2016] HCA 43
(2016) 258 CLR 467
Coverdale v West Coast Council
[2016] HCA 15
(2016) 259 CLR 164
Maritime Union of
Australia v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
(2016) 259 CLR
Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Commission v May
[2016] HCA 19
Project Blue Sky v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
R v Gurruwiwi
[2008] NTCCA 2
(2008) 22 NTLR 68
SZTAL v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 91 ALJR 936
Owners–Strata Plan 11564
(2014) 253 CLR 531
Thiess v Collector of
[2014] HCA 12
(2014) 250 CLR 664
, referred to.
REPRESENTATION:
Crown: T Moses
Defendant: M Aust with J Lowrey
Solicitors:
Crown: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Defendant: North Australian Aboriginal Justice Agency
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 17
IN THE FULL COURT OF THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
The Queen v JHW
[2021] NTSCFC 1
No. 21946870
CORAM: GRANT CJ, SOUTHWOOD & KELLY JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 8 April 2021)
[1] On 15 April
2020, a Judge of the Supreme Court reserved the following questions of law for
the consideration of the Full Court
pursuant to
Court Act 1979
If a court finds a youth under the age of 15 guilty of an offence but does
not record a conviction, does
Youth Justice Act
preclude the Supreme Court from taking into account the commission of that
offence when sentencing that person at a later date:
(a) if the Supreme Court is sentencing the person under the provisions of the
Sentencing Act
(b) if the Supreme Court is sentencing the person under the provisions of the
Youth Justice Act
(c) if the Supreme Court is sentencing the person utilising the provisions of
Sentencing Act
Youth Justice Act
[2] On 23 April
2020, following the hearing of submissions on the reference, the Full Court
answered those questions as follows:
(a) Yes, if the person was an adult at the time of committing the offence for
which he or she is being sentenced.
[3] The Court
advised that written reasons for these determinations would be delivered at a
later date. These are those reasons.
The circumstances in which
the questions arose
[4] On 15 April
2020, the offender pleaded guilty in the Supreme Court to one count of
aggravated robbery.
[5] At the time
the matter came before the Supreme Court, the offender had just turned 14, and
was 13 years and 11 months old when
he committed the instant offence on 18
December 2019.
[6] The Crown
tendered a copy of an Information for Courts and sought to rely in particular on
the fact that the offender was on a
Good Behaviour Bond for aggravated robbery
when he committed the instant offence.
[7] The offender
had been dealt with by the courts three times before the present episode of
(a) On 21 March 2019, he committed a number of offences including property
damage, being in possession of stolen property and assault
with intent to steal.
A week later, on 28 March 2019, he committed further property damage and
trespassed on enclosed premises.
He was not dealt with for those offences until
27 November 2019. The offences were found proved, but no conviction was
(b) On 26 June 2019, he committed two lots of property damage, two lots of
trespass, unlawful entry and stealing. He was dealt with
for those offences on
6 December 2019. Again, the offences were found proved but no convictions were
(c) On 22 November 2019, when he was 13 years and 10 months old, he was dealt
with by Mildren AJ in the Supreme Court for aggravated
robbery committed on 25
July 2019 when he was aged 13 years and 6 months. He was released on a bond to
be of good behaviour for
12 months without proceeding to a conviction.
course of the sentencing proceedings before the Supreme Court, defence counsel
objected to the receipt of the Information
for Courts, contending that the
Supreme Court was precluded by
Youth Justice Act 2005
(NT) from taking into account any of the offences committed by the offender
before he was 15 in respect of which no conviction was
[9] The Crown
contended that
Youth Justice Act
does not have that
Section 136
findings of guilt not to be mentioned
finds a youth guilty of an offence but does not record a conviction, no evidence
or mention of the offence may be made to, nor may
the offence be taken into
account by, a
other than the Youth Justice
(2) Subsection (1):
(a) applies whether the offence was committed, or the finding of guilt made,
before or after the commencement of this section; but
(b) does not apply if the offence was committed after the youth had turned 15
years of age.
Defence contentions
[11] In the
submissions on the reference, counsel for the defence relied principally on the
fact that a distinction is drawn in the
Youth Justice Act
between the
terms “Court”, “Youth Justice Court” and “Supreme
Court”. It was said to follow
that in the operation of
Youth Justice Act
, “a court other than the Youth Justice
Court” must necessarily include the Supreme Court.
Youth Justice Act
provides the following definition of
means the Youth Justice
Court as mentioned in
and, if the context requires, includes the
Supreme Court exercising its jurisdiction under this Act.
Youth Justice Act
Continuation
and constitution
(1) The Juvenile Court established under the repealed Act is continued in
existence as the Youth Justice
(2) Each Local Court Judge is a Judge of the Youth Justice Court.
(3) The Youth Justice Court is a court of record and has a seal that must be
affixed to all process issued out of the Court.
Youth Justice Act
refers to the powers of the Supreme Court in
sentencing a youth. It provides:
of Supreme Court in sentencing
(1) If a youth is found guilty before the Supreme Court of an offence, the
Supreme Court may do any of the following:
(a) exercise, in addition to its powers, the powers of the Youth Justice
(b) order that the youth be detained in a detention centre or imprisoned for a
period not exceeding the period of imprisonment for
which such an offence would
be punishable if committed by an adult;
(c) remit the case to the Youth Justice Court.
(2) If the Supreme Court makes an order under subsection (1)(b), it may also
make any order in relation to that detention or imprisonment
that it could make
in relation to a sentence of imprisonment under the
Sentencing Act
(3) If the Supreme Court finds a youth guilty of murder, the Supreme Court may,
despite s 157(2) of the Criminal Code, sentence the
youth to life
imprisonment or a shorter period of detention or imprisonment as it considers
appropriate.
[15] Counsel for
the defence submits that
Youth Justice Act
offences to which the section applies from being taken into account by any court
other than the Youth Justice Court. The
prohibition is a blanket one and the
only exception is the “Youth Justice Court”. The section does not
use the word
“Court” to create the exception to the prohibition,
which would have picked up the definition of that term in
the Supreme Court when exercising jurisdiction under the
Youth Justice
. Nor does it say, “other than the Youth Justice Court or the
Supreme Court exercising the powers of the Youth Justice Court”:
specifies the Youth Justice Court alone.
contentions
[16] Counsel for
the Crown contended that
Youth Justice Act
construed in the context of the statutory scheme, which creates a distinct
regime for dealing with youth offenders. That
regime is generally more
resource- and time-intensive, reports are mandated in certain circumstances, and
the sentencing court needs
to be much more aware of the personal circumstances
and criminal histories of the youths appearing before it. The availability,
receipt and consideration of such information is critical to the effective
imposition of rehabilitative sentencing orders responsive
to the youth’s
current circumstances.
[17] To that
and (e) of the
Youth Justice Act
expressly requires
the “Court” (which includes the Supreme Court when sentencing a
to consider information
matter, including “any history
of offences previously committed” and
“any previous order in relation to an offence that still applies to the
This would not be possible in relation to offences which fall
if the defendant’s construction of that section was
Youth Justice Act
provides that a Court considering imposing a
sentence of detention or imprisonment on a youth must ensure that “it is
as to the circumstances of the youth”, and to that end must
require a pre-sentence report to be provided to it unless satisfied
that it has
the information necessary to determine an appropriate sentence.
Youth Justice Act
provides that a pre-sentence report may
set out all or any of a number of matters relevant to the sentencing of the
youth, including:
(a) the social history and background of the
(b) the circumstances of other offences of which the youth has been found
(c) any relevant diversion history of the
(d) the extent to which the youth is complying with any sentence currently
imposed on him or her;
(e) family and community views of the youth's offending
(f) risk issues in relation to the youth and further
[20] Each of
these matters may require reference to offences to which
applies. If
the defence contention in relation to the construction of that section were to
be accepted, that would preclude mention
of those prior offences in the
pre-sentence report, which would in turn render the pre-sentence report less
than useful and possibly
actively misleading. Because the Supreme Court is
required to engage in the same intensive rehabilitation-prioritised procedure
the Youth Justice Court when sentencing a youth offender, in order to ensure the
Supreme Court has all of the powers particular
to that jurisdiction which are
conferred by the
Youth Justice Act
on the Youth Justice Court,
confers on the Supreme Court “the powers of the Youth
Justice Court”.
[21] In that
context, the Crown contends that
is a facultative provision and
should be construed liberally to confer on the Supreme Court all of the powers
of the Youth Justice
Court, including its power to receive evidence that a youth
has been found guilty of an offence committed when the youth was under
of age where no conviction was recorded – unencumbered by the prohibition
Youth Justice Act
against other courts receiving
such evidence. That construction is necessary to reconcile the operation of
with the power of the Supreme Court to order and receive information
concerning matters falling within 70(1)(g) to (i) and (n) of
Justice Act
, and more generally, to receive evidence into account where
relevant under
Both powers are necessarily
unencumbered by the limitation found in
Youth Justice
[22] In further
support of that proposition, the Crown points out that the construction of
contended for by the defence would lead to a range of anomalous and
absurd outcomes. These include:
(a) The Supreme Court is obliged when sentencing a youth to consider the
youth’s likelihood of reoffending, and his or her
offence history and
suitability for any rehabilitative sentencing dispositions. If the defence
contention is correct, the Supreme
Court could not consider evidence of those
matters if caught by the terms of
Youth Justice Act
(b) When considering sentencing a youth to a term of imprisonment, the Court
must order a pre-sentence report unless satisfied that
it already has sufficient
information necessary to determine an appropriate sentence. That report would
ordinarily deal with a range
of matters, including any previous findings of
guilt, which, on the defence contention, may be prohibited from being mentioned
the court. Moreover, if the defence contention is correct, the Supreme Court
might even be precluded from knowing the matters necessary
to decide whether it
has sufficient information to determine an appropriate sentence.
(c) Evidence of previous findings of guilt might conceivably, in some
circumstances, cause the Youth Justice Court to decline to
determine a charge
summarily under
Youth Justice Act
. If the defence
contention is correct, when the charge came to the Supreme Court, it would be
precluded from considering those previous
findings of guilt.
(d) Although the Supreme Court is obliged to engage in the rehabilitative
sentencing exercise required by the
Youth Justice Act
construction urged by the defence was to be adopted that exercise might be
impaired or distorted. So, for example, where
the Supreme Court deals with a
youth by adjourning the matter for a period not exceeding six months under
Youth Justice Act
with a view to discharging the
youth without penalty if he or she does not commit a further offence during that
period (as envisaged
in this case), the Supreme Court could not receive or take
into account evidence of any offending within the terms of
during the adjournment.
(e) If the defendant’s construction were to be adopted, when sentencing a
youth for an offence the Supreme Court could not
deal with any consequential
breach of an order previously made by the Youth Justice Court on a finding of
guilt falling within
Youth Justice
What is more, there
would be no court empowered to deal with breaches of Supreme Court sentencing
orders imposed for offences within
the terms of
That would be
because the prohibition in
is not simply against taking offences
falling within the section into account on sentencing. It is that evidence of
such offences
may not be given, and that such offences may not even be
(f) For the same reason, a defendant sentenced for an offence within the terms
Youth Justice Act
by the Supreme Court would be
unable to seek reconsideration in that Court under
if their circumstances
changed. Nor could a defendant sentenced by the Youth Justice Court for an
offence within the terms of
appeal to the Supreme Court against
either the conviction or sentence under
Youth Justice
[23] The Crown
contends that such a result is not required by the legislative text and cannot
have been the legislative intention.
Discussion and
[24] The proper
method or approach to the construction of a statute is by “regard to the
text of the statute as a whole, and
the subject, scope and purpose
statute and against the legislative history and antecedent
circumstances”.
consideration may, in appropriate circumstances, involve reference to extrinsic
materials to confirm the legislative
The question in the
present case is not whether
Youth Justice Act
read in anything other than a literal or grammatical
The question is whether
Youth Justice Act
should be read to extend the
exception in
to the Supreme Court when it is sentencing a youth
offender. The legislative purpose of the scheme in which
informs the question whether the reference to the “Youth Justice
Court” in that section is limited to that court.
This is because the
“objective discernment of statutory purpose is integral to contextual
construction”.
[25] The purpose
and operation of
Youth Justice Act
was described by
Martin (BR) CJ in
R v Gurruwiwi
in the following terms:
the primary source of the sentencing powers of the Supreme Court is the
Sentencing Act 1995
Braun v The Queen
(1997) 6 NTLR 94 at
100. However,
Youth Justice Act 2005
(NT) provides
that if a youth is found guilty before the Supreme Court the court may, in
addition to its powers, exercise the powers
of the Youth Justice Court.
Speaking generally, therefore, when sentencing a youth, in addition to the
powers found in the
Sentencing Act
, the Supreme Court may call upon the
powers of the Youth Justice Court contained in the
Youth Justice
[26] Similarly,
Riley J observed:
Youth Justice Act
provides the powers of the Supreme Court in sentencing a youth who is found
guilty before that court of an offence [...]
In addition to the sentencing options available to the Supreme Court under
Sentencing Act
it has available to it the powers of the Youth Justice
Court which are found in
Youth Justice
significant that
also appears in
and forms part of the scheme
for the sentencing of youths created by the legislation. The intention of that
scheme as a whole is
that the Supreme Court can do everything that the Youth
Justice Court can, and more. That is to say, by virtue of
Youth Justice Act
, the Supreme Court has all of its own powers plus all
of the powers of the Youth Justice Court, and by virtue of
Act, those powers (ie the powers of the Youth Justice Court conferred on the
Supreme Court) are not affected by the prohibition
in that section. Three
particular observations should be made in relation to that conclusion.
[28] First, it
may be accepted that
Youth Justice Act
is not a source
of power. Rather, it is a prohibition coupled with an exception. However,
Youth Justice Act
vests the Supreme Court with
“the powers of the Youth Justice Court”. That investment carries
with it all the incidents
and conditions necessary for the proper exercise of
those powers. One such incident and condition is the exception contained in
, and its characterisation as an exception rather than a grant of
power cannot displace the requirement that a court empowered to
sentence a youth
offender under the scheme created by
, Division 1 of the
Youth Justice
must consider “any history of offences previously committed by the
youth” and “any previous order [made] in relation
[29] Secondly,
the conclusion reached in relation to the purpose and operation of the
legislation does not involve reading
Youth Justice Act
as if it contained additional words in the manner discussed by the High
Taylor v Owners–Strata Plan 11564
. The majority of the
Court stated that a purposive approach does not permit a construction that fills
“gaps disclosed in legislation”
or makes an insertion which is
“too big, or too much at variance with the language in fact used by the
legislature”.
above, the proper approach to the present question of interpretation is to
construe the phrase “the powers of the
Youth Justice Court”
appearing in
Youth Justice Act
to include the
power and obligation to consider a youth’s full criminal history.
[30] Thirdly,
has been in the
Youth Justice Act
since it commenced. The
section was later amended by
Justice Legislation Amendment
Act (No 2) 2006
, which came into operation on 3 November 2006. The
amendment inserted s 136(2) of the Act in its current form. Otherwise, the
remains unchanged. During the second reading speech for the
Legislation Amendment Act (No 2) 2006
on 30 August 2006, the
Attorney-General described the intention of the amendment in the following
Section 136(2) is amended to clarify that it applies whether
the findings of guilt of a youth who has turned 15 at the time were made
or after the commencement of the Act. Section 136(2) was a new provision that
provides that the unrecorded conviction of a
youth can be taken into account by
any court if the offence resulting in the finding of guilt was committed after
the youth turned
15 years of age. For removal of a doubt that has been raised,
the amendment clarifies that from the date of the commencement of the
mention can be made in an adult court
to the criminal history of findings
of guilt where the offence was committed after 15 years of age, and whether
those findings of
guilt were made before or after the commencement of the
(Emphasis added)
[31] The purpose
Youth Justice Act
is to give people who have a
history of committing criminal offences when they were under 15 years of age,
for which no conviction
was recorded, the benefit of such a history not being
permitted to be raised in an adult court. That purpose extends beyond
and criminal cases. For example, it limits the power of a civil
court to receive evidence under
Evidence (National Uniform
Legislation) Act 2011
(NT). The prohibition recognises the reduced moral
culpability of offenders under the age of 15 years, their capacity for
rehabilitation,
and the importance of not stigmatising such young offenders who
have not been convicted of a criminal offence so their prospects
rehabilitation are enhanced. The purpose of
Youth Justice
is not to preclude a court when sentencing a youth from taking into
account the complete history of offences previously committed
by the youth. For
the reasons which have been described above, that information is important when
determining a sentencing disposition
which recognises the needs of the youth and
at the same time appropriately holds the youth accountable for the offending
[32] When regard
is had to the context in which
Youth Justice Act
appears, and the purpose of both that section and the provisions for the
sentencing of youths generally, it is plain that the result
contended for by the
defence could not have been intended. The section was not intended to, and on
proper construction does not,
fetter the ability of the Supreme Court to carry
out its functions, including the functions and duties conferred on it by the
Youth Justice Act
in sentencing youths. Rather, the intention and
operation of the provision is to give defendants who had been found guilty of an
offence or offences to which
applies the benefit of having no mention
of such offences made in legal proceedings once they have reached the age of
[33] The defence
acknowledges that the construction advocated by the Crown in many respects makes
perfect sense, and would ultimately
operate for the benefit of a youth offender,
but says that questions of construction are not answered simply for the purpose
of achieving
a pragmatic result. The defence contends that the construction
favoured by the Crown effectively involves rewriting
so that the term
“Court” is substituted for the term “Youth Justice
Court” or the words “or the Supreme
Court exercising the powers of
the Youth Justice Court” are added at the end of the subsection. For the
reasons given, we
do not agree. The construction contended for by the Crown
simply requires a recognition that what is conferred on the Supreme Court
is all of the powers of the Youth Justice Court – and that
the powers of the Youth Justice Court so conferred are not encumbered
prohibition under
_________________
The repealed Act is the
Juvenile Justice Act
. It contained an identical definition of
“Court” in s 3, and an identical provision in relation to the
powers of the
Supreme Court in sentencing in s 39.
See definition of "Court":
Youth Justice Act
Youth Justice Act
s 70(1)(b).
Youth Justice Act
s 70(1)(g).
Youth Justice Act
s 70(1)(h).
Youth Justice Act
s 70(1)(i).
Youth Justice Act
s 70(1)(m).
Youth Justice Act
s 70(1)(n).
Section 147
Justice Act
operates to confer analogous power on the Supreme Court when it
is hearing an appeal. This recognises that in deciding an appeal
the Supreme
Court may need to exercise the same sentencing jurisdiction as the Youth Justice
ML v The Queen
Coverdale v West Coast
[2016] HCA 15
(2016) 259 CLR 164
Thiess v Collector of
[2014] HCA 12
(2014) 250 CLR 664
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and
Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 91 ALJR 936
, [81] and [92];
Union of Australia v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
259 CLR 431
at [23], [25], [28], [30] and [34];
Military Rehabilitation and
Compensation Commission v May
[2016] HCA 19
(2016) 257 CLR 468
Those circumstances include to
conclude or confirm that the interpretation conforms with purpose described in
the extrinsic materials
Maritime Union of Australia v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
(2016) 259 CLR 431
[2016] HCA 43
(2016) 258 CLR 467
); and to ascertain purpose upon the
identification of a clear ambiguity in the statutory language (
Coverdale v
West Coast Council
[2016] HCA 15
(2016) 259 CLR 164).
Project Blue Sky v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
(NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue (Northern
[2009] HCA 41
(2009) 239 CLR 27
Thiess v Collector of
[2014] HCA 12
(2014) 250 CLR 664
R v Gurruwiwi
[2008] NTCCA 2
Anderson v The Queen
[2014] NTCCA 18
R v Gurruwiwi
[2008] NTCCA 2
Taylor v Owners–Strata
(2014) 253 CLR 531
Northern Territory,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 30 August 2006, 2964 (Peter
Toyne, Attorney-General).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (238 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter