URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCAT/2025/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:17:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hashemi v Morgan [2025] NTCAT 3 (5 March 2025)
Hashemi v Morgan
DECISION NUMBER:
[2025] NTCAT 3
SEYED MOHAMMAD HASHEMI
AMBER RAE MORGAN
MATTER TYPE:
Original Jurisdiction –
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
2024-01441-CT
HEARING DATE:
16 AUGUST 2024
DECISION OF:
DATE OF ORDERS:
5 MARCH 2025
APPEARANCES and REPRESENTATION (if any):
Mitch Elton and Jo Tee (Raine & Horne)
RESPONDENT:
Amber Morgan (in person) and Paul Hendriks
REASONS FOR DECISION:
application dated 2 May 2024 the applicant and former landlord, Seyed Hashemi,
claimed compensation in the total sum of $3,091.64
from the respondent and
former tenant, Amber Morgan, in relation to a residential lease of premises at
37 Brolga Street, Wulagi,
claimed compensation of $3,091.64 comprised the sum of the following items:
$857.14 (unpaid rent from 1 to 10 April 2024); $2,124.00
(to replace two missing
ladders); and $110.50 (for a spa
Morgan denied the claim, and sought return of the security deposit or bond in
the sum of $2,400.00 – which Mr Hashemi had
retained. Ms Morgan also
cross-claimed for compensation due to the outside spa not working between the
commencement of the tenancy
on 3 October 2022 to 16 November 2022 (a period
of six weeks and two days).
time she sought a reduction of rent to compensate for their being no functioning
spa, but this was not agreed.
deal with each item of the claim and cross-claim under the headings
Unpaid rent
lease of the premises was initially for a fixed term from 3 October 2022 to
1 October 2023 (ie 52 weeks), at a rental of $600.00
per week. The
bond or security deposit was $2,400.00.
was the first lease of the premises; hitherto Mr Hashemi resided at the
the expiry of the initial term the lease was extended for a period of 26 weeks
to (Easter Sunday) 31 March 2024. The shorter term
of the extension contributed
to Ms Morgan seeking alternative accommodation, in which respect she gave
an “early heads up”
to Raine & Horne on 28 November 2023 that
she (then) expected to vacate the premises in “January/early
2024 and “move back into my own
Ms Morgan continued to reside at the premises until the expiry of the extended
term on (Easter Sunday) 31 March 2024, and
paid rent to that
In that respect, on
29 January 2024, Mr Hashemi formally issued and served a notice that
the tenancy would end on 31 March
Pursuant to
s 101(1)(b)
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
Ms Morgan was required to
“give up vacant possession of the premises” to Mr Hashemi from
that date (ie on Easter Monday
1 April 2024).
Morgan said that she commenced the process of vacating the premises about two
weeks prior to 31 March 2024, and was assisted by
a contractor, Paul Hendriks,
both for moving her furniture and for cleaning/gardening (both internally and
externally).
Hendriks was also engaged by Ms Morgan during the tenancy to ensure that the
premises was properly maintained. In that respect
four routine inspection
reports were filed which were in positive terms regarding the maintenance and
cleanliness of the premises.
Hendriks attended the hearing with Ms Morgan, as did Mr Hashemi and Raine &
Horne representatives (Mitch Elton and Jo Tee).
Each of these four persons gave
evidence, and/or made submissions, at the hearing regarding the issues in
Morgan said that she appreciated that the lease ended on a public holiday
(Easter Sunday 31 March 2024), and accordingly rang Raine
couple of weeks earlier” and asked “what to do about that”
– namely whether she should
vacate the premises on the preceding
“Friday” 29 March 2024 when the firm’s office was open to
receive the keys,
or whether it was acceptable that that occur on a business day
after the Sunday (noting that Easter Monday was also a public
Ms Morgan sought
this advice in circumstances where the Raine & Horne office was closed over
the Easter period, particularly
Easter Sunday and Monday.
Morgan said that she was told by the Raine & Horne property manager with
whom she spoke, Tamika Andrews, that it was acceptable
that she leave the
premises at her “earliest convenience after the public holiday”. Ms
Morgan’s understanding was
that she would deliver the keys to the agent at
the exit inspection, which was scheduled for Tuesday 2 April 2024 – being
first business day after the Easter long
was a common sense arrangement that any landlord, or agent on behalf of a
landlord, would enter with a tenant where a fixed term
lease expired on a
weekend or public holiday. The telephone conversation did not constitute an
agreed extension of the lease to 1
or 2 April 2024, with resultant additional
rent; nor did it involve Ms Morgan holding over beyond the expiry of the fixed
31 March 2024, and thus incurring liability for additional rent.
after the expiry Ms Morgan was authorised (or licensed) by Ms Andrews, on behalf
of the landlord, to be on the premises up
to the exit inspection which was then
scheduled for the first business day after Easter (ie Tuesday 2 April 2024).
Legally this licence
authorised access to the premises; it did not grant
exclusive possession or involve the tenant holding over, and could be terminated
at any time by the landlord. It was not a lease, or an extension of the previous
lease. As discussed below, the legal outcome of
this arrangement is that vacant
possession was delivered from the expiry of the lease on Sunday 31 March
2024 (ie on Easter Monday
1 April 2024) – as required by
Mr Hashemi’s termination notice which was issued on 29 January
Accordingly,
in reliance on Ms Andrews’ advice (and the licence granted), Ms Morgan
departed the premises on (Easter Monday)
1 April 2024, and slept that evening at
her own home. All of her personal belongings had been removed from the premises,
principal remaining task was to empty the outdoor spa of water (and also
attend the scheduled exit inspection) – this being
its state at the
commencement of the tenancy (see below). Mr Hendriks was responsible for
that task, and a pump and related tools
belonging to him were present outside at
the premises after 31 March 2024.
exit inspection was scheduled for Tuesday 2 April 2024, however Raine &
Horne representatives were unable to attend due to
illness (two staff had
Covid-19). The inspection was rescheduled for the following day (Wednesday 3
April 2024), and was attended
by Ms Tee. Ms Morgan and Mr Hendriks were also
the exit inspection Ms Tee observed that Ms Morgan’s personal belongings
had been removed from inside the premises, and the
only property present (other
than the landlord’s chattels) was Mr Hendriks’ utility vehicle and
trailer in the driveway
and his pump and related tools (including gardening
tools) which were in the outside yard. Mr Hendriks said that he and his
were present so that he could promptly rectify any concerns which the
agent may raise about the premises at the inspection.
Morgan said that, as arranged with Ms Andrews, she attempted to return the keys
to the agent but Ms Tee did not accept them. Ms
Tee said that this was because
Mr Hendriks’ property remained present in the outside yard meaning
that, in her view, the premises
had not been “fully
response Mr Hendriks explained that his property could readily be removed, and
was only present so that he could promptly rectify
estimated that it would take about “15 minutes” to remove
Mr Hendriks’ tools.
Since the property was outside, it was not necessary that Ms Morgan retain the
keys to remove that property. In my view these circumstances
do not establish
that the premises had not been “fully vacated”; Ms Tee’s
refusal to accept the keys was misplaced.
Regardless,
it was common ground that Ms Morgan needed to retain the keys after the exit
inspection so as to rectify some concerns
These were discussed at the inspection and noted in the exit condition report,
and subsequently
itemised in an email from Ms Tee to Ms Morgan dated 4
April 2024. Ms Tee advised that the exit condition report had been
forwarded to Ms Morgan (via a facility called ‘Inspection
Express’), and anticipated a further inspection on the early
afternoon of
5 April 2024.
It was necessary that Ms Morgan retain the keys so that those items could be
rectified, and naturally Ms Tee agreed to that occurring.
doing so Ms Tee properly ensured that the landlord accorded Ms Morgan an
opportunity to mitigate any possible claim for financial
uncleanliness, damage, unauthorised alteration of the premises, or missing
property) by rectifying concerns identified
at the exit inspection, as required
Residential Tenancies
agreeing to Ms Morgan retaining the keys Ms Tee also licensed, or authorised,
Ms Morgan (and Mr Hendriks and other contractors)
to access the premises
for the purpose of rectifying concerns about the condition of the premises.
Morgan anticipated that there may be concerns (hence Mr Hendriks was
at the exit inspection), and with Mr Hendriks’ assistance
rectified all but two of the concerns during the remainder of the
included – as expressly requested by Ms Tee in her email dated 4 April
2024 – cleaning some “[w]ashable
marks” or dust/cobwebs in the
house, professionally steam cleaning carpets on Friday 5 April 2024 (at a cost
of $180.00),
and removing a wall
bracket which had been affixed for a mounted television and removing wall hooks.
Mr Hendriks completed these
tasks by around Saturday
6 April 2024,
included patching resultant holes relating to the wall bracket and hooks and
applying matching paint.
concerns were not addressed, or subsequently resolved. The first was the absence
of two ladders from the external yard of the
premises, which belonged to Mr
Hashemi – who required that they be produced or returned. The second was
Ms Tee’s advice
that Ms Morgan should “refill the pool/spa”,
which Mr Hendriks had emptied using a
These issues are discussed
under separate headings below.
anticipated further inspection did not occur on Friday 5 April 2024 (evidently
given communications between the parties about
the timing of Mr Hendriks’
maintenance), and instead took place on Monday 8 April 2024. It was conducted by
Ms Tee; Ms Morgan
was not present, and was not notified of
email to Ms Morgan dated Wednesday 10 April 2024 (2.18 pm), Ms Andrews confirmed
that Ms Tee had been “discussing bond &
vacation inspection items
with Ms Morgan, and that the “Tenant has indicated that keys to the
property will be returned before
close of business
10/04/2024”.
listed outstanding items including that “rent will be charged up to &
including day of key return”, and
that compensation would be sought (inter
alia) for two “missing ladders from the external grounds of the
property” and
the cost of “cleaning & balancing the pool”
(ie the spa). Accordingly Ms Andrews enclosed, by way of service, a form
RT08 Notice of Landlord’s Intention to Retain Security Deposit of
$2,400.00, which would be held on trust pending resolution
of Mr Hashemi’s
compensation claim (with a formal Tribunal application foreshadowed).
Wednesday 10 April 2024 (at 3.30 pm) Ms Morgan delivered the keys to Ms Andrews
and Ms Elton at the Raine & Horne office, and
signed a pro forma
‘Vacate Key Return Envelope’ to that
It is evident that this
timing occurred by prior
arrangement.
2 May 2024 Mr Hashemi filed an application in the Tribunal which
(inter alia) compensation for unpaid rent between 1 and 10 April 2024
in the sum of $857.14. The resolution of this claim requires
consideration of the circumstances, so as to identify the date upon which Ms
Morgan delivered vacant possession of the premises
to the landlord.
question was considered by an Appeal Panel of the NSW Civil and Administrative
Tribunal in
Phoenix v Guangyue Chen
[2020] NSWCATAP 255
, which explained
by reference to authorities (at [77]):
It is clear that the
question whether a tenant has given vacant possession of premises is a question
of fact in each case.
a tenant “ordinarily” does not give up vacant possession until the
keys are returned to the landlord or the landlord’s
agent, as the NSW
Tribunal explained the circumstances or “fact[s] in each case” mean
that exceptions may arise.
NSW Tribunal gave the following
be cases where a tenant gives notice that they have vacated the property and
have in fact left the property empty but haven’t
handed over the keys. In
those circumstances the landlord would generally be entitled to act upon the
tenant’s notification
and enter the property and change the locks on the
basis that the tenant had communicated an intention to deliver vacant
possession.
differently constituted Appeal Panel of the NSW Civil and Administrative
Tribunal also considered this question in
Stuart v Leonardo
NSWCATAP 111
, and likewise explained (at
above, the tenancy ends when possession is given up to a landlord. This is a
question of fact. Matters relevant to determining
whether possession has been
given up include whether a tenant has left the premises and met their
obligations under clause 17, including
delivery up of the keys. This is because
the performance of these obligations before the tenancy ends is consistent with
relinquishing use and control of the premises and returning possession
of the premises to the landlord in the state as required by
the agreement.
common sense arrangement entered into by Ms Andrews (on behalf the landlord)
whereby Ms Morgan was authorised to return the keys
at the scheduled exit
inspection since the lease expired on a public holiday (and during a four day
long weekend) is a further example
of possession being given up albeit that
thereafter the keys were retained by the tenant for a short period.
objectively, it is plain that – by arrangement with Ms Andrews
– Ms Morgan “relinquish[ed] use and control
of the premises”
upon expiry of the lease on Sunday 31 March 2024. Thereafter Ms Morgan was
no longer in possession of the
premises, but was licensed to be present upon and
access the premises up until the exit inspection (including its rescheduled date
of Wednesday 3 April 2024). That licence extended to Ms Morgan’s
contractor, Mr Hendriks, insofar as he performed cleaning
or maintenance
factual finding that vacant possession was delivered on Monday 1 April 2024
wholly disposes of Mr Hashemi’s claim for unpaid
rent between 1 and 10
April 2024.
for completeness, I also deal with an additional issue which arises insofar as
Mr Hashemi’s claim for unpaid rent concerns
the period from the
rescheduled exit inspection on Wednesday 3 April 2024 to the physical delivery
of the keys to Raine & Horne
on Wednesday 10 April
considered objectively, at the time of the exit inspection Ms Morgan had clearly
“relinquish[ed] use and control of the
premises”, and was no longer
in possession of the property. The relatively minor presence of Mr
Hendriks’ tools in the
outside yard for the purpose of promptly rectifying
concerns does not alter that conclusion, and did not justify Ms Tee refusing
accept the keys from Ms Morgan. The contrary understanding of Mr Hashemi,
and Raine & Horne, was misplaced.
landlord and agent’s understanding was misplaced, and incorrect, for
another reason.
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
provides that a landlord may
serve an exit condition report on a tenant “within 3 business days
vacant possession” is given (underlining added). Likewise
provides that a landlord may serve a form RT08 notice that the bond will
be retained “within 7 business days
the tenant gave up vacant
possession of the premises” (underlining added).
pursuant to
a landlord (or agent) cannot enter and inspect premises
in a tenant’s legal possession unless “at a time previously arranged
with the tenant not less than 7 days before the entry is made”.
Raine & Horne served the exit condition report on Ms Morgan on Thursday
4 April 2024 (ie exactly “3 business days”
after Easter
Monday 1 April 2024, being the date on which I find vacant possession was
given), and served the form RT08 notice on
Ms Morgan by email on Wednesday 10
April 2024 at 2.18 pm (ie exactly “7 business days” after Easter
Monday 1 April 2024).
both cases these documents were served prior to 3.30 pm on Wednesday
10 April 2024, being the time at which Mr Hashemi submits
that vacant
possession was given. If so, neither document was served “after”
that time, meaning that there would be non-compliance
by Mr Hashemi with
Ms Tee inspected the premises on the rescheduled date of Monday
8 April 2024 without, on the evidence, notifying Ms Morgan
date and obtaining her agreement to that entry. If, as the landlord submits, Ms
Morgan was legally in possession of the premises
at that time (and thus liable
to pay rent), there would be non-compliance by Mr Hashemi with
fact, as I have found, Mr Hashemi (and Raine & Horne including Ms Tee)
complied with each of those provisions
(ss 70(2)(a)
(5)) because
vacant possession was given on Easter Monday 1 April 2024.
follows, from this conclusion, that Mr Hashemi’s claim for unpaid rent
between 3 and 10 April 2024 is contradicted by Raine
& Horne’s actions
on his behalf, which necessarily were on the basis that vacant possession had
been delivered at least
by the exit inspection on 3 April 2024. This internal
contradiction in Mr Hashemi’s claim for unpaid rent (particularly for
period) serves to confirm that it is misconceived.
Hashemi claimed compensation in the sum of $2,124.00 to replace two missing
ladders which, together with other ladders, were stored
unsecured in the outside
yard of the premises.
proceed on the basis that those ladders were “ancillary property”
which was part of the lease between the parties, meaning
that legally Ms Morgan
had exclusive possession and use of
text of the entry condition report records that there were two “blue
ladders” against the back fence of the premises,
and two “red
ladders” in the carport area. The report includes one photograph showing
at least one blue ladder against
the back fence, but no external photographs of
any red ladders from outside the premises. However a portion of what appears to
a red ladder can be seen through the dining window of three internal
photographs.
It was accepted
that two red ladders were stored against the wall of the house in that location
(which is around the corner from
the carport), noting that at the hearing Mr
Hashemi said that an extendable green ladder was also stored there (as discussed
Morgan made modifications to the report, but not in relation to the ladders. The
report, as modified, was accepted and deems the
condition of the premises at the
commencement of the tenancy – ie that two blue ladders and two red ladders
were present outside
in the backyard of the premises, respectively against the
or in the general carport area (in fact around the corner under
the dining room window).
Hashemi said that he left the ladders in case they were of use to Ms Morgan, but
that if not she could ask for them to be
Ms Morgan said that she
never touched or used the ladders (and certainly did not remove them), and had
little awareness of them.
Mr Hendriks
saw the ladders when doing gardening work, and said that they were not visible
from the front of the premises. He said
that the ladders were not padlocked or
“secured in any way”, and noted that at the commencement of the
tenancy there
were no locks on the access gates to the
Mr Hashemi did not
dispute that the ladders were unsecured, and the entry condition report does not
record otherwise (as would be
expected if they were padlocked). Mr Hendriks said
that he did not remove any ladder from the
four routine inspection reports filed by the landlord do not contain any record
or any photograph relevant to
that issue.
Hashemi said that, in fact, there was also an extendable green ladder belonging
to him at the premises (which was stored under
the dining room window together
with the two red ladders), giving a total of five ladders. Mr Hashemi said
that two of the five ladders
were missing, namely the extendable green ladder
and a short blue ladder which was stored against the back
not recorded in the text of the entry condition report (which only mentions two
blue and two red ladders), by reference to
three photographs Mr Hashemi said
that the green ladder was visible against the outside of the house through the
louvred dining room
so, this would mean that the report recorded the existence of five ladders at
the premises.
am unable to accept this submission. I have carefully examined the three
photographs including under magnification, and consider
that the green colour to
which Mr Hashemi refers is actually the colour of several louvres when viewed
edgeways through the entire
width of the pane (being how those louvres are
oriented in the photographs) – as distinct from viewed laterally though
thin and transparent pane.
exit condition report records: “One long retractable and one short
ladders not
which Mr Hashemi
said were respectively a green ladder and a blue ladder. This record is said to
be supported by two photographs
at p 321 of the report. In fact, only one
photograph on that page is relevant. It depicts two ladders under the dining
room window,
at least one of which is
There are no photographs in
the exit inspection report showing the remaining blue ladder, or the back fence
where two “blue
ladders” were stored at the start of the lease.
my view, taking into account the deeming effect of the entry condition report,
the evidence demonstrates that at the commencement
of the tenancy there were two
blue ladders stored against the back fence, and two red ladders stored against
the house under the
dining room window. This is a total of four ladders.
Pursuant to that report there was no green ladder stored under that window (ie
in the carport area), or otherwise on the premises.
finding means that Mr Hashemi’s claim for compensation for the extendable
green ladder must fail. It is not proven that
that ladder was ever in Ms
Morgan’s possession.
accept that at the end of the tenancy one of the blue ladders was missing, being
a short foldable ladder that was stored against
the back fence.
Ms Tee’s email dated 4 April 2024 requested that Ms Morgan
“return” the two missing ladders (which includes
the blue ladder),
it was not suggested at the hearing that either Ms Morgan or Mr Hendriks
had removed them.
The evidence
demonstrates, and I accept, that they did not do so.
Mr Hashemi claimed that Ms Morgan breached cl 31.1(d) of the lease because she
failed to “ensur[e] the Property is in
the same condition as described in
the Property condition report (reasonable wear and tear accepted)” at the
end of the tenancy
– due to the missing ladder(s). In that respect,
pursuant to
s 112(3)(b)
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
, Mr Hashemi
retained the bond (in part) to “replace ancillary property lost or
destroyed by the tenant” (or a tenant’s
response, Ms Morgan suggested that one of the landlord’s contractors may
have used and taken one or more ladders during the
tenancy, and filed evidence
that contractors attended the premises on various occasions for maintenance.
This included the replacement
of the fluorescent light in the kitchen by an
electrician in November 2022, and rectification of a roof leak above the
bathroom in
February 2023.
Hendriks pointed out that, since they were not locked or secured, an unknown
person could easily have stolen the ladders, particularly
if that person knew
the ladders were stored in the backyard.
my view the evidence does not establish that Ms Morgan breached cl 31.1(d)
the lease, or that she otherwise breached any legal duty (including at
common law) to Mr Hashemi regarding the storage of the ladders.
during the tenancy, the ladders (including the short blue foldable ladder) were
stored by Ms Morgan in exactly the “same
condition” as they were
left by Mr Hashemi at the commencement of the tenancy.
inferred fact that an unknown person, whether mistakenly or deliberately (ie
unlawfully), removed the ladder(s) does not demonstrate
any act or omission by
Ms Morgan in breach of the lease or any legal duty.
finding means that Mr Hashemi’s claim for compensation for the short blue
foldable ladder must fail.
finding also provides an additional basis whereby Mr Hashemi’s claim for
compensation for the green extendable ladder must
fail if, contrary to my
factual finding above, it was in fact stored upon the premises during the
Condition of the spa (end of the tenancy)
A of the pro forma used for the lease (published by the Real Estate Institute
Northern Territory) identifies the “residential
premises” which was
leased to Ms Morgan by reference to its address. This reference encompasses both
the land at that address
and fixtures thereon (which conceptually at law are
part of the land), including the house (which incorporates a store room), a
shed in the backyard, and an outside spa. Additionally, in a part of the
pro forma used to identify inclusions (eg “parking
space or furniture
provided”) or exclusions (eg “sheds” used by the landlord),
the “Spa”, “Shed”
and “Store room” were
expressly confirmed as part of the “residential
entry condition report, as initially served on Ms Morgan, recorded that the spa
was clean, undamaged and working (as marked with
the letter Y in tabular
columns) at the commencement of the tenancy on 3 October 2022 (noting that Raine
& Horne prepared and
signed the report six days earlier on 28 September
2022). However that record was qualified by text and photographs which described
the spa as “empty” with a “large amount of leaves
Separately,
the spa filter was described as clean, undamaged and working, with text
recording that the filter was “present and
Morgan made modifications, and signed, the report on 8 October 2022. She did not
accept Raine & Horne’s description of
the spa (as marked with the
letter N in a tabular column), and commented that there were “lots of
tadpoles” in rainwater
at the bottom of the spa, “many missing
tiles”, and that “some of the slating is not secure”. Ms
Morgan provided
seven photographs to that effect. Those photographs confirmed
both Ms Morgan’s comments, and the agent’s observation
spa was “empty” with a “large amount of leaves present”
both in and around the spa.
Morgan accepted the agent’s description of the spa filter as clean,
undamaged and working (as marked with the letter Y in
& Horne did not respond to Ms Morgan’s modifications, meaning that
pursuant to
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
the landlord is
taken to have accepted the modified condition report – particularly as to
the condition of the spa and the
and (2) the modified report is “conclusive evidence of the
condition of the premises” at the commencement of the tenancy,
the spa and filter, “unless the Tribunal determines otherwise in a
particular case”.
spa was empty when Ms Morgan viewed the premises with Raine & Horne prior to
signing the lease, and advised that she wanted
an operating spa (as had been
depicted in the agent’s advertising, and as legally contemplated by the
noting that
Darwin’s build up and associated humidity had
Morgan said she was advised at that time by the then Raine & Horne property
manager that, to be operative all the spa “needed
was water” (and
chemical balancing), and that she specifically asked about the return of the spa
at the end of the tenancy
and was told that it could be returned empty of water
since that was the spa’s current condition (ie at the commencement of
Morgan cleaned the spa (which now included leaves, rainwater and some sludge),
and added clean water and turned it on – but
the spa was faulty. Ms Morgan
believed that the pump may be broken, and requested that Mr Hashemi rectify the
email to Ms Morgan dated 18 October 2022, Raine & Horne confirmed that
“unfortunately the spa has been deemed unfunctional”
as per advice
from a pool contractor.
to the accepted record in the entry condition report, the spa had a faulty
filter. It was replaced on 16 November 2022,
at which time the spa was filled
with clean water and chemically balanced (at a cost to Ms Hashemi of
Accordingly,
pursuant to
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
, I determine
that the spa filter was damaged and not working at the commencement of the
tenancy. The contrary record in the accepted
condition report is factually
incorrect, and has no deeming
8 November 2022 Ms Morgan requested a reduction in rent “for the time
since moving in until the spa situation is rectified”.
Mr Hashemi did not
agree to this request, and on 11 November 2022 Ms Morgan foreshadowed that
compensation may be claimed in the
Tribunal (as considered
the end of the tenancy Ms Morgan arranged for Mr Hendriks to pump the water out
of the spa, this being its state at the commencement
of the lease. In doing so
Ms Morgan relied on the advice of Raine & Horne’s then property
manager that it was appropriate
to empty the spa, and that doing so would fulfil
her obligations under the lease.
emptied spa was left in a clean state, that is without leaves as at the start of
the tenancy (ie 28 September 2022) or tadpoles
and sludge as observed
(and cleaned) by Ms Morgan on or about 8 October 2022.
Hashemi claimed the sum of $110.50 as compensation for the cost of refilling and
chemically balancing the spa after the tenancy
turn now to the legislative scheme.
Section 51(2)
Residential
Tenancies Act 1999
provides as a term of the lease that a tenant must return
the premises at the end of the tenancy “in a reasonable state of
(s 51(2)(a))
, and “in a reasonably clean condition”
provides that in deciding this question it is necessary to consider the
condition of the premises at the start of a tenancy as deemed
by an entry
condition report.
does not mandate that a tenant must, or may, leave the premises (or
part thereof) in the same condition as deemed by an entry condition
report. The
deemed entry condition is simply one consideration which must be taken into
account in deciding whether a tenant has
returned premises “in a
reasonable state of repair” and “in a reasonably clean
condition” as required by
circumstances are, to a degree, analogous to where a landlord modifies a
premises during a tenancy, for example by replacing a
stove, renovating an
existing deck, or installing a new deck or a new pool (when one did not
previously exist).
each case the entry condition report would say nothing about these items,
because they either did not exist (ie the stove, new deck, or new pool) or
did not exist
in the same form (the renovated deck) at the start of the
plainly does not contemplate that a landlord may formally
prepare a report about installations or renovations which occurred during
Nonetheless
a tenant would still be required to maintain such installations or renovations
during a tenancy “in a reasonable
state of repair” and “in a
reasonably clean condition”, and to return the property to the landlord in
that condition
at the end of the
That question would be
decided only by reference to the evidence; the entry condition of the
installations or renovations would not
be recorded, or deemed, by an accepted
a tenant could not at the end of the tenancy remove such installations or
renovations, on the basis that
meant that the premises must or could
be returned to the landlord in its original state. And
apply to deem that the tenant had complied with his or her obligations about
cleanliness and damage regarding such installations
or renovations because there
was no condition report about
that provision would not
apply because the legislative scheme about condition reports would not be
engaged in this circumstance.
Mr Hashemi repaired pre-existing damage to the spa, and added chemically
balanced water, during the tenancy. In my view, if the
spa had been returned
filled with chemically balanced water at the end of the tenancy, Ms Morgan would
have complied with her obligations
and (b). The spa would have
been returned “in a reasonable state of repair”, and “in a
reasonably clean condition”,
which in fact is how Ms Morgan maintained the
spa (once it was operative) during the tenancy – as demonstrated by four
inspection reports.
that is not the question which falls for consideration on the facts of this
matter. Ms Morgan relied on a representation given
by the then Raine & Horne
property manager at the start of the tenancy to the effect that the spa could be
emptied of water at
the end of the lease – albeit that it was used by Ms
Morgan during the tenancy. The representation was given in circumstances
Ms Morgan expressly asked for advice on this issue.
these circumstances, in my view, Ms Morgan complied with her obligations under
and (b). The spa was returned in a “reasonable state of
repair” and in a “reasonably clean condition”, taking
account its state at the commencement of the tenancy on the express advice given
to Ms Morgan by the landlord’s agent
at that time.
finding means that Mr Hashemi’s claim for compensation for the filling and
chemically balancing the spa must fail.
Ms Morgan’s
cross-claim: inoperative spa (3 October to 16 November 2022)
detailed above, the spa was inoperative due to a faulty filter from
commencement of the lease 3 October 2022 to 16 November 2022 when it
rectified. This is a period of six weeks and two days (ie 44 days).
Morgan sought a reduction of the rent at the time as compensation, but this was
not agreed. According to Mr Hendricks, Ms Morgan
suggested that it would be
appropriate that her rent be reduced by $50.00 per
This equates to an 8.33%
reduction in the weekly rent.
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
provides that a landlord must
ensure that a residential premises is “in a reasonable state of repair
when a tenant enters into
occupation”, and “must maintain the
premises ... in a reasonable state of repair, having regard to their age,
and prospective life”.
pursuant to
, a landlord does not breach an obligation in
he or she “has notice of the defect requiring repair” and
“fails to act with reasonable diligence to have
is no evidence that Mr Hashemi was apprised that the spa filter was faulty prior
to the commencement of the tenancy. Rather,
Mr Hashemi said that he left the spa
empty because he expected it would be “costly” for him if it was
operative (ie with
ongoing maintenance costs from time to
is evident from correspondence between Ms Morgan and Raine & Horne that
there was initially some misunderstanding by Mr Hashemi
as to whether the lease
included an operating spa, which may reflect some inexperience on his part as to
the operation of the legislative
scheme. In that respect, prior to the tenancy,
Mr Hashemi resided at the premises and had not previously rented
misunderstanding was clarified particularly with Raine & Horne’s
assistance, and Mr Hashemi accepted (in his words
after a “few
weeks”) that he was obliged to provide an operating
Mr Hashemi emphasised that
his object was to comply with the legislative scheme, and in that context to be
the tenant.
& Horne timeously engaged a pool contractor on 10 October 2022 (ie one week
after the start of the lease), and received
a report on 18 October 2022 that the
pool was “deemed unfunctional” due to the faulty filter. There was
then some delay
until 10 November 2022 (a period of almost three weeks),
when Mr Hashemi approved a different pool contractor to rectify the fault.
rectification occurred six days later on
16 November 2022.
my view, exercising reasonable diligence, the faulty filter and inoperative spa
ought to have been rectified by the last week of
October 2022, that is about
three weeks earlier than occurred. This delay arose because it took a “few
weeks” to clarify
Mr Hashemi’s misunderstanding about the
legislative scheme. It is not reasonable that Ms Morgan
be denied her
contractual right to enjoy the spa while that misunderstanding was
Accordingly
I find that Ms Morgan is entitled to compensation for a period of three weeks in
relation to the faulty filter and inoperative
spa. Bearing in mind that
Darwin’s humidity commences in October, I accept her submission that
compensation of $50.00 per week
for breach of contract is appropriate.
order below that Mr Hashemi pay the total sum of $150.00 to Ms Morgan as
compensation for the inoperative spa.
order as follows:
application by the applicant, Sayed Hashemi, for compensation from the
respondent, Amber Morgan, is dismissed.
applicant shall return the security deposit of $2,400.00 to the respondent by
close of business on 27 March 2025.
applicant shall pay the sum of $150.00 to the respondent as compensation for the
faulty and inoperative spa.
5 March 2025
TRIBUNAL MEMBER
As articulated by Mitch Elton,
Raine & Horne Property Development Manager, at the hearing (audio of hearing
~9 min 12 sec to
13 min 40 sec). The application incorrectly identified the
unpaid rent as $257.14 – rather than $857.14 (hearing book (
noting that the sum of $857.14 was accurately stated in the form RT08 Notice of
Landlord’s Intention to Retain Security
Deposit (HB 195). The application
estimated the cost of a spa service as $180.00 (cf $110.50), and also claimed
compensation to steam
clean carpets ($572.00) and remove wall hooks and a
bracket (for a mounted television) (quoted as $250.00), but the latter two
were not pursued (Ms Morgan attended to these tasks in April 2024).
Consequently the original total claim of $3,622.14 reduced to
Amended form 2
response filed on 17 July 2024 (HB
Ms Morgan’s text
message to Raine & Horne on 8 November 2022 (HB
Ms Morgan’s emails
to Raine & Horne dated 28 November and 1 December 2023 (HB 600 to
Tenant rental history (HB
Form RT05 Notice of
Intention to Terminate Tenancy Agreement dated 29 January 2024 (HB 192).
Notwithstanding this notice, Raine &
Horne subsequently suggested by email
dated 13 February 2024 that Ms Morgan needed to “provide 14 days notice to
us to vacate
the property on 31/03/24”; this was an inadvertent error
because pursuant to
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
landlord had already terminated the lease from that date (HB
The four routine
inspection reports were dated 25 January 2023 (HB 130 ff), 11 May 2023 (HB 143
ff), 29 August 2023 (HB 157 ff),
28 November 2023 (HB 171). With minor
and explicable exceptions (eg where illness precluded spa cleaning) they
recorded that the
premises was “being maintained”, was
“satisfactory”, and was “clean and tidy”. The
photographs
enclosed with the reports confirm that was the
Ms Morgan’s
evidence (audio of hearing ~22 min 9 sec ff). Good Friday was also a public
holiday, but presumably Ms Morgan’s
reference to “Friday”
should be taken as referring to the preceding business day for which the Raine
& Horne office
was open – ie Thursday 28 March
Ideally this arrangement
would have been recorded in writing so as to preclude future disputes (eg in a
subsequent email or text
message), however that commonly may not occur for
cooperative arrangements of this
evidence (audio of hearing ~25 min 0
Mr Hendriks’
evidence (audio of hearing ~28 min 33 sec
Ms Morgan’s
evidence (audio of hearing ~28 min 24
HB 216. Ms Andrews
also emailed the exit condition report to Ms Morgan on 9 April 2024 (HB
Section 120
that the law of contract about mitigation of loss applies to a breach of a
residential lease. See
Richardson v Crawford; Crawford
2022-03402-CT 12 May 2023 (unpublished) at [56] to [62], in which I
discussed the effect of
HB 647. Some confusion
seems to have arisen since the agent arranged for further steam cleaning of the
carpets at a cost of $572.00
on or about 11 April 2024 (HB 212), with
compensation for that sum originally claimed in this proceeding (see application
That and other claims were not pursued at the
Mr Hashemi saw Mr
Hendriks’ utility vehicle in the driveway on Saturday 6 April 2024,
and in case of assistance took a photograph,
but noting that Mr Hendriks agreed
he was present (audio of hearing ~29 min 59 sec
Ms Tee’s email to
Ms Morgan dated 4 April 2024 (HB 217). By the time of the hearing this was
the only outstanding issue insofar
as the cleanliness or condition of the
premises was concerned.
Morgan’s evidence (audio of hearing ~38 min 6 sec). On Wednesday 10 April
2024, when returning the keys to the Raine &
Horne office, Ms Morgan also
recorded in handwriting on the pro forma ‘Vacate Key Return
Envelope’ that she “Wasn't
advised about this” inspection
– ie the further inspection on Monday 8 April 2024 (HB 213). (The pro
forma question to
which Ms Morgan responded in fact concerned the “final
inspection” on Wednesday 3 April 2024 which Ms Morgan and Mr Hendriks
attended, but Ms Morgan explained that her handwritten entry related to the
further inspection on 8 April 2024 which she did not
Ms Morgan and Raine
& Horne collaborated about rectification and the return of the keys. Ms
Morgan’s understanding, when
the further inspection was scheduled for
Friday 5 April 2024, was that she should “return the keys directly to
Horne the following week” (Ms Morgan’s timeline
entitled ‘Lease Expiry’ (HB 620)). Ms Andrews recorded in
email to Ms Morgan dated 10 April 2024 (2.18 pm) that the “Tenant has
indicated that keys to the property will be returned
before close of business
10/04/2024” (HB 214).
Phoenix v Guangyue Chen
[2020] NSWCATAP 255
Phoenix v Guangyue
[2020] NSWCATAP 255
See also the
discussion in
Taylor v Reilly
[2021] NSWCATCD 74
This question,
including whether such a licence was granted, must be considered objectively
from the perspective of a hypothetical
reasonable observer who is apprised of
the circumstances; it is not determined by the subjective views of either
This issue only
arises if, contrary to my factual finding above, Ms Morgan did not deliver
vacant possession on Monday 1 April 2024
but instead was holding over in
possession of the premises until the exit
inspection.
The lease itself
does not identify any ladders (or other chattels) as being part of the premises
which was leased. In that respect
the pro forma used for the lease (published by
the Real Estate Institute Northern Territory) contemplates that
“additional
matters” such as “furniture provided” may be
listed in Part A where the address is identified (HB 23). A
“Shed” and “Store room” were
confirmed as part of the “residential premises”, but their contents
(eg a lawnmower and two soccer balls) were not listed, and the four ladders also
were not listed. Clause 1 of Part B of the lease
contemplates the provision of
an entry condition report which does refer to all of those items; it was
prepared by Raine & Horne
on 28 September 2022 (HB 126), being the date on
which Ms Morgan signed the lease (HB 37).
If, contrariwise, the ladders were
not part of the lease, Ms Morgan possessed the ladders as a gratuitous or
involuntary bailee (without
reward), and had a duty only to maintain them in the
same condition as when received (and to return the chattels on request). Here
that condition was that the ladders were stored outside and unsecured in the
backyard of the premises. Ms Morgan did not breach that
duty. An involuntary
bailee may also return the property to the owner, and thus end the bailment
(since possession has ended). See
Ross v Lord & Lord
[2021] NTCAT 29
Yogi v Trans Territory Refrigerated Pty Ltd
NTCAT No 2023-01527-CT 21
December 2023 (unpublished) for a discussion of the law of
HB 51, 52, 74
(10th to 12th photographs, shown through the louvred dining room window), 119
(6th photograph).
Hashemi’s evidence (audio of hearing ~49 min 0
Mr Hendriks’
statement filed on 17 July 2024 (HB 618). The entry condition report confirms
that there were no such
Mr Hendriks also said
that the agent suggested that the ladders be used “to remove the upper
story screens for cleaning”,
but Mr Hendriks said that they were
“not tall enough” and that “this was not a safe or necessary
(Whether the extendable green ladder referred to by Mr Hashemi,
if present, was “tall enough” for this task, was not
explored at the
hearing.) Instead Mr Hendriks cleaned the louvres from inside the premises, and
hosed them from the outside
Hashemi’s evidence (audio of hearing ~47 min 50 sec ff). Mr Hashemi
purchased the ladders two or three years ago, including
for work purposes. Ms
Morgan suggested by reference to published prices from the Bunnings Warehouse
that the two ladders, if new,
were respectively worth $445.50 and $150.00
– totalling $595.50 (HB 621). Mr Hashemi responded that the ladders were
quality and thus more expensive (estimated as $2,124.00), being made of
fibreglass and manufactured by the firm Bailey Ladders (audio
of hearing ~1 hr
22 min 0 sec). A perusal of the website of the Bunnings Warehouse confirms
Mr Hashemi’s evidence as to the
cost of such
HB 74 (10th to 12th
photographs, shown through the louvred dining room
HB 542 (3rd
photograph). The other two photographs on that page show gas bottles in the
carport, at least four of which belong to
Mr Hashemi (the large gas bottle may
supply the stove and be owned by a utility
s 112(3)(b)
and cl 31.1(d), the statute and the lease do not expressly provide in relation
to missing ancillary property.
Section 51(1)
and (2) of the
Residential
Tenancies Act 1999
provide that a tenant must maintain the premises and
ancillary property in a “reasonable state of repair” and in a
“reasonably
clean condition”, and “must not intentionally or
negligently cause or permit damage to the premises or ancillary property”
(corresponding lease provisions are to the same effect). However these
provisions are not directed at missing ancillary
See text messages
between Ms Morgan and Raine & Horne (HB 621 to
HB 23. Notwithstanding
that the term “premises” is used in Part A of the pro forma, the
provisions in Part B predominantly
uses the undefined term
“Property” to identify land and other property which is subject to
the lease. In that respect
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
distinguishes between “residential premises” and “ancillary
property” (see definitions in
The definition of “ancillary
property” includes both “fixtures” and “chattels”.
It is not entirely
clear why this definition includes “fixtures”,
since conceptually fixtures are legally part of the land or premises –
are part of leased land unless stated otherwise. No issue arises about that
aspect of the definition in this proceeding. (I note
that the meaning of the
expression “ancillary property” was discussed by President Bruxner
Shepherd & Shepherd v Metcalf
[2016] NTCAT 147
to [58], albeit in a different
HB 53, 124 to
HB 53 and 129. Rainwater
is not visible in the agent’s photographs of 28 September 2022, but is
apparent in Ms Morgan’s
photographs of 8 October 2022. Ms Morgan
confirmed that there was rainfall between those
Properly construed, the
lease included an operating spa. It was open to the landlord to exclude an
operating spa from the lease (eg
by specifying that the empty spa could be used
but must be maintained at the tenant’s expense), but that was not the case
Ms Morgan’s
evidence (audio of hearing ~1 hr 39 min 19 sec ff). Ms Morgan’s advice was
formalised by 10 October 2022
(see Raine & Horne’s email to her on
that date (HB 627)).
Morgan’s evidence (audio of hearing ~1 hr 40 min 5
Ms Morgan’s
evidence (audio of hearing ~1 hr 27 min 7
HB 588 to 589. Mr
Hashemi also incurred an earlier cost of $110.50 for a pool service (invoiced on
2 November 2022 from a different
contractor), which presumably
identified that the filter was
As stated above, in
a different line item Ms Morgan rejected the agent’s record in the entry
condition report that the spa
was clean, undamaged and working. Plainly it was
not working given the faulty filter, however Ms Morgan had no way of knowing
(since the spa was empty). Thus her response was directed at uncleanliness
and the existence of damaged tiles and slate. The better
view, in these
circumstances, is that the report does not deem that the spa was working.
However, to the extent that there may be
doubt about this (ie by implication
from the focus of the response), to the extent required I also determine that
the spa was not
working at the start of the
Text messages
between Ms Morgan and Raine & Horne
Ms Elton identified
the sum of $110.50 at the hearing (audio of hearing ~13 min 23 sec). It appears
that in doing so Ms Elton relied
on an old invoice for that sum dated 2 November
2022 (HB 590), rather than a current invoice for a spa service at the end of the
tenancy in April 2024. The latter was not filed. Given my finding herein that Ms
Morgan is not liable to pay compensation for this
cost, I have not sought
clarification of the actual cost incurred for the spa service (ie a current
invoice). In that respect Mr
Hashemi expressed concern that the filter was
“full of sludge” and not working properly at the end of the tenancy,
was presumably rectified by the spa service (audio of hearing ~1 hr 54 min
50 sec). However, if so, there is no evidence before the
Tribunal that such
build up of sludge in the filter was not “reasonable wear and tear”,
particularly given Ms Morgan’s
observation of sludge at the start of
the tenancy.
As distinct
from the “continuation of a tenancy” after renovations or new
installations have occurred where, pursuant
Residential
Tenancies Act 1999
, a further entry (or ingoing) condition report may be
As required by
and (c), and
(2)(a) and (b) of the
Residential Tenancies Act
As discussed by
President Bruxner in
Shepherd & Shepherd v Metcalf
Hendriks’ statement filed on 17 July 2024 (HB
Mr Hashemi’s
evidence (audio of hearing ~1 hr 51 min 57 sec
HB 624, and 627 to 630.
I apprehend that, with hindsight, the lease may have been drafted differently
vis-à-vis the spa if
Mr Hashemi had appreciated the legal effect of the
Mr Hashemi’s
evidence (audio of hearing ~1 hr 51 min 57 sec
See email and text
message correspondence at HB 625, 627 and 628.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (36 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter