URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTSC/2025/44.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:22:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Northern Territory of Australia v Bellamack Pty Ltd [2025] NTSC 44 (24 July 2025)
Northern Territory of Australia v Bellamack Pty Ltd
PARTIES: NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
BELLAMACK PTY LTD
(ACN 135 043 033)
TITLE OF COURT: SUPREME COURT OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: 2023-00175-SC
DELIVERED: 24 July 2025
HEARING DATE: 24 February 2025
JUDGMENT OF: Smyth A/AsJ
CATCHWORDS:
Application to Strike Out Pleading – No Reasonable Cause of Action
Pleaded – Breach of Contract – No material facts
pleaded linking
breaches of contract to caused loss – Application dismissed
Application to Strike Out Pleading – Concurrent Application to Amend
Pleadings– Amendments made without leave of Court
– Abuse of Process
– Amendment seeking to withdraw admission made in pleading –
Application to strike out dismissed
and leave to amend granted
Supreme Court Rules 1987
(NT) r 23.02(a), r 23.02(d), r 23.04(2)
A v Ipec Australia Ltd and Crew
[1973] VicRp 4
[1973] VR 39
Amcor Pty Ltd Trading
as A.P.M Containers v Victoria Valley Beef Pty Ltd & Anor
[1995] NTSC
Bellgrove v Eldrige
[1954] HCA 36
(1954) 90 CLR 613
Berno v Green’s Steel
Constructions Pty Ltd
[1991] NTSC 4
Bond Corporation Pty Ltd v Thiess
Contractors Pty Ltd
[1987] FCA 84
(1987) 71 ALR 615
Bulmer v Oakey Co-op Dairy Co
[1908] St R Qd 216
Darcy v Connolly
[1923] WALawRp 24
(1924) 26 WALR 93
Cesare v Deluxe Motors Pty Ltd
(1996) 67 SASR 28
Director of War Service
(1968) Qd R 275
Fancourt v Mercantile Credits Ltd
(1983) 154 CLR 87
Golding v Wharton Saltworks
[1876] UKLawRpKQB 41
(1876) 1 QBD 374
Frosthollow Pty Ltd
[2014] VSC 77
Karlovsky v Q-Built Constructions
[2006] NTMC 93
Knowles v Roberts
[1888] UKLawRpCh 42
(1888) 38 Ch D 263
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal
[1990] HCA 31
(1990) 170 CLR 70
Liddle v North
Australian Aboriginal Legal Aid Service Inc
[1993] NTSC 78
Accidents (Compensation) Commission v Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Limited
[2023] NTSC 65
Northern Territory of Australia v Bellamack
[2024] NTSC 66
Northern Territory of Australia v John Holland
Pty Ltd & Ors
[2008] NTSC 4
Otter Gold NL v Barcon Pty Ltd &
[2000] NTSC 65
Robinson v Harman
[1848] EngR 135
(1848) 1 Exch 850
Carver Pty Ltd v SAS Trustee Corporation
[2005] NSWCA 462
Sherrington v
Independent Commissioner Against Corruption (NT) & Anor
[2025] NTSC 27
Singleton v. John Fairfax & Sons Ltd
[1982] 2 NSWLR 38
Aviation v Electrum Finance Pty Ltd
(1984) 56 ALR 716
Tabcorp Holdings
Ltd v Bowen Investments Pty Ltd
(2009) 236 CLR 272
Tropicus Orchids
Flowers and Foliage Pty Ltd v Territory Insurance Office
[1995] NTSC 131
UI International Pty Ltd v Interworks Architects Pty Ltd & Ors
UI International v Interworks Architects P/L & Ors
UI International Pty Ltd v. Interworks Architects Pty Ltd & Ors
[2007] QSC 96
UI International Pty Ltd v Interworks Architects Pty Ltd
[2007] QCA 402
(2008) 2 Qd R 158
Webster v Lampard
[1993] HCA 57
(1993) 177 CLR 598
Management Ltd v Chocolate Factory Apartments Ltd
[2007] NSWCA 253
Grant on Civil Procedure
, Presidian Legal Publications, paragraph
Heydon on Contracts
, (Sydney, Thomson Reuters, 2019)
REPRESENTATION:
Plaintiff: P Bick KC with T Silvester
Defendant: D Robinson SC
Solicitors:
Plaintiff: HWL Ebsworth Lawyers
Defendant: Clayton Utz followed by MCS Wolf Pty Ltd
Judgment category classification: B
Judgment ID Number: Smy2506
Number of pages: 39
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Northern Territory of Australia v Bellamack
[2025] NTSC
No. 2023-00175-SC
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
BELLAMACK PTY LTD
(ACN 135 043 033)
CORAM: SMYTH A/AsJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 24 July 2025)
Defendant makes application by summons filed 23 October 2024. In turn the
Plaintiff makes application by summons filed 25
November 2024.
[2] By summons
filed 23 October 2024 the Defendant relevantly seeks the following orders:
rule 23.02(a)
or (d), paragraph [23] of the second amended statement of claim
filed 4 October 2024 including the particulars thereto be struck
plaintiff not be granted further leave to amend paragraph [23] of the second
amended statement of claim filed 4 October 2024.
[6] and [19] of the second amended statement of claim filed 4 October 2024 be
struck out and in lieu thereof reinstate
paragraphs [6] and [19] of the amended
statement of claim filed 21 June 2023.
[3] By summons
filed 25 November 2024 the Plaintiff seeks the following:
Plaintiff be granted leave to amend its pleading in accordance with paragraphs
4(a), 6(b), 14(b), 17(c)(i), 19 and 19(a) of the
Second Amended Statement of
Claim filed 4 October 2024.
[4] There are
essentially two arguments arising in this proceeding:
(1) Issues relating to the strike out of paragraph [23] of the Second Amended
Statement of Claim (“2ASOC”); and
(2) Issues relating to the purported withdrawal of admissions in paragraphs 6
and 19 of the 2ASOC and various other amendments to
other paragraphs 4(a),
17(c)(i), 13(a)(i)(B) and 14(b).
Preceding Interlocutory Application
[5] It is not
possible to get a full appreciation of what is sought without the context of the
proceeding to date. On 24 January
2023 the Plaintiff filed its Writ and
Statement of Claim. On 21 June 2023 the Plaintiff filed an Amended Statement of
Claim (“ASOC”).
On 12 July 2023 the Defendant filed a summons for
summary judgment of the whole of the claim, and alternatively in respect to
parts of the ASOC including paragraph [23] of the ASOC to be struck out.
On 3 November 2023 an application was heard by Huntingford
decision delivered on 24 August 2024, dismissing the summary judgment
application, and ordering paragraph [23] of the ASOC
to be struck out, but
granting leave to file a further Amended Statement of Claim. On 4 October 2024
the Plaintiff filed a 2ASOC
which is the subject of these
applications.
Factual Background to the Proceeding
[6] The factual
background to the substantive proceeding is set out in the judgment of
Huntingford J, particularly at paragraphs [4]
As it was before Huntingford
J, the essential facts were not in dispute for the purposes of these
applications. The factual background
is rather complex and I am assisted by
adopting the factual findings of Huntingford J which are set out in full as
[4] Sometime before 1 June 2009, the Territory decided to
develop a suburban subdivision on Crown land in Palmerston, to be known
suburb of Bellamack. The Territory was the registered proprietor of the land
which was referred to as the “lease area”.
There was a call for
expressions of interest for proponents to develop the lease area and a
competitive selection process was conducted.
Bellamack was selected as the
preferred proponent.
[5] On 1 June 2009, the Territory and Bellamack entered into a development
agreement. The scheme of the development agreement was
that Bellamack was
initially granted a Crown lease over the area of land to be developed, subject
to the terms and conditions in
the development agreement and the lease.
[6] As part of its obligations under the development agreement
(developer’s works) Bellamack was required to develop, inter
residential housing blocks in the lease area, together with a number of house
and land packages (affordable homes) which were
to be sold to qualified
low-income consumers (eligible purchasers).
[7] In accordance with the development agreement, Bellamack was to complete
the subdivision works in stages over six years. As each
stage was practically
complete, areas of the Crown lease were converted into titles to the developed
lots registered in the name
of Bellamack. As the development went on, some lots
were further subdivided and additional titles were issued. Bellamack then sold
the titled lots to third parties (purchasers) and remitted a percentage of the
sale price of each lot to the Territory upon settlement.
After issue of a
certificate of title, and pending the sale of each lot, the Territory was
entitled to register a caveat to protect
its interest. The caveat on each lot
was removed upon completion of sale to a purchaser.
[8] The consideration payable to Bellamack is set out in special condition 2
of schedule 4 of the development agreement. In practical
Bellamack’s payment came from monies received on the sale of the lots.
The development agreement also stipulated that
the minimum consideration payable
to Bellamack upon completion of all lots was to be $14,450,000.
[9] It is not in dispute that, after the sale of each lot had taken place,
and the amount payable under the development agreement
had been paid, the
Territory had no ongoing proprietary or beneficial interest in the land the
subject of a sold lot.
[10] Bellamack was obliged, in accordance with clause 3 of schedule 4 of the
development agreement, to allocate 67 lots as “affordable
allotments”. The location of those allotments was required to be approved
by the Territory. Bellamack was also obliged to make
available to eligible
purchasers the maximum number of affordable homes capable of being constructed
on the affordable allotments,
which was said to be between 77 and 114 houses. An
eligible purchaser is defined in the development agreement as “a purchaser
determined by the Territory (in its absolute discretion) who has pre-approval
for finance to purchase an Affordable Allotment and
Affordable Home under this
special condition”.
[11] The Territory’s obligation in relation to identification of
eligible purchasers was set out in the development agreement
in these terms:
The Territory must at all times during the Term make its best endeavours to
nominate and refer to the Developer a sufficient number
of Eligible Purchasers
to enable the Developer to fulfil its obligations under this special condition
[12] That clause is followed by clause 3.4 which provides, in summary, that
if an affordable lot or home was unsold after three months
from issue of the
title, Bellamack was required to offer it to the Territory for purchase on the
same terms as the property would
have been sold to an eligible purchaser. If the
Territory failed or refused to purchase the property, Bellamack could then offer
it for sale on the open market at market price.
[13] Bellamack’s obligations under the development agreement as pleaded
in the ASOC also included:
indemnity to the Territory in relation to certain stipulated liabilities,
including for any loss or damage to any property caused
by any errors,
omissions, faulty workmanship or any negligent act or omission or wilful
misconduct of Bellamack or its subcontractors
and any costs (on a solicitor and
own client basis, and whether incurred by or awarded against the Territory) that
the Territory
may sustain or incur as a result (clause 8.2);
carry out the work in a proper and workmanlike manner and in accordance with the
development agreement (clause 11.2(b));
all times during the construction of the developer’s works, to ensure that
they complied with the
Building Act 1993
Building Act
Building Regulations and/or Building Code of Australia (the Code) (clause
11.2(c)(ii));
make affordable homes, constructed to comply with the Code, available to the
eligible purchasers (schedule 4 special conditions
3.1(b) and (c), 3.3 and
take all steps reasonably necessary or appropriate to ensure that the affordable
manner (Schedule 4 special
condition 3.14); and
design and construct the affordable homes in accordance with the requirements of
Building Act
(including obtaining building certification); carry out all
works in accordance with the building permit; and ensure the affordable
comply with and meet the Code and other relevant standards, including the then
current Code requirements for the tropical cyclone
region (Annexure F
[14] In 2012, by separate contract, Bellamack sub-contracted
that part of its obligations under the development agreement which related
construction of the 18 houses the subject of this proceeding to San Industries
Pty Ltd trading as Titan Building Systems (San
Industries). The houses were
constructed between 2012 and 2014. San Industries is now insolvent.
[15] Ten of the 18 homes built by San Industries were subject to the
compulsory home warranty protection scheme known as the Home
Certification Fund (HBCF) then in place in the Northern Territory. The HBCF was
the scheme of insurance approved by the
Director of Building Control pursuant to
Building Act
at the relevant time. The HBCF was financed
largely by the Territory, with some contribution through premiums paid by
builders and
owners. Initially, the HBCF was managed by the Territory Insurance
Office on behalf of the Territory.
[16] The remainder of the houses built by San Industries were covered by the
Master Builders Association Fidelity Fund Scheme (MBA
Fidelity Fund) insurance
arrangement which replaced the HBCF scheme as the approved insurance pursuant to
Building Act
from 1 January 2013.
[17] In the period from about 2013 to 2014, Bellamack sold 17 of the
affordable homes constructed by San Industries to eligible purchasers
to individual contracts of sale between it and the relevant purchaser(s) (home
owners). Bellamack retained ownership of
one lot on which San Industries had
constructed a house (house 9) and made the relevant payment to the Territory in
accordance with
the development agreement.
[18] From about 2015, serious construction defects became apparent in all of
the houses constructed by San Industries. In about July
2015 Bellamack wrote to
the purchasers of the houses acknowledging the defects, and stating that it had
written to San Industries
to rectify the faults and had engaged a structural
engineer. The defects were not rectified. In 2019 Bellamack commenced
proceedings
against San Industries claiming damages in respect of the defects in
the houses.
[19] The owners of each of the ten houses covered by the HBCF scheme
(including Bellamack in relation to house 9) have made a claim
under that scheme
for rectification of defects. The Territory has, so far, assessed that the HBCF
scheme covers all of the claims,
other than that made by Bellamack which remains
outstanding. On the basis that none of the houses could be economically
the Territory has provided purchasers with an option to either rebuild
their homes or sell them to the Territory. As a result, six
of the nine lots
were purchased by the Territory and three houses were rebuilt. The claim in
relation to the property owned by Bellamack
has not been finalised.
[20] The eight houses insured under the MBA Fidelity Fund scheme have not
been purchased or rebuilt at the expense of the Territory.
[21] For the purpose of this application, Bellamack asks the Court to assume
that the 18 affordable homes built by San Industries
did not meet the
contractual definition and specifications of an affordable home prescribed by
the development agreement in accordance
with clauses 3.3 and 3.14 of the special
conditions and clauses 1.2 and 2.3 of Annexure F (functional design guidelines).
The obvious
consequence is that for the purpose of this application it is
assumed that Bellamack breached its contract with the Territory. Bellamack
not, however, admit the breach of the development agreement for the purpose of
the proceeding generally.
Issues in respect to Paragraph 23 of the Statement of Claim
[7] Application
is brought pursuant to Rule 23.02(a) or (d) which
23.02 Striking out pleading
Where an endorsement of claim on a writ or originating motion or a pleading
or a part of an endorsement of claim or pleading:
(a) does not disclose a cause of action or defence;
(b) is scandalous, frivolous or vexatious;
(c) may prejudice, embarrass or delay the fair trial of the proceeding; or
(d) is otherwise an abuse of the process of the Court,
the Court may order that the whole or part of the endorsement or pleading be
struck out or amended.
[8] As was the
case in the preceding interlocutory application, there was no substantial
argument in respect to paragraph [23] of
the 2ASOC being an abuse of process of
the Court, and argument centred on whether the relevant pleading disclosed a
cause of action
[9] Rule 23.02
supports the underlying proper purpose of pleadings, which were aptly expressed
by Angel J in
Northern Territory of Australia v John Holland Pty Ltd &
(a) to define with clarity the issues which are in dispute between the parties
and fall to be decided by the court;
(b) to require each party to give fair and proper notice to the other of the
case to be met to enable the opponent to frame and prepare
the opponent’s
own case for trial;
(c) to inform the court what are the precise matters in issue between the
parties which alone the court may determine, since they
set the limits of the
action which may not be extended without due amendment properly made, and
(d) not only to provide a brief summary of the case of each party, which is
readily available for reference, and from which the nature
of the claim and
defence may be easily apprehended, but also to constitute a permanent record of
the issues and questions raised
in the action and decided therein so as to
prevent future litigation upon matters already adjudicated upon between the
or those privy to them.
The general rules of pleading are contained in Order 13
Supreme Court Rules
O 13.02(1)(a) provides:
“A pleading shall ... contain in a summary form a statement of all the
materials facts on which the party relies but not the
evidence by which those
facts are to be proved.”
Material facts are those necessary to formulate a complete cause of action.
The Statement of Claim must state with sufficient clarity
the case that must be
met. Material allegations of fact are not to be expressed in terms of great
generality. They must inform the
defendants of the case they must meet and set
it out with particularity sufficient to enable any eventual trial to be
conducted fairly
to all parties. As James LJ said in Davy v Garrett
[1878] UKLawRpCh 8
(1878) 7 Ch
“... a defendant may claim ex debito justitiae to have the
plaintiff’s case presented in an intelligible form, so that
he may not be
embarrassed in meeting it ...”
A defendant is entitled to have a plaintiff tied down to a clearly pleaded
case so as not to be able to spring a new case on the defendant
at trial. A
plaintiff must plead its case with clarity sufficient to preclude conjecture as
to what the case being made against a
defendant might be. The defining of the
issues in litigation is required from an early stage because discovery and other
interlocutory
procedures and steps necessary to deal with an opposing case must
be conducted within a known framework. Apart from questions of
fairness, properly pleaded cases set the arena for the eventual trial and
interlocutory processes preceding trial and
assist the court by ensuring that
the task of managing interlocutory processes and of supervising the conduct of
the trial itself
are conducted in circumstances where the nature and ambit of
the dispute between the parties is clear and the issues for decision
defined. The general rule is that relief is confined to that available on the
pleadings. This is a basic requirement of procedural
Commerciale SA, En Liquidation v Akhil Holdings Pty Ltd
(1990) 169 CLR 279
In a claim for breach of contract the material facts which must be pleaded
(1) the term of the contract alleged to have been breached;
(2) the nature of the breach alleged;
(3) the particular means by which the breach is alleged to have occurred;
(4) the details of any special or consequential damage claimed, and
(5) the facts which establish the necessary causal link between breach and
, as there is in this case, there was an issue in respect to the
pleadings, and in particular an argument that the plaintiff had failed
the material facts which established the necessary causal link between breach of
contract and damage.
[11] In respect
Rule 23.02(a)
, the reference to a statement of claim or pleading not
disclosing a cause of action is a reference to a reasonable cause of action.
such, the test to be applied is similar to that which applies to an application
for summary judgment. The test for a failure
to disclose a cause of action on
the strike out application was the “no reasonable prospects of
success” test.
In accordance
Rule 23.04(2)
, a decision in relation to a strike out application is based
only upon the wording of the pleading. Notwithstanding the tender of
evidence in support of the
application,
in respect to
affidavit evidence I note
Rule 23.04(2)
application under
no evidence shall be admissible on the question
whether an endorsement of claim or pleading offends against that rule.
[12] I therefore
have not taken affidavit material into account, certainly in respect to the
issue concerning paragraph [23] of the
2ASOC. There is commentary that, for the
purposes of whether pleadings constitute an abuse of process, evidence
surrounding that
pleading must be provided to the court to allow it to make an
informed decision.
[13] The power
to strike out or compel amendment of a pleading is
discretionary.
There is a heavy
onus to warrant exercise of the power under
, it should be exercised
with caution, especially where it appears there is a real question to be
The court will not make
an order where the pleading raises a debatable point of
Defendant’s submissions
[14] It was the
Defendant’s position that the central issue was whether the Plaintiff had
properly re-pleaded its claim for
compensatory damages caused by the alleged
breaches of the Development Agreement. It was the Defendant’s position
Plaintiff had failed to address the fundamental criticisms of this
aspect of the pleading made by Huntingford J and therefore it
had not plead a
tenable cause of action. Huntingford J’s criticisms were highlighted at
paragraphs [58], [61]-63] of her Honour’s
argues that the Territory’s ASOC is defective because it fails to plead
material facts which, if proved, would establish
that Bellamack’s breaches
caused the Territory’s alleged loss by connecting the alleged breaches of
contract to the alleged
losses flowing from the defective construction of the 18
houses, and because it fails to include material facts which are relevant
the categories of loss claimed by the Territory are not too remote.
At paragraph [23] the Territory sets out its alleged losses, namely the cost
of demolishing and rebuilding, or alternatively acquiring,
various houses in the
table set out at [6] of the ASOC.
Leaving aside the HBCF indemnity claims, which are a separate cause of
action, there is no pleading of material facts which link the
loss in paragraph
[23] to the failures of Bellamack in circumstances where it is unclear why the
Territory was required to replace
or rebuild the houses. There is no pleading,
for example, that the contract was entered into for the benefit of the ultimate
or that the Territory has an obligation to them in some other way,
such as misrepresentation/reliance.
The pleading at paragraphs [21] and [22] that the failures of Bellamack meant
that it did not make affordable homes available which
complied with the
requirements of the development agreement does not in my view sufficiently link
the alleged failure with the loss
which is alleged at paragraph [23].
[15] It was
accepted that the Plaintiff may have a claim for nominal damages only but not
compensatory damages. Further, two incontestable
facts were found by
Huntingford J, namely:
(a) There was no suggestion that the Plaintiff was suing on behalf of other
persons to whom it is obliged to pass on any damages
recovered; and
(b) The Plaintiff ceased to have any economic interest recognised by law in the
land that was being developed by the Defendant long
before any Affordable Home
Defendant submitted that the Plaintiff had failed to plead material facts in
paragraph [23] of the 2ASOC, but rather had
recited a conclusion of law in
Robinson v Harman
is premised on the position that the owner requires an economic interest in the
relevant property which requires rectification
by the person who is in breach of
the contract. It was submitted there was no such economic interest in this case.
In short, it was
submitted that there was no pleading of material facts which
would satisfy the issue raised by Huntingford J, namely as to why the
was required to replace or rebuild the houses, that nothing had changed and the
pleading remained similarly defective.
The Defendant submitted that, if the
Plaintiff wished to pay out losses in respect to the homes, it did so as a
Defendant opposed the exercise of any discretion to allow a re-pleading, noting
that, should paragraph [23] of the 2ASOC
be struck out, it would be the third
formal attempt to plead the case. It was submitted that the overwhelming
likelihood was that
no case could be pleaded which accorded with Australian law,
and were it otherwise the defects identified by Huntingford J would
Plaintiff’s submission
[18] It was the
Plaintiff’s position that the issue for determination was whether the
2ASOC containing paragraph [23] plead
an arguable claim for damages for breach
of contract appropriate to send the matter to trial.
Plaintiff submitted that it had properly addressed Huntingford J’s
criticisms in respect to the strike out of paragraph
[23] of the
[20] It was the
Plaintiff’s position that authority establishes that it is entitled, in
respect to a breach of contract, by
an award of damages, to be placed in the
position it would have been if the contract had been performed. It was
submitted that one
form of loss capable of compensation is the value of what a
promisee would have received if the promise had been performed. In this
the Plaintiff submitted the focus should have been on the task of identifying
the loss of the value of what the Plaintiff would
have received if the Defendant
had performed the contract. The Plaintiff says, in determining the loss, it is
not necessary to focus
on the loss of third parties incurred on separate
transactions, being the owners of the Affordable Homes, and that any such loss
is irrelevant to the loss suffered by it. The Defendant, the Plaintiff says,
was required to make available Affordable Homes which
complied with the
requirements of the Development Agreement, which had nothing to do with
obligations owed to third parties. It
follows, as it is alleged the Defendant
did not do that, the task of the Court is to place the Plaintiff, so far as
money can do
it, in the position it would have been had the Development
Agreement been performed, and the Court must quantify the loss of the
what the Plaintiff would have received if the promise by the Defendant had been
performed. It was submitted that, in paragraph
[23] of the 2ASOC, the Plaintiff
pleads that loss and its value, namely the necessary and reasonable cost of
rectification or of
demolishing and rebuilding the Completed Affordable Homes
where that is the reasonable cure.
[21] In respect
to the argument that the Territory could not have suffered a loss because it had
no legal obligation to rectify the
defective building work and any loss was
suffered by purchasers from the Defendant, the Plaintiff argues that that
contention arises
by virtue of Huntingford J’s statement that “it
was unclear why the Territory was required to replace or rebuild the
houses”. The Plaintiff submitted that it did not contend that it was
required to rebuild or replace the houses, but rather
it was entitled to rebuild
or replace the houses to procure what the Defendant was required to do under the
Development Agreement
and by breaching its contractual obligations had failed to
[22] It was the
Plaintiff’s position that, it was not its claim that it held any
proprietary or equitable interest in the land
or it had any obligation to repair
them. Further, it was argued that it mattered not that the land had left the
ownership of the
Plaintiff and become the property of the Defendant and then the
property of third parties.
Plaintiff relied on a number of authorities to the effect that, notwithstanding
that land with a defective building on it
was sold or otherwise ceased to be
owned by a party, that any such sale did not affect the entitlement of the
person, to whom contractual
obligations to build was owed, to compensation for
that breach of the building contract.
Disposition
starting position in respect to consideration of this matter is set out in
Tabcorp Holdings Ltd v Bowen Investments Pty
where the High Court
noted the ruling principle with respect to damages at common law for breach of
contract is that stated in
rule of common law is, that where a party sustains a loss by reason of a breach
of contract, he is, so far as money can
do it, to be placed in the same
situation with respect to damages, as if the contract had been
performed.”
[25] The High
Court recognised placing a party in the same financial situation was apt where
the contract was for the sale of marketable
commodities, but not so in others,
where the diminution in value damages would not restore an innocent party to the
same situation
as if the contract had been
Bellgrove v
the High Court
recognised that in respect to a breach of contract in building
In the present case, the respondent was entitled to have a
building erected upon her land in accordance with the contract and the
specifications which formed part of it, and her damage is the loss which she has
sustained by the failure of the appellant
to perform his obligation to her. This
loss cannot be measured by comparing the value of the building which has been
erected with
the value it would have borne if erected in accordance with the
contract; her loss can, prima facie, be measured only by ascertaining
required to rectify the defects complained of and so give to her the equivalent
of a building of her land which is substantially
in accordance with the
[26] The above
was subject to the qualification that not only must the work be necessary to
produce conformity, but that also, it
must be a reasonable course to
What rectification work
is necessary and reasonable is a question of fact. As stated in
this area of the law protects the interests of “performance itself, [and
damages are not] confined to compensating
for the loss of economic benefits of
performance”. There are limits on the extent to which a decree of specific
performance
of a contract will be granted. But damages can secure a similar
result if those damages will ensure performance, however belatedly,
compensation for some decline in the value by reason of non-performance.
[27] The factual
circumstances in
(and other cases) are distinguishable. In
this proceeding, the contract, the Development Agreement, was between the
Plaintiff and
the Defendant. The defective buildings were built on land owned
by the Defendant, having had that land transferred to it, by the
Plaintiff, for
that purpose pursuant to the Development Agreement. Unlike other similar cases,
including those of subsequent sale,
the Plaintiff never actually owned the
building after it was built. All buildings have been sold (all but one) via the
to third parties. In respect to the latter issue, there is authority
that recognises that the subsequent sale by an original owner
of a building to a
third party, in respect to a claim for defective building works as against a
builder, does not disentitle the
original owner from damages arising from the
breach of contract between it and the builder. That is, the sale of the
property by
a plaintiff, whereby the plaintiff is subsequently divested of an
interest in the property, does not itself displace the entitlement
according to the rectification measure in
[28] The most
often cited authority in respect to that principle is that of
Director of War
Service Homes v
builder in breach of his contract delivered to the building owner a building
that did not conform to the specifications,
the owner became entitled to recover
damages according to the measure approved in
Bellgrove v Eldridge
owner subsequently sold the building, or gave it away, to a third person, that
would not affect his accrued right against
the builder to damages according to
the same measure. The fact that the building had been sold might be one of the
circumstances
that would have to be considered in relation to the question
whether it would be reasonable to effect the remedial work, but assuming
would be reasonable to do the work the owner would still be entitled to recover
as damages the cost of remedying the defects
or deviations from the contract
(assuming of course that the contract price had been paid). In assessing those
damages it would not
be relevant whether the owner was under a legal liability
to remedy the defects, or whether he had a profit or a loss on the sale
building, for the builder has no concern with the details of any contract that
the owner might make with a third party.
, the trial judge held that no damages were recoverable because the
loss was caused by a voluntary act and stated (my
shown what interest the Director of War Services Homes then had in any of the
nine houses, nor is it shown that he was under
a legal liability to the owners
to rectify any defects or omissions in the works originally specified. The fact
that he did pay
to have some remedial work carried out between November 1955 and
March 1956 does not, in my opinion, entitle him to recover against
the defendant
the cost of such work.... In [
Bellgrove v Eldridge
[1954] HCA 36
(1954) 90 CLR 613]
which was an action by the building owner, the cost of making the building
confirm to the contract was adopted plus consequential
losses. In the present
case there was no attempt made to prove any loss on the part of the Director of
War Service Homes on the
sale of the houses
and it appears to me that the
cost of the remedial work was not a loss resulting from the breach of the
contract but from a voluntary
[30] That the
remedial work was not a loss resulting from a breach, and was a voluntary act,
was not accepted by the Court on appeal
owner of a defective building may decide to remedy the defects before he sells
it so that he may obtain the highest possible price
on the sale; he may sell
subject to a condition that he will remedy the defects; or he may resolve to put
the building in order after
it has been sold because he feels morally, although
not legally, bound to do so. These matters are nothing to do with the builder,
whose liability to pay damages has already accrued.
[31] The three
scenarios referred to above in the judgment of Gibbs J were cited by Williams JA
UI International Pty Ltd v Interworks Architects Pty Ltd
“In my view the reasoning of the Full Court should be restricted to the
three situations referred to in the
[32] Harris has
subsequently been referred to by numerous other authorities, which are helpfully
summarised in
Westpoint Management Ltd v Chocolate Factory Apartments
notwithstanding some
divergence in the decisions as to the relevance of the sale of the building to
the question of whether it would
be reasonable, necessary or at all possible to
effect the remedial work.
Relevantly, the cases of
UI International Pty Ltd v Interworks Architects Pty
where issues were
taken with pleadings. In the first instance proceeding of
UI International
Pty Ltd v Interworks Architects Pty Ltd & Ors
, after an analysis of
cases such as
, McMurdo J
provides support for this plaintiff’s case then in two respects. First, it
holds that the cost of demolishing and rebuilding
a structurally unsound
building is the appropriate measure of damages, the qualification of
reasonableness not being significant
where the defect is of that kind. Secondly,
it holds that it is unnecessary, at least in every case, to prove that there
a demolition and rebuilding.
The plaintiff in
had remained the owner of the building.
was applied in favour of a plaintiff which had sold
the relevant property in
Director of War Service Homes v Harris
respondent there was a builder who had breached his contract with the appellant
by substantially departing from the specifications
for ten houses. It was only
after the houses had been sold that the breaches were discovered and there were
complaints by occupiers
to the appellant. The appellant demanded that the
respondent rectify the defects but he refused. The appellant then had another
do the work at the appellant’s cost, and the appellant claimed
that cost from the respondent. The trial judge dismissed the
claim because in
his view "the cost of the remedial work was not a loss resulting from the breach
of the contract but from a voluntary
act." That was reversed by the Full Court,
in which the principal judgment was given by Gibbs J....
That passage seems to provide sufficient support for the present claim;
indeed it suggests that the plaintiff who is a former owner
need not plead, as
this plaintiff has, that it will demolish and rebuild. But the difference
between that case and the present, of
course, is that there the plaintiff had
rectified the works, and it was the amount which it had spent which it sought to
The question was one of causation: whether a proven loss, from the
plaintiff’s expenditure upon remedial works, was relevantly
caused by the
defendant’s breach of contract. The disposition of the appeal required
only a decision as to whether there was
that causal relationship, the trial
judge having dismissed the claim upon that issue. Many of the remarks in the
above passage were
obiter dictum.
In holding that the owner in
need not prove that she would
demolish and rebuild her house, the court was not holding that proof of a loss
was unnecessary. The
respondent there remained the owner of the house, and her
loss came from her not having the benefit of the performance of her contract,
which mattered to her because of the consequences for her enjoyment of her
Similarly, in
Director of War Service Homes v Harris
, there was no
question that the plaintiff had suffered a loss. As I have said earlier, the
issue for determination was whether that
loss (the plaintiff’s expenditure
on rectification works) was relevantly caused by the breach of contract. I agree
CJ in De Cesare that the obiter dictum of Gibbs J is, with great
respect, "expressed in terms that are too absolute". Where a building
not have a building that conforms with that required by its contract (or which
it would have had absent a breach of a
duty of care owed to it) the owner
suffers a loss, and one to be compensated according to the measure expressed in
, unless, as Hodgson said in
, that is displaced by
supervening circumstances showing that a different loss or indeed no loss has
been suffered.
Plaintiff’s 2ASOC can be summarised as follows:
(a) Paragraphs [4] – [5] plead the terms of the Development Agreement;
(b) Paragraph [6] pleads the construction of the 17 defective homes;
(c) Paragraphs [7] – [11] plead the building requirements of the
Development Agreement (Building Code of Australia,
Building Regulations
(d) Paragraph [12] pleads non-compliance with the Building Code of Australia,
Building Permits and Australian Standards;
(e) Paragraph [13] pleads the breaches of the Development Agreement by reference
to the matters of non-compliance in paragraph [12].
(f) Paragraphs [14] – [17] plead the consequences of the breaches;
(g) Paragraphs [18] – [20] relate to the Home Builders Certification Fund,
which is not relevant to this part of the application;
(h) Paragraph [21] pleads that, had the Defendant complied with its obligations
under the Development Agreement, it would have made
available for sale homes
which complied with the Development Agreement;
(i) Paragraph [22] pleads that, by reason of paragraphs [14] – [17]
breaches, the Defendant failed to make available houses
which complied with the
Development Agreement;
(j) Paragraph [23(a)] pleads that, had the Defendant complied with the
Development Agreement, then 17 affordable homes would have
been released to the
residential housing market to be purchased by Eligible Purchasers which complied
with the development agreement
and would have not been 17 severely defective
(k) Paragraph [23(b)] pleads that as a result of the Defendant’s breaches
and consequences thereof pleaded in paragraphs [14]
– [17] 17 homes which
did not comply with the development agreement were released to the market, and
were purchased with defects,
requiring demolition and in most cases rebuilding.
Plaintiff’s pleading at paragraph [23(c)] of the 2ASOC then
As a result of the Defendant’s breaches and the
consequences thereof pleaded in [14]-[17] above, the Plaintiff is entitled to
measure of compensatory damages in an amount, so far as money can do it, that
places the Plaintiff in the same situation as if
the Development Agreement had
been performed. Namely, the Plaintiff is entitled to the necessary and
reasonable cost of rectification
or where the reasonable cure is to demolish and
rebuild the Completed Affordable Homes, then the cost of that undertaking, so as
to repair or remove the defective homes (as each case may require) and create
Affordable Homes which complied with the Development
Agreement on the Affordable
Allotments available to be owned by Eligible Purchasers or to enable the
construction on them of homes
which were not defective and which complied with
Building Act
[35] Paragraph
[23(a)] of the 2ASOC pleads what the Plaintiff should have received in terms of
expectation. Paragraphs [23(b) and
(c)], particularly through the use of the
words “as a result of” plead what the Defendant’s breaches
caused. Paragraph
[23(c)] begins with the statement from
, further qualified by the statement that such damages are to be the
reasonable and necessary cost of rectification or demolition/rebuilding
give the Plaintiff the equivalent of a building which is substantially in
accordance with the contract. That qualification
is in accordance with the
principles in
. Particulars of the loss, are
provided in terms of the reasonable and necessary costs of rectification or
demolition, which comprises:
costs of assessing the nature, extent and cost of
repairs (paragraph [23(i)]), the costs of demolishing and rebuilding homes under
the HBCF claims (paragraph [23(ii)]), Costs of acquisition, demolition, resale
of lots to third parties minus amounts received on
resale for certain other HBCF
expenses of demolishing
and rebuilding, or costs of acquisition, demolition,
resale to third parties less amounts received from sale (paragraph [23(iv)]).
The pleadings state that particulars of loss and damage are set out in an
attached schedule and that further particulars of quantum
will be provided when
identified and otherwise prior to trial, with which no issue was taken.
[36] As noted
above, a decision to strike out a pleading should not be made lightly and should
be made on the basis of there being
no reasonable prospect of success, and in
respect to a cause of action, no reasonable prospects of success in respect to
the raising
of a reasonable cause of action.
[37] On its face
there is a reasonable cause of action pleaded, namely that there has been a
breach or breaches of the development
agreement, and as a result of that breach
or breaches, a loss was caused (i.e. damage). The loss or damage, that is
“the something
of value”, is the loss of expectation that the houses
were to be built in accordance with the contract, the Development Agreement,
through the remedy of damages, the Plaintiff is entitled to be put into the
position it should have been had the contract been
performed. The measure of
which, in the circumstances, is the necessary and reasonable cost of
rectification of the defective homes
or of demolition and rebuilding of the
Plaintiff had
in fact already rectified or demolished/rebuilt the homes, as
damages are assessed in a “once and for all
Further, on the
authority of
, the entitlement to the remedy of damages may be
unaffected by a subsequent sale of a defective property, or the fact that the
did not have an interest in the property at the time of the suit. As
Gibbs J stated in
, the Plaintiff “may resolve to put the
building in order after it has been sold because he feels morally, although not
bound to do so” and that has “nothing to do with the
builder, whose liability to pay damages has already accrued”.
therefore not necessary, given the manner in which the Plaintiff’s case is
pleaded, to plead why the Plaintiff was actually
required to replace or rebuild
the houses because that is not the Plaintiff’s case.
[38] At hearing
the Defendant made the point that it was not my role to act as an appeal of
Huntingford J’s decision in striking
out paragraph [23] of the ASOC. In
determining these applications I am not doing so. I am determining the
applications, made and
argued before me, on the basis of submissions and the
authorities referred to. Her Honour examined the nature of contractual damages
without reference to
but with reference
. Reference was made to by her Honour certain English
authorities. I can only discern from that, that the argument was not fully
developed before her Honour in those respects, and had it been so, possibly a
different result may have arisen.
[39] It may be
that the Plaintiff faces issues at trial. It may be that the circumstances of
this case, given the nature of the contract
and the dealings with the land, this
case is distinguished from the general principles which applied in
, and the manner of the sale of the property displaces an
entitlement to damages. Alternatively, it may be that if the
measure of damages applies it may be found that the damages claimed were not
reasonable or necessary, or too remote. Those risks
were acknowledged by the
Plaintiff. Those matters, in my view, are certainly arguable and substantive
matters which should be determined
at trial, in light of a reasonable cause of
[40] On the
basis of the above, and the authorities referred to, I am satisfied that the
Plaintiff’s pleading at paragraph [23]
of the 2ASOC discloses a reasonable
cause of action which should not be struck out. That part of the
Defendant’s application
is dismissed.
Issues in respect to
Paragraphs [6] and [19] of the 2ASOC
[41] The second
aspect of this proceeding is that the Defendant seeks paragraphs [6] and [19] of
the 2ASOC be struck out as an abuse
of process pursuant to Rule 23.02(d) and the
former paragraphs be re-instated.
Plaintiff, in turn, seeks leave, pursuant to Rule 36.03(b), to amend the ASOC,
to amend various paragraphs. Some amendments
are of a minor grammatical nature
and are of no issue. The substance of the amendments relate to paragraphs [6]
and [19] (and [17])
of the ASOC in so far as reference is made to a home which
was developed and retained by the Defendant in the course of development
(referred to as House No.9 in paragraph [17] of Huntingford J’s judgment
extracted above).
Defendant’s position is that leave was not granted to amend paragraphs [6]
and [19], they should not have been amended
and leave should not be granted now.
analysis of Huntingford J’s judgment, although the final order is framed
in terms of “The Territory has leave
to file and serve a further amended
statement of claim” it was clearly not intended that be
in terms of amendment, rather the leave granted was referable to the
defects in the pleadings identified by her Honour, most notably
those arising in
paragraph [23]. There were no arguments before Huntingford J about the adequacy
of paragraphs [6] or [19] such
that they required amendment and it is difficult
to see why the Plaintiff would have thought that any order for leave to amend
to those provisions. In submissions, the Plaintiff stated that whilst
the leave granted might properly encompass the relevant amendments,
acknowledged that the better course may have been to seek consent to amend or,
absent that, make application to
I agree with the latter.
The Plaintiff ought not to have amended paragraphs [6] or [19] of the ASOC
without seeking leave of the
Court. Rule 36.03 provides that a party may amend
a pleading once before the close of pleadings. Pleadings have not yet closed
and the Statement of Claim was amended once already, arguably using up the one
opportunity to amend before the close of
On its face, filing
an amended statement of claim, amending parts of a statement of claim for which
leave was not granted, would
amount to an abuse of process. However, leave has
now been sought,
ex post facto
, under Rule 36.03(b) and I will proceed to
consider the amendments sought.
[45] The law in
respect to seeking leave to amend pleadings is well established. Authorities
make it clear that the general approach
to applications to amend pleadings is
liberal and amendment should be allowed if it can be made without injustice to
the other side.
Parties should
not be punished for mistakes in the conduct of their cases, unless fraudulent or
intended to be over-reach.
Further, where the withdrawal of an admission in a pleading is sought, an
explanation may be required which is sensible and based
on substantial
Considerations as to
the administration of justice, proper case management and prejudice to the
non-amending party are all relevant.
[46] In this
particular instance the amendments concern deletion of reference to House No. 9
from paragraphs [6] and [19] (and paragraph
[17]), of the ASOC. House No. 9, as
found by Huntingford J at paragraph [17] of her judgment, was constructed by San
and retained by the Defendant who made payment to the Plaintiff in
accordance with the Development Agreement. House No. 9 was described
Honour as one of the 10 houses “subject” to the HBCF scheme of
As noted by her
Honour, the owners of each of the 10 houses covered by the HBCF scheme had made
a claim under the scheme for rectification
defects. As her Honour also noted,
the Territory, had at that point in time assessed that the HBCF scheme covered
all of the claims,
other than that made by Bellamack which remained outstanding,
and that that claim had not been
Subsequent to hearing
before Huntingford J, the Defendant’s HBCF claim was determined on 17 May
2024. The Defendant was informed
by letter of 17 May 2024 that its claim had
been rejected as the “HCBF policy does not respond to the HBCF claim. That
is because,
inter alia, Bellamack Pty Ltd does not fall under the definition of
“Owner” under the HBCF Policy”. In response
on 17 June 2024,
by letter, the Defendant stated that the Plaintiff’s position was
inconsistent with the admission made by
it in paragraph [19] of the ASOC. It
was the Defendant’s position that the admission put the matter of the
indemnity (i.e.
that the policy applied to House 9 and an indemnity was
provided) beyond doubt.
[47] On 27 June
2024 the Plaintiff responded indicating that it would be taking steps to
withdraw the alleged “admission”
after Huntingford J’s
decision was received.
Defendant’s position is that the amendments to paragraphs [6] and [19]
(and [17](c)(i)) of the ASOC are seeking to
withdraw an admission previously
made in the ASOC and leave to do so should not be granted.
[49] Formal
admissions may be made in a number of ways: through statements of the party or
counsel, express admissions in pleadings
(Rule 35.02(1)), a failure to deal with
an allegation of fact in a pleading (Rule 13.12), an answer or failure to answer
to admit facts (Rule 35.03), answer to interrogatories or as agreed
between the parties. The Defendant’s written submissions
referred to Rule 35.02 and the process under that Rule for the withdrawal of an
admission. Rule 35.02 applies to a notice
served on one party voluntarily
admitting facts. That does not apply here. Rather, this is an application for
amendment under Rule
36.03(b) for leave to be granted to amend a pleading. The
question is whether what is contained in the pleading is an admission
should leave to withdraw it be granted. If it was an admission it would need to
be an informal one. If it is not an
admission the “regular”
principles in respect to amendments should apply.
Defendant submitted that the inclusion of Home No. 9 in paragraph [19] of the
ASOC represented an admission by the Territory
that the HBCF Policy
“responds to the claim by Bellamack in relation to the property”.
“Responds to the claim”
is a reference to what is pleaded in
paragraph [19] of the ASOC namely:
Pursuant to its policy terms, the
HBCF insurance coverage responded to claims for defective building work made in
respect of the Completed
Affordable Homes identified in No. 9-18 of the table
pleaded in [6] above.
[51] Particulars
are provided to paragraph [19](a)] which provides that “The owners of the
Completed Affordable Homes made claims
under the HBCF insurance policy on the
following dates (HBCF Claims)” and thereby follows a further table in
which the claim
details of all 10 homes are listed including House No. 9, which
the Plaintiff now seeks to amend by deletion. Paragraph [20] of
the 2ASOC then
goes on to state that the Plaintiff is liable to settle or had settled each of
the HBCF claims in the following ways
– (a) by reference to Homes 10, 12
and 18 of the table pleaded in [6], by demolition and rebuilding (called the
Demolish and
Rebuild HBCF Claims) and (b) by reference to Homes 11 and 13-17 of
the table pleaded in [6], by acquisition and sale (called the
Acquisition HBCF
Claims). There is no reference to Home No. 9.
Defendant says that the ASOC contains an admission that Bellamack came within
the policy terms of the HBCF insurance policy
(not an admission of liability
under the policy per se), that is, it was
prima facie
covered by the
policy. The relevance of whether Bellamack comes within the policy terms is
important, the Defendant says, because
broadly the Plaintiff wishes to advance
an argument that it was obliged to insure the subsequent purchasers of the Homes
by the HBCF scheme (and seek to rely on the indemnity in clause 8.2 of
the Development Agreement), because the subsequent purchasers
of those homes
come within the definition of “owners” as defined in the policy.
The Defendant disputes that the policy
extends to any other owners other than
itself. In any event, the Defendant says, inclusion of reference to its house
in the ASOC,
was an admission that the policy applied to it as well, as an
owner. That broader argument is set out in more detail in paragraphs
– [47] of Huntingford J’s judgment.
[53] It is the
Defendant’s case that the ASOC has been in its current form since the
beginning of the proceedings, and it was
only now that the Plaintiff sought to
abandon something it had agreed to.
response, the Plaintiff submitted that the relevant parts of paragraphs [6] and
[19] of the ASOC were not an admission for
the purposes of the pleadings rules,
and therefore their proposed amendment does not constitute a withdrawal of an
admission. The
Plaintiff submitted that the statements were mere assertions,
and assertions made in a pleading do not constitute an admission by
filing the pleading. As such, specific leave to withdraw an admission is not
required. Reliance was placed on the High
Court decision of
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal
traditional principle is that assertions made in pleadings do not amount to
admissions. In
Boileau v. Rutlin
, the Court of Exchequer Chamber held
that an averment of the existence of an agreement in a bill in equity in another
suit between
the same parties could not be received as an admission of the
agreement by the party pleading the agreement...
It has been suggested that the traditional principle may be too strict and
that in some circumstances an assertion in a pleading should
be received as an
admission... More recently, in
Singleton v. John Fairfax & Sons Ltd
Hunt J. declined to follow the older cases and concluded that:
"an imputation pleaded in a statement of claim as required by Pt 67, r. 11(2)
is admissible evidence by way of admission against the
plaintiff that the matter
complained of conveyed that imputation in fact. The same may well operate
against a defendant in relation
to any contextual imputation pleaded in his
In reaching this conclusion, Hunt J. considered that pleadings should be
treated "in the same way as any other form of admission"
and that the
susceptibility of a pleading to be received as an admission should depend upon
whether it was intended to be taken as
a sincere or absolute assertion.
However, in
Stohl Aviation v. Electrum Pty. Ltd
. Jenkinson J. declined
to follow the approach taken by Hunt J., preferring the traditional rule of
exclusion on the ground that a
departure from that rule would often lead to
unprofitable collateral inquiries concerning the circumstances in which the
was included in the pleading. The suggestion that pleadings should be
treated in the same way as any other form of admission fails,
in our view, to
take account of the function and object of pleadings, when they are not required
to be verified, in outlining the
party's case and defining the issues to be
Plaintiff says that reference to the Defendant’s Home No. 9 was included
in error in the table in paragraph [6] and
subsequently by back reference to it
in paragraph [19] of the ASOC. The table at paragraph [6] of the ASOC refers to
the allocation,
by the Defendant, of lots to be Affordable Allotments where
Affordable Homes were constructed on each Affordable
It follows that, according
to the definition of Affordable Allotment in Clause 3.1(a) of the Special
Conditions of the Development
Agreement (at [5](i) ASOC), it was to be a lot
allocated by the Developer, with the approval of the Plaintiff, for the
construction
and sale of Affordable Homes. The Plaintiff submits that the
Defendant built House No. 9 on a lot, but kept it for its own purposes,
such it was not an Affordable Allotment (as defined in the Development
Agreement). As such, House No. 9 was included in error
in the table in
paragraph [6] of the ASOC, of Affordable Allotments, and as result it was
referenced as a Completed Affordable Home
that the HBCF insurance coverage
responded to at paragraph [19] of the ASOC. As an error, which should be
corrected, the Plaintiff
submits that leave to amend in the ordinary course
should be granted.
[56] I am not
satisfied that paragraph [19] of the ASOC was an admission. I do so on the
basis of the authority of
and the relevant authorities referred to
therein, namely that an assertion made in an unverified pleading does not, or
cannot, amount
to an admission.
Even on the more liberal test expounded by Hunt J in
Singleton v John Fairfax
the relevant
paragraphs are internally inconsistent, such that it could not logically or
rationally amount to an admission. I accept
reference to House No. 9 in
paragraphs [6] and [19], and in paragraph [17(c)(i)] of the ASOC, was a mistake
by the Plaintiff as claimed,
and ought to be corrected. The distinction between
House No. 9 and the other Houses, was, as the Plaintiff’s counsel pointed
out, a point of distinction which was made by the Defendant in submissions
before Huntingford J in which it was said necessitated
separate consideration of
the engagement of the HBCF policy in respect to that particular
[57] I therefore
do not take the inclusion of Home 9 in the ASOC as an admission but rather an
error in the pleading in assertions
made therein. In the exercise of the
discretion to allow the amendment, there is no significant prejudice or
injustice which would
flow to the Defendant. The proceeding, in terms of
pleadings and case management, is at very early stage, and the Defendant is yet
to file a defence. Even if prejudice arises, it could be otherwise met by an
application for costs if necessary.
[58] Leave is
therefore granted for the Plaintiff to make amendments in terms of the 2ASOC as
filed in this proceeding, and the 2ASOC
as already filed shall be taken to be so
filed in accordance with leave granted.
[59] The usual
order in interlocutory orders is that costs are costs in the proceeding.
Although the Plaintiff has been successful
in maintaining its amendments, some
of those amendments were not made in accordance with leave granted by
Huntingford J, and precipitated
not only part of the Defendant’s summons
but the Plaintiff’s summons. My preliminary view is that the usual order
to costs should apply. However, should either party wish to make an
application for costs, they should do so within four weeks of
the date of this
judgment, with two weeks provided for any reply. A decision on costs will then
be made on the papers.
[60] The orders
are as follows:
(1) The Defendant’s summons dated 23 October 2024 is dismissed.
(2) On the Plaintiff’s summons dated 25 November 2024, the Plaintiff has
leave to amend paragraphs [4(a)], [6(b)], [14(b)],
[17(c)(i)], [19] and [19(a)]
in terms of the Second Amendment Statement of Claim filed 4 October
(3) The Second Amended Statement of Claim, filed on 4 October 2024, shall
be taken as filed in accordance with these orders.
(4) Costs are reserved.
-------------------------------------
Northern Territory of Australia
v Bellamack Pty Ltd
[2024] NTSC 66
(“Huntingford J’s
See paragraph [12] of the
Defendant’s written submissions dated 11 November 2024. See paragraph
[34] of the submissions in
respect to the issue of abuse of process.
[2008] NTSC 4
John Holland
The Defendant also cited
Corporation Pty Ltd v Thiess Contractors Pty Ltd
[1987] FCA 84
(1987) 71 ALR 615
the same effect.
Sherrington v Independent
Commissioner Against Corruption (NT) & Anor
[2025] NTSC 27
Northern Territory of Australia v Bellamack Pty Ltd
[2024] NTSC 66
per Huntingford J;
Motor Accidents (Compensation) Commission v Toyota
Motor Corporation Australia Limited & Anor
[2023] NTSC 65
Luppino AsJ (“
The affidavits of Spain made 23
October 2024, Bloemendal made 19 February 2025 and Chin made 25 November
2024 were tendered by both
parties and taken as read.
Grant on Civil
at paragraph 5.23.106 citing
Karlovsky v Q-Built
Constructions
[2006] NTMC 93
in respect to the equivalent rule in the
Local Court, although there is no express rule prohibiting affidavit evidence in
Court Rules as there is in
Supreme Court
Golding v Wharton Saltworks
[1876] UKLawRpKQB 41
(1876) 1 QBD 374
Knowles v Roberts
[1888] UKLawRpCh 42
(1888) 38 Ch D 263
Bulmer v Oakey
Co-op Dairy Co Ltd
[1908] St R Qd 216
Darcy v Connolly
[1923] WALawRp 24
Fancourt v Mercantile
Credits Ltd
(1983) 154 CLR 87
Webster v Lampard
[1993] HCA 57
(1993) 177 CLR
at 602-603 (cited in
Otter Gold NL v Barcon Pty Ltd & Sankey
[2000] NTSC 65
A v Ipec Australia Ltd and
[1973] VicRp 4
[1973] VR 39
Hoh v Frosthollow Pty Ltd
[2014] VSC 77
[1848] EngR 135
(1848) 1 Exch 850
Defendant’s written
submissions dated 11 November 2024 at paragraph [31].
Plaintiff’s submissions
dated 25 November 2024 at paragraph [19].
(2009) 236 CLR 272
[1848] EngR 135
(1848) 1 Exch 850
Also see Heydon JD,
on Contracts
, (Sydney, Thomson Reuters, 2019), paragraph 26.430 entitled
“Expectation loss: recovery not limited to financial loss”.
[1954] HCA 36
(1954) 90 CLR 613
, (Sydney, Thomson Reuters, 2019), paragraph 26.430.
(1968) Qd R 275
per Gibbs J at
at 277-278.
UI International Pty Ltd v
Interworks Architects Pty Ltd
[2007] QCA 402
(2008) 2 Qd R 158
Westpoint Management Ltd v
Chocolate Factory Apartments Ltd
[2007] NSWCA 253
See paragraph [50] in
Westpoint Management Ltd v Chocolate Factory Apartments Ltd
[2007] NSWCA
, Also and subsequently
UI International Pty Ltd v Interworks Architects
[2007] QCA 402
(2008) 2 Qd R 158
at 170-17, 192, 194.
There were four sets of
proceedings involving challenges to pleadings:
UI International Pty Ltd v
Interworks Architects Pty Ltd & Ors
[2006] QSC 79
(20 April 2006) upheld
on appeal in
UI International v Interworks Architects P/L & Ors
[2006] QCA 434
(3 November 2006) and further challenges to pleadings in
International Pty Ltd v. Interworks Architects Pty Ltd & Ors
(30 April 2007) and on appeal
UI International Pty Ltd v Interworks
Architects Pty Ltd
[2007] QCA 402
(2008) 2 Qd R 158.
UI International Pty Ltd v
Interworks Architects Pty Ltd & Ors
[2006] QSC 79
Nor possibly other more
contemporary cases such as
De Cesare v Deluxe Motors Pty Ltd
Scott Carver Pty Ltd v SAS Trustee Corporation
[2005] NSWCA 462
Westpoint Management Ltd v Chocolate Factory Apartments
[2007] NSWCA 253
UI International Pty Ltd v Interworks Architects Pty Ltd
Plaintiff’s written
submissions dated 25 November 2024 at paragraph [44].
It is not apparently clear how
that was done. The Plaintiff had contacted the Court Registry indicating it
wished to file without
leave or consent using up its one chance to do so under
Rule 36.03(a)
but also sought dispensation from marking up the amended copy in
accordance with the Rule. Leave was granted to file an Amended
Statement of
Claim and was so filed. The Amended Statement of claim is headed “Amended
Pursuant to
Rule 36.03(a)
”, which I take to be use of the “free
amendment” before pleadings closed.
Berno v Green’s Steel
Constructions Pty Ltd
[1991] NTSC 4
Liddle v North Australian
Aboriginal Legal Aid Service Inc
[1993] NTSC 78
Tropicus Orchids Flowers
and Foliage Pty Ltd v Territory Insurance Office
[1995] NTSC 131
Amcor Pty Ltd Trading as A.P.M Containers v Victoria Valley Beef Pty Ltd
[1995] NTSC 11
per Coulehan M at [20] – which was an
application by a defendant to withdraw, by amendment, an admission in its
to the existence of a written agreement and its effect.
Northern Territory of
Australia v Bellamack Pty Ltd
[2024] NTSC 66
Northern Territory of
Australia v Bellamack Pty Ltd
[2024] NTSC 66
The relevant correspondence is
set out in the affidavit of Chin made 25 November 2024, Annexure AYC-1.
[1990] HCA 31
(1990) 170 CLR 70
Gaudron and McHugh JJ, and at 86 per Mason CJ and Brennan J
Paragraph [6(a)] of the ASOC
states “The Defendant (a) allocated Lots to be Affordable Allotments
including as listed in the
table below”. Paragraph [6(b)] of the ASOC
further qualifies the table by stating the Defendant “on the dates
in the rightmost column of the table caused to be constructed and made
available to Eligible Purchasers, Affordable Homes on each
of those Affordable
Allotments, pursuant to its obligations under the Development
Agreement.”
Stohl Aviation v
Electrum Finance Pty Ltd
(1984) 56 ALR 716
[1982] 2 NSWLR 38.
Defendant’s submissions
dated 9 October 2023 at paragraph [15].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (332 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter