URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTRTCmr/2015/26.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:22:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bader & Tennyenhuis -v- Allison [2015] NTRTCmr 26 (22 September 2015)
REASONS FOR THE ORDER OF THE COMMISSIONER OF TENANCIES
INQUIRY – Monday, 14 September 2015
AMANDA BADER AND BLAKE TENNYENHUIS ('TENANTS')
SHAUN ALLISON ('LANDLORD')
RT1415-0832
is an determination of an application by Amanda Bader and Blake Tennyenhius (the
‘Tenants’) dated 29 May 2015 in
respect of premises located at 91
Priest Circuit, Gray, in the Northern Territory of Australia (the
‘Premises’). The
Tenants seeks compensation under s 122 of the
Residential Tenancies Act
(NT) (the ‘RTA’) for loss and
damage in the sum of $9,877.87 they say resulted from the matters noted below.
The Landlord
seeks to retain the security deposit of $2,200 under s 113 of the
RTA and also seeks compensation under s 122 of the RTA from the
Tenants for loss
and damage. In total, the Landlord claims the sum of $7,169.08 (which sum
includes the retained security deposit)
he says resulted from the matters
enumerated below.
Notice of Inquiry regarding the Tenants’ application was posted to the
parties on 15 June 2015. The inquiry was conducted
on 14 September 2015 during
which evidence was taken from Amanda Bader on behalf of the Tenants, and the
Landlord. Also giving evidence
on behalf of the Landlord were Michelle Davies
and Jessica Boakes of Approved Realestate (NT), which, I was informed, was
Chilcott Realestate (collectively referred to as the
‘Agent’), the agent for the Landlord.
Abhishek Jain, a solicitor with the Darwin Community Legal Service, also
appeared on behalf of the Tenants. The Landlord, pursuant
to s 148 of the RTA,
objected to Mr Jain representing the Tenants. Relevantly, s 148
(1) A person
is not to be represented before the Commissioner by a legal practitioner ...
(a) with the
agreement of the other party to the tenancy agreement to which the proceeding
relates; and
Commissioner is of the opinion that neither party will be disadvantaged by
permitting such representation.
is clear from the wording of s 148(1) of the RTA that s 148(1)(b) is engaged
only if the consent requirement in s 148(1)(a) is
satisfied. Given that the
Landlord did not agree to the Tenants being represented by a legal practitioner,
I directed that Mr Jain
was not entitled to make any representations on behalf
of the Tenants. I allowed Mr Jain to be present during the inquiry, however,
I was informed by Ms Bader that she has a hearing disability and that it may
become necessary for Mr Jain to explain matters to
her that, because of her
disability and the fact that she was attending by telephone, she might miss. As
the inquiry transpired,
however, the need for Ms Bader to confer with Mr Jain
did not arise.
evidence before the inquiry consisted of the following material:
documents submitted by the tenants in support of their application and kept
under identifying tabs on the Commissioner of
Tenancies file numbered RT
1415-0832 (the ‘Commissioner’s File’);
documents submitted by the Landlord in response to the Tenants’
application and kept under identifying tabs on the
Commissioner’s
5.3. submissions
prepared by Mr James Burke, a solicitor with Hall Payne Lawyers, on behalf of
the Landlord dated 4 July 2015;
5.4. the oral
evidence of the parties;
5.5. the oral
evidence of Ms Davies and Ms Boakes on behalf of the Landlord.
the basis of the documentary and oral evidence before the inquiry, I find that
there was a tenancy agreement within the meaning
of, and subject to the terms of
the provisions of, the RTA on the following terms:
Duration: Fixed
term commencing on 4 March 2013 and ending on 2 March 2014 (the
‘First Tenancy Agreement’)
Memorandum of variation of residential tenancy agreement providing for a
fixed term commencing on 2 March 2014 and ending on 1 March
‘Second Tenancy Agreement’)
Rent: $550/week payable fortnightly in advance
Security deposit: $2,200
Background facts
Notwithstanding
the Second Tenancy Agreement, the Tenants vacated the Premises on 7 October
2014. I was informed that the early termination
of the Second Tenancy Agreement
was done with the consent of the Landlord.
Notice of the Landlord’s Intention to Retain Security Deposit (the
‘RT08’) was given to the Tenants on 15 October
2014 by post and by
email. That the RT08 was served in accordance with s 112(5) of the RTA was not
disputed by the Tenants. Pursuant
to the RT08, the Landlord indicated that the
full amount of the security deposit of $2,200 was to be retained for the
Making good damage to the Premises or ancillary property (see s
$1,294.50 - consisting of:
Damage to blinds
Repair of holes
in screens -
Cleaning Premises or ancillary property (see s 112(3)(c))
$1,182.00 – consisting of:
Spray for ticks,
fleas and cockroaches -
Unpaid rent (see s 112(3)(e))
Unpaid charges for water payable by Tenants (see s 112(3)(e))
$1,856.30 (but subsequently reduced to
a statutory declaration declared by Jessica Boakes on 15 October 2015, tax
invoices or quotes were annexed in support of the matters
claimed under
s 112(3)(a) and (c) above. While a water usage report for the Premises for
the period 18 December 2012 to 16 September
2014 prepared by Power and Water
Corporation was annexed to Ms Boakes’ affidavit, the documents evidencing
the amount paid
by the Landlord for water usage during the tenancy period was
not provided until 30 August
Trust Ledger Report was annexed to support the Landlord’s claim for unpaid
addition to the claims identified in the RT08, the Landlord made additional
claims under s 122(1)(a) of the RTA for:
10.1. damage to
an air conditioning unit which, had it been replaced by the Landlord, would have
cost $1,534.70. This claim was supported
by a quote from the firm of Johnny
Cool, quotation number 1373 dated 28 August 2015;
cleaning in the sum of $600.32. This claim was supported by what appears to be
an excerpt of an invoice from an unidentified
Tenants’ claim under s 122(1)(a) of the RTA was set out in the statutory
declaration of Amanda Bader declared on 29 May
2015 (the ‘Bader
Declaration’). Before setting out the detail of that claim, it should be
noted that the Tenants do not
dispute the Landlord’s claim for unpaid rent
in the sum of $942.30. As is discussed in greater detail below, the Tenants also
admit responsibility for the damage to the window blinds in the first bedroom.
Tenants’ claim relates to a number of items and is set out in the
following table:
Table of Tenants’
Tenants’ Evidence
Observations
payment made by Tenants to Landlord at the commencement of the tenancy in the
amount of $1,100.
Bader Declaration at [3]. No bank records provided by Tenants in support of
Tenants withdrew this claim during the course of the inquiry.
of pool – cane toads and tadpoles in pool at commencement of tenancy and
exposed wiring on spa light throughout tenancy.
Amount claimed
Bader Declaration at [5(i),(ii)].
pool gate for which Tenants are claiming $234.29. Also claiming depreciation for
a barbecue used to hold up the faulty pool
gate in the sum of
Matter reported to Agent on 25 November 2013 and repairs to the pool gate
effected on 6 December 2013 (see Bader Declaration at [5(iii)]
No evidence that barbecue was replaced and no evidence of depreciation
other than as set out in Bader Declaration.
pump not working properly. Amount claimed $90.00.
Matter reported to Agent on 6 August 2014 – Bader Declaration at
No evidence provided by Tenants as to what was wrong with the pool pump.
Landlord’s evidence is that there was nothing mechanically
or electrically
wrong with the pool pump; it simply needed to be primed.
and disposal of pool draining pump. Amount claimed $58.00.
Tenants maintain that spa needed to be drained for safety reasons. Bader
Declaration at [5(vi)].
bathroom silicone. Amount claimed $675.00 (which includes the purchase by the
Tenants of a scraping tool and silicone gun).
The problem with the bathroom silicone was first reported to the Agent on
25 November 2013. Bader Declaration at [6].
No receipts for the purchase of the scraping tool and silicone gun produced
by the Tenants.
infestation. Amount claimed $652.88.
Tenants’ claim for compensation relates to a general claim for
exposure of occupants to unsafe trees, and the destruction of
a dog kennel.
Bader Declaration at [7].
Presence of termite mounds on grounds of the Premises admitted by the
air-conditioning units. Amount claimed – compensation as determined by the
Commissioner.
The Tenants allege that:
conditioning unit in the first bedroom did not work properly from the start of
the tenancy;
the remote for
the unit in the lounge room did not
causing it to
operate at a cooler temperature than Tenants desired;
service the air conditioning units resulted in excess electricity
Bader Declaration at [8]-[10].
taps in kitchen. Amount claimed – compensation as determined by the
Commissioner.
The Tenants allege that the taps in the kitchen leaked from 10 February to
12 August 2014, and as a consequence higher water consumption
occurred. Bader
Declaration at [11].
gutter. Amount claimed $1,675.72.
The Tenants allege that a rusted gutter on the property resulted in the
accumulation of moss and mildew on the outside staircase and
concrete. Bader
Declaration at [13].
Part of the Tenants claim relates to the cost of approximately $100.00 to
buy a high pressure cleaner to clean the moss and mildew.
No documentation
evidencing this purchase was produced.
fire alarms. Amount claimed $416.43.
Tenants allege that fire alarms in the Premises were not working from
4 March 2013 to 7 October 2014. The Tenants notified the Agents
problem on 25 August 2014. Bader Declaration at [14].
On being notified by the Tenants that the fire alarms were not working, the
alarms were replaced on 25 September 2014 as evidenced
by letter from JK
Electrical Pty Ltd dated 25 September 2014.
full access to storage room. Amount claimed – compensation as determined
by the Commissioner.
Tenants alleged that Landlord had property stored in the storage room.
Bader Declaration at [15].
with wiring of clothes line. Amount claimed $124.00
The Tenants alleged that the wiring on the clothes line disintegrated and
had to be replaced at the Tenants’ cost. Bader Declaration
door jamming. Amount claimed $26.00.
The Tenants alleged that the front door jammed resulting in children being
locked in the house. Ms Bader had to break into the front
door resulting in the
cost of $26.00 to replace the door knob. Bader Declaration at [17].
fly screens. Amount claimed – compensation as determined by the
Commissioner.
The fly screens would disintegrate upon touch. Bader Declaration at
Miscellaneous
problems. Amount claimed $500.00.
As set out in Bader Declaration at [19].
and disappointment. Amount claimed $500.00.
Tenants make a claim ‘at large’ for distress and disappointment
resulting from the tenancy. Bader Declaration at [20].
Consideration
Tenants’ claims for compensation
as is evident from the above table of the Tenants’ claims, the amount
claimed in compensation by the Tenants was
not supported by documentary evidence
of expenditure. Further, much of the claim consists of what appears to be
general damages for
inconvenience and distress arising from the Landlord’s
failure to respond adequately to maintenance issues raised by the Tenants.
Landlord, in a detailed submission, addressed the claims made by the Tenants for
compensation. Reliance was placed on the fact
that an incoming condition report
was prepared in compliance with s 25 of the RTA. The Incoming Condition Report
was signed by both
Bader gave evidence that she was not present when the incoming condition report
was completed and states that she was later asked
to sign it by the Agent. She
also gave evidence that she made amendments to the incoming condition report,
which amended report was
provided to the inquiry. There was no evidence,
however, that the amended report was provided to the Landlord or the Agent
5 business days after receiving the condition report as required by s
26(1) of the RTA.
the circumstances, the incoming property condition report signed by the parties
is conclusive evidence of the condition of the
property at the commencement of
the tenancy (s 28(2) of the RTA). In the Landlord’s submission, this is
determinative of items
2, 10, 15 and 16 noted in the above Table of
Tenants’ Claims.
addition, regarding item 2 the Landlord denies the allegation that there were
cane toads and tadpoles in the pool at the commencement
of the tenancy. Further,
the Landlord maintains that wiring on the pool light was insulated, and, in any
event, at no time did the
Tenants request that the pool light be fixed.
Consequently, the Landlord also relies on s 57(3)(a), (b) and (d) of the RTA to
his argument that the he is not in breach of his obligation to
agree with the Landlord’s submissions regarding items 2, 10, 15 and 16 in
the Table of Tenants’ Claims noted above.
I accept that the matters
alleged by the Tenants were not noted on the incoming condition
accept that neither the Landlord nor his Agent were notified of the problem with
the pool light before this matter was
the subject of a Notice of Inquiry. In the
circumstances, therefore, I dismiss the Tenants’ claims set out in items
15 and 16 of the Table of Tenants’ Claims.
addition to item 2, the Landlord also relied on s 57 of the RTA in response to
the Tenants’ claim relating to item 13. In
particular, the Landlord
maintains that the Tenants did not notify the Landlord of the need to repair the
clothes line, as required
by s 57(2)(a) of the RTA.
agree with the Landlord’s submission regarding the application of s
57(2)(a) of the RTA. In the circumstances of this case,
the Landlord cannot be
held responsible for the repair of a clothes line which the Landlord was not
notified required repair. The
Tenants’ claim set out in item 13 in the
Table of Tenants’ Claims above is dismissed.
next with the matters relating to pool gate and the pool pump, being items 3 and
4 respectively in the Table of Tenants’
Claim, the Tenants maintain that
the Landlord was notified of the problem with the pool gate on 25 November
2013. In support of this
claim, the Tenants annexed to the Bader Declaration a
notice letter on Chilcott Real Estate letterhead; a letter the Agent denies
receiving. Notwithstanding that the Agent denies receiving the letter, repairs
to the gate were carried out on 6 December 2013.
accept Ms Bader’s evidence that the letter of 25 November 2013 was
provided to the Agent. This, however, does not mean that
the Tenants’
claim for compensation arising from the faulty pool gate should be accepted. The
Landlord effected repairs to
the gate on 6 December 2013, and, therefore, acted
with reasonable diligence within the meaning of s 57(2) of the RTA. While the
Tenants maintain that the repairs were defective, no compelling evidence to
support this allegation was adduced. Finally, the evidence
in support of the
claim for depreciation of the barbeque (which, according to the Tenants,
depreciated at a greater than normal rate
as a consequence of being placed in
front of the gate to hold the gate up) was equally deficient.
now to the Tenants’ claim relating to the faulty pool pump, the Landlord
maintains that there was nothing mechanically
or electrically wrong with the
pump, and that it just needed to be primed. Such priming of the pool pump,
according to the evidence
of the Landlord, involved the removal of the filter
box housing and adding two cups of water. While the outgoing condition report
notes that the operation of the pool pump could not be checked at the time of
the outgoing inspection due to a lack of power, a subsequent
Building Inspection
report carried out by Darwin Building Inspections (the ‘Building
Report’) dated 20 April 2015 notes
that the pool pump was
‘operational’. This is of little assistance, however, because, as
shall be discussed below, there
is evidence that the pool pump was serviced in
January 2015.
the deficiencies in the evidence relating to the pool pump, the determination of
this issue turns on the onus of proof. The
onus is on the Tenants to establish
on the balance of probabilities that the pool pump was faulty. The Tenants have
not met this
follows from what I have set out above that the Tenants’ claims set out in
items 3 and 4 in the Table of Tenants’ Claims
are dismissed. With respect
to item 5, which relates to the purchase and disposal of a pool draining pump,
no documentary evidence
of the purchase or the disposal of such a pump was
produced by the Tenants. Therefore, I also dismiss this claim.
Tenants maintain that they notified the Landlord of the problem relating to
loose silicone, which is item 6 in the Table of Tenants’
Claims, on 25
November 2013 in the letter referred to at [21] above. The Landlord did attend
to these repairs, although the evidence
is not at all clear as to when such
repairs were made. This is irrelevant, however, because the extent of the
Tenants’ damages
appear to be confined to the purchase of a scrapping tool
and silicone gun for which no receipts were produced. While the Tenants
made a claim for risk of injury arising from rotten floorboards, in evidence at
the inquiry Ms Bader admitted that no such ‘risk’
eventuated during
the term of the tenancy. Finally, the Landlord relies on the fact that the
Building Report does not disclose the
existence of rotten floorboards. Taking
all of the above into consideration, I dismiss the Tenants’ claim set out
in the Table of Tenants’ Claims.
Tenants’ claim relating to alleged damage suffered as a consequence of the
termite infestation, being item 7 in the Table
of Tenants’ Claims, is also
dismissed. While the Landlord accepts that there were termites in trees on the
Premises, none of
the evidence adduced by the Tenants proved on the balance of
probabilities that a dog kennel was destroyed, the cost of such kennel
the trees affected with termites were a danger to the Tenants’
Tenants’ damages claim relating to faulty air conditioning units had three
distinct components: increased electricity usage
resulting from an inoperative
remote; the failure of the unit in one of the bedrooms to work; and the
dismantling of one of the air-conditioning
units. No documentary evidence was
adduced by the Tenants in support of their claim for an alleged increase in
electricity usage.
Further, it would appear from the evidence that the problem
with the air-conditioning unit that did not work was not reported to
until 6 August 2014, which is more than 16 months after the tenancy commenced.
In an email from Ms Bader to Ms Boakes
of the Agent dated 17 August
2014, Ms Bader notes that “I am just writing to notify you that the
Air-conditioning Technicians
attended yesterday, Saturday 16 August, just after
9am”. It would appear from the email that the technicians installed a new
air-conditioning unit in the first bedroom.
find that the Landlord is not in breach of his obligation to repair the
air-conditioning unit. Once notified, the Landlord acted
with reasonable
diligence to have the unit repaired (s 57(2)(b) of the RTA). Further, in the
absence of any evidence to support the
Tenants’ allegation that a faulty
remote for the air-conditioner resulted in higher electricity costs this claim
also cannot
be sustained. It follows that I dismiss the Tenants’ claim set
out in item 8 in the Table of Tenants’ Claims.
issue of the dismantling of one of the air-conditioning units was the subject of
conflicting evidence at the inquiry. While it
not entirely clear in which room
the dismantled air-conditioning unit was located, nothing turns on this fact as
both parties acknowledged
that there was a dismantled air-conditioning unit in
one of the rooms of the Premises.
Tenants deny that they dismantled the air-conditioning unit. The evidence relied
on by the Landlord to rebut this denial consisted
of the following:
Agent’s inspection report dated 4 September 2014, in which photos indicate
that the air-conditioning unit in ‘Bedroom
1’ was partially
dismantled (although from the photo it appears that the unit was still affixed
to the wall);
invoice from Top End Property Maintenance dated 28 October 2014 in which it is
noted under the heading ‘Work Completed’
that: “Travelled to
house to service a/c units as required to, was told not touch a/c that had been
pulled apart by Tennent
Agent’s inspection report, while establishing that there was a partially
dismantled air-conditioning unit in one of the
rooms, is neutral on the question
of who dismantled the unit. With respect to the invoice, the person at Top End
Property Maintenance
who made the previous representation referred to in the
invoice, and set out in the preceding paragraph, was not called by the Landlord
to give evidence, nor was a statutory declaration of the person who made the
representation adduced in evidence.
to s 141(3) of the
Commissioner is not bound by evidentiary rules but may inform himself or herself
as he or she thinks fit”. While
I am not bound by evidentiary rules, I
nevertheless have concerns in this case about accepting a previous
representation of an unidentified
employee of Top End Property Maintenance as
proof of the fact that it was the Tenants who dismantled the air-conditioning
particular, I have no way of ascertaining whether such representation
is first hand or more remote hearsay, which has a significant
impact on the
reliability of the evidence. As the Australian Law Reform Commission has
he view should be taken that second-hand hearsay is generally
so unreliable that it should be inadmissible except where some guarantees
reliability can be shown together with the need for its
admissibility
the case of business records, which it can be argued characterises the invoice
from Top End Property Maintenance, greater latitude
is given to the admission of
hearsay evidence. For example, the
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation)
(NT), s 69(2) provides that:
The hearsay rule does not
apply to the document (so far as it contains the representation) if the
representation was made:
(a) by a person who had or might reasonably be supposed to have had personal
knowledge of the asserted fact; or
(b) on the basis of information directly or indirectly supplied by a person
who had or might reasonably be supposed to have had personal
knowledge of the
asserted fact.
that neither the employee of Top End Property Maintenance who made the
representation, nor the source of the information that
it was the Tenants who
dismantled the air-conditioning unit, have been identified, I have no way of
knowing whether the unidentified
employee of Top End Property Maintenance
“had or might reasonably supposed to have had personal knowledge” of
that it was the Tenants who dismantled the air-conditioning unit. For
example, it is conceivable that the employee of Top End Maintenance
was informed
by a person other than the Tenants that it was the Tenants who had dismantled
the air-conditioning unit. Further, it
is conceivable that such informant did
not have “personal knowledge of the asserted fact”.
this case, who dismantled the air-conditioning unit is relevant to the
Landlord’s claim for compensation under s 122 of the
RTA. The Landlord,
therefore, has the onus of establishing, on the balance of probabilities, the
fact that it was the Tenants who
dismantled the unit. Taking into consideration
the fact that Ms Bader in evidence denied that the air-conditioning unit was
by the Tenants, and the fact that the Landlord adduced no evidence
from the employee of Top End Property Maintenance who made the
above-noted
representation, I cannot be satisfied that the previous representation contained
in the invoice by Top End Property Maintenance
is reliable evidence of the truth
of the facts asserted in that representation. In other words, I cannot be
satisfied that the reference
in the invoice to being told not to touch the
air-conditioning unit that had been pulled apart by the tenant is evidence of
that it was the Tenants who dismantled the unit. What impact this has
on the Landlord’s claim will be addressed below.
now to the leaking taps, the Tenants allege that the taps in the kitchen leaked
from 10 February to 12 August 2014, and that
such leaks led to higher water
consumption. This notwithstanding, it would appear from the evidence that the
Tenants did not notify
the Landlord of the leaking taps until 14 July 2014. The
Landlord’s evidence, which is not disputed by the Tenants, is that
his brother-in-law attend at the Premises to assess the problem. The Landlord
was told by his brother-in-law that the tap
seals would have to be reset by a
plumber. It would appear that the problem was resolved by 12 August 2014.
In the circumstances
I find that the Landlord, once notified of the problem,
acted with reasonable diligence to have the defect repaired (s 57(2)(b) of
the RTA). The Tenants’ claim set out in item 9 in the Table of
Tenants’ Claims above is dismissed.
Tenants’ claim for compensation arising from non-functioning fire alarms
(item 11 in the Table of Tenants’ Claims)
is also dismissed. It is the
Tenants’ evidence that they notified the Landlord of the problem on 25
August 2014. As evidenced
by the letter from JK Electrical Pty Ltd dated
25 September 2014, the non-functioning fire alarms were replaced. That this
is not in dispute. The Landlord acted with reasonable diligence to have
the defect repaired (s 57(2)(b) of the RTA).
Tenants have made a general claim for damages arising from the Landlord using a
storeroom on the premises to store some of the
Landlord’s items. That such
items were stored was not denied by the Landlord. Ms Bader’s evidence was
that she complained
to the Agent about the Landlord’s use of the
storeroom, however, she gave no details about when, and to which employee of the
Agent, the complaint was made. According to the Landlord there was no evidence
of a complaint having been made concerning the use
of the storeroom, and he was
not aware that his storage of items on the Premises was an issue. In the absence
of any evidence to
support the Tenants’ assertion that such a complaint
was made to the Agent, I accept the evidence of the Landlord on this issue.
Tenants’ claim set out in item 12 in the Table of Tenants’ Claims
above is dismissed.
Tenants allege that there was a problem with the front door of the Premises
jamming which resulted in the Tenants’ child
being locked in the house.
Consequently, they had to break into the house, which resulted in damage to the
front door knob. According
to the Tenants it cost $26.00 to replace the door
knob. No receipt for the cost of the item was adduced.
the inquiry I asked Ms Bader why she did not simply enter the Premises through
the back door. In response, Ms Bader indicated that
the back door was also
locked because the “children locked themselves in the house”. Given
that the necessity to break
into the Premises arose from the conduct of the
Tenants’ children, no claim for the replacement value of the door knob can
be made against the Landlord. The Tenants’ claim set out in item 14 in the
Table of Tenants’ Claims is dismissed.
final claim for compensation made by the Tenants was for distress and
disappointment. For this the Tenants seek $500.00. To order
that compensation
for loss or damage suffered by the Tenants should be paid to the Tenants by the
Landlord pursuant to s 122 of the
RTA, I have to be satisfied that the Landlord
“has failed to comply with the agreement, or an obligation under the [RTA]
to the tenancy agreement”. As the above discussion and findings
illustrate, I am not satisfied that the Landlord has failed
in this regard. The
Tenants’ claim set out in item 17 in the Table of Tenants’ Claims
above is dismissed.
Landlord’s claim for
compensation
Landlord’s claim for compensation has been noted at [8]-[10] above.
Dealing first with the items noted in the RT08, Ms Bader
conceded at the inquiry
that unpaid rent in the sum of $942.30 was owing to the Landlord at the
termination of the tenancy. The Landlord,
therefore, is entitled to retain the
sum of $942.30 from the security deposit (s 112(3)(e)).
Landlord also made a claim under s 112(3)(c) of the RTA for cleaning the
Premises. An outgoing condition report was prepared in
the presence of at least
one of the Tenants, Mr Tennyenhuis. Pursuant to s 111 of the RTA, the outgoing
condition report is conclusive
evidence of the condition of the premises at the
time the Tenants vacated. In addition to the outgoing condition report,
photographic
evidence of the condition of the Premises after the Tenants vacated
also was adduced by the Landlord. Based on the outgoing condition
report, and
the photographic evidence, I am satisfied that the Premises was left in an
unreasonably dirty condition within the meaning
of s 112(3)(c) of the RTA,
and that the Landlord has complied with the requirements of s 112(5) with
respect to this aspect of the
claim. The Landlord is entitled to retain from the
security deposit the sum of $940.00 for cleaning.
Landlord also claimed the cost of spraying the Premises for fleas and ticks. In
support of this claim, an invoice for $242.00
from Durakill Pest Control dated 9
October 2014 was annexed to the statutory declaration of Jessica Boakes. It was
not in dispute
that the Tenants kept pets at the Premises. Pursuant to a
Memorandum of Variation of Tenancy Agreement duly executed by the parties,
Tenants agreed to have a tick and flea spray done at the termination of the
tenancy. I am satisfied, therefore, that the Landlord
is entitled to retain from
the security deposit the sum of $242.00 for the cost of spraying the Premises
for ticks and fleas.
Landlord’s claim in the RT08 for making good damage to the Premises, as
has been noted above, consists of $794.50 for damage
to blinds, and $500 for the
repair of holes in screens. In support of these claim, quotes from NT Blinds Pty
Ltd dated 10 October
2014, and from JACZ Carpentry Services dated
14 October 2014, were annexed to the statutory declaration of Jessica
first with the blinds, Ms Bader at the inquiry conceded that the Tenants were
responsible for the damage to the blinds in
one of the bedrooms, but otherwise
denied that the Tenants were responsible for any damage to other blinds in the
Premises. The blinds
in the Premises were made of metal. According to Ms Bader,
at the commencement of the tenancy, she noted a number of instances where
blinds had been bent and forced back into place. It was her evidence that any
damage to the blinds was pre-existing; a claim
that was denied by the
to say that the incoming condition report does not support the Tenants’
claim. Further, both the outgoing condition
report and the quotes from
NT Blinds supports the Landlord’s claim that the blinds were damaged
during the Tenants’ occupancy.
Based on the evidence provided, and s 111
of the RTA, I am satisfied that the Landlord is entitled to retain from the
security deposit
the sum of $794.50 to make good the Tenants’ damage to
the blinds.
damage to the screens was also noted in the outgoing condition report. I am
satisfied, therefore, that the Landlord is entitled
to retain from the security
deposit the sum of $500.00 to make good the damage to the screens.
in the RT08 Notice is a claim for $1,856.30 for unpaid charges for water (s
112(3)(e) of the RTA). This claim was subsequently
retain from a security deposit the amount necessary to pay for unpaid water
charges, the RTA requires that the Landlord comply
with both ss 118 and
112(5)(c). I am not satisfied that the requirements of s 118 have been met.
While the Premises are individually
metered for water usage and the tenant was
required to pay for excess water used pursuant to the terms of the tenancy
the amount requested does not appear to be calculated in accordance
with the tenancy agreement.
tenancy agreement, cl 3, provides that the Tenants agree to pay all the charges
xcess water in respect of the Property (“Excess water
charges” shall mean charges levied for water used in connection
Property in excess of 500 kilolitres per year, or in the case of any broken
period, a pro rata amount calculated in accordance
of water consumption sourced from Power and Water Corporation was adduced by the
Landlord. The water consumption for the
period 21/03/2013 to 16/09/2014 was
1,882 ‘Consumption Units’. The correlation between kilolitres and
‘consumption
units’ was not explained, either in the
Landlord’s submissions or in evidence at the inquiry. The Landlord, in an
dated 30 August 2015, maintained that the Tenants used 1,959 kilolitres of
water for the period of their tenancy and claimed $1,615.26
as the cost
attributable to such excess water
possible to ascertain, from the evidence adduced by the Landlord, whether the
amount requested was calculated in accordance
with the tenancy agreement as
required by s 118(2) of the RTA.
problem with the Landlord’s claim for unpaid charges for water payable by
the Tenants arises from the application of
s 112(5) of the RTA. As was noted in
the decision of the delegate of the Commissioner of Tenancies, Mr Bruxner, in
Gregory Watt (Tenant) v Michelle Whittaker (Landlord)
(RT1415-0377,
21 April 2015) at [49]:
The purpose of the notice
requirements in s 112(5) is to ensure that the tenant is made aware: 1) that the
landlord proposes retaining
part or all of the security deposit; 2) how much the
landlord proposes retaining; and 3) upon what precise basis. This allows
tenant to make a judgment as to the reasonableness of what the landlord
proposes and, in turn, to make an informed decision whether
to challenge the
retention of part or all of the security deposit. Again, the critical underlying
consideration is that, except to
the extent the Act says otherwise, the security
deposit is the tenant’s money.
the information provided by the Landlord, there was no way the Tenants could
know the precise basis on which the Landlord’s
claim for excess water was
calculated. Only the Power and Water consumption information noted above was
annexed to the statutory
declaration of Jessica Boakes. No receipts, invoices or
other documents relating to the claim for unpaid charges for water were annexed
to Ms Boakes’ declaration. Further, as has been noted above, the
subsequent information adduced by the Landlord in support
of the claim for
unpaid water charges was inadequate. In the circumstances, the Landlord is not
entitled to retain from the security
deposit the sum of $1,615.26 for unpaid
water charges.
claims not included in the RT08, but now claimed by the Landlord as loss or
damage pursuant to s 122 of the RTA, were the damage
to the air-conditioning
unit as discussed above in the sum of $1,534.70, and pool cleaning in the sum of
$600.32. Dealing first with
the claim for pool cleaning, the Landlord did
provide an invoice for charges relating to the cleaning and maintenance of the
The services provided date from 8 January 2015, however, which is three
months after the termination of the tenancy. Further, while
the outgoing
condition report does indicate that the spa was ‘green’ and that the
pool pump could not be tested because
the power had been disconnected, as
I’ve noted above the Landlord’s evidence was that there was nothing
electrically
or mechanically wrong with the pump. In the circumstances, and in
particular the time delay in having the pool cleaned and the Landlord’s
evidence regarding the condition of the pool pump at the termination of the
tenancy, I am not satisfied that the need for such an
extensive cleaning of the
pool and servicing of the pool pump can be attributable to the actions of the
Tenants. I dismiss the Landlord’s
claim for $600.32 for loss relating to
pool cleaning.
now to the Landlord’s claim for damage to the air-conditioning unit, I am
not satisfied on the evidence that the Tenants
were responsible for the damage.
My concerns about the evidence are set out at [30]-[36] above. Given that the
Landlord has brought
a claim under s 122 of the RTA for the cost of replacement
of the damaged unit, the onus in on the Landlord to establish, on the
probabilities, that the Tenants were responsible for such damage. This the
Landlord has failed to do and, therefore, I
dismiss the Landlord’s claim
for $1,534.70 for damage to the air-conditioning unit.
summary, the Landlord is entitled to the following:
s 112(3)(a) – making good damage to the Premises or ancillary
$1,294.50 - consisting of:
Damage to blinds
Repair of holes
in screens - $500.00
s 112(3)(c) – cleaning Premises or ancillary property
$1,182.00 – consisting of:
Spray for ticks,
fleas and cockroaches - $242.00
s 112(3)(e) – unpaid rent
follows from the above that:
Tenants’ application for compensation under s 122 of the RTA for loss
or damage in the sum of $9,877.87 is dismissed;
Landlord is entitled to retain the security deposit in the sum of $2,200;
Landlord is entitled to an order for compensation against the Tenants jointly
and severally in the sum of $1,218.80.
while the Landlord in the Response made a claim for costs of the proceedings, I
decline to make such an order. Pursuant to
s 147(2) of the
a costs order
against an applicant can be made if the “Commissioner is of the opinion
that an application to the Commissioner
was frivolous or vexatious or brought
otherwise than in good faith”. While the Tenants’ claim was
ultimately unsuccessful,
it did not fall within s
application for compensation under s 122 of the
Residential Tenancies
(NT) of the tenants, Amanda Bader and Blake Tennyenhuis, for loss
or damage in the sum of $9,877.87 is dismissed.
tenants, Amanda Bader and Blake Tennyenhuis, are jointly and severally liable to
pay $1,218.80 to the landlord, Shaun Allison,
as compensation under s 122
Residential Tenancies Act (
NT). Such amount is to be paid to the
landlord by the tenants within a reasonable time, but in any event no later than
30 days from
the date of this order.
September 2015
Les McCrimmon
Delegate of the Commissioner of Tenancies
NT Blinds Pty
Ltd quote number 00243480 dated 10 October
Carpentry Services quote dated 14 October 2014 (which quote related to 15
windows and 1 screen door in the sum of $1,000 plus
Property Services invoice number 00001503 dated 10 October
Pest Control invoice number 3569 dated 9 October
the Landlord to NTCAT and the solicitor for the Tenant dated 30 August
Landlord to NTCAT and the solicitor for the Tenants dated 30 August
Bader Declaration at [9] it was alleged that no remote was provided when the air
conditioning unit was replaced on 3 April
2014. At the inquiry, however, Ms
Bader’s evidence was that a remote was provided but that it did not work
resulting in the
air conditioning unit being set at 18C; the result being higher
electricity
respect to the guttering, the guttering on the front of the Premises is
described as “Secure, weathered” and the
guttering on the back as
“Few leaks in
Residential Tenancies Act
(NT) as in force on 1 May
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Evidence (Interim)
, Report 26, vol 1
from the Landlord to NTCAT and the solicitor for the Tenant dated 30 August
from the Landlord to NTCAT and the solicitor for the Tenants dated 30 August
Residential Tenancies Act
(NT) as in force on 1 May 2012.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (247 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter