URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTRTCmr/2015/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:22:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kopp & Wilson -v- Aughterson & Aughterson [2015] NTRTCmr 6 (17 March 2015)
REASONS FOR THE ORDER OF THE COMMISSIONER OF TENANCIES
INQUIRY - 4 MARCH 2015
PETER KOPP AND ROBYN WILSON
ANDREW AUGHTERSON AND JUSTINA AUGHTERSON
RT1415-0376
is a determination of an application dated 24 December 2014 by the Tenants,
Peter Kopp & Robyn Wilson, seeking orders for
compensation for excessive
rent under section 42 and compensation under section 122 of the
Residential
Tenancies Act
(NT) (“the Act”). The application is made in
respect of premises being 68 Adcock Crescent, Nakara in the Northern Territory
of Australia.
amended Notice of Inquiry dated 3 February 2015 was posted to the parties. The
inquiry was conducted on 4 March 2015 during which
evidence was taken from
Andrew Aughterson on behalf of himself and his wife (“the
landlords”) and Robyn Wilson on behalf
of herself and Peter Kopp
(“the tenants”).
evidence before the Inquiry consisted of the following material:
documents submitted by the tenants in support of their application and kept
under identifying tabs on the Commissioner of Tenancies
file numbered
RT1415-0376 (‘the file’);
documents submitted by the landlords in response to the tenants’
application and kept under identifying tabs on the file;
documents relied upon by the tenants at the hearing and subsequently provided
after the hearing;
landlords’ written response to these documents;
tenants’ written response to the landlords’ written response;
landlords’ final written response; and
oral evidence of the parties at the hearing.
the basis of the documentary and oral evidence before the Inquiry, I find there
is a tenancy agreement within the meaning of and
subject to the provisions of
the Act on the following terms:
Duration:: Fixed term commencing on
24 June 2013 and ending on 26 January 2014.
Rent: $ 770.00 per week payable fortnightly in advance
Security Deposit: $ 3,080.00
Background/Chronology
landlords provided evidence that the property was initially advertised on 24
April 2013 on
realestate.com.au
as being a family home with pool man and
gardener at a rent rate of $820.00 per week.
tenants provided evidence that they responded to a May 2013 advertisement for
the property on
realestate.com.au
which advertised the property as being
a family home with pool man and gardener at a rent rate of $770.00 per
tenants submitted a rental application to the appointed agent, One Real Estate,
which was subsequently accepted.
tenancy agreement was signed by the parties dated 17 June 2013 with a
commencement date of 24 June 2013 and a rent rate of $770.00
per week. The
contain specific provisions indicating that the
landlords are responsible for the provision of gardening and pool servicing
the agreement.
landlords were of the view that the rental rate of $770.00 had been negotiated
down from their initial asking rate of $820.00
to reflect the fact that a pool
man and gardener
included in the terms of the tenancy
tenants assert that they were advised in a phone conversation with One Real
Estate on 25 June 2013 that the terms of the tenancy
include regular pool maintenance serving.
tenants emailed the agent the same day advising that the advertisement that they
responded to included reference to the provision
of pool and garden maintenance
agent responded the same day advising that they would ensure that a pool company
attends on a monthly basis.
pool maintenance services organised by the agent commenced on 3 July 2013 and
garden maintenance services on 11 July 2013.
doubt in response to the tenants ongoing complaints about the pool and the
increasing costs the landlords were incurring, on 9
September 2013 the landlords
asserted that pool maintenance services paid for by the landlords
a component of the tenancy agreement.
tenants again took this issue up with the agent on 10 September 2013 referencing
the advertisement that they had responded to
stating that this service was to be
provided by the landlords.
tenants’ view of the circumstances surrounding their entering into the
tenancy arrangements are supported by an email dated
22 November 2013 from One
Real Estate to the landlords.
any event the evidence provided shows that the landlords ultimately accepted
that pool and gardening services were advertised as
being included in the rent
rate with the consequences being that the landlords arranged for pool
maintenance and gardening services
to be undertaken on a regular basis.
Subsequently
the landlords also agreed that all excess water charges would be paid by the
landlords although this does not appear
to have been conveyed to the
of the tenants’ frustration appears to centre on the fact that they felt
they had to continually prove that these services
were indeed included in the
rent for the property.
The tenant’s application under s42
tenants’ claim under section 42 centres on the fact that one of the
essential features they were looking for in a rental
property was that it had to
have a pool. Whilst the property in question has a pool they argue that for a
range of reasons the pool
was not being maintained in an acceptable working
order for the duration of their tenancy by the landlord.
such they did not have the amenity of the pool that was factored in to the rent
they were paying to the landlords.
is not entirely clear that their claim in this matter rests solely on a claim
under section 42. In most respects it appears to
be a claim for compensation
under section 122 for the failure of the landlords to maintain ancillary
equipment in working order.
For this reason I have analysed the claim under both
sections and provided findings under each treatment of the claim.
a claim under section 42, the tenants argue that the rent they were paying under
their tenancy agreement for the property was excessive
as it included the
provision of a pool that purported to be in working order but in fact, in their
view, wasn’t.
tenants are seeking a retrospective order declaring the rent payable under the
tenancy agreement to be excessive.
determining what the tenant’s believe should have been the rent payable
for the property they have produced as evidence an
advertisement for what they
claim to be a comparable premises in the same locality with an advertised rent
rate considerably lower
($650.00 per week) than what they were paying ($770.00
per week) under their tenancy agreement.
basis of their argument then lies in the fact that the rent differential could
only be attributed to the ‘mark up’
by the landlord for the service
that were being provided by the landlord under the terms of the tenancy
agreement, namely gardening
and pool services at the landlords’
the claim centres on valuing the pool component of the rent, the tenants
estimate this to be $105.00 per week of the total rent
and make a further
adjustment to this rate of $25.00 per week for the maintenance to be done by the
tenants and not the landlords.
This leaves an assessed value of the pool
component at $80.00 per week which, under the tenants claim, represents the
excessive rental
tenants say that the rent they paid under the tenancy agreement should be
reduced by $80.00 per week (ie from $770.00 to $690.00
per week) on and from the
commencement of the tenancy agreement on 24 June 2013.
entirety of section 42 is set out as
42 Commissioner
may declare rent excessive
(1) The Commissioner may, on the application of the tenant, declare that
the rent payable under a tenancy agreement is excessive.
(2) The Commissioner must not make a declaration under subsection (1)
unless he or she:
(a) has given 14 days notice to the landlord of the application;
(b) has invited the landlord to make submissions to the
Commissioner in relation to the application before the date specified
notice; and
(c) has considered any submissions made by the landlord.
(3) The Commissioner may only make a declaration under subsection (1)
if the rent paid in respect of the tenancy agreement is, in
the opinion of the
Commissioner, excessive:
(a) having regard to the general level of rents for comparable
premises in the same or similar localities and the cost of any
services provided
in connection with the tenancy agreement by the landlord or the tenant; or
(b) because the level of services provided under the agreement has,
in the opinion of the Commissioner, been reduced to a significant
extent, having
regard to the cost of any services provided in connection with the tenancy
agreement by the landlord or the tenant.
(4) If the Commissioner makes a declaration under subsection (1), he or
she may by order:
(a) specify the rent payable for the premises and vary the
agreement by reducing the rent payable under the agreement accordingly;
(b) specify a date (which is not to be before the date of the
application) from which the variation takes effect; and
(c) specify the period of not more than 12 months that the order
is to remain in force.
(5) The Commissioner may, on the application of the landlord, vary or
revoke an order under this section as the Commissioner thinks
(6) While an order remains in force under this section, the landlord must
not ask for or receive rent exceeding the amount fixed by
Maximum penalty: 20 penalty units.
regard to the structure and wording of the section I believe that any
consideration of an application by a tenant under this
section can only relate
to a tenancy presently in existence. The section does not contemplate the making
of a retrospective order
after a tenancy agreement has come to an end.
(4)(b) in particular provides that where the Commissioner makes an order under
section 42, he may specify a date (which
is to be before the date of
application) from which the variation takes effect. Clearly the section is aimed
at a prospective application
not retrospective.
find that I have no capacity to provide the relief sought by the tenants under
section 42.
The tenants’ application for compensation
functionality of the pool is the subject of significant dispute between the
tenants and the landlords and forms the largest component
of the tenants’
claim for compensation.
incoming condition inspection was conducted on 20 June 2013. The report (ICR)
arising from this inspection has the agent indicating
by ticking predefined
fields that the pool water was “clean”, “undamaged” and
“working”. The
box titled “Tenant Agrees” remained
un-ticked and the tenants made the following handwritten notes against this
“Pool slimy with many leaves + debris in
“Pool not acceptable – pool to be balance & cleaned @
work order was issued by the agent to Calipso Pools & Spas the same day
which details the work required in the following
“Please clean and balance pool and provide handover
for new tenants (Moving in Monday 24
30 June 2013 the tenants emailed the agent as follows:
have not yet heard from the pool man and the pool is getting
agent responded on 1 July 2013 as follows:
“I have spoken
to the pool company & they will be in touch with you shortly to arrange for
the pool clean & handover.
They will then attend monthly to give it a clean
& balance.”
tenants responded to the agent’s email on 2 July 2013 as
“ Matt – the pool fellow is coming over
Wednesday at 8.30am. Apart from the cleaning he said he will be doing a
As the pool man is included in the rent, I am not sure why or what the
handover will be. Could you please advise me?”
agent responded the same day via email as follows:
pool guy’s will be attending once a month to clean and balance the pool,
however there may be times where you may
have to give it a bit of a
clean/backwash in between their visits so I always find it helpful that tenants
know how to operate everything
just in case.”
invoice from Calipso Pools & Spas ($417.85) shows that they attended the
property on 3 July 2013 and provided a handover to
the new tenants in addition
to cleaning and vacuuming the pool and adding a range of chemicals.
Pools & Spas also attended the property on 5 July 2013 to attend to issues
with the pool pump ($145.05) and again on 22
August 2013 for a pool service
Winnellie attended on 23 August 2013 to replace the filter ($1,100.00) and then
subsequently on the following dates to undertake
regular pool maintenance
18 September
2013 ($213.50);
09 October 2103
13 November 2013
12 December 2013
($205.50); and
09 January 2014
various occasions over the period 10 July 2013 to 27 August 2013 the tenants
raised ongoing issues with the pool with the agent
including problems with the
pool pump. The tenants assert they needed to run the pool filter for 4 days
continuously and sought recompense
for electricity costs. Concern about water
consumption was also raised.
Pool compensation claim
($2,270.00)
have decided to consider the tenants claim under section 42 as being a claim for
compensation under section 122 for the failure
of the landlords to maintain
ancillary equipment in working order.
evidence suggests that all pool maintenance issues were dealt with by the agent
in a timely manner.
have been provided with no evidence by the tenants to support their view of the
ongoing state of the pool that made it unusable
in the face of the documentary
evidence provided from the landlords in respect of pool maintenance servicing
and associated costs.
do however find that the pool should have been balanced and cleaned prior to the
tenants taking up occupancy on 24 June 2013. In
the absence of evidence that
this occurred I can only conclude that the pool was not cleaned and balanced
until 3 July 2013.
is no doubt from the evidence before me that the landlords were obligated to
provide pool maintenance services as a component
of the tenancy agreement.
Notwithstanding
this, the pool should have been fully ready for use on 24 June 2013. The ICR as
amended by the tenants and accepted
by the landlords shows this not to have been
therefore find that the tenants are entitled to be compensated for the 10 day
period that the pool was unusable.
assess the pool component of the rent as being $50.00 per week and as such award
compensation of
Pool Chemicals ($147.50)
tenancy agreement obligates the tenants to maintain the pool in good working
order between the pool services being paid for by
the landlords. The need for
the tenants to purchase chemicals is therefore not unreasonable in the
circumstances.
the basis of the evidence before me I can find no basis for this component of
Electricity ($270.06)
element of the claim is made on the basis that the tenants have incurred higher
electricity costs due to ongoing problems with
the pool requiring the filter to
be run for longer periods than would normally be the case.
tenants assert that they were required to run the pool filter at one stage
continuously for four days. No evidence was produced
to substantiate the need
for this course of action.
tenants claim that when they first experienced problems with the pool they were
advised by a Poolwerx employee that the problems
be due to the pool
not having been maintained between tenancies. The tenants provided no
independent evidence to corroborate that
this conversation occurred. As such I
must treat it as hearsay.
tenants have assessed this additional cost as being 20% of their electricity
does seem an extraordinary amount to claim as it implies that in excess of 20%
of their entire electricity bill is attributed
to a single appliance – the
pool filter.
am not satisfied on the basis of the evidence before me that the tenants have
sufficiently made out their claim.
Public Swimming Pool Fees
evidence suggests that the pool was being fully maintained at the landlords
expense on and from 3 July 2013 and faults identified
by the tenants attended to
as soon as possible.
element of the tenants claim relates to public pool access fees on and from 9
September 2013, well after regular pool maintenance
services commenced.
tenants have produced no evidence other than emails between themselves and the
agent asserting the pool not being suitable for
use. These claims appear
inconsistent with the evidence that regular pool maintenance services were
provided at the landlords expense.
Fuel ($111.02)
element of the claim relates to fuel costs for travel by the tenant in their
motor vehicle to and from the public pool for the
period they allege the pool at
the property was not in a usable condition.
the reasons contained at paragraphs [62] to [64] this claim
Distress and disturbance – pool related problems
diminishing the tenants genuine feelings of distress in relation to their views
that they had to constantly prove the conditions
of the tenancy agreement
related to the landlords obligations for pool and garden maintenance services,
on the basis of the evidence
before me, I am unable to find that the tenants
have suffered physical inconvenience to a level that would warrant compensation
distress and disappointment.
am not convinced that the tenant has failed to receive proper treatment at the
hands of the landlords or their then agent and have
therefore suffered distress
and disappointment.
fact the tenants complemented the agent in an email of 17 February
“Please thank Joely and the whole team for being a
pleasure to deal with for the duration of our lease. Actually I will drop
Gardening purchases ($7.00)
claim relates to the purchase by the tenants of a hose set and connector to hand
water the garden whilst the irrigation system
was unusable.
allowed for the reasons detailed in paragraphs [74] to
Gardening compensation claim ($216.00)
tenants noted on the ICR that the irrigation system had not been in use for some
time as the lawn and gardens were in a poor to
average state.
tenants emailed the agent on 30 June 2013 to advise that they had not had
having agreed to
arrange for a contractor to attend the premises following the incoming
inspection) and that lawn was looking to
be in poor condition.
agent responded the following day to advise that the contractor would be in
contractor attend on 2 July 2013 and the evidence suggests that the repair work
required to get the irrigation system working
properly was significant and that
the agent had provided the contractor with the authority to do whatever was
necessary to fix the
10 July 2013 the tenant emailed the agent to advise that the contractor had not
yet returned to the property and that they had
purchased a hose to hand water to
prevent the plants from dying. The email also requests that the tenants be
relieved from their
obligation under the tenancy agreement for excess water
charges for the duration of the lease (along with some recompense for
electricity
consumption).
agent responded the same day advising that they would follow up with the
contractor and also that they would discuss water and
electricity charges with
the landlords.
17 July 2013 the tenant emailed the agent requesting that the contractor return
to the property as there was a particular area
of the system not working that
presumably had been like that since the contractor had repaired the system on 2
July 2013 (rock garden).
agent responded the same day to the effect that the contractor was busy doing
other priority jobs and would attend to the work
2 August 2013 the tenants again emailed the agent asking when the contractor
would return to site.
tenants emailed the agent on 7 August 2013 advising that they had still not
received advice as to when the contractor would be
back on site and that they
only had a gardener attend once since moving in on 24 June 2013.
20 August 2013 the tenants emailed the agent advising that the contractor had
still not returned and fixed the system to the area
previously advised (refer
para [80]) and that the tenants had purchased a hose to hand water this area.
The email also indicates
that a gardener attended on 2 July 2013 and mowed the
property but has not been back since.
email was sent to the agent on 28 August 2013 asking when the contractor would
be back on site and also advising that the water
meter pit had water in it up to
tenants sent an email on 9 September 2013 requesting that the gardener attend
the property at a specified time and requesting
an update on the situation with
the contractor finishing the work to the area not working. Concern was also
expressed about the water
collecting in the water meter pit (which was also
identified as maintenance issue during a 20 August 2013 property
inspection).
agent responded the same day to advise that they were changing gardeners for the
property and would check their availability for
the time requested by the
tenants. The agent also indicated that in discussions with the landlords there
was no intention that the
sprinkler system was to be upgraded to include the
area the subject of the previous emails. In a further email to the tenants the
same day the agent advised that messages had been left with the contractor and
the new gardener.
16 September 2013 the agent emailed the tenants to advise that the gardener
would attend monthly in the ‘dry’ season
and fortnightly in the
‘wet’ season.
18 November 2013 the tenants emailed the agent to advise that no one had
attended to the leak in the water pit since this was first
raised on 20 August
agent responded the same day and advised that the contractor had been contacted
twice previously and the agent would contact them
again that day. The agent
raised an order on the contractor the same day.
tenants emailed the agent on 29 November 2013 and advised that the contractor
had attended on 25 November 2013 and repaired the
problems (including the water
pit problem was caused by palm roots).
were provided by the landlords which show garden maintenance services were
provided as follows:
11 July 2013
22 August 2013
13 September
2013 ($77.00);
03 October 2013
27 November 2013
($83.60); and
10 December 2013
tenants are claiming compensation of $9.00 per week for a 24 week period that
the gardening/irrigation problems remained unresolved.
The claim is based on the
inconvenience of having to undertake lawn/yard maintenance.
tenants claim that they were advised by the irrigation contractor that the
problems with the system were due to the fact that
the system was not properly
maintained between tenancies. Likewise they claim that the contractor also
advised them that he had provided
the landlords with a quote in early 2013 to
bring the system up to working order and the landlords did not act on this at
The tenants provided no independent evidence to corroborate that this
conversation occurred. As such I must treat it as hearsay.
with the compensation claim relating to the availability of the pool, the
tenants have calculated the loss based on their assessment
of the value of the
garden maintenance service as a component of the rent. They have assessed this
as being $15.00 per week and self-maintenance
at $6.00 per week leaving a rate
of $9.00 per week of the rent as the compensable amount.
it is evident that that the agent could have taken better steps to keep the
tenants informed of actions, it is nevertheless
not apparent how under either
the Act or the terms of the tenancy agreement the tenants have suffered a loss
that might give rise
to compensation.
landlords have met all water charges for the duration of the tenancy, repaired
the irrigation system and paid for regular gardening
also note that the tenants had their full security deposit returned at the end
of the tenancy.
though the landlords bore the obligation for the maintenance of the garden the
tenants were still obligated to maintain the garden
between regular
Distress and disturbance –
gardening/irrigation related problems ($40.00)
the reasons mentioned in paragraphs [68] to [70] this claim
Accordingly,
I order that:
Respondents is to pay the Applicants compensation in pursuance of section 122 in
the amount of $
Dated this 17 March 2015
Andrew Macrides
Delegate of the
Commissioner of Tenancies
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (163 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter