URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCA/2024/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:17:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McNamee v McNamee & Anor [2024] NTCA 1 (22 March 2024)
McNamee v McNamee & Anor
[2024] NTCA 1
PARTIES: McNAMEE, Mitchell
McNAMEE, Clinton Blake (as Litigation Guardian for Lorna Jennie PASCOE)
McNAMEE, Tiarni (as Litigation Guardian for Lorna Jennie PASCOE)
TITLE OF COURT: NORTHERN TERRITORY COURT OF APPEAL
FILE NO: AP 12 of 2022 (22236104)
DELIVERED: 22 March 2024
HEARING DATE: 28 September 2023
SUPPLEMENTARY
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS: 10 and 17 October 2023
JUDGMENT OF: Grant CJ, Kelly and Brownhill JJ
CATCHWORDS:
LAND LAW – Torrens title – Unregistered interests –
Existence of unregistered interests
Appeal against summary judgment for possession of land pursuant to Order 53
Supreme Court Rules
– Procedure intended to apply only in
clear cases where no question to try – Order for possession may be made
notwithstanding
factual dispute only if Court able to satisfy itself as to
material facts summarily – Factual dispute concerning whether appellant
licensee who remained in occupation without the respondents’ licence or
consent – Relevant question whether intention
of owner and appellant that
appellant have exclusive possession of property or part of it for an agreed
period – Relevant question
whether appellant acted on common assumption
that he could reside in property and acted to his detriment in reliance on that
– Whether appellant had equitable lease or proprietary interest
turned on disputed factual issues that could not be determined
hearing – Appeal allowed.
Supreme Court Rules 1987
Framlingham Aboriginal Trust v McGuiness
[2014] VSC 24
Framlingham
Aboriginal Trust v McGuiness
[2014] VSC 354
Hoare v O’Neill
(1961) 78 WN (NSW) 882
In Re Sharpe
[1980] 1 WLR 219
Investments Ltd v Hackett
[1995] UKPC 8
[1995] 1 WLR 713
Milton v Proctor
NZI Insurance Australia v Baryzcka
[2003] SASC 190
(2003) 85 SASR 497
Pappas v Bowmark Pty Ltd
[1998] VSCA 120
Radaich v Smith
[1959] HCA 45
101 CLR 209
Ramsden v Dyson
[1866] UKLawRpHL 7
(1866) LR 1 HL 129
Stephenson v
[1963] 80 WN(NSW) 1719
Varilla v Marsicovetere
[1954] VicLawRp 47
Walsh v Lonsdale
[1882] UKLawRpCh 85
(1882) 21 Ch D 9
Western Australia v Ward
[2002] HCA 28
(2002) 213 CLR 1
, referred to.
ed, 2010, Lawbook Co, [15.10],
[15.41], [15.42], [15.43], referred to.
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: D McConnel SC
Respondents: A Harris KC
Solicitors:
Appellant: Piper Grimster Jones
Respondents: Maher Raumteen Solicitors
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 28
IN THE COURT OF APPEAL
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
McNamee v McNamee & Anor
[2024] NTCA 1
AP 12 of 2022 (22236104)
MITCHELL McNAMEE
CLINTON BLAKE McNAMEE (as Litigation Guardian for LORNA JENNIE
First Respondent
TIARNI McNAMEE (as Litigation Guardian for LORNA JENNIE PASCOE)
Second Respondent
CORAM: GRANT CJ, KELLY and BROWNHILL JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 22 March 2024)
[1] This is an
appeal from judgment for possession of certain land given for the respondents
(then plaintiffs) following a summary
hearing pursuant to Order 53 of the
Supreme Court Rules 1987
history and evidence
[2] The freehold
estate in the land at 3A Neptuna Court, Larrakeyah (‘the Land’) is
held by Lorna Pascoe. She is the mother
of both the appellant (‘MM’)
and the respondents (‘CM’ and ‘TM’). She is 91 years
old. She acquired
the Land in early 2020. A townhouse has been built on the Land
(‘the Property’). The Property is virtually complete,
occupancy permit has yet been issued for it.
[3] MM and his
daughter reside in the Property.
October 2021, Ms Pascoe suffered a stroke, causing her to lose legal capacity.
On 7 March 2022, CM and TM were appointed
her guardians for financial and
personal matters. Ms Pascoe lives in a nursing home providing her with 24 hour
[5] On 21 March
2022, CM’s and TM’s solicitor wrote to MM withdrawing any consent of
Ms Pascoe for him to reside in the
Property and requiring him to vacate the
Property within seven days. It was said that, if MM did not vacate the Property
within seven
days, proceedings would be commenced under Order 53 of the SCRs
seeking possession.
asking for the seven days to be extended to 21 days, for the expenses of his
vacating, and for an immediate mediation
with CM and TM.
[6] On 22 March
2022, CM’s and TM’s solicitor replied to MM suggesting he engage a
solicitor. MM replied saying he did
not intend to engage a solicitor, but sought
to engage with CM and TM and their solicitor to articulate his concerns.
[7] On 1 April
2022, CM’s and TM’s solicitor wrote to MM indicating that, as the
time for MM to vacate the Property had
passed, a Supreme Court proceeding for
recovery of possession of the Property was being prepared. It was said MM had no
defence to such a claim, whatever Ms Pascoe may have said or done in
the past, and that all MM had were ‘privileges’
granted by Ms Pascoe
which were withdrawn by CM and TM. It was also said that CM and TM declined to
meet with him, and that if Ms
Pascoe could return to living in her home in
Brinkin, she would require expensive care which could be paid for by a return on
[8] MM remained
in possession of the Property.
[9] On 28 April
2022, CM and TM commenced proceedings in the Supreme Court against MM for the
recovery of possession of the Property
under Order 53 of the SCRs, being
proceedings numbered 2022-01009-SC, and separate proceedings for the recovery of
possession of
a vehicle, being proceedings numbered 2022-01010-SC. The
originating motions were supported by an affidavit made by CM on 14 April
CM attested that he believed MM had entered into possession of the Property
after Ms Pascoe’s stroke, that MM had taken
undue advantage of Ms
Pascoe’s generosity and frailty prior to her stroke, that he had access to
her cheque books and bank
cards after her stroke, and that he was in possession
of her vehicle and the Property despite paying no rent or any other costs
with the Property.
[10] At the
first mention of the proceedings on 19 May 2022, MM was legally represented, but
the notice of appearance had been withdrawn.
The matter was adjourned to allow
MM time to instruct his lawyers.
[11] At the
directions hearing on 26 May 2022, MM was self-represented. He initially sought
a 12 week adjournment, and then a nine
week adjournment. The matter was
adjourned for two weeks to enable him to get legal representation.
[12] At the
directions hearing on 9 June 2022, MM was again self-represented. He informed
the Court he resisted the orders sought,
had identified lawyers and was in the
process of engaging them. Orders were made requiring MM to file affidavit
evidence by 30 June
2022, and requiring CM and TM to file any affidavit evidence
in reply by 13 July 2022.
[13] At the
directions hearing on 23 June 2022, MM was once again self-represented. He
sought an extension of time to file his evidence,
which he indicated would be
from himself, his brother who was in England (not CM), his sister (not TM) and
his bank manager. No orders
were made and the application for an extension of
time was adjourned in the hope that MM would file his evidence prior to the next
[14] On 30 June
2022, MM filed two affidavits made by himself.
affidavit made on 29 June 2022 comprised six pages and 352 pages of attachments
but the filed version was missing the second
On 6 July 2022, MM filed a
re-sworn version of this affidavit, including the missing second
In that affidavit, MM deposed
(a) He had had numerous and substantial business and personal dealings with Ms
Pascoe for over 25 years.
(b) Those included building a ‘forever home’, as distinct from an
investment home, on the Land, in which he had built
a room for Ms Pascoe to
reside with him during the renovation of her home at Brinkin ‘and
thereafter if she chose to return
to [the Property] in her much older
(c) Ms Pascoe had set out to provide accommodation for MM and his six year old
daughter, close to the daughter’s school in
Larrakeyah. The Land was
identified by MM for this purpose and Ms Pascoe purchased it. From that time, MM
and Ms Pascoe had a verbal
agreement that, in lieu of payment for his project
management services in relation to the build of the Property, MM and his
could live in the Property for six years, being the duration of his
daughter’s primary schooling.
(d) As part of that agreement, Ms Pascoe gave MM full control of the Land and
the build of the Property, with Ms Pascoe signing the
agreements with builders
and making payments by cheque.
(e) During the build, MM lived in rented accommodation paid for by Ms Pascoe as
part of their verbal agreement.
(f) MM worked with the builders and consultants in relation to the build, often
for seven days per week, for eight months. He effectively
identified that the
cost of his work was $425,000 plus his expenses during the build.
(g) About five weeks before Ms Pascoe had the stroke, she proposed a variation
of their agreement, by reducing the six years to two
(h) MM did not agree with the proposed variation because by then the build was
almost complete. In response, he told Ms Pascoe to
finish the house herself and
pay him for his work.
(i) Ms Pascoe then withdrew her proposed variation and went back to the six year
agreement. She also agreed to pay the ‘costs
of the house’ for the
first two years or until he found a job, whichever came first.
(j) In accordance with the agreement, the build was completed and MM lived in
the Property thereafter, with his daughter living there
when he had her care,
which was every second week.
(k) Obtaining the certificate of occupancy was in the hands of CM.
(l) Ms Pascoe has sufficient earnings and wealth to be appropriately
accommodated and cared for in her home in Brinkin.
affidavit annexed an affidavit of Paulo de Jesus, the second builder engaged to
finish the build of the Property, an affidavit
of Tessa Brittain, an officer of
Ms Pascoe’s bank, and an affidavit of Desmond Robertson, the architect
engaged to design the
other affidavit, made on 30 June 2022, related largely to the vehicle sought to
be recovered by CM and TM in proceeding
2022-01010-SC. In it, MM attested that
Ms Pascoe’s house in Brinkin had been ready for her return to it after her
stroke, but
she had remained in the 24 hour care
This affidavit annexed
the same affidavit from Tessa Brittain referred to above, numerous documents
relating to the vehicle and documents
relating to the sale by MM of chattels for
in excess of $100,000 (which he later attested he paid to Ms Pascoe).
[18] At the
directions hearing on 21 July 2022, MM was self-represented. At MM’s
request, the times for MM to file additional
evidence, and for CM and TM to file
evidence in reply, were extended, and the matter was listed for mention before
the Judge who
would hear the matter.
[19] On 8 August
2022, MM filed an affidavit made by himself on that
In that affidavit, he
attested that a power of attorney from Ms Pascoe to CM and TM was not signed by
her and was invalid. He also
revised the cost of his work on the build to
approximately $420,000 plus expenses. He also attested that he was having
from them to establish ‘matters and events surrounding the
which was ‘imperative to this trial’. Numerous documents were
annexed, including a copy of the power
of attorney and some of the documents
from Ms Pascoe’s guardianship proceedings.
[20] At the
directions hearing on 24 August 2022, at MM’s request, the times for the
filing of affidavit material were extended
and the matter was listed for hearing
on 21 October 2022.
September 2022, MM filed an affidavit made by him on 6 September 2022, annexing
phone records which MM attested were proof
of his efforts as project manager on
the build of the Property, and invoices created by MM for the work he had
undertaken on the
build. The affidavit also annexed part of a further affidavit
from Paulo de Jesus and an affidavit from Andrea Rice, the interior
engaged to decorate the Property.
September 2022, MM filed a writ seeking payment from CM and TM of an invoice for
the project management services Ms Pascoe
had engaged him to perform in relation
to the build of the Property. The writ was served on CM’s and TM’s
solicitor on
4 October 2022.
September 2022, CM and TM filed affidavits made by them on that date in reply to
MM’s affidavit evidence. Those affidavits
contain serious adverse
allegations against MM in relation to his influence and conduct affecting Ms
Pascoe’s money and financial
October 2022, CM’s and TM’s solicitor wrote to the Court asking for
all three proceedings to be heard together,
and for the proceedings commenced by
CM and TM to proceed as if commenced by writ, with MM’s claim to be
pleaded as a counterclaim.
October 2022, the Court made orders in chambers consolidating the two
proceedings commenced by CM and TM, dismissing MM’s
proceedings and
granting leave to MM to file a defence and counterclaim in CM’s and
TM’s proceedings containing the information
from MM’s writ. MM was
given seven days to do so.
October 2022, CM and TM filed written submissions regarding the summary
application for recovery of the Land. On 14 October
2022, their counsel’s
objections to MM’s affidavit evidence were filed. Those objections were to
almost all of the affidavit
evidence filed by MM.
October 2022, MM filed a defence and counterclaim. It is voluminous and contains
much material in the nature of evidence
and submissions.
October 2022, MM filed an application for an adjournment of the hearing, and an
affidavit in which he sought a further
two weeks to file his affidavit evidence,
which he attested would address matters in the affidavit of TM and matters
relating to
his defence and counter-claim. He referred to his efforts to brief
counsel (which consisted of two emails sent on 19 October 2022
to the senior
counsel of his choice, who was then on holidays), his health issues related to
some hearing loss and assessment by
a psychiatrist due to stress, and his
difficulties preparing for a hearing whilst caring for his six year old
October 2022, the application for possession of the Property was heard and
determined. CM and TM were granted judgment
for possession of the Land under SCR
53.07. CM and TM were granted leave to issue a warrant of possession once the
three months under
SCR 53.08(1)(a) had elapsed without compliance with SCR
53.08(1)(b). MM’s defence and counterclaim were listed to be heard
February 2023.
The decision below
[30] The hearing
Judge refused MM’s application for an adjournment of the application for
recovery of possession of the Land,
for the reasons set out below.
(a) The medical reasons relied on by MM were not such as to deprive MM of the
ability to be able to conduct the proceedings, there
being no evidence to that
effect expressed by the doctors in their letters annexed to MM’s
(b) The extension of time for CM and TM to file evidence in reply, to which MM
consented, did not create any impediment to the application
in relation to the
Land from proceeding. Rather, it gave MM more time to produce his evidence,
which was always going to have to
establish his right to remain in the
(c) MM had had ample opportunity to obtain assistance from counsel, and had not
filed any evidence regarding his unsuccessful efforts
to obtain legal
representation from others or the reasons why those efforts were
unsuccessful.
(d) MM’s application was made only the day before the hearing, meaning CM
and TM had lawyers attending the hearing ready to
[31] The Court
was prepared to grant an adjournment in relation to the remainder of the
proceedings, that is, MM’s claim for
damages and CM’s and TM’s
claim for recovery of the vehicle.
[32] As regards
the Land, the Court held that, at its highest, MM’s case was that he had a
verbal agreement with Ms Pascoe permitting
him to occupy the Property for a
period of time in exchange for him undertaking work as a project manager in
relation to the build
of the Property. It was held that the agreement could not
constitute a lease because the agreement did not contemplate that MM would
exclusive possession. Nor could the agreement constitute a tenancy under the
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
(NT) because that Act does not apply to an
agreement under which no rent is paid and services are provided in return for
the granting
of a right to occupy premises for the purpose of residence
(s 6(1)(c)).
It was held that, putting MM’s case at its highest, MM
had a contractual licence which could be revoked by the grantor (Ms
her guardians (CM and TM), with such revocation sounding only in damages. As CM
and TM had revoked the licence, MM had
no right to occupy the Property and no
defence was available to MM regarding his continued occupation of the Land.
Consequently,
judgment was granted to CM and TM for possession of the
November 2022, MM filed a notice of appeal. On 12 January 2023, MM filed an
amended notice of appeal. By that notice of
appeal, MM sought a stay of the
judgment giving CM and TM possession of the Land. On 8 February 2023, a
stay was granted pending
the determination of the appeal.
[34] The amended
notice of appeal, drafted by MM without the benefit of legal representation, was
said by MM’s counsel in oral
submissions at hearing of the appeal to
distil to three distinct grounds of appeal, as follows:
(a) MM was denied procedural fairness by:
(i) the refusal of the adjournment of the hearing of the application for
possession of the Land; and
(ii) the determination of the application for possession of the Land by a
summary process, particularly where the facts were contentious
and those facts
were not tested.
(b) The Court erred by confining its consideration to whether or not MM held a
licence rather than considering whether MM held a
proprietary right.
(c) The Court failed to consider whether CM and TM were properly appointed as Ms
Pascoe’s guardians.
[35] The third
ground was not pressed at hearing of the appeal.
procedure for recovery of possession in Order 53
Framlingham Aboriginal Trust v
Derham AsJ set out
the following principles gleaned from the authorities in relation to the
operation of Order 53:
(a) It is intended to enable a speedy resolution in favour of the proprietor of
land of a dispute whereby trespassers are keeping
the proprietor
(b) It is intended to apply only in clear cases where there is no question to
(c) The existence of a factual dispute does not deny the applicability of Order
53 where it is possible to resolve the dispute readily
(d) While an order for possession may be made notwithstanding that there is a
factual dispute between the parties, such an order
will only be appropriate if
the Court is able to satisfy itself as to the material facts that bring the case
within Order 53.
(e) The jurisdiction should be exercised with great
(f) Where an issue does emerge, the judge has discretion whether simply to
dismiss the proceeding, to determine the issue, or cause
the issue to be
subsequently tried. This includes giving directions as to the further conduct of
the proceeding or ordering the proceeding
to continue as if begun by writ
pursuant to Rule 4.07.
(g) Where the Court gives judgment for possession under Order 53, it may grant a
stay of execution.
original affidavit made no mention of any agreement or consent on the part of Ms
Pascoe to MM’s occupation of
the Property. TM’s affidavit response
to MM’s evidence about an agreement with Ms Pascoe for his occupation of
the Property
was that she was unaware of any such agreement, and her
understanding of Ms Pascoe’s intentions for the Property were that
an investment property. CM’s affidavit response to MM’s evidence
of the Property was that,
before her stroke, Ms Pascoe told him she wanted to allow MM to live in the
Property for one year and she
intended to sell the Property after a couple of
years, and that she subsequently told him MM would stay in the Property for
two years. Both TM and CM attested that they were unaware of Ms Pascoe
hiring MM as a project manager for the build of the Property,
at least until MM
began issuing them with invoices for his services after the build was
effectively completed.
[38] There was
therefore clearly a factual dispute between the parties as to whether or not the
pre-requisites to the application
of Order 53
namely (relevant to
this case):
(a) whether MM entered into occupation of the Property without Ms Pascoe’s
licence or consent; or
(b) more relevantly, whether MM was a licensee who had remained in occupation
without Ms Pascoe’s guardians’ licence
or consent.
[39] As set out
above, the existence of a factual dispute does not deny the applicability of
Order 53 where it is possible to resolve
the dispute readily and fairly and the
Court is able to satisfy itself as to the material facts that bring the case
within Order
53. The Judge below sought to do so by dealing with the application
on the basis most favourable to MM, which was found to be that,
at its highest,
MM had a verbal agreement with Ms Pascoe permitting him to occupy the Property
for a period of time in exchange for
him undertaking work as a project manager
in relation to the build of the Property.
[40] Counsel for
MM argued that the Judge below did not consider whether, on that case, MM had an
equitable lease over, or some other
equitable proprietary interest in, the Land.
It was contended that, on either basis, MM had the reasonable possibility of a
which raised a triable issue that should not have been determined by
way of the summary procedure in Order 53.
agreement to execute a lease in the future is treated in equity as if it were a
The agreement must
identify the parties, the premises, the starting date, the duration and, if rent
is to be paid, the amount of
rent or a procedure to determine the
It must be for value and
evidenced in writing or supported by sufficient acts of part performance, which
is generally satisfied by
the tenant being let into possession under the
touchstone of a lease is the grant of a right of exclusive possession, that is,
a right to occupy and possess the leased
land to the exclusion of all others,
including the lessor.
for the agreement between MM and Ms Pascoe to constitute an agreement to execute
a lease in the future (when the build of
the Property was complete), the
agreement would have to contemplate that MM would have an entitlement to
exclusive possession.
[43] Counsel for
CM and TM argued that, on MM’s evidence, the agreement with Ms Pascoe
contemplated that she could reside in
the Property whilst her home in Brinkin
was being renovated, and that she could reside in the Property in her later
years if she
wished. The Property was constructed to include a room suitable for
her to do so on the ground floor.
[44] Counsel for
MM argued that an agreement under which Ms Pascoe would live in a room in the
Property would nevertheless have preserved
to MM exclusive possession of at
least some part of the Property, including his own bedroom, his daughter’s
bedroom and the
upstairs bathroom. Exclusive possession of part only of a
premises was said to be sufficient for a conclusion that there could have
an agreement for a lease.
[45] Counsel for
MM relied on
Stephenson v
In that case, with
nothing reduced to writing, the owner of a house permitted a family to live in
the house with him and have exclusive
occupation of some rooms and the use of
other rooms together with the owner. The family paid periodical sums for the
accommodation,
which continued for some seven years. The owner then went into a
convalescent home and subsequently died some 18 months later. Before
the owner did nothing about the home or the family occupying it. An action for
ejectment of the family was brought by
the executors of the owner’s will.
The executors sought leave to enter judgment summarily. Walsh J held that the
question whether
the family were tenants (lessees) or lodgers (licensees) was a
question of fact for the jury and dismissed the application for summary
[46] Walsh J
considered (at 1721) that the factual enjoyment of exclusive occupation by the
family of their rooms provided some, although
not conclusive, evidence of the
existence of an intention between the parties that the home owner had granted
the family the right
to exclusive possession of the rooms, rather than the home
owner retaining dominion and control over the rooms.
[47] In that
case (at 1724), Walsh J adhered to the view he had earlier expressed in
non-exercise over a long period of any right of entry by the owner also living
in the premises to that part of the premises
occupied by another person pointed
to the owner having given up their right to exclusive possession of that part.
With that and other
evidence, the Court was satisfied there was evidence that
could support a finding that a tenancy had been granted over part of the
property and dismissed the application for summary judgment for possession.
Walsh J held in
Stephenson v Morgan
that the non-exercise of any right of
entry was a fact from which an inference could be drawn that the owner had not
retained the
right of possession and control in relation to the rooms which the
defendants separately and exclusively occupied in fact. In
, the occupation of rooms by the defendant had lasted for 11
Stephenson v Morgan
, Walsh J contrasted the occupation of rooms
by the defendant for nine weeks in
Marsicovetere
held not to amount to a tenancy.
[48] Walsh J
held (at 1724):
In relation to the factor of actual exclusive use,
or to the description of payments as rent, as well as other factors, these may
occur in circumstances and in a setting such that a court will say that, upon
the whole of the material, there is no sufficient basis
for a finding of a
tenancy. But in other situations, one or more of these factors may properly be
regarded as affording of an intention
to create a tenancy and thus may warrant
the leaving of the question of tenancy or no tenancy to the tribunal of fact.
That tribunal
will weigh these matters against the counter-veiling fact that the
premises in dispute are part of the owner’s house, in which
he also lives,
which fact tends towards the conclusion that the intention was not to create a
[49] It follows
from this decision that actual occupation of part of a premises by the owner
does not prevent another person in occupation
of another part of those premises
from being classified as a lessee.
MM’s evidence, he and his daughter were in occupation of the Property from
late November 2021.
and TM’s solicitor wrote to MM demanding he leave the Property on 21 March
2022. MM remains in occupation of the
Property. Ms Pascoe never actually
occupied the Property at any time.
[51] It must
follow from the decision in
Stephenson v Morgan
and the authorities there
referred to that an intention by MM and Ms Pascoe at the relevant time that she
would or might occupy some
part of the Property during the agreed period of
MM’s occupation is not
necessarily
inconsistent with an intention
to grant to MM a right of exclusive possession to at least part of the Property
(being the rooms to
be exclusively occupied by him and his daughter). The
relevant question is whether it was the intention of Ms Pascoe and MM, at the
time they made the agreement, that MM would have, for the agreed period,
exclusive possession of the Property or part of it.
[52] As set out
above, the Judge below found that the agreement did not contemplate that MM
would have exclusive possession of the
Property. The only basis for that finding
was MM’s evidence that Ms Pascoe would or might live in the Property
whilst her Brinkin
of the above authorities, it could not be concluded on a summary basis
taking MM’s case at its highest, the agreement did not contemplate that MM
would have exclusive possession for that reason
alone. As the authorities show,
it is a question of fact whether or not it was the intention of Ms Pascoe and MM
to create an entitlement
to exclusive possession of at least part of the
Property, an entitlement which can exist even where the home owner is also in
of the home.
[53] If that
question of fact were to be answered affirmatively, MM would have an arguable
case for an equitable lease which entitles
him to be treated in equity as if he
has a lease over at least part of the Property. This is not to say that
MM’s evidence
in that respect would be accepted at trial, or even that it
is particularly compelling. It is only to say that there is an arguable
his evidence is taken at its highest. There would also remain a factual dispute
between the parties as to the duration of
any equitable lease, given MM’s
evidence that the agreed period was six years and CM’s evidence that Ms
Pascoe told him
MM could stay in the Property for two years.
[54] Counsel for
CM and TM referred to MM’s evidence that, after saying he could stay in
the Property for six years, Ms Pascoe
told MM he could stay for two years
instead of six years, from which it could be inferred that her intention was to
create an arrangement
variable or terminable at her discretion (and so, not a
lease). While that inference may be open, it is also potentially open to
that, as MM attested, Ms Pascoe had ‘proposed [a] reduction in payment and
variation of our agreement’, which was
not agreed to by him as he
‘had already completed the work’. That inference is supported by
MM’s evidence that
Ms Pascoe ‘then withdrew her new demand and went
[55] Counsel for
CM and TM referred to MM’s evidence of his response to Ms Pascoe, which
was to tell her to finish the Property
herself and pay him the money owed. It
was argued that MM’s conduct was not consistent with his understanding
that Ms Pascoe
had promised him an interest in the Land or the Property, namely
a lease as distinct from a licence, because he did not say to her
that she had
promised him he could stay there for six years, or that she had promised him an
interest in the Land. Rather, MM’s
response was a
‘contractual’ response. Even if that conclusion were drawn, it is
not implausible that a lay person would
not understand, or claim, that their
verbal agreement about occupying a house for a period of years conferred on them
an equitable
lease, a proprietary equitable interest or even an interest in
land. While it might be inferred from MM’s response that he
understood that Ms Pascoe could withdraw her consent to him living in the
Property and, if she did, he would only be entitled
to be paid for the work he
had done, it would also potentially be open to infer that, in the face of Ms
Pascoe’s denial of
his legally enforceable entitlement to remain in the
Property for six years, he was simply reminding her that he had executed his
part of the agreement.
[56] Nor does
MM’s commencement of proceedings for the recovery of the value of his
project management work, without legal assistance,
necessarily
some sort of concession that the agreement with Ms Pascoe was intended by her to
convey to him merely a licence the revocation
of which entitled him only to
damages. The same may be said of the inclusion in MM’s Defence and
Counter-claim of the following:
Effectively, my daughter and I were
to permanently reside there or at the very least 6 years subject to our verbal
contract in exchange
for searching and finding the land and building the house
and my mother to intermittently reside there ...
[57] First, that
statement is not sworn evidence; it is a pleading. Second, it is unclear whether
MM intended by that statement to
convey that the term of the agreed occupation
was not certain (so as to preclude a finding of an equitable lease). Third, the
is not inconsistent with MM’s affidavit evidence that he and his
daughter were to live in the Property for six years under
the verbal agreement
between himself and Ms Pascoe. The reference to permanently residing there may
be to MM’s hope that their
residence would extend beyond the agreed six
years. What, if anything, should be made of that statement could only be
following its exploration in cross-examination of
Equitable proprietary interest
[58] Under the
principle of proprietary equitable estoppel, if a person with a verbal agreement
with a land owner for a certain interest
in the land, or with an expectation
created or encouraged by the land owner that they will have a certain interest
in the land, takes
possession of the land with the consent of the land owner
and, in reliance on the promise or expectation, with the knowledge of the
owner and without their objection, expends money on the land, a court of equity
will compel the land owner to give effect to
the promise or
expectation.
[59] It is not
MM’s case that he expended money on the Land, but in more recent times,
the principle has been expressed as follows:
...[I]f the parties
have proceeded on a common assumption that [one party] is to enjoy a right to
reside in a particular property
and in reliance on that assumption [that party]
has expended money
or otherwise acted to his detriment
, [the other party]
will not be allowed to go back on that common assumption and the court will
imply an irrevocable licence or trust
which will give effect to that common
assumption.
[60] In that
case, the New South Wales Court of Appeal characterised the defendant’s
interest as ‘a licence coupled with
an equity’ arising from her
expenditure on the premises, with the knowledge of the plaintiff, in the
expectation that she could
remain there for life. The equity was held, in
principle, to be sufficient to sustain an action for relief from forfeiture. In
circumstances of the case it was held that the plaintiff had not acted
unconscionably in terminating the licence.
MM’s affidavit evidence, taken at its highest, he and Ms Pascoe had a
common assumption that he would have a right to
live in the Property for six
years and, in reliance on that assumption, he acted to his detriment by
performing project management
work for the build of the Property for a period of
some two years. That evidence raises the possibility that he has a licence
with an equitable proprietary interest in the Land precluding, in
principle at least, the termination of the licence by Ms Pascoe
guardians, CM and TM, before the expiry of its six year duration.
[62] Counsel for
CM and TM argued that, unlike the promise or assumption of a right to occupy the
property for life in
Milton v Proctor
, the evidence here is not such as
to suggest any common assumption that MM had an interest in the Land. This
argument rests on the
same matters referred to in paragraphs [56] and [57]
above. For the reasons there set out, those matters do not lead
necessarily
to the conclusion that MM’s interest was contractual
only. On MM’s affidavit evidence, if accepted, it would be open
court to find that there had been a common assumption between Ms Pascoe and MM
that MM would have a right to live in the Property
for six years from the time
of its completion and that he had acted to his detriment in reliance on that
assumption with the knowledge
of Ms Pascoe.
[63] Counsel for
CM and TM argued that expenditure of money or money’s worth in return for
a right to occupy a property does
not, of itself, create an equitable interest
in the land. This appears to be a restatement of the observation of McHugh JA in
Milton v Proctor
(at 9660-9661), where his Honour said that expenditure
on improvements on land by a licensee to the licensor’s knowledge does
by itself create any equity. His Honour went on to quote the passage from
set out in paragraph [59] above and said that, accordingly, his
view was that equity will prevent a licensor from revoking a licence
period of the licence agreement if the licensee has expended money on land upon
the common assumption that the licensee
is to have the right to reside on that
[64] The Judge
below did not consider whether MM has, in addition to a licence, an equitable
proprietary interest in the Land. His
make no reference to equity or equitable principles, concluding only that MM did
not have a lease or a residential tenancy
and consequently had, at best, a
contractual licence. Nor were any oral submissions put to him on behalf of CM
and TM about equity
or equitable principles. Their counsel’s written
submissions made only two references to equity. The first was a reference
obiter dicta
of McHugh J in
Western Australia v
to the effect that a
licensee ejected from land by the grantor may obtain an injunction to restrain
the grantor from breaching the
contract. The second was a submission that, if
equity could intervene, MM’s conduct in his dealings with his mother gave
to unclean hands such that equity would not intervene.
53 was an inappropriate process
[65] For the
reasons set out in paragraphs [50] to [62] above, there were questions to be
tried, namely whether or not MM had an equitable
lease or an equitable
proprietary interest in the Property. Those questions turned on disputed factual
issues that could not be readily
determined on a summary hearing. The case was,
therefore, not one to which the summary procedure in Order 53 properly applied.
ground of appeal has been made out.
[66] The proper
course is for the proceedings seeking recovery of possession of the Land to
proceed as if commenced by writ and heard
and determined at a
Other grounds of appeal
conclusion makes it unnecessary to consider the other grounds of appeal.
[68] We do not
intend to do so, save to say that we do not accept that MM was denied procedural
fairness in the failure to grant him
an adjournment. The Judge below determined
the Order 53 application on the basis of MM’s evidence about the essential
of his agreement with Ms Pascoe in relation to the Property. There was
no suggestion that there were additional relevant elements
of that agreement
that MM did not have the opportunity to put before the Court. Whatever
difficulties MM may have had in gathering
and preparing evidence and in making
legal submissions, the Judge below proceeded on the basis of the essential facts
relating to
the agreement as pressed by MM.
Disposition
[69] For the
reasons set out above, we make the following orders:
appeal is allowed.
orders of the Court made on 21 October 2022 are set aside.
to Rule 4.07 of the SCRs, the proceeding commenced by the amended originating
motion for recovery of land under Order 53
of the SCRs is to continue as if it
had been commenced by writ.
proceedings are remitted to the Registrar for case management directions and to
fix a date for trial.
[70] We will
hear the parties as to costs if need be.
_________________________
The Court’s reasons are set
out in the transcript of the hearing on 21 October 2022, at pp 21-22.
The return of a vehicle said to
belong to Ms Pascoe was also sought within seven days.
Appeal Book ('AB'), Tab 38.
AB, Tab 34.
Appeal Book (‘AB’),
AB, Tab 30.
Framlingham Aboriginal Trust v
[2014] VSC 24
. This decision was upheld on appeal and the
parties on appeal did not dispute the principles identified by Derham AsJ: see
Framlingham Aboriginal Trust v McGuiness
[2014] VSC 354
per Ginnane J,
esp at [6].
Pappas v Bowmark Pty
[1998] VSCA 120
per Tadgell JA (Callaway and Chernov JJA
Palazzo v Pullen
(unreported, SCV, Brooking J, 24 July 1992, BC9200663). In that case, Brooking J
observed that Order 53 would normally apply only
in virtually uncontested cases
or in clear cases where there is no issue or question to try, ie where there is
no reasonable doubt
as to the claim of the plaintiff to recover possession of
the land or as to wrongful occupation of the land without licence or consent
without any right, title or interest thereto. In
Tolhurst Druce &
Emmerson v Maryvell Investments Pty Ltd
[2007] VSC 271
, Dodds-Streeton J
said that Order 53 provides for a summary procedure which is usually reserved
for relatively clear-cut cases in
which the defendant occupier has no arguable
defence and there is no reasonable doubt as to the plaintiff’s claim to
possession.
Pappas v Bowmark Pty
[1998] VSCA 120
per Tadgell JA (Callaway and Chernov JJA
Melbourne Anglican Trust Corporation v Greentree
(unreported,
SCV, Vincent J, 29 May 1997);
Tolhurst Druce & Emerson v Marywell
Investments Pty Ltd
[2007] VSC 271
[2009] VSC 114
per Kyrou J.
Byrne v Ritchie
[2009] VSC 114
per Kyrou J.
Melbourne Anglican
Trust Corporation v Greentree
(unreported, SCV, Vincent J, 29 May 1997);
Max Moar & Quuenbridge Pty Ltd v Shazia Duman
[2007] VSC 266
per Pagone J.
Palazzo v Pullen
(unreported, SCV, Brooking J, 24 July 1992, BC9200663).
Parker v Mielicki
[2003] VSC 263.
Pappas v Bowmark Pty
[1998] VSCA 120
per Tadgell JA (Callaway and Chernov JJA
See P Butt,
ed, 2010, Lawbook Co, [15.41] and
Walsh v Lonsdale
[1882] UKLawRpCh 85
See P Butt,
ed, 2010, Lawbook Co, [15.43] and
NZI Insurance Australia v
[2003] SASC 190
(2003) 85 SASR 497
See P Butt,
ed, 2010, Lawbook Co, [15.42].
Radaich v Smith
[1959] HCA 45
(1959) 101 CLR 209
at 214 per McTiernan J, 217 per Taylor J, 220 per Menzies J,
222 per Windeyer J. See also P Butt,
Lawbook Co, [15.10] and
Inverugie Investments Ltd v Hackett
[1995] UKPC 8
[1995] 1 WLR
Stephenson v Morgan
[1963] 80 WN(NSW) 1719.
Hoare v O’Neill
(1961) 78 WN (NSW) 882.
Varilla v Marsicovetere
[1954] VicLawRp 47
[1954] VLR 550.
AB, Tab 38, Affidavit of MM,
[9] and Annexure I1 (invoice of furniture removalists).
Ramsden v Dyson
[1866] UKLawRpHL 7
LR 1 HL 129
at 170 per Kingsdown LJ.
In Re Sharpe
Milton v Proctor
(1988) 4 BPR 9654 at 9669 per Clarke
JA (Mahoney JA agreeing), at 9661 per McHugh JA.
Western Australia v Ward
[2002] HCA 28
(2002) 213 CLR 1
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (231 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter