URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCAT/2025/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:17:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mardi; Mardi v Fejo; Burrburr [2025] NTCAT 4 (14 May 2025)
Mardi; Mardi v Fejo; Burrburr
DECISION NUMBER:
[2025] NTCAT 4
KEIFFEN MARDI
1ST APPLICANT
AARON MARDI
2ND APPLICANT
LYNNETTE FEJO
1ST RESPONDENT
TIMOTHY BURRBURR
2ND RESPONDENT
MATTER TYPE:
Original Jurisdiction -
Burial and Cremation Act 2022
2024-03946-CT
HEARING DATE:
23 APRIL 2025
DECISION OF:
MARK O'REILLY - PRESIDENT
INGRID MEIER
DATE OF ORDERS:
14 MAY 2025
APPEARANCES and REPRESENTATION (if any):
RESPONDENT:
REASONS FOR DECISION:
is an application under the
Burial and Cremation Act 2022
Initiating Application filed on 2 December 2024 sought a number of orders from
the Tribunal broadly described under the subheadings
Declaration of Senior Next of Kin;
Reburial Approval;
Recognition of Improper Burial;
Authority to Make Decisions;
Cultural and Customary Compliance;
Compliance with
Burial and Cremation Act
Objection to Burial Location.
factual background to the dispute is that Mr D Mardi, who died on 18 November
2023 has been laid to rest in a burial at Bulgul,
a small community located
approximately 220 km south-west of Darwin. The decision to bury him at Bulgul
was made by his de facto
partner of many years, Lynette Fejo, who is the
respondent in the proceeding. The decision was informed by a wish to be buried
Bulgul underneath the Wombidi tree that Mr Mardi expressed prior to his
death. It was also in recognition of the fact that:
“Mr Mardi’s connection to Bulgul is the Wadjiginy/Kiyuk clan
group which he takes under his mother [M] Moreen (Wadjigany/Kiyuk
deceased) and Uncle Simon Moreen (Phud) Wadjigany/Kiyuk lore
to the burial, Ms Fejo consulted with Simon Moreen and was given “full
” for the burial to
occur at Bulgul.
applicants are Mr Mardi’s sons. Their position is that the burial at
Bulgul is culturally inappropriate and constitutes
a significant breach of
traditional cultural practices. Their wish is to have Mr Mardi’s remains
exhumed and for a burial
to occur in Belyuen, another community south-west of
The Jurisdiction of NTCAT
orders sought in the Initiating Application reflect the ultimate aims of the
applicants.
is well established that “NTCAT only has such jurisdiction as is conferred
on it by the NTCAT Act or any other
legislation.”
Northern Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2014
30 Sources of jurisdiction
The Tribunal has the jurisdiction conferred on it by this or any other
Tribunal’s jurisdiction under the
Burial and Cremation Act 2022
does not extend
to many of the dispositions sought by the
applicants.
section 13(1)(b)
the Tribunal has jurisdiction to determine who is the senior
next of kin for a deceased person. The Tribunal also has power under
to make determinations in circumstances where executors of an estate cannot
agree on decisions regarding human remains.
has no application to
this proceeding.
only other powers conferred on NTCAT under the
Burial and Cremation Act
sections 67(7)(b)
, neither of which have application
to this proceeding.
Section 67(7)(b)
confers jurisdiction on NTCAT to resolve a
dispute about the withholding of consent for the burial of human remains by an
holder of land that is subject to native title.
Section 187
review jurisdiction on NTCAT in respect of the reviewable decisions listed in
Schedule 1.
Burial and Cremation Act 2022
section 14(1) of the Act:
(1) The decision maker for a person has the power to:
(a) make any decision required under this Act regarding the human remains of the
deceased person in accordance with this Act; and
(b) decide the outcome of any dispute regarding the human remains of the
deceased person under this Act.
is defined in section 9:
9 Meaning of decision maker
decision maker
, for a deceased person, means:
(a) the executor or administrator of the estate of the deceased person; or
(b) if there is no executor or administrator of the estate of the deceased
person - the senior next of kin;
Tribunal understands that there is no executor or administrator of Mr
Mardi’s estate.
13 of the Act relevantly provides that:
(1) If there is a dispute regarding who is the senior next of kin for a
deceased person, a next of kin may:
(b) apply to NTCAT for a determination of the senior next of kin for the
deceased person.
(2) NTCAT must consider the following in determining the senior next of
(a) the order of people mentioned in section 11(1);
the purposes of this proceeding, NTCAT’s role is confined to a
determination of who is to be recognised as the senior next
of kin in accordance
with the Act. While a determination of that point may allow further actions to
be taken under the Act, NTCAT
has no part to play in making any determination
exhumation.
already referred to, in making a determination of the senior next of kin under
section 13(1), NTCAT must consider the order of
people mentioned in section
11(1). That section creates a hierarchy in descending order of potential
decision makers for a deceased
the purposes of this dispute the relevant provisions are sections 11(1)(a) and
11(1)(d) which provide as follows:
11(1)(a) if the deceased person was an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander
person and had strong cultural and traditional ties to
a community or group
– a person who, according to the customs and traditions of that community
or group to which the person
belonged, is appropriate to perform that role;
11(1)(d) if paragraphs (a) to (c) do not apply and the deceased person was,
immediately before death, in a de facto relationship –
the deceased
person’s de facto partner.
other words, the first thing to consider is whether or not a deceased Aboriginal
person such as Mr Mardi had strong cultural and
traditional ties to a community
or group. If so, an appropriate person according to that culture will be the
senior next of kin.
The applicants’ position
applicants’ evidence was to the effect that Mr Mardi was “an
Amiyenggal man through his father and a Kiyuk man from
was clarified that Mr Mardi was ‘not a Kiyuk person by way of Aboriginal
culture and practices and as such is bound by the
customs and traditions of both
his father’s and mother’s respective clan
was not contested that some cultural groups “claim rights as Traditional
Owners through both patrilineal and matrilineal
lineages however Kiyuk,
Wadjigan, Amiyenggal and other clan groups do not. The Kiyuk, Amiyenggal and
other groups in the Anson Bay
and wider region claim such Traditional Owner
rights and follow customs and traditions through patrilineal
grounds...”
to who specifically is the appropriate person to perform the role of senior next
of kin in respect of Mr Mardi, the applicants’
evidence is as
Unattested Declaration of James Sing states: ‘..the Kiyuk as a group feels
that the decision maker... should be determined
by his children (Aaron and
Mardi) or the surviving
elders of [Mr Mardi’s] father’s surviving family members. His
Aunt’s in Rosie Gordon (nee
Bigfoot-Mardi) and Shirley Bigfoot-Mardi...
[Aaron and Keiffen Mardi must be declared as senior next of kin] due to their
rites as men, their father’s initiation rites and status and the
customs and traditions of the Kiyuk and Amiyenggal clan
her Unattested Declaration, Shirley Bigfoot describes herself as Aunt of Mr
Mardi and a Senior Elder of the Mardi-Bigfoot Amiyenggal
clan group. Ms
Bigfoot’s evidence is that Mr Mardi ‘went through men’s
business and only his sons can decide for
him as they have been through
men’s business as well. In Aboriginal culture only sons and brothers can
decide for a man burial
and ceremony. If no son’s or brother’s alive
then Aunts, sisters daughters or wife decide’.
Harwood provided an Unattested Declaration on behalf of her mother Gracie
Moreen, who is described as the oldest living member
of the Kiyuk tribal clan
group, the oldest member of the Moreen family, and the Aunt of Mr Mardi. This
evidence includes the following:
As my brother went through Aboriginal men's initiation, he must follow the
culture and practices of his people, Amiyenggal and his
mother’s people
Kiyuk. As his sons themselves having gone through men's initiation, this gives
them rights under traditional
lore, rights and responsibilities such as the
burial date, location and arrangement for other traditional ceremonial
We are not disputing that this may have been his (my cousin's) wish to be
buried on his mother’s country, but aboriginal lore
and culture must be
followed, so [not] to cause any potential long-term anger and distress between
Kiyuk and Amiyenggal families
or towards Ms Fejo.
The decision of where my cousin is to be buried must follow our culture
and must made by my nephews and my cousin’s Amiyenggal group the
Bigfoot-Mardi family. The acknowledgement of my nephews as the rightful
Senior Next of Kin would allow them to follow Aboriginal culture
and practices
and remove all anger, frustration and distress caused by the
his Unattested Declaration dated 17 March 2025, Conway Wirrapanda-Blanasi
[6] Under customary law, which follows the father’s line, David’s
eldest surviving son, Aaron, is his Senior Next of Kin...
[9] The correct person to speak for [an exhumation and reburial] to happen is
[Mr Mardi’s] eldest son, Aaron, as the Senior
Next of Kin, together with
[10] Please let me know if you need any further information from me
to confirm that, under Aboriginal customary law, Aaron is his
father’s appropriate Senior Next of Kin.
information provided by the applicants was from Brian Young, which was in the
form of a Form 3 application dated 10 March
2025, rather than as an Unattested
Declaration. In that document Mr Young, who describes himself as a senior
cultural Arrernte Leader
of the Central Arrernte men of Alice Springs, seeks to
‘verify the claims’ of Keiffen Mardi. He states: ‘...under
Aboriginal customary practices when traditional Owners Passes, the rights
related to a father passes to his sons. Especially if they
have themselves
undertaken men’s related ceremonies as Keiffen and Aaron have. I can
verify that Keiffen has undertaken the
traditional rituals required of our
culture and earned the status of Senior Next of Kin under Aboriginal
status of the information from Mr Young was raised during the hearing, given
that the proceeding concerns the culture and traditions
of the Amiyenggal and
Kiyuk groups, rather than Central Arrernte. It was submitted by Janet Turner,
the mother of Keiffen Mardi,
that Mr Young also possesses knowledge of the
culture and traditions of groups in the Top End due to family ties in the
Ms Fejo’s position
Fejo’s claim to be recognised as senior next of kin is outlined in her
Response. She asserts that:
“I am appointed by the late Mr
Mardi as his Next of Kin and have all the relevant legal documents to prove
support of that position she has provided the Tribunal with a copy of a letter
a “Medico Legal Officer” at Royal Darwin Hospital dated 11
December 2023 which includes the following statement:
“Medical Records indicate the nominated next of kin as Lynette Fejo
death certificate identifies Lynette Fejo as Mr Mardi’s partner and
describes that they were in a defacto relationship.
The death certificate also
identifies the applicants as the only surviving children of Mr
Fejo has also provided a copy of correspondence apparently from the
Coroner’s office to the funeral arrangers. That correspondence
paraphrasing of the Act as follows:
“...a certificate ‘Coroners Release’ has been issued
releasing the body of Mr Mardi to your organisation.
In relation to NOK below is the definition as stated in the
Burial Act 2022
Spouse or de facto partner of the deceased
Choose the situation that best fits the relationship status of the deceased
person immediately before their death.
Both married and
in a de facto relationship, the senior next of kin may be the
In a continuous
de facto relationship for at least 2 years immediately before death, and
didn’t during those 2 years live with
the deceased person’s spouse
– the senior next of kin is the de facto partner.”
Unfortunately,
that summary of the Act does not consider section 11(1)(a).
Fejo has also provided a statutory declaration of Simon Moreen dated 15 January
2025 which states:
...I am a Wadjigany/Kiyuk elder, lore man and Senior Traditional Owner. My
nephew told me if he ever passed away he wanted to be taken
back home to Bulgul
and buried under the Wombidi tree. I gave my full permission to his wife Lynette
Fejo to do this. [Mr] Mardi
is my nephew through my deceased sister, [M] Moreen.
I have never objected to [Mr] Mardi being buried at Bulgul.
the hearing it was submitted by Mr Sing that Mr Moreen was under emotional
strain at the time of his involvement in arrangements
for Mr Mardi’s
burial, which affected his capacity to engage fully in collective
decision-making. Mr Sing submitted that Mr
Moreen has since formed the view
that Mr Mardi should not remain where he has
been buried.
the hearing, Ms Fejo explained that she had been Mr Mardi’s de facto
partner for over twenty years. She said that she had
been living a cultural life
with Mr Mardi, which involved travelling throughout Arnhem Land with Mr Mardi
and Simon Moreen for cultural
business in their capacity as senior lore
Fejo has described Mr Mardi’s connection to Bulgul as through the
Wadjiginy/Kiyuk clan group of his mother. Her evidence
was that Mr Mardi
remained connected to his cultural heritage and regularly took part in
ceremonies and cultural business at Bulgul.
the hearing Ms Fejo handed up photos of Mr Mardi at Bulgul, and explained that
the Wombidi tree at Bulgul was significant to Mr
Mardi as he was known as
‘Wumbidi’, as is recorded on his death certificate. Her evidence was
that she had sought and
gained permission from senior lore men Simon Moreen and
Freddy Scrubby to bury Mr Mardi at Bulgul, and had sought to honour his wishes
by burying him there.
Consideration
determining who is the senior next of kin for the purposes of the Act, NTCAT
must consider the descending order of people in section
is clear that, in circumstances where a deceased person was Aboriginal and had
strong cultural and traditional ties to a community
or group, the senior next of
kin will be someone who is appropriate according to the customs and traditions
of that community or
list in section 11(1) does not give priority to a person who is designated as
‘next of kin’ in the medical records
of the deceased person. While
‘de facto partner’ is in the list, a de facto partner is lower in
the list where the deceased
was an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander person
who had strong cultural and traditional ties to a community or group.
is no dispute that Mr Mardi was an Aboriginal man with strong ties to tradition
and culture.
evidence is that Mr Mardi had a close connection to both the Amiyenggal and
Kiyuk groups. Mr Mardi may have felt a closer connection
to the Kiyuk group
towards the end of his life, indicated in his preference to be buried at
evidence is that both Amiyenggal and Kiyuk groups are patrilineal, and that
since Mr Mardi has sons, they are the appropriate
persons to perform the role of
senior next of kin according to the customs and traditions of both
of Mr Mardi’s sons have sought to be declared as Mr Mardi’s senior
next of kin, however the Act requires one person
to be nominated as the senior
next of kin. Section 13(2)(b) provides that if two or more people have equal
status as the senior next
kin, consideration is to be given to who will
organise and pay for the cost for the burial and disposal of the deceased
person. This
consideration is not relevant here, because Mr Mardi has already
been buried.
any case, the evidence indicates that the status of Aaron Mardi and Keiffen
Mardi is not equal. At [6] of his Unattested Declaration
dated 17 March 2025,
Conway Wirrapanda-Blanasi stated that Aaron is Mr Mardi’s senior next of
kin, as his eldest surviving
all of the evidence into account we determine that, for the purposes of s 13 of
the Act, the senior next of kin for Mr Mardi
is Aaron Mardi. We make the
following order:
Burial and Cremation Act 2022
, the senior next of
kin for Mr Mardi is Aaron Mardi.
14 May 2025
MARK O'REILLY - PRESIDENT
INGRID MEIER
NTCAT Response filed by Lynette
Fejo on 20 January 2025.
Statutory Declaration of Simon Moreen dated 15 January
Rex v Broadspectrum
[2016] NTCAT 436
Unattested Declaration of
Conway Wirrapanda-Blanasi dated 17 March 2025 at
Unattested Declaration of
James William Sing dated 16 March 2025 at p
Unattested Declaration of
James William Sing dated 16 March 2025 at p
Although the death
certificate of Mr Mardi contains the spelling ‘Keiffan’, these
reasons use the spelling ‘Keiffen’
as that is the spelling used in
the documents filed by the
applicants.
Declaration of James William Sing dated 16 March 2025 at p
Declaration of Natalie Harwood dated 17 March 2025 at p1.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (12.8 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter