URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCA/2024/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:17:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Chief Executive Officer (Housing) v Pepperill & Ors [2024] NTCA 10 (24 December 2024)
Chief Executive Officer (Housing) v Pepperill & Ors
[2024] NTCA 10
PARTIES: CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER (HOUSING)
JOANNE PEPPERILL
JAMESIE STAFFORD
KENNEDY BROWN
ANITA McNAMARA
JOHNNY JACK
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: AP 2 of 2024 (22403881)
DELIVERED: 24 December 2024
HEARING DATE: 29 November 2024
JUDGMENT OF: Kelly, Brownhill and Huntingford JJ
CATCHWORDS:
APPEAL – Residential tenancies – Habitability of residential
premises – Statutory meaning of ‘habitable’
the concept of habitability – Whether the requirement of habitability is
confined to the premises –
Implied term in s 48(1)(a) that the landlord
must ensure habitability of premises – Proper construction of the implied
– For premises to be other than habitable they must be not reasonably
suitable for occupation for residential use in that condition
whether by reason
of safety, health or reasonable comfort – Whether the landlord’s
obligation requires strict/absolute
liability or only ‘reasonable
steps’ – Landlord has an obligation to take ‘reasonable
Assessment of whether ‘reasonable steps’ have
been taken requires a multifactorial analysis – Matters relevant
assessment are yet to be determined – Matter remitted for reconsideration
in accordance with this Court’s judgment
– Appeal dismissed.
NOTICE OF CONTENTION – Whether the NTCAT failed to consider or evaluate
the central and undisputed evidence of the relationship
between the tenants and
third party supplier of water – Evidence relied upon was neither pertinent
nor contradictory –
Evidence relied upon did not require weighing or
preference – NTCAT did not ignore, overlook or misunderstand the materials
relied upon or arguments made by the tenants – Notice of contention
Interpretation Act 1978
Power and Water Corporation Act 1987
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
Collins v Hopkins
[1923] 2 KB 617
Jack v Chief Executive Officer
(Housing) (No 2)
[2021] NTSC 81
Minister for Immigration and Border
Protection v MZYTS
(2013) 230 FCR 431,
Northern Sandblasting Pty Ltd v
[1997] HCA 39
(1997) 188 CLR 313
Plaintiff M1/2021 v Minister for Home
[2022] HCA 27
(2022) 275 CLR 582
Chief Executive Officer (Housing) v Young
[2022] NTCA 1
, referred to.
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: D McLure SC with T Moses
Respondent: M Albert
Solicitors:
Appellant: Mills Oakley
Respondent: Australian Lawyers for Remote Aboriginal Rights
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 43
IN THE COURT OF APPEAL
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Chief Executive Officer (Housing) v Pepperill & Ors
[2024] NTCA 10
No. AP 2 of 2024 (22403881)
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER (HOUSING)
JOANNE PEPPERILL
First Respondent
JAMESIE STAFFORD
Second Respondent
KENNEDY BROWN
Third Respondent
ANITA McNAMARA
Fourth Respondent
JOHNNY JACK
Fifth Respondent
CORAM: KELLY, BROWNHILL and HUNTINGFORD JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 24 December 2024)
Factual and procedural background
[1] This is an
appeal from the decision of the Supreme Court in
Pepperill v Chief Executive
Officer (Housing)
[2023] NTSC 90.
By that decision, the Supreme Court
granted the now respondents leave to appeal the decision of the Northern
Territory Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (‘NTCAT’) made on 13 May
2022 and allowed their appeal. The Supreme Court set aside the decisions
NTCAT made on 13 May 2022 and 29 July 2020 in relation to six identified files
and remitted the matter to the original jurisdiction
of the NTCAT for
reconsideration in accordance with the recommendation that the applications in
those files ‘be determined
consistently with the Supreme Court’s
decision, especially at [47].’
following background is taken from the Supreme Court’s decision at
[1]-[14], [28]-[30].
[3] In November
2019, 24 separate applications were commenced in the NTCAT pursuant to the
provisions of the
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
applicants, including the five respondents in this appeal
(‘tenants’), are all tenants of residences in Laramba,
remote Aboriginal community located approximately 200km north-west of Alice
Springs and has a population of about 300
respondent to each of the 24 applications, the appellant in this appeal
(‘CEOH’) is the landlord of the residences
the subject of the NTCAT
applications. It is a body corporate sole with perpetual succession created by
Housing Act 1982
(NT). One of its functions is to provide and assist
in the provision of residential accommodation
(s 15(1)(a)).
In the exercise
of its powers and the performance of its functions, it is subject to the
direction of the Minister
[6] Under the
Power and Water Corporation Act 1987
(NT), statutory responsibility for
the supply of water to residences in Laramba lies with the Power and Water
Corporation (‘PWC’).
A wholly owned subsidiary of the PWC,
Indigenous Essential Services Pty Ltd (‘IES’), actually supplies the
water to the
residences.
applications to NTCAT alleged,
, that the concentration of
uranium in the water supplied to the residences was significantly higher
(alleged to be three times higher)
than the maximum level for that mineral set
out in the Australian Drinking Water Guidelines (‘Water
Guidelines’). The
24 applications alleged that, for that reason, the
residences were not ‘habitable’ as required by s 48(1)(a) of
and/or did not meet all health and safety requirements specified under
an Act as required by s 48(1)(b) of the RTA.
[8] The relief
sought by the tenants in each application was: (i) an order, pursuant to
Northern Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal
that the CEOH
install a system or filter to remove uranium from the water emanating from at
least one tap in the kitchen to below
the maximum safe drinking level in the
Water Guidelines; and (ii) compensation and/or rent repayment to the tenants
pursuant to
[9] By agreement
between the parties, three of the 24 applications proceeded as ‘test
[10] On 1 July
2020, the NTCAT decided that a preliminary question should be determined as to
of the RTA required a landlord to ensure a certain standard
of water quality.
The NTCAT found
(at [45]) that the CEOH did not make the water available to the residences;
rather (at [46]), the PWC did so in accordance
with its statutory
responsibilities. The NTCAT concluded (at [47]-[55]) that, in those
circumstances, the CEOH could not be in breach
of the RTA with
respect to the level of uranium in the water supplied to the residences.
[11] On 29 July
2020, the NTCAT dismissed the three applications insofar as they relate to the
uranium in the water issue.
[12] The tenants
applied for an internal review of the NTCAT’s decision. On the review, the
NTCAT received additional evidence
from both parties to the evidence before the
NTCAT at first instance. The additional evidence related to the
intragovernmental and
funding arrangements for the supply of water to remote
communities including Laramba. On the basis of that evidence, the NTCAT found
that: (a) the PWC has sole responsibility for the supply of water to residences
at Laramba; (b) the CEOH is not legally responsible
for that supply of water,
whether directly or pursuant to some agency or de facto arrangement with the PWC
or the Northern Territory;
and (c) the tenants (and other Laramba residents)
were not charged for the supply of water to their
residences.
[13] On 13 May
2022, the NTCAT confirmed the NTCAT’s decision at first instance
dismissing the three applications.
[14] Pursuant to
Northern Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
(NT), the tenants sought leave to appeal to the Supreme Court the
NTCAT’s review decision. The proposed grounds of appeal were:
[NTCAT] failed to apply a correct understanding of
of the [RTA]
by concluding that there is no breach of that obligation if:
(a) the cause of there being a risk of injury to health in the premises emanates
from a third party or ‘external provider’;
(b) questions of health and safety are determined by reference to a standard of
reasonableness that has determinative regard to who
or what, other than the
landlord, might be responsible for a risk of injury to health for those resident
in the premises.
[NTCAT] failed to consider or evaluate a central element of the case, namely,
the undisputed evidence that the tenants had no
contractual or financial
relationship with the company engaged by the landlord to supply water, which
water was paid for by, and
under an agreement with, that
September 2022, the Supreme Court allowed the tenant’s appeal, concluding
(at [47]) that the NTCAT erred in law in
holding that the quality of drinking
water supplied to the residences in Laramba was not an issue of habitability
of the RTA. The appeal was allowed (at [50]) on ground
1(a). The Supreme Court held (at [51]) that appeal ground 1(b) ‘is close
to incomprehensible’ and, in any event, it would be inappropriate for the
Supreme Court to decide arguments on that ground
where the NTCAT had not yet
heard and determined the parties’ cases in relation to the risk to health
and/or safety as a result
of the uranium content in the water. The Supreme Court
(at [52]) did not consider it necessary to consider ground 2.
[16] The CEOH
appealed to this Court from the decision of the Supreme Court. The ground of
appeal is that:
The Court below misinterpreted
the [RTA] in determining, especially at paragraphs [43]-[45] and [47] of the
Reasons, that the quality and safety of the water
supplied by the [PWC] to the
premises fell within the scope of the landlord’s obligation under that
[17] The appeal
seeks orders that the decisions of the NTCAT made on 13 May 2022 and 29 July
2020 are confirmed, with costs in this
Court and the Supreme
[18] In addition
to their case in opposition to the appeal, the tenants have contended (by way of
an amended notice of contention)
that the Supreme Court’s orders should be
upheld on ground 2 as set out above which was not addressed by the Supreme
The issue/s for determination on this appeal
[19] The order
made by the Supreme Court was to set aside the NTCAT’s orders dismissing
the parts of the applications relating
to ‘the uranium in the water
issue’ and to remit the matter back to the NTCAT for reconsideration
consistently with the
Supreme Court’s judgment, especially at paragraph
paragraph [47], the Supreme Court held that the NTCAT erred in law in holding
that the quality of drinking water supplied
to the tenants’ residences in
Laramba was not an issue of habitability for the purposes of
[21] The Supreme
Court arrived at that conclusion by the following process of reasoning (at
[43]-[46]):
(a) If running water were not supplied to the tenants’ residences, the
residences would not be habitable because they would
not provide the applicants
with ‘reasonable comfort’ in the Central Australian climate, citing
Chief Executive Officer (Housing) v Young
[2022] NTCA 1
’) at [47]-[50].
(b) The CEOH’s obligation under
thus requires that it
ensure that running water is supplied to the residences.
(c) Water is supplied to the residences by the PWC (through its subsidiary,
(d) The CEOH knows, or must be taken to know, that water is supplied to the
residences by the PWC (or a subsidiary). Water is supplied
with the consent,
express or implied, of the CEOH.
(e) It follows from these propositions that the quality of the water which the
CEOH permits to be supplied to the residences is a
habitability issue because it
would make no sense if the CEOH were not required to ensure that the water
supplied is safe to drink.
That is a matter of ‘health and safety’
as it bears on habitability.
(f) The objective standard of reasonableness applied to the criterion of comfort
or reasonable comfort in
was incorrectly applied by the NTCAT to
this criterion of ‘health and safety’, although it may still be
relevant to determining
the measures required to minimise or eliminate a real or
potential risk, if one is identified.
[22] The CEOH
argued that this reasoning is wrong as a matter of law, both as to the
conclusion that
of the RTA obliges the CEOH to ensure that
running water is supplied to the residences and as to the conclusion that
obliges the CEOH to ensure that the water supplied is safe to
drink, including but not only because the second conclusion depends
first, incorrect, conclusion.
[23] The tenants
argued that the Supreme Court’s reasoning is wholly
[24] The RTA is
an Act to regulate the relationship of landlord and tenant under residential
tenancy agreements and for related purposes
(long title).
[25] The RTA has
various objectives, including to fairly balance the rights and duties of tenants
and landlords
, to ensure that tenants are provided with safe and
habitable premises under tenancy agreements
, and to facilitate
landlords receiving a fair rent in return for providing safe and habitable
accommodation to tenants
of the RTA is located in
, headed ‘Repairs and maintenance’,
and in Division 1, headed ‘Landlord’s responsibilities’.
provides as follows:
to be clean and suitable for habitation
(1) It is a term of a tenancy agreement that the landlord must ensure that the
premises and ancillary property to which the agreement
(a) are habitable;
(b) meet all health and safety requirements specified under an Ac that apply to
residential premises or the ancillary property; and
(c) are reasonably clean when the tenant enters into occupation of the premises.
(2) It is not a breach of the term specified in subsection (1) if the failure to
comply with the term is caused by:
(a) an act or omission of the tenant; or
(b) the tenant’s failure to notify the landlord of repairs required to the
[27] The term
‘tenancy agreement’ is defined to mean an agreement under which a
person grants to another person for valuable
consideration a right (which may
be, but need not be, an exclusive right) to occupy premises for the purpose of
[28] The term
‘premises’ is defined to mean residential premises or part of
residential premises to which a tenancy agreement
relates or is to relate, but
does not include premises leased principally for business purposes whether or
not the premises may be
used for residence under the lease
[29] The term
‘residential premises’ is defined to mean premises intended for
occupation as a place of residence and includes
a caravan intended for
occupation as a place of residence and a houseboat intended for occupation as a
place of residence
[30] The term
‘ancillary property’ is defined to mean: (a) ancillary real
property, including a garden, not forming part
of the premises; (b) fixtures;
and (c) chattels, including but not limited to furniture, other household
effects and a garden watering
system, provided by the landlord either under the
tenancy agreement or independently of the agreement for use by the tenant, but
does not include common property within the meaning of the
Unit Titles Act
Unit Title Schemes Act 2009
‘Habitable’
[31] The term
‘habitable’ is not defined in the RTA. An indication of its meaning
is found in the heading to
which refers to
‘premises’ being ‘suitable for habitation’.
‘Habitable’ includes both health and safety and
reasonable comfort
[32] As this
Court observed in
(at [33]), the notion of habitability has a long
jurisprudential history and the concept of ‘habitability’ in general
tenancy law has been transposed into statutes, including the RTA, with its base
meaning remaining largely unchanged.
[33] As this
Court also held in
(at [33], [43]-[46], [49]), the notion of
habitability has two aspects or criteria: health and safety, and reasonable
comfort. So
much was not in dispute.
general and broad statement, adapted from this Court’s decision in
(at [42]-[43]), it should be accepted that, for premises or
ancillary property to be other than ‘habitable’ within the
of the RTA, they must be not reasonably suitable for occupation for residential
use in that condition, whether by reason
of safety, health or reasonable
‘Habitable’
– Is the term confined to the premises or does it extend beyond?
[35] The parties
were at odds as to the reach of the concept of habitability and particularly as
to its operation in respect of things
emanating or sourced outside of the
[36] The CEOH
argued, by reference to the terms ‘premises and ancillary property’
in s 48(1)(a), the subject matter of
Part 7, being repairs and maintenance
and defects, and the language of other surrounding provisions (ss 51(1)(b),
58(1), 60(a), 63(2)),
that the concern to which s 48(1)(a) is directed is
the physical property the subject of the tenancy agreement, curable by repair
maintenance, rather than ‘an untethered inquiry as to health and safety
risks or the reasonable comfort of tenants’.
[37] The tenants
argued that whether premises are habitable is not confined by reference to
whether the cause of the matter impacting
habitability is within or external to
the premises. Rather, it was said, a building may be uninhabitable,
‘whatever be the
cause and whosesoever the
parties relied on numerous authorities from the United Kingdom and (in the
tenant’s case) the United States.
example, the CEOH relied on the decision of the English High Court of Justice in
Stanton v Southwick
[1920] 2 KB 642
’). In that case, the tenant claimed damages against the
landlord for breach of the condition implied by statute into the lease
house be ‘reasonably fit for human habitation’. Shortly after
letting, the premises were found to be overrun
with sewer rats which
intermittently entered from an old drain which ran under the premises. Salter J
(Roche J agreeing) distinguished
(at 645) this case from others in which it had
been proved that the house was infested with bugs, as in
Smith v Marrable
[1843] EngR 181
(1843) 11 M&W 5.
His Honour held (at 645-646) that the question was whether
there was evidence on which it could be found that the house was infested
rats, in the sense that they bred there, were regularly there and ‘formed
part of the house’. There was no such
evidence because the evidence showed
that the rats had their home in the sewer passing below the house from which
they made incursions
into the house in search of food.
[40] This case
was said by the CEOH to illustrate that the landlord’s obligation that
premises be habitable does not extend
to matters emanating from outside the
premises, namely the rats making incursions into the premises from the
[41] The tenants
argued that
Stanton v Southwick
has been expressly disapproved, if not
overruled, by the House of Lords in
Summers v Salford
[1943] AC 283.
There, the House of Lords was dealing with whether a broken window sash in the
only window of a bedroom in a two bedroom, four room
house, meant that the
landlord was in breach of the statutory condition that the premises be ‘in
all respects reasonably fit
for human habitation’. The House of Lords held
that it did. In coming to that conclusion, only Wright LJ referred to
v Southwick
(at 295) and all that his Honour said was that, if he put
himself in the position of the tenant, he agreed with the first instance
not the appeal court. His Honour added that the cases each turn on their
particular circumstances. With that observation,
we entirely agree. We do not
accept that
Stanton v Southwick
has been overruled.
[42] By way of
example for the tenants, reliance was placed on
Collins v Hopkins
In that case, the tenant claimed damages from the landlord for breach
of warranty implied into the tenancy by the common law that
the premises be
reasonably fit for habitation at the start of the tenancy. The day after the
tenant moved in with his family, he
found out that the landlord’s husband
had recently lived in the house whilst suffering pulmonary consumption. McCardie
(at 620) that the implied warranty ‘tends in the most striking
fashion to the public good and the preservation of public health’
to be ‘extended rather than restricted’. McCardie J posed the
question (at 621) as follows:
Was there an actual and appreciable
risk to the tenant, his family or household, by entering and occupying the house
in which the
infectious disorder had occurred? If the risk be serious, no one, I
think, could doubt that the tenant may renounce. But in dealing
with bacilli
which may mean illness and death, I think further that an appreciable measure of
actual risk justifies the tenant in
throwing up his contract. A man should not
be called on to expose his wife and children, household and himself to
Amongst the matters to be considered are the nature of the disease; the
degree and persistence of its infectivity; the date when the
sufferer resided in
the house; the steps taken to prevent risk of infection and the like.
[43] On the
evidence, McCardie J found (at 628) that there was a substantial risk that the
house and its contents were so infected
with the infectious bacilli when the
tenant moved in as to constitute an actual danger to the tenant and his
household, the house
was unsafe for occupation, and as such the house was not
reasonably fit for habitation.
[44] This case
was said by the tenants to illustrate that the landlord’s obligation that
premises be habitable does extend to
matters emanating from outside the
premises, namely the pulmonary consumption bacilli emanating from the
landlord’s husband.
[45] The tenants
also relied on
Hall v Manchester Corporation
(1915) 84 LJ Ch 732.
case concerned whether the appellant’s three adjoining houses were
‘unfit for human habitation’ as had been
declared by the respondent
council pursuant to a statutory power to make such a declaration, the effect of
which was to prohibit
the houses from being occupied. At first instance, it was
held that the declaration could only be made where the unfitness was due
structural or other defect existing in the building itself. It had been admitted
that each house taken separately was fit
for human habitation, and that their
unfitness (a lack of ventilation) lay in their contact and proximity to each
other. The enclosed
yards were small in area, the passage leading into the yards
was narrow and the houses surrounding the yards were two storeyed. The
were ill-ventilated, the only access to air being the narrow passage or over the
roofs of the buildings. The House of Lords
concluded that the declaration was
within the council’s power to make.
[46] Atkinson LJ
held (at 740):
...[I]t is impossible to confine the words of the
section to an unfitness for human habitation due to structural defects in a
itself, or to defective internal physical conditions in a house itself. I
think that those words include an unfitness due to external
causes, such as want
of ventilation, noxious effluvia, &c.
[47] Parker LJ
held (at 742):
Can a house be, within the meaning of the section,
‘unfit for human habitation’ for a reason extrinsic to itself; for
example, because neighbouring buildings preclude the access of air and impair
its proper ventilation? It was argued that a building
could not be unfit for
human habitation within the meaning of the section unless it was in itself, and
without reference to surrounding
circumstances, so unfit. I agree with the Court
of Appeal that this construction cannot be maintained. The sole question in
case is whether the house is as a fact unfit for human habitation, and not
in any case the cause of the unfitness.
[48] Parker LJ
added (at 743) that the standard to be applied to the phrase ‘unfit for
human habitation’ is that of ‘the
ordinary reasonable
[49] Sumner LJ
held (at 743):
The section enables the [council] to declare a
building to be ‘not fit for human habitation’ and thereupon to make
habitation an offence for which a heavy penalty may be imposed. It does not
say from what causes the unfitness must arise. It does
not specify who, if
anybody, must be to blame. It is concerned with the building. ... Public health
is the matter in hand, and public
health seems to demand that a building which
is in fact unfit to be inhabited should not be inhabited, whatever be the cause
whosesoever the blame. ... There is nothing [in the preamble nor the
Act’s other sections] to confine the unfitness for habitation
to unfitness
due to something in the state or the construction or condition of the building
itself, and I do not see why we should
supply this. Why are we to suppose that
the Legislature meant this concrete question to be considered in the abstract,
building stood in the midst of an imaginary desert and not in a
particular street in a populous city?
[50] This case
was also said by the tenants to illustrate that the landlord’s obligation
that premises be habitable extends
to matters emanating from outside the
premises, namely the lack of ventilation caused by the proximity of the other
[51] The CEOH
argued that
Hall v Manchester
was not a case regarding the operation of
residential tenancies legislation; it was about public health and safety
legislation. Further,
it was a case about the nature of the premises themselves,
which lacked proper ventilation.
[52] Noting, as
is well recognised in the authorities, that each case turns on its particular
facts, the difficulty with seeking to
define the limits of the concept of
‘habitability’ by drawing a distinction between impacts upon
habitability arising
from a matter within or without the premises is that it is
possible to see each of the examples just referred to (and others in the
authorities to which we were referred) as involving each of: (a) a problem with
a source external to the premises; (b) which problem
can be seen as a
characteristic of the premises; and (c) which problem impacts upon the
reasonable residential occupation of the
premises by the tenant.
Stanton v Southwick
, the rats in the house came in from the sewer outside
the premises. It was their presence in the house which impacted the
reasonable residential occupation of the premises. It could be
said that the rats could only ingress the premises from the sewer
because of the
location of the premises proximate to the sewer drain and because the premises
were not secure against rats. The external
source of the problem can
nevertheless be seen as
of the premises
Collins v Hopkins
, the pulmonary consumption bacilli was brought into the
premises by the previous resident. The likely presence of the bacilli in
premises presented a substantial risk of infection to the tenant and his family
residing there. The premises themselves were
infected with the bacilli. The
external source of the problem can be seen as
of the premises
v Manchester
, the lack of ventilation in any particular house was caused by
other buildings external to the premises. The lack of ventilation
impacted upon
the tenant’s residential occupation of that premises. The lack of
ventilation was because of the location of
the premises proximate to other
buildings and the way the buildings as a group were constructed. Again, the
external source of the
problem can nevertheless be seen as
approach to the concept of habitability results in a conclusion which turns
largely on the perspective with which one begins.
If one begins with the
perspective that the problem is external to the premises, that is likely the
conclusion arrived at. If one
begins with the perspective that the problem is
internal to or
the premises, that is likely the conclusion arrived
[57] It is an
unhelpful way to approach the questions presently before this Court.
The implied term in s 48(1)(a)
[58] It is of
more assistance to consider the implied term in s 48(1)(a) of the RTA as a
whole. Section 48(1) of the RTA implies into
tenancy agreements an obligation
that the landlord must ensure the things there set out, including that the
premises are habitable.
Is the landlord’s obligation one of
strict/absolute liability or one requiring reasonable steps?
appear to be two potential constructions of the term implied by s 48(1)(a)
of the RTA, namely that it imposes an obligation
on the landlord of strict and
absolute liability,
that it imposes an obligation on the landlord
which requires only the taking of reasonable steps.
consideration is of assistance because the CEOH effectively sought to import
into (thereby confining) the concept of ‘habitable’,
factors which
are usually considered when determining whether a duty to take reasonable steps
has been breached. Equally, the tenants
effectively sought to translate (thereby
enlarging) the scope of the landlord’s obligation in s 48(1)(a) to
the concept of
‘habitable’.
[61] The first
potential construction is that the implied term in s 48(1)(a) is breached
when premises or ancillary property are or
become uninhabitable, for whatever
cause, and whether that cause is within or outside the power or capacity of the
landlord to control
or address. That construction, which appeared to be pressed
by the tenants, is effectively one of strict or absolute liability, in
to which the power or capacity of the landlord to control or address the issue
is irrelevant.
[62] The second
potential construction is that the implied term is only breached to the extent
that the landlord has power or capacity
to control or address the cause
affecting the safety, health and/or reasonable comfort of the tenant. That
construction is effectively
one the scope of which is dependent upon factors
which include the nature and degree of the impact on or risk to the tenant, the
power or capacity of the landlord to control or address the issue (including
whether the issue is the responsibility of a third party)
and the nature and
degree of any skill or expertise involved in doing so. If this construction is
correct, it points against confinement
of the concept of ‘habitable’
pressed by the CEHO as the factors argued to confine it are matters which go to
there is a breach, not the concept of ‘habitable’
[63] In favour
of the first construction, it could be argued that the intention of the
legislature was that, in the broader interests
of public health, safety and/or
reasonable comfort, housing which is not reasonably suitable for occupation for
residential use,
whether by reason of safety, health or reasonable comfort,
simply should not be occupied.
[64] In favour
of the second construction, it could be argued that the intention of the
legislature was that the regulation of residential
tenancies, which are founded
in the contractual relationship between landlord and tenant, is to adopt a
scheme of balanced and reciprocal
rights between the two, and is not directed to
imposing on landlords strict or absolute liability rendering them the insurers
tenants by distributing all risks to safety, health and reasonable comfort
from tenants to landlords.
constructional choice is assisted and informed by the decision of the High Court
Northern Sandblasting Pty Ltd v Harris
[1997] HCA 39
(1997) 188 CLR 313.
case, the plaintiff, the child of the tenants, brought an action for damages in
negligence against an independent contractor
electrician, the electricity board
and the landlord for personal injury caused by electrocution following repairs
done on the premises
by the electrician, who had been engaged by the landlord.
At first instance, the plaintiff succeeded against the electrician and
against the electricity board and the landlord. On appeal to the Court of Appeal
from the dismissal of the action against
the landlord, the appeal was allowed.
[66] In the High
Court, by a majority of 4:3, the appeal from that decision was dismissed. In the
High Court, the plaintiff’s
claim for damages was founded on a breach of a
common law duty of care to the tenants and their family to ensure that the
system in the premises was safe, a breach of a non-delegable duty of
care owed by the landlord in the repair work done on the premises,
breach of a statutory duty imposed by the Queensland equivalents to
s 48(1)(a) of the RTA. Those statutes provided that
the landlord had an
implied obligation to provide and maintain the premises ‘in a condition
reasonably fit for human habitation’
or ‘in good tenantable repair
and in a condition fit for human habitation’. Nothing turned on the
difference between
these provisions.
majority in the result (Brennan CJ, Toohey, Gaudron and McHugh JJ) held that the
landlord had breached the duty of care the
landlord admitted it owed to the
plaintiff and was therefore liable to the plaintiff in negligence.
[68] Four of the
seven members of the Court (Brennan CJ, Dawson, Toohey and Gummow JJ) held that
the statutory provisions did not
create a tortious or contractual right in any
person other than the tenant. Gaudron and Kirby JJ held that the statutory
did create a tortious right in the members of the tenants’
household. Five of the seven members of the Court (Dawson, Toohey,
Gummow and Kirby JJ) held that the statutory provisions did not impose a duty on
the landlord in respect of latent defects
unknown to the landlord and of which
the landlord could not reasonably be expected to have been aware.
[69] Brennan CJ
held (at 328-329) that the statutory provisions did not create any contractual
right in the plaintiff against the
landlord because the lease determined the
right of a tenant as against a landlord with respect to the condition of the
but not the right of one whom the landlord allows to enter in some
other capacity.
[70] Dawson J
held (at 343) that the landlord’s concession as to the existence of a duty
of care to the plaintiff was properly
made having regard to the obligation
implied into the tenancy agreement between the landlord and the
plaintiff’s parents to
maintain the premises in good tenantable repair and
in a condition fit for human habitation. Further, the obligation of the landlord
as to the premises under the statutory provisions was sufficient to justify the
relationship between the plaintiff and the landlord
being regarded as
sufficiently proximate to give rise to a duty of care under the ordinary
principles of negligence to take reasonable
care to avoid foreseeable risk of
injury to the plaintiff.
[71] Toohey J
agreed (at 348) with Gummow J that the statutory provisions did not provide a
cause of action upon which the plaintiff
could recover damages against the
landlord. His Honour also held (at 352-353) that the statutory provisions were
relevant to the
existence of a non-delegable duty of care under the general law
which could not be discharged simply by engaging an independent contractor
the work, because there was control in the landlord and a special vulnerability
in the plaintiff. His Honour agreed (at 355)
with the observation of the
President of the Court of Appeal that the statutory provisions could not be
intended to derogate from
a fundamental requirement of basic safety.
[72] Gaudron J
agreed (at 363) with Gummow and Kirby JJ that the statutory provisions did not
impose an absolute liability on the
part of the landlord in relation to the
safety of the premises. Rather, her Honour held, the expression
‘reasonably fit for
human habitation’ indicates a duty to exercise
reasonable care and skill in providing and maintaining premises in a safe state.
Consequently, the provisions did not give rise to an obligation which, in the
circumstances, was different from the landlord’s
common law duty of care.
[73] McHugh J
held (at 369) that the landlord owed a non-delegable duty of care to the
plaintiff in relation to the repairing of the
stove, including because of the
duties under the statutory provisions.
[74] Gummow J
took guidance (at 373) from the decision of the House of Lords in
as to the meaning of the statutory provisions, particularly the
adoption of Atkin LJ’s statement in
Morgan v Liverpool Corporation
[1927] 2 KB 131
at 145 that, if the state of repair of a house is such that by
ordinary user damage may naturally be caused to the occupier, either
of personal injury to life or limb or injury to health, then the house is not in
all respects reasonably fit for human
habitation. His Honour held (at 373-374)
that, after the negligent electrical repairs had been made, the state of repair
of the premises
was such that, by ordinary use, personal injury would be caused
to the occupier, and so the premises were not reasonably fit for
habitation within the statutory provisions. However, his Honour held that it did
not necessarily follow that the plaintiff
succeeded in her claim for damages
because the next questions were whether the defective condition of the premises
involved a breach
by the landlord of the obligation and, if so, whether the
plaintiff who was not the tenant could bring an action to recover loss
occasioned by the breach. His Honour undertook a review of English and Canadian
decisions relating to similar statutory provisions.
His Honour cited (at 381)
the observation of Jones JA of the Nova Scotia Supreme Court of Appeal in
Gaul v King
(1979) 103 DLR (3d) 233
at 243 that the statutory provisions
did not impose an absolute liability and did not cover latent defects which
could not be discovered
by the exercise of reasonable care and skill; that
construction would not impose an undue hardship on the landlord and would afford
a reasonable measure of protection to the tenant; and the object of the
legislation is to provide reasonable standards for rental
premises, which does
not mean that the legislature intended that lessors should be insurers. Justice
Gummow concluded (at 382-383,
384-385) that the statutory provisions imposed an
obligation upon the landlord, contractual in nature between the landlord and the
tenant, to which the plaintiff was not a party, and there was no obligation
under the statutory provisions, even in favour of the
tenant, in respect of
latent defects unknown to the landlord and of which the landlord could not
reasonably be expected to have been
aware. His Honour adapted what was said by
Jones JA in
Gaul v King
and said that the object of the statutory
provisions was to provide reasonable standards for rental premises, rather than
lessors insurers.
[75] Kirby J
held (at 412, 413), following the decision in
Gaul v King
Canadian decisions, that the statutory provisions did give rise to a right in
the plaintiff, as a member of the tenants’
household, to enforce the
benefit of the implied term, notwithstanding that she was not party to the
tenancy agreement. His Honour
held (at 414) that the duty to provide and
maintain premises in a condition fit for human habitation was not dependent upon
giving the landlord notice of the relevant defect. His Honour
referred (at 414) to the arguments in favour of construing the landlord’s
liability under the statutory provisions as absolute rather than as restricted
to ensuring that the condition of the premises is
fit for human habitation to
the extent that it is reasonable to expect of a landlord of such premises. Those
included the apparently
unqualified and objective expression ‘fit for
human habitation’; the absence of the word ‘reasonably’; the
protective purpose of the statutory provisions; and the policy argument that the
imposition of an absolute duty is the only effective
way of ensuring that the
purpose of avoiding the provision of dwelling houses unfit for human habitation
is fulfilled. However, his
Honour was driven (at 415-416) to the opposite
conclusion because: (a) the obligation was effected by the introduction of an
term into an agreement between the landlord and the tenant which exists
against the background of the common law, such that if the
obligation was an
absolute one, it might have been expected that the legislature would have said
so, noting the obligation must be
given content in circumstances where the
landlord is usually out of occupation; (b) the other obligations implied by the
indicated, not that the obligations of landlord and tenant were
absolute duties, but that the governing words ‘provide and
are modified to include ‘to the extent that is reasonable’; (c) the
Canadian authorities had held a statutory
cause of action extending to the
tenant’s immediate family had been construed as one imposing a general
duty of reasonable
care, not an absolute duty (citing
Gaul v King
(d) had it been intended to impose upon landlords a strict and absolute
liability, as of an insurer, this would have been done
in a provision
differently written given it was such a substantial enlargement of
landlords’ obligations and liabilities. Thus,
his Honour held (at 416)
that if the premises were not fit for human habitation, that was not by reason
of a breach on the part of
the landlord of the obligation to provide and
maintain the premises in the condition required.
[76] This case
did not decide, directly, the scope and content of the landlord’s
obligation to the tenant under a provision
like s 48(1)(a) of the RTA.
However, four members of the High Court (Gummow J (with whom Toohey and Gaudron
JJ agreed) and Kirby
J (with whom Gaudron J agreed)) concluded that the
landlord’s contractual obligation to the tenant to provide and maintain
the premises in a condition fit for human habitation was not a strict and
absolute liability, but was only an obligation to take
reasonable steps to do
so. Consequently, those members of the High Court concluded that the fact (if it
be established) that the
premises were not in a condition fit for human
habitation was not,
, a breach of the landlord’s obligation.
A breach of the implied term would have only occurred if the landlord had failed
take reasonable steps to provide and maintain the premises in that condition.
[77] In our
view, those conclusions and the reasoning upon which they are founded are
readily applicable to the term implied into
tenancy agreements by
s 48(1)(a) of the RTA.
Effect of the words ‘must
[78] It is noted
that s 48(1)(a) provides that the landlord ‘must ensure’ that
the premises are habitable.
National Disability Insurance Agency v WRMF
[2020] FCAFC 79
(2020) 276 FCR 415
Court of the Federal Court held (at [65]) that a statutory requirement imposed
on a tribunal to ‘ensure’ that
a party before it is afforded a
reasonable opportunity to present its case meant that the tribunal ‘is not
a passive by-stander
in the hearing’. The tenants argued that this
supported the construction that the landlord could not fulfil its obligation
under s 48(1)(c) by simply relying on an external service provider to
supply safe water to the premises. Given the very different
statutory context,
this case is of little assistance in determining whether the landlord’s
obligation under s 48(1)(a) of the
RTA is one of strict or absolute
Slivak v Lurgi (Australia) Pty Ltd
(2001) 205 CLR 304
, the High Court
considered the operation of occupational health and safety legislation that
provided that, where any structure was
to be erected, the person who designed it
‘must ensure so far as reasonably practicable’ that the structure
was designed
so that the persons erecting it were safe from injury and risks to
health. In rejecting the submission that the designer had failed
to comply with
the statutory duty where the structure had not been erected in accordance with
the design, Gleeson CJ, Gummow and
Hayne JJ held (at [37]) as
... The appellants stressed the presence of the term
‘must ensure’. However, the requirement is one of ensuring safety
‘so far as is reasonably practicable’. The requirement applies to
matters which are within the power of the designer
to perform or check, such as
ascertaining what use the structure will be put to, what loads it will
experience when being built and
the nature of the location in which it is to be
erected. This is in contrast to the matters that would be forced within the
of this requirement were the submissions for the appellants accepted; for
then a designer would be required to take account of factors
outside the power
of the designer to control, supervise or manage, such as the procedures to be
adopted during construction.
[81] Callinan J
held (at [87]) that the statute imposed a higher duty upon a designer than the
common law, which consequence was produced
by the words ‘must
[82] To the
extent that the tenants relied on the plurality’s expressed agreement (at
[39]) with the analysis of Callinan J,
we note that their Honours’
expressed agreement was with Callinan J’s analysis regarding the onus of
proof (at [92]-[98]),
which analysis did not turn, in any way, on the words
‘must ensure’. To the extent that the tenants relied on the
observations
of Gaudron J (at [51]) that the statutory duty was greater than the
common law duty in negligence, and was a duty to protect against
all risks to
construction workers, if that was reasonably practicable, we note that Gaudron J
was in dissent and her Honour’s
observations are inconsistent with those
set out above.
[83] Again,
given the different language and context of the statute in issue there, this
case is of little assistance.
[84] In any
event, neither case detracts from anything said in
Northern Sandblasting v
. In particular, we do not accept that the words ‘must
ensure’ impose any higher duty than the words ‘provide and
maintain’ contained in the residential tenancies legislation considered in
Contextual considerations
[85] Support for
the application of the conclusions reached in
Northern Sandblasting v
to s 48(1) of the RTA is also found in the other provisions of
the RTA which can operate in relation to premises which are not habitable
the meaning of s 48(1)(a).
[86] First,
s 48(2) of the RTA provides that it is not a breach of the implied term in
s 48(1) if the failure to comply is caused
by an act or omission of the
tenant, or the tenant’s failure to notify the landlord of repairs required
to the premises. This
confinement of the scope of the landlord’s duty
under s 48(1) supports the proposition that it is not absolute or
[87] Secondly,
ss 86(c) and 92(c) permit the landlord and tenant respectively to terminate
the tenancy by two days’ written
notice if the premises have become
uninhabitable. These powers to terminate turn on the premises becoming
uninhabitable
, not upon the landlord’s breach of the implied
term in s 48(1). Thus, if the premises become uninhabitable, both the
and the tenant may elect to terminate the tenancy, or not, regardless
of whether the condition of the premises is a consequence of
landlord’s or the tenant’s act or omission.
[88] Alternatively
to termination, s 60 of the RTA provides that, if the premises are
uninhabitable or unsafe due to disrepair, the
tenant may elect (in certain
circumstances) to have the premises or ancillary property repaired.
Additionally, s 63 of the RTA provides
that a tenant may apply to the NTCAT
for an order that the landlord ‘ensure’ that specified
‘emergency repairs’
are made to the premises.
provisions show that premises which become uninhabitable during a tenancy may
nevertheless continue to be occupied by the
tenant, with both the landlord and
the tenant having the option to quit on short notice. This supports the
distinction between the
concept of habitability
and a breach of
the landlord’s duty in s 48(1)(a), and that the latter is not
established simply by showing the former.
s 47(a) of the RTA, it is an offence, punishable by a fine, for a landlord
to enter into, or offer to enter into, a tenancy
agreement unless the premises
and ancillary property are habitable. It is by this means that the RTA achieves
the policy objective
of ensuring that residential premises which are not
habitable are not occupied for residential purposes.
[91] Finally,
the RTA confers a power on the NTCAT to order compensation for loss or damage
suffered by the tenant to be paid by the
landlord because the landlord has
failed to comply with the tenancy agreement (s 122(1)). Such compensation
may not include compensation
in respect of death, physical injury, pain or
suffering (s 122(5)(a)). Again, s 122(5)(a) contains a limitation on
the extent of
the landlord’s liability. Further, in contrast with the
other provisions referred to above, the right to compensation for loss
arises on the landlord’s breach of the tenancy agreement, which must
include the implied term in s 48(1)(a). This
also supports the distinction
between the concept of habitability and a breach of the landlord’s duty in
s 48(1)(a), and that
the latter is not established simply by showing the
Conclusions as to ‘habitable’ and the
landlord’s duty under s 48(1)(a)
[92] It follows
from the above that the question whether premises or ancillary property are
‘habitable’ does not turn
on the landlord’s power or capacity
to control the matter affecting habitability or whether that matter emanates
from within
or external to the premises, as those are matters directed to
whether or not the landlord has breached its duty under s 48(1)(a).
[93] Rather, as
set out in paragraph [34] above, for premises or ancillary property to be other
than ‘habitable’ within
the meaning of the RTA, they must be
‘not reasonably suitable for occupation for residential use in that
condition, whether
by reason of safety, health or reasonable comfort’.
Where the issue is one of safety or health, premises will be other than
habitable where there is an actual and appreciable risk to the health and/or
safety of the tenants in their ordinary residential
day to day use of the
[94] Further, if
premises are not habitable, the question may then arise as to whether the
landlord has breached the term implied
into the tenancy agreement by
s 48(1)(a) of the RTA. That question has arisen in this case because the
tenants have sought compensation
under s 122 of the RTA (which permits
compensation for a breach by the landlord of the terms of the tenancy agreement)
and what are
said to be orders ancillary to a finding by the NTCAT in that
[95] While we
are not called upon to decide whether the NTCAT would have power to make such
‘ancillary orders’ in this
matter, we note that the orders sought
would now appear to be futile given that the PWC (though IES) has now installed
a water treatment
plant which has lowered the concentration of uranium in the
water supplied by it to the community of Laramba and the residences the
of these proceedings.
[96] Whether or
not the landlord has breached the implied term in s 48(1)(a) turns on
whether the uninhabitable condition of the premises
(assuming that be
established) was a consequence of the landlord’s failure to take
reasonable steps to ensure that the premises
or ancillary property were
habitable. That consideration involves questions as to the nature and degree of
the risk to or impacts
upon the health, safety and/or reasonable comfort of the
tenants, the measures available to the landlord to alleviate the risks or
impacts, the capacity and power of the landlord to control or address those
risks or impacts and the nature and extent of any expertise
or special skill
The decision of the Supreme Court appealed from
[97] We turn
then to the decision of the Supreme Court from which this appeal is
[98] The first
matter is whether the Supreme Court erred in the conclusion (at [43.1]) that, if
running water were not supplied to
the tenants’ premises, they would not
be habitable within the meaning of the RTA.
[99] We consider
that this conclusion discloses no error in the circumstances of this case. Those
circumstances are that the premises
are located in Central Australia. The
premises are plumbed and fitted out with taps, toilets and other fittings
designed to distribute
and provide, within the premises, water for use by the
occupants of the premises in their ordinary residential activities of day
living. The premises are connected via pipes to a town water supply. That town
water supply is provided to the community of
Laramba via infrastructure operated
and managed by the entity (PWC, through its subsidiary EIS) with statutory
functions and responsibility
to acquire, store, treat, distribute, market and
otherwise supply water for any purpose and to undertake, maintain and operate
works, system, facilities, apparatus or equipment required for such
The town water supply
is sourced from groundwater, the health and safety of which is the statutory
responsibility of the Chief Health
[100] In those
circumstances, if water was not supplied to those residences, at least for a
period of time sufficiently significant
to impact upon the reasonable comfort of
the tenants, they would not be habitable because the premises would not provide
comfort to the tenants.
[101] The period
of time is relevant because it must be accepted that, in the ordinary course of
the provision of an essential service
such as water in accordance with statutory
responsibilities to do so, there may be interruptions to that supply from time
as a consequence of, for example, maintenance and works on
infrastructure, breakdowns and damage to infrastructure, and/or environmental
factors or natural disasters, which affect supply.
[102] The second
matter is whether the Supreme Court erred in the conclusion (at [43.2]) that
s 48(1)(a) of the RTA obliges the CEOH
to ensure that running water is
supplied to the tenants’ premises.
[103] For the
reasons already explained, properly understood, s 48(1)(a) is not an
obligation of strict or absolute liability, but
an obligation to take reasonable
steps to ensure the habitable condition of the premises. Importing that
understanding into the Supreme
Court’s conclusion, particularly the word
‘ensure’, the conclusion is not in error.
conclusions in paragraphs [99] and [103] above do not render the CEOH (or any
other landlord in the Northern Territory)
liable, without more, for any
disruption to the water supply or any corruption of the water supplied, even for
periods of time which
do impact upon the reasonable comfort of the tenants. As
already explained, the question whether such disruption or corruption
constitutes
a breach of the landlord’s obligation in s 48(1)(a)
requires a finding that the premises are not habitable, but requires more
that because the landlord’s obligation is to take reasonable steps to
ensure the habitable condition of the premises.
[105] The third
matter is whether the Supreme Court erred in holding (at [44]) that it follows
from the earlier conclusions that the
quality of the water which the CEOH
permits to be supplied to the premises is a habitability issue, and (at [45])
that the CEOH is
obliged to ensure that the water supplied by the PWC is safe to
drink, because it is a matter of health and safety.
[106] Again, for
the reasons already explained, the quality of the water which the CEOH permits
to be supplied to the residences is
‘a habitability issue’ in the
sense that, in the circumstances of this case, it may give rise to a finding
that the residences
were not habitable. That conclusion is not in error.
Further, properly understood, s 48(1)(a) is not an obligation of strict or
liability, but an obligation to take reasonable steps to ensure the
habitable condition of the premises. Importing that understanding
Supreme Court’s conclusion, particularly the word ‘ensure’,
the conclusion is not in error.
[107] If the
uranium levels in the water supplied to the premises posed an actual and
appreciable risk to the health and/or safety
of the tenants in their ordinary
residential day to day use of the premises, then those premises would not be
habitable. It is not
relevant to that determination whether or not the water is
supplied by a third party with statutory responsibility for the supply
essential services such as water.
[108] However,
for the reasons explained above, where the relief sought by the tenants turns on
whether or not the landlord has breached
the obligation in s 48(1)(a) of
the RTA, determination of that question (the breach) will depend on not only
whether the premises
were not habitable, but whether the landlord took
reasonable steps to ensure the habitability of the premises. Relevant to that
will be various matters, including the fact that the water was
supplied by a third party with statutory responsibility and particular
expertise for doing so.
acknowledged by the Supreme Court (at [46]-[48]), both of those matters are yet
to be determined.
[110] It follows
that the Supreme Court’s conclusion (at [47]) that the NTCAT erred in law
in holding that the quality of the
drinking water supplied to the tenants’
premises in Laramba was not an issue of habitability for the purposes of
of the RTA was not in error.
[111] The appeal
will be dismissed.
[112] The orders
made by the Supreme Court included an order remitting the matter back to the
original jurisdiction of the NTCAT for
reconsideration with the recommendation
that the tenants’ applications ‘be determined consistently with this
judgment in
Pepperill v CEO (Housing)
[2023] NTSC 90
particularly at paragraph [47]’.
[113] Given that
this Court has now determined this appeal, we consider it appropriate to vary
the order made by the Supreme Court
to recommend that the NTCAT determine the
tenants’ applications consistently with this Court’s
Notice of contention
[114] By their
amended notice of contention, the tenants contended that the Supreme Court
should have decided a matter in their favour,
namely that (as contended under
their ground 2 in the Supreme Court), the NTCAT failed to consider or evaluate
the central and undisputed
evidence that the tenants had no contractual or
financial relationship with the company engaged by the CEOH to supply water,
which water was paid for by, and under an agreement with, the
tenants’ position on this appeal was that, if this Court was satisfied
that the appeal should be dismissed, there
was no need for us to address the
notice of contention.
[116] We are so
satisfied. However, given that we have drawn some conclusions about the content
and effect of s 48(1)(a) of the RTA
which were not specifically expressed
by the Supreme Court, and lest we be wrong in our conclusion about the appeal,
we will also
deal briefly with the notice of contention.
[117] The notice
of contention is directed to the conclusion of NTCAT on the review that there
was no evidence that the CEOH had accepted
some responsibility, de jure or de
facto, for the supply of water by the external (i.e. third party)
The NTCAT said:
...[A] landlord may bear responsibility for the quality of water
and other utilities under the concept of habitability. ... [E]xamples
this may occur [is] a landlord’s provision of water from a tank.
Another example ... might be where a landlord such as the [CEOH] accepts some
responsibility, de jure or de facto, in the context
of a residential tenancy
arrangement, for the supply of water by an external entitle such as the [PWC].
However, on the evidence
before us that is not the case here.
tenants argued that there was evidence of this, it was a central tenet in the
tenants’ case, and that the NTCAT’s
conclusion to the contrary was
an error of law for failure to properly address that evidence.
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v MZYTS
(2013) 230 FCR
431, the Full Court of the Federal Court held (at [49]-[50])
The Court is entitled to take the reasons of the Tribunal as
setting out the findings of fact the Tribunal itself considered material
decision, and as reciting the evidence and other material which the Tribunal
itself considered relevant to the findings it
made ... Representing as it does
what the Tribunal itself considered important and material, what is present
– and what is
absent – from the reasons may in a given case enable a
Court on review to find jurisdictional error ...
... The Tribunal’s reasons disclose no process of weighing evidence and
preferring some over the other. In the context of two
or more pieces of
apparently pertinent, but contradictory, evidence an expression of a preference
for some evidence over other evidence
generally requires an articulation of the
different effects of the evidence concerned, and then some indication as to why
is given. All these are matters for the trier of fact. The absence
from the recitation of country information of the material referred
post-hearing submissions is indicative of omission and ignoring, not weighing
and preference.
Plaintiff M1/2021 v Minister for Home Affairs
[2022] HCA 27
(2022) 275 CLR 582
CJ, Keane, Gordon and Steward JJ held (at [27]):
None of the
preceding analysis detracts from, or is inconsistent with, established principle
that, for example, if review of a decision
maker’s reasons disclose that
the decision maker ignored, overlooked or misunderstood relevant facts and
materials or a substantial
and clearly articulated argument; misunderstood the
applicable law; or misunderstood the case being made by the former visa holder,
that may give rise to jurisdictional error. [citations omitted]
establish that the proposition that the CEOH had accepted responsibility for the
supply of water to the tenants’ premises
because the water was paid for by
and under an agreement with the CEOH was a central tenet in their case. The
tenants argued, by
reference to a document provided to the NTCAT, that they had
sought such a finding of fact and identified the source of the evidence.
contained 23 findings
of fact sought, the last five of which were to the effect that there was no
contractual or other financial
relationship between each tenant and the PWC (or
IES) concerning water and the premises; each tenant did not pay for the supply
water or the quantum of water to the premises; and the rent paid by the
tenants went into the bank account of the government department
responsibility for housing.
[123] It is by
no means apparent from that document that a central tenet of the tenants’
case was that the water supplied to
the premises by the PWC subsidiary was paid
for by, and under agreement with, the CEOH. Indeed, the document asserts
findings of
fact that the department of the Northern Territory government with
primary responsibility for housing was responsible for co-ordinating
and funding
the supply of water to Laramba by the PWC or IES. Bearing in mind that the CEOH
is not the Territory or the Crown, but
a separate juridical
these asserted facts are
inconsistent with the fact now said to have been open on the evidence before the
evidence said to source the above findings of fact was an unattested declaration
of the tenants’ solicitor dated 25
The thrust of that
declaration is that, by reference to conversations with the tenants and various
publicly available documents,
such as Administrative Arrangements Orders, an
Annual Report of IES, and the transcript of a meeting of the Legislative
Committee on the Northern Territory’s Energy Future, the tenants
do not pay anyone for water supplied to the premises, the
government departments
responsible for the provision of essential services in remote Aboriginal
communities and the
Housing Act 1982
(NT) were the same for various
periods, IES was contracted to deliver essential services to remote Aboriginal
communities on behalf
of the Northern Territory government, IES charged
non-residents (such as government employees) of remote Aboriginal communities
the supply of essential services (such as water) but did not charge
residents of those communities, and rent paid by the tenants
was paid to the
government department.
[125] The Annual
Report of IES
The Company
recognises revenue from three major sources being the provision of electricity,
water and sewerage services to 72 remote
communities and 79 outstations. The
Company also receives operational recurrent grant funding from the Northern
Territory Government
to supplement the revenue that the Company generates
through the sales of electricity, water and sewerage services to remote
communities.
[126] There is
no suggestion in this material
, nor could any rational inference
be drawn from it, that the CEOH paid or pays for water supplied to the
tenants’ premises
under an agreement with the PWC subsidiary.
[127] Given that
the document in which the tenants set out the findings of fact they sought in
the NTCAT did not contain the fact
asserted in the notice of contention and the
findings of fact therein were actually inconsistent with that asserted fact, and
the evidence of the asserted fact referred to does not contain the asserted
fact nor permit an inference of it, it is unsurprising
that the NTCAT dealt with
the matter briefly. The evidence was neither pertinent nor contradictory and did
not require any weighing
or preference. Consequently, we do not accept that the
NTCAT ignored, overlooked or misunderstood relevant facts and materials or
substantial and clearly articulated argument, or misunderstood the case being
made by the tenants. In any event, given the established
legal distinction
between the Northern Territory government (and its departments) and the CEOH,
the finding asserted in the notice
of contention was not open.
[128] The error
asserted in the tenants’ notice of contention is not established. The
notice of contention will be dismissed.
Disposition
[129] We make
the following orders:
appeal is dismissed.
amended notice of contention is dismissed.
order made by the Supreme Court remitting the matter back to the Northern
Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal is varied
to replace the reference
to the Supreme Court’s judgment with reference to this Court’s
Chief Executive Officer (Housing) v Pepperill & Ors
[130] We will
hear the parties as to costs.
-------------------
Those provisions permit the NTCAT
to ‘make any other order it considers appropriate’ despite the fact
that a specific
order is sought by the applicant (s 64) and to impose
conditions on its decision and to make an ancillary order or direction the
considers appropriate for achieving the purpose for which the NTCAT may exercise
the power to make a decision (s 67).
The reasons of the Supreme Court
refer only (at [3]) to the first order sought by the tenants. The tenants’
applications to
the NTCAT are not before this Court. That the tenants also
sought an order for compensation is confirmed in the NTCAT’s decision
Various Applicants from Laramba v Chief Executive Officer (Housing)
[2020] NTCAT 22
Various Applicants from Laramba
v Chief Executive Officer (Housing)
[2020] NTCAT 22.
Various Applicants from Laramba
v Chief Executive Officer (Housing)
[2022] NTCAT 3
Amended Notice of Appeal filed on
14 June 2024.
The heading to the section is part
of the Act: s 55(2)(a),
Interpretation Act 1978
This is effectively an amalgam of
the passage from Woodfall,
Landlord and Tenant
[1-1477] cited with approval at [42], and the passage from
Finn v Finato
[2004] NSWCTTT 179
, cited with approval at [43].
Hall v Manchester
Corporation
(1915) 84 LJ Ch 732
at 743 per Sumner LJ.
Adopting the test expressed by
McCardie J in
Collins v Hopkins
Section 14A(1)(a) and (c),
Power and Water Corporation Act 1987
Sections 29,
, 133(2)(d),
Power and Water Corporation Act 1987
Various Applicants from
Laramba v Chief Executive Officer (Housing)
[2022] NTCAT 3
to by the Supreme Court at [21].
Appeal Book (‘AB’)
Jack v Chief Executive
Officer (Housing) (No 2)
[2021] NTSC 81
, [43]-[45] per Grant CJ.
AB 168-174.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (300 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter