URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTRTCmr/2015/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:21:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Dives -v- Silvio & Stanes [2015] NTRTCmr 7 (16 March 2015)
REASONS FOR THE ORDER OF THE COMMISSIONER OF TENANCIES
INQUIRY - Wednesday, 25 February 2015
DARYL AND SAMANTHA DIVES (‘Tenants’)
BELINDA SILVIO AND DOUGLAS STANES (‘Landlord’)
RT1415-0390
This is a determination of an application by the tenant dated 9 January 2015
in respect of premises being 304 Bronzewing Avenue, Howard
Springs in the
Northern Territory of Australia (‘the premises’), seeking an order
Residential Tenancies Act
(NT) (‘the Act’) as
return of retained security deposit moneys under section 113 totalling $2066.99
but specifically comprised of:
(a) $525.25
making good damage to the premises or ancillary property; and
(b) $1541.44
paying unpaid charges for electricity, gas or water payable to the
compensation in the amount of $8,575 pursuant to section 122 for ongoing
maintenance issues with the property and administrative
costs incurred by the
A Notice of Inquiry dated 28 January 2015 was posted to the
parties with the Inquiry set down for Wednesday, 25 Ferbuary 2015. The
following appeared at the Inquiry and made submissions:
Honor Borg and Ms Emma Atkinson of C-Vue Property on behalf of the Landlord; and
Samantha Dives on behalf of herself and her husband as tenants.
evidence before the Inquiry consisted of the following materials:
documents submitted by the Tenants in support of the application and kept on the
Commissioner of Tenancies file numbered RT1415-0390;
footage taken by the Tenants of the pool pump and reticulation at the premises
(contained in a USB memory stick provided by
the tenant);
documents submitted by the Landlord and kept on Commissioner of Tenancies file
numbered RT1415-0390;
documents contained in Commissioner of Tenancies file RT1415-0288 which related
to an earlier application by the tenant against
the landlord;
following additional materials received by me at the Inquiry and marked as such
on the file:
of e-mails between the Tenants and Ms Atkinson dated 1 August 2014 and 27
November 2014 incorporating attached documents routine
inspection letter from
C-Vue Real Estate dated 30 June 2014, routine inspection report dated 10 July
maintenance
request form dated 8 July 2014 signed by the tenant; and
colour copy of a document showing photographs stated to be taken on 11 November
2014 with particular reference drawn to Image 38
by the Landlord.
oral evidence of Ms Borg, Ms Atkinson and Mrs Dives.
dated 10 March 2015 from Ms Borg containing the outgoing condition report and
photographs taken at the outgoing inspection.
e-mail dated 10 March 2015from Ms Dives confirming that the Tenants had not
received a copy of the outgoing condition report.
On the basis of
the above evidence I find there was a tenancy agreement between the Landlord and
the Tenants in respect of the premises
within the meaning of and subject to the
provisions of the Act. The key details of the tenancy agreement were as
Duration: Fixed term commencing 26/05/14 and ending on 25/05/16
Rent: $1250 per week payable monthly in advance
Security Deposit: $ 5,000
An ingoing inspection report was conducted with a significant range of items
disputed by the Tenants. The Tenants appear to have signed
the condition report
on 2 June 2014. The Landlord reviewed these matters and accepted the changes
made by the Tenants by signing
the condition report on 19 June 2014. Whether the
Landlord’s acceptance was relevant given the effect of section 27(4) of
Residential Tenancies Act
is not an issue as the parties did not
dispute the validity of the ingoing inspection report as amended by the
After taking possession of the premises, the Tenants raised ongoing repairs
and maintenance issues with the landlord culminating in
the service of an RTO4b,
‘Notice by Tenant to Landlord to remedy Breach of Term of
Agreement,’ on the Landlord dated
7 November 2014.
The Tenants then lodged an application to the Commissioner for Tenancies
dated 28 November 2014 seeking the termination of the lease.
An inquiry was
conducted by a delegate of the Commissioner of Tenancies on 2 December 2014. By
consent of both parties the tenancy
was terminated and vacant possession
provided to the Landlord on 11 December 2014.
The Tenants now seek the return of a portion of the security deposit and
compensation due to the Landlord’s failure to maintain
the premises.
The Tenants requested that the materials lodged in relation to the previous
application to the Commissioner for Tenancies to terminate
the tenancy be
considered as evidence in relation to this application. I explained to both
parties that while I would consider those
materials, this should not be
construed as a review of that matter and the decision made by the delegate of
the Commissioner of Tenancies.
The Landlord was provided with a copy of the relevant materials relating to
the previous application and provided with a reasonable
period of time to make
further submissions, however none were forthcoming.
I also note that I requested a copy of the outgoing condition report from the
agents of the Landlord on 10 March 2015 as this was
not provided in the
materials submitted by the parties. The agents provided the outgoing condition
report and advised in an e-mail
of the same date that the outgoing condition
report was not given to the tenant because Ms Dives was present when it was
being conducted
and there were no issues from the report.
The Tenants also confirmed on 10 March 2015 by e-mail that they were not
given the outgoing condition report.
The Security Deposit Matters
The Tenants confirmed that the retention of the security deposit for the
unpaid rent component is not disputed. The basis of their
dispute is as
(a) $525.25 making good damage to the premises or ancillary property; and
(b) $1,541.44 paying unpaid charges for electricity, gas or water payable to the
The $525.25 amount according to the tax invoices attached
the RT08 security deposit retention notice provided by the landlord to the
tenant, consisted of:
Maintenance
and service works undertaken by Friendly Pools and Spa Care to deal with the
algae growth as well as a black spot on the
floor of the pool totalling $281.50
(noting that the invoice is in the amount of $381.50 however the owner has paid
for the 2 regular
servicing components on 27 November 2014 and 29 November
undertaken by Build It NT to replace 2 electrical ports in the shed, inspect
stations 1-20 of the reticulation system and to
replace damaged sprinklers on
stations 1-11.
Making Good Damages To The Premises
Section 112 sets out when a landlord is entitled to retain a security
Section 112(4) provides:
“(4) The landlord is not entitled to retain some or all of the
amount of a security deposit for a purpose referred to in subsection
(3)(a), (b)
or (c) unless:
(a) a condition report in relation to the premises was accepted by the
tenant under Part 5; and
(b) if the tenant has given up vacant possession of the premises or has,
in the opinion of the landlord, apparently abandoned the
premises – a
condition report has been given to the tenant under section 110
As the Landlord has not complied with section 112(b) by giving the tenant a
condition report under section 110, the security deposit
cannot be validly
retained for any of the purposes in section 112(3)(a), (b) or (c). One of the
purposes under section 112(3)(a)
is to make good any damages. The retention of
$525.26 of the security by the Landlord to make good damages is therefore
While it is may have been open for the Landlord to make a compensation claim
under section 122 for these moneys to cover the repairs
of the damages, the
Landlord has not made such an application and must return that portion of the
security deposit to the Tenants.
Unpaid Charges for Water
The Tenants have disputed liability for unpaid water usage charges which have
been retained by the Landlord from the security deposit.
The Tenants have submitted copies of correspondence and supporting materials
between them and the Landlords’ agent claiming
that the water usage
charges the Landlord is requiring them to pay is unfair. I note that the Tenants
requested that the Landlord
vary this requirement, on the basis that it was
onerous, however this was rejected by the Landlord.
The Tenants also submitted video evidence (date stamped 16 November 2014) of
leaks to the irrigation and a pool filter which they
say has contributed to the
excess water usage. The Tenants stated that they had raised this issue as a
maintenance request which
was not addressed by the Landlord.
According to the ingoing inspection report, there were no issues in relation
to the pool filter/pump leaking. The condition of the
pool at the commencement
of the tenancy was stated in that report as, “
All clean and intact with
all chemicals balanced
The Tenants said that the leaking of the pool pump/filter was first raised
with the Landlord on 27 June 2014, although no documentary
evidence was provided
to support this, and then again on 10 July 2014 at the 6 week routine
inspection. The Tenants said a copy of
a maintenance request form dated 8 July
2014 was personally handed to Shelly Holland of C-Vue Property at the routine
inspection.
The maintenance request form identified the pool leaking as a
maintenance issue. Ms Borg and Ms Atkinson stated they have never seen
maintenance request.
I note that both parties provided a copy of a notice dated 2 October 2014
from Friendly Pool and Spas left at the premises advising
that the pool had been
serviced on that day. The notice also stated that,
“....you have a very
small leak in the backwash line. Let us know if it gets worse
The Tenants said it was a minor leak up until 23 October 2014. Around 23
October 2014 the leak had in the word of Ms Dives at the
playing up a bit
,’ and she reported this in an e-mail dated 23 October
2014 to the landlord. The e-mail dated 23 October 2014 stated ‘
pump/backwash leaking
’ under the heading ‘
Current maintenance
issues requiring attention/review/action
’. There was no indication in
this e-mail whether this was an urgent maintenance issue, however I note that Ms
Shelly Holland
of C-Vue Property replied by e-mail dated 29 October to the
Tenants confirming that it is the Landlords responsibility to fix the
The written submissions from Ms Borg on behalf of the Landlord were that:
6 week inspection report on 10 July 2014 2014 did not note any issue with the
pool. A copy of the inspection report was provided.
The inspection report did
not identify any problems with the pool.
2 October 2014 pools service conducted by Friendly Pools and Spa Care only
identified a minor leak.
11 November 2014 routine inspection report did not identify the leak issue. A
copy of the inspection report was provided. The
inspection report does however
state that there is problem with a the pool timer but there is no mention of a
pool filter/pump leak.
13 November 2014 the tenant advised the pool leak is excessive now. Friendly
Pools and Spas tried to attend on 20 November 2014
but were refused entry. On 27
November 2015 Friendly Pools and Spas attended and stopped the leak. On 29
November 2014 Friendly
Pools and Spas attended with a part to make the pool work
without a leak.
I accept that that the pool filter leak would have
required the Tenant to have topped up the pool with fresh water to avoid the
running dry. The evidence is that this would not have been required to any
great degree prior to 23 October 2014 as the leak was
minor in nature. However
this would have increased at some time after 23 October 2014 up until the leak
was fixed on 29 November
(approximately one month) as the leak appeared
substantial.
The Tenants also claimed that the water usage charges were inflated due to
leakage with the irrigation system. The Tenants submitted
video footage date
stamped 16 November 2014 showing leakage in various irrigation stations.
The Tenants claimed this was an issue that was identified at the outset. In
the ingoing condition report the Tenants modified the
entry regarding the
‘Watering System’ to state a few sprinklers not working require
fixing. This terminology does not
convey that the issue is severe.
There is some disagreement between the Landlord and Tenant as to whose
responsibility it was to fix the sprinklers. In any event,
the damaged
sprinklers were repaired at the Landlords cost on 19 November 2014.
I note at this point that the 2 invoices from PowerWater relating to the sum
of $1,541.44 retained from the security deposit by the
Landlord show the
following usage and charges:
June 2014 to 29 August 2014, 781 kilolitres, $1,305.23 (Tenant’s component
according to agent $1009.96); and
30 August 2014 to 27 November 2014, 380 kilolitres, $758.54 (Tenant’s
component according to agent $531.48).
The Tenants reduced water
usage after receiving the first invoice which caused them to seek a variation to
the water usage costs that
were being passed on to them by the Landlord under
the Tenancy agreement. The evidence however reveals that the pool leakage issue
and most likely the irrigation leakage became more prominent in the second water
billing cycle (ie. 30 August 2014 to 27 November
2014). During this period water
consumption was however reduced by the Tenant, which indicates that the topping
up of the pool with
fresh water was not significant in this period.
112(3)(e) of the Act provides that:
of a tenancy agreement the
landlord is entitled to retain so much of the
security deposit paid by the tenant as is necessary to:
(e) pay for unpaid rent or for unpaid charges for electricity, gas or
water payable by the tenant under section 118
Section118 provides:
(1) A tenant is only required to pay the landlord for a charge payable
by the owner or occupier of premises for electricity,
gas or water supplied
to the premises during the tenancy:
(a) if the tenant is required to do so under the tenancy agreement; and
(b) if the owner would be liable, including by way of a statutory
charge or overriding statutory charge within the meaning
to pay for the charge if it were not paid by the tenant;
(c) if the premises to which the agreement relates are individually
metered for the service or facility to which the charge
relates or the
agreement states:
(i) the service or facility for which the
charges are payable; and
(ii) the method of determining the
apportionment of the charge; and
(iii) how the charge may be
recovered by the landlord from the tenant.
(2) A landlord must not request from a tenant an amount for a charge
payable by the owner or occupier of premises for electricity,
gas or water
supplied to the premises unless the amount is calculated in accordance with
the tenancy agreement.
The tenancy agreement states at clause 3 that the Tenants agree:
To pay all the charges for:
Electricity;
Gas (and to
ensure the gas bottle is full at the end of the tenancy);
television (if approved); and
Excess water
(which means; water in the amount of 125 kilolitres per service provider billing
quarter or greater and where the period
of use by the tenant is less than the
relevant quarter; water used during the lesser period which proportionally
equates to 125 kilolitres
or greater per quarter.
literal interpretation of this clause appears to indicate that the Tenants are
required to pay for all water usage charges and not
just the usage above 125
kilolitres. I note however that the Landlords appeared to have interpreted this
clause in favour of the
Tenants by seeking to only charge them for water usage
over and above 125 kilolitres in a billing cycle.
At the inquiry the landlord provided a clear and logical explanation of how
the water charges were determined. I also noted the agents’
submission of
PowerWater invoices from other properties under their management showing
comparative water usage.
In conclusion, the Tenants have entered into an agreement with the landlord
and part of the agreement requires them to pay excess
water charges. The
premises in question is a large property, which under clause 26 of the tenancy
agreement they are required to,
maintain the garden and lawns of
Property in good order at all times including regular pruning and watering
during the tenancy...
I can see no valid basis as why the Tenants should be relieved from complying
with the terms of the tenancy agreement. However, I
accept that relevant
maintenance issues caused the Tenants to utilise more water than they would have
if the pool filter leak and
irrigation leakage issue had been rectified. I do
not however find that this additional usage was significant, in fact the
indicates that it was relatively modest. Accordingly I order that the
Landlords return the sum of $50.00 to the Tenants from the
portion of the
security deposit retained to pay for the Tenants water usage liability.
The Compensation Claim
The Tenants have claimed compensation in the sum $8575.00 which is made up of
the following components:
for maintenance issues not addressed for a period of 6 months. This is
calculated as 4 weeks rental;
for the pool being unusable from 23 October 2014 to 11 December 2014 due to
inaction and non-repair. This is calculated on
the basis of $175 per week x 7
for the Pool assessment fee from Hi-Tech Pools and Spas; and
Tenants’ Administrative Costs. This is calculated on the basis of
photocopying costs and 55 hours at $25 per hour to prepare
the relevant
applications and documentation.
122 of the Act provides that compensation for loss or damage suffered
by an applicant can be awarded on the grounds that one
party has failed to
comply with the tenancy agreement or an obligation under the Act relating to the
tenancy agreement.
122(2) of the Act provides that a party may not apply for compensation
for loss or damage suffered by reason of a breach of
the landlord’s duty
to repair, unless notice under section
of the Act has been given. Section
58(1) of the Act makes it a term of the tenancy that if a property
requires repair the tenant,
as soon as reasonably practicable after becoming
aware of the need for repairs, is to notify the landlord orally or in
writing. Section
58(3) of the Act provides that if the Landlord requests the tenant to
put notice in writing the tenant is not taken to have given
notice under section
unless the notice is given in writing.
122 of the Act also provides that in determining whether to order the
payment of compensation to a party the Commissioner
must take into consideration
a number of factors. Those factors include:
whether the
person from whom compensation is claimed has taken all reasonable steps to
comply with his or her obligations;
action was taken by the applicant to mitigate the loss or damage; and
any tender of
compensation.
Further section
122(5) of the Act provides that the Commissioner is not to make an
order for the payment of compensation in respect
of death, physical injury, pain
or suffering.
57 of the Act makes it a term of the tenancy agreement that the
Landlord must ensure that the premises and ancillary property
(a) in a reasonable state of repair when a tenant enters into occupation of the
premises; and
(b) maintained in a reasonable state of repair having regards to their age,
character and prospective life.
A Landlord does not breach that
term unless they have notice of the repair (under section
58 of the Act) and if they have acted with
reasonable diligence to have
the defect repaired.
Section 48 provides that it is a term of a tenancy agreement that the
landlord must ensure the premises are habitable, meet all health
requirements and are reasonably clean when the tenant enters into occupation of
the premises.
Maintenance Issues
As stated earlier, the ingoing inspection report was conducted with a
significant range of items disputed by the Tenants. Some of
these disputed items
related to matters such as cleanliness while others related to the state of
repair of the premises.
The agents for the Landlord reviewed the disputed items raised by the Tenants
and accepted the changes made by the Tenants by signing
the condition report on
19 June 2014.
The Landlord therefore has actual notice of the defects identified by the
Tenants at the commencement of the tenancy. As stated by
Blokland J in Koufos
& Koufos v Northern Territory of
The duty of the landlord is invoked when a tenant notifies a landlord
of the need of any repair because of a defect discovered or
arising during the
course of the tenancy
As I have found that the Landlord has notice of the need for repair, the
issue for decision is whether the Landlord has acted with
reasonable diligence
to have the defects repaired.
The written submission by the agent of the Landlord stated that Tenants
occupied the premises for 200 days and for 150 days there
were no written
maintenance reports. The agent noted that:
on 23 October
2014 they received a full written report of maintenance issues from the
on 24 October
2014 the agent reviewed the e-mail and sent it to the Landlords;
on 28 October
2014 the agent advised the Tenants to immediately stop using the pool and to
secure the area until such time that a
pool company can attend;
on 29 October
2014 the agent updated the Tenants on urgent repairs which have been
on 6 November
2014 the agents receive an email from the Landlord to start organising
maintenance and who to organise it with;
10 November 2014
to 3 December 2014, the agents e-mail the Tenants to get all maintenance
The 23 October 2014 e-mail sent to the agent by the
Tenants sets out the various maintenance issues requiring attention. An e-mail
dated 29 October 2014 was sent in response to the Tenants by Ms Shelly Holland
from the agents of the Landlord. In this e-mail Ms
Holland indicated against
each item whether the relevant issue was a matter for the owner to address. I
have attached an extract
of that e-mail.
The majority of the items are listed as items that were noted on the ingoing
condition report and for the owner to rectify. The items
that are not listed as
owner’s responsibility are as follows:
backing up in toilets, ensuites, kitchen sink and main bathtub. The comment made
by the agent was that this was not reported.
bathroom towel rack – broken and needs repair. The comment made by the
agent was that this was not reported.
door handles x 2 – broken and needs repair. The comment made by the agent
was that this was never reported.
cupboard – collapsed and broken. The comment made by the agent was that
this was never reported.
The Tenants provided a response by e-mail
dated 31 October 2014 in relation to the items claimed by the agent to have
never been reported.
In relation to the plumbing issues, the Tenants conceded that it was not
reported. I note that the Tenants also confirmed that Trademark
Plumbing called
them on 30 October 2014 which indicates the Landlord had acted with reasonable
diligence in relation to this issue.
In relation to the broken kitchen door handles and the broken main bathroom
towel rack, the Tenants stated that this had been reported
on 23 October 2014.
The Tenants correctly pointed out that the collapsed laundry cupboard was noted
in the 10 July 2014 routine condition
report as ‘Work to be carried out by
the landlord.’
The Tenants submitted that on 10 November 2014 they were contacted by a
carpenter and plumber to fix some of the problems. However
the Tenants stated
that the following items remained outstanding:
Air conditioner
in main bedroom;
Outdoor bar area
door handle and door catcher;
Ensuite bathroom
tile and shelves;
Pile of dirt not
Pool filter
The agents submitted that they required notice of maintenance
issues to be submitted in writing. When the maintenance list was provided
Tenants on 23 October 2014 they sought instructions from the Landlords and claim
to have acted reasonably in arranging for
some items to be repaired while they
continued to work on the remaining items.
I do not accept this argument put forward on behalf of the Landlord. Other
than the plumbing issues noted above, the Landlord had
effective notice of the
defects which was accepted on their behalf by their agents when signing the
ingoing condition report and
as set out in the routine inspection report on 10
July 2015. No remedial action was taken to address the various issues until
the 23 October 2014 e-mail was sent to them by the Tenants (a period of
approximately 5 months).
Most of the items in the maintenance list submitted by the Tenants could not
be categorised as major in nature. However when taken
in their totality and
having regard to the rent of $1,250 per week that the Tenants were paying, it is
not unreasonable for the Tenants
to expect an appropriate level of functionality
and state of repair of the premises at the commencement and during the
I also note that the agents confirmed that they instructed the Tenants not to
utilise the pool from 28 October 2015. The Landlord
has not refuted the Tenants
claim that the pool was unusable until 11 December 2014.
I will allow compensation for failing to act with reasonable diligence to
have the defects repaired. I calculate the compensation
elements payable by the
Landlord as follows:
rental reduction of $150 for a period of 5 months (20 weeks) due to the loss of
amenity in relation to the maintenance items (excluding
the major pool leak
which occurred after 23 October 2014 ). This totals $3,000; and
rental reduction of $100 per week due to the pool being unusable from 23 October
2014 until 11 December 2014 (7 weeks) This totals
The Pool Assessment Fee and Administrative
Section 122 of the Act provides that I may order compensation for loss or
damage suffered by the applicant because the other party
has failed to comply
with the tenancy agreement or an obligation under the Act.
The Tenants obtained their own pool assessment report from HiTech Pools and
Spas to satisfy themselves that the condition of the pool
was not as a result of
poor maintenance on their part. This was entirely voluntary on their part and
apparently undertaken to provide
some evidentiary basis to refute liability for
the condition of the pool. The fee paid by the Tenants for this report cannot be
categorised
as loss or damage suffered by them due to the Landlord’s
failure to comply with the tenancy agreement or the Act.
I also do not accept the claim put forward by the Tenants that they should be
compensated for administrative cost/fees. The Tenants
state in their RT01
application as follows:
Administrative Cost/Fee – Fee is inclusive of emails ,
writing reports, issuing a breach notice, lodging applications, taking
work, materials ie. 50 cents per page photocopying etc. We are individuals not
an organisation or registered business
– Amount being 55 hours x $25.00
Exercising one’s rights under the Act cannot be categorised as loss or
damage suffered because the Landlord has failed to comply
with the tenancy
agreement or an obligation under the Act.
The Tenants claim appears to be more in the nature of a claim for costs
against the Landlord. I note that section 147 of the Act provides
that an order
must not be made requiring a party to a proceeding before the Commissioner to
pay an mount by way of costs.
Accordingly, I dismiss the Tenants application for compensation in relation
to the pool assessment fee and their administrative cost/fee.
Landlord is to return to the Tenant the amount of $525.26 being that portion of
the security deposit invalidly retained by the
Landlord to make good
Landlord is to return to the Tenant the sum of $50.00 to the Tenant being that
portion of the security deposit invalidly retained
by the Landlord to pay for
unpaid charges for water usage.
Landlord is to pay the Tenant compensation in the sum of $3,700 due to the
Landlord’s failure to act with reasonable diligence
to have defects
Demetrios Laouris
Delegate of the
Commissioner of
16 March 2015
[2013] NTSC 25
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (220 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter