URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCCA/2024/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:18:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Namala v The King [2024] NTCCA 7 (5 July 2024)
Namala v The King
[2024] NTCCA 7
PARTIES: NAMALA, Christopher
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: CA 2 of 2024 (22216118)
DELIVERED: 5 July 2024
HEARING DATE: 4 July 2024
JUDGMENT OF: Brownhill, Huntingford and Reeves JJ
CATCHWORDS:
CRIMINAL LAW – Appeals – Appeal against sentence – whether
sentence breached the principle of parity having regard
to the different
objective and subjective circumstances of the appellant and co-offender –
whether sentences imposed gave rise
to a justifiable sense of grievance –
whether ‘disparity’ is both unjustified and significant –
differences between co-offenders – whether sentencing Judge had
regard to relevant differences between co-offenders –
appeal dismissed.
Criminal Code 1983
(NT) s 211, s 218, s 241.
Sentencing Act 1995
AK v The Queen
[2021] NTCCA 4
Bara v The Queen
[2016] NTCCA 5
Bianamu v Rigby
[2021] NTCA 4
Bugmy v The Queen
(2013) 249 CLR
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
SE v The Queen
TM v The Queen
(2017) 40 NTLR 58
Whitehurst v The Queen
[2011] NTCCA 11
, referred to.
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: J Bourke with M Mazzone
Respondent: L Babb SC with L Auld
Solicitors:
Appellant: North Australian Aboriginal Justice Agency
Respondent: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 19
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Namala v The King
[2024] NTCCA 7
CA 2 of 2024 (22216118)
CHRISTOPHER NAMALA
CORAM: BROWNHILL, HUNTINGFORD AND REEVES JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered on 5 July 2024)
BROWNHILL J:
appellant and his co-accused pleaded guilty to three offences, namely: (i)
aggravated robbery contrary to s 211 of the
Criminal Code 1983
(Count 1); (ii) unlawful use of a motor vehicle contrary to s 218 of the
Criminal Code
(Count 2); and (iii) damage to property contrary to
s 241 of the
Criminal Code
offenders were sentenced by the Supreme Court at the same time. The sentences
imposed on both offenders were a total effective
sentence of imprisonment for
four years, comprised of three years and two months on Count 1, 10 months on
Count 2, with four months
of the sentence on Count 2 cumulative on the sentence
on Count 1, and eight months on Count 3, with six months of the sentence on
Count 3 cumulative on the sentence on Count 2. The appellant’s sentence
was suspended after serving 20 months, while his co-offender’s
was subject to a non-parole period of 24 months.
[3] On 22 May
2024, the appellant was granted leave to appeal against his sentence on the
ground that the lack of greater disparity
between the sentences imposed on the
appellant and the co-offender gave rise to a justifiable sense of grievance and
gives the appearance
that justice has not been done.
[4] The basis of
that ground is said to be the absence of any distinction in the culpability of
each offender’s offending and
the ‘vast difference’ in
personal circumstances, particularly that the appellant had no criminal history,
while the co-offender
had a significant criminal history.
[5] On 4 July
2024, this Court dismissed the appeal, with reasons to be published. These are
my reasons.
The circumstances of the offending
circumstances of the offending were that, on 27 May 2022 at around 3am, the
appellant and the co-offender went to a premises
in Palumpa. Two vehicles were
parked there which belonged to an Aboriginal development corporation. The
offenders went into the front
yard and got into one of the vehicles. They tried
to start it, damaging the steering column in the process. They were
unsuccessful.
The occupier of the premises woke up, went outside and stood on
the front steps of a secure patio. Security lights were activated
offenders ran off. The occupier heard people yelling that they would hurt him
and steal the vehicle. The occupier went inside
and locked his doors. He called
000, and was told Police would be there in about an hour. He stayed inside. He
again heard people
yelling, threatening to hurt him and demanding the keys for
the vehicle. One or both of the offenders forced open the door to the
area of the premises by cutting the mesh, reaching in and opening the door. One
or both of them entered that common area,
armed with a tomahawk, hammers and/or
a machete. The occupier could see one or both of the offenders through the glass
or both of the offenders said to him words to the effect of:
‘I’m going to kill you unless you give me the keys’
vehicle. The occupier feared for his safety and said he would bring the keys if
they went outside and down the stairs. One
or both of the offenders did so, the
occupier got the keys, went outside and threw the keys to one or both of the
offenders. He then
sat on the stairs outside for about an hour, watching the
offenders trying to start the vehicle. They could not start it and were
agitated. They demanded the keys to the other vehicle. The occupier told them he
did not have the keys, even though he did. The appellant
walked to that vehicle,
holding a hammer and a machete, and hit the side rear vision mirror, causing it
to break. The offenders then
said words to the effect that if the occupier did
not give them the keys, they would kill him and his dogs. The occupier again
them he did not have the keys. They became more agitated. The appellant
armed himself with a machete and a hammer and walked up the
stairs towards the
occupant. The co-offender armed himself with a tomahawk and was behind the
appellant. The offenders stopped a
couple of steps away from the occupier, and
the appellant swung the machete towards the occupier’s neck, stopping
before striking
him. He said: ‘Give us the keys or I’ll cut your
head off’. The co-offender lifted the tomahawk above his head
‘And I’ll put my axe in your skull’. The occupier was very
scared and said he would get the keys. He
went inside, got them, went outside
and threw them to the co-offenders. The co-offenders went to the vehicle. The
appellant got in
the passenger seat, the co-offender got in the driver’s
seat and they left in the vehicle. Police arrived two minutes later
and pursued
the vehicle before they lost sight of it. It was later found
Legal principles
[7] The ground
of appeal is, in essence, that the parity principle has been misapplied, or has
not been applied.
principles relevant to an allegation of a justifiable sense of grievance arising
from the parity principle are well known,
and not in dispute. They were
summarised by the Court of Criminal Appeal in
. I need not repeat
[9] In short,
where the appeal ground is that like co-offenders were given different
sentences, the appellant must point to a marked
or clearly unjustifiable, or
manifest disparity, which objectively engenders a justifiable sense of
[10] Such an
error, which may be summarised as a misapplication of, or failure to apply, the
parity principle, would be an error as
identified in
House v The
It is not, therefore,
necessary for the appellant to show that the sentence imposed on the appellant
was manifestly excessive in
order to ground the appellate court’s
intervention.
[11] Where the
appeal ground is that different co-offenders were given like sentences, it is
necessary that the ‘disparity’
be both unjustified and significant,
that is, manifestly and not merely arguably excessive, before the appeal court
will intervene,
where ‘disparity’ is understood in circumstances
where the same head sentence was imposed in circumstances where the
conduct and antecedents warranted the imposition of disparate
differences
Differences in criminal record, character and prospects of
rehabilitation
appellant was 20 years old at the time of the offending and was 23 years old at
the time of sentence. The co-offender was
20 years old at the time of the
offending and was 22 years old at the time of sentence. There is no relevant age
difference.
appellant had no criminal history. The appellant submitted two character
references which attested to his excellent prior
good character. The sentencing
Judge noted that the appellant’s prior good character entitled him to
‘a significant degree
of leniency’, that his prospects of
rehabilitation were ‘reasonable’ and better than those of the
co-offender.
co-offender had a criminal record which included what the sentencing Judge
described as ‘significant offences’
of an aggravated robbery in
2019, and an associated aggravated assault. The co-offender’s criminal
history also included two
other aggravated assaults committed in 2019, an
offence of going armed in public committed in 2020, an offence of damage to
committed in 2022, with single instances of related offences of
stealing and unlawful entry, an offence of aggravated unlawful use
vehicle committed in 2022, and an offence of driving whilst unlicensed committed
in 2021. There were also seven instances
of breaching a condition of a suspended
sentence. The sentencing Judge described the co-offender’s prospects of
rehabilitation
as not ‘better than guarded’.
appellant argued that the sentencing Judge’s assessment of his prospects
of rehabilitation as ‘reasonable’
was understated, but acknowledged
that no ground of appeal was brought from this finding. Rather than the label, I
have taken into
account the matters about the appellant’s circumstances
set out above.
sentencing Judge expressly took into account the difference between the
appellant’s and co-offender’s prospects
of rehabilitation.
appellant relied upon the observations of the Court of Criminal Appeal in
Bara v The Queen
effect that it may be accepted that a recidivist will ordinarily receive a
heavier sentence than a person who has previously
led a blameless life. The
appellant also argued that, while both offenders were of a very similar age, the
Supreme Court had failed
to recognise a qualitative difference between the
co-offenders which disregarded or did not give sufficient weight to the
diminishing
mitigatory effect of the sentencing principles applicable to youths
(particularly the emphasis on rehabilitation, a decreased importance
deterrence and a reduction in moral culpability due to immaturity) in the case
of ‘recidivist offenders who have
previously been afforded a number of
opportunities to modify [their] behaviours ... but [have] failed to do
co-offender’s criminal record disclosed 10 offences committed in five
separate periods of offending over the course
of some three years, for which he
was before the Local Court three times and the Supreme Court once. He was also
dealt with for each
of the breaches of his suspended sentence. It should be
noted that the three aggravated assaults and the aggravated robbery were
committed when the co-offender was 17 years old, and he did not receive
convictions. He completed the 12 month suspended sentence
imposed. The
co-offender breached the suspended sentence six times, four of those breaches
resulted in no action being taken, and
two of those breaches resulted in the
extension of the operational period. For the offence of going armed in public,
he was given
a good behaviour bond.
[19] By way of
contrast, the appellant in
TM v The Queen
was a 14 year old when he
committed the very serious offence the subject of the sentence appealed from. He
had appeared 33 times
before the Youth Justice Court where offences were found
proved, and had committed further offending after the offence, and whilst
The Court in
described the offending in that case as being of ‘considerable
gravity’, describing it as ‘very violent’.
The offending
included both punching and kicking the vulnerable victim to her face and other
parts of her body, it was a prolonged
attack and the seriousness escalated with
the undoing of the button on her jeans and the attempt to pull her jeans down,
the victim to fear she would be raped, and having a significant and
ongoing effect upon her.
[20] What the
Court of Criminal Appeal said in
TM v The Queen
rehabilitation over deterrence in the case of youthful offenders (at [26]) is as
Rehabilitation may carry far less weight in respect of a
repeat offender who has previously been afforded a number of opportunities
modify his or her behaviours through the imposition of non-custodial
dispositions, but has failed to do so and has committed a
very serious criminal
offence. In such cases the prospects of rehabilitation may be considered
diminished, and the weight properly
attributed to rehabilitative purpose in the
sentencing process lessened as a result.
[21] While it is
accepted that the appellant was entitled to a degree of lenience for his prior
good character which the co-offender
was not, and that the factor of specific
deterrence would have less weight in the case of the appellant than the
co-offender, I do
not accept that the co-offender’s criminal record or the
seriousness of this offending was such as to reduce by any substantial
the weight to be given to the rehabilitation of the co-offender as a young
person in this case.
Differences in personal circumstances and
‘Bugmy factors’
appellant was born in Darwin and grew up between Papangala Outstation, Palumpa
and Wadeye. He was raised by his maternal
grandfather, a senior cultural leader,
who taught him song lines, stories and how to hunt. He passed away when the
appellant was
10 years old. The appellant then lived with his mother, father and
sister, who both worked. He went to school in Wadeye until he
was 18 years old,
he then moved to a remote outstation, where he learnt to hunt. He returned to
Wadeye and worked with the Community
Development Program. He was involved in the
Men’s Shed and sports, and had an important cultural role as taught to him
father and grandfather. He was married and had a child and his wife
continued to support him. He recalled his childhood being marred
by significant
unrest and interfamilial conflict in the community. The sentencing Judge
accepted that the appellant was exposed to
unrest and interfamily violence
during his formative years for the purpose of the application of the principle
Bugmy v The
co-offender was born and raised in Palumpa in a house with more than 10 people
living in it. As an infant, he suffered from
illness and deprivation in a
profound way. At nine months old, he was taken to hospital with pneumonia and
concerns of malnutrition.
Whilst an infant, he was again treated in hospital for
tuberculosis. He was underweight, dehydrated and lethargic. Concerns were
with the child protection authorities. When he was 11 years old, he was an
unrestrained passenger in a car involved in a rollover.
The co-offender’s
uncle and one of his grandfather’s died in front of him. He was ejected
from the car, sustaining traumatic
injuries. When admitted to hospital, he was
found to be suffering from various conditions associated with malnutrition.
accident, his attendance at school dwindled and he started using
cannabis and volatile substances. The sentencing Judge said that
principles should be given full weight in his case, and he was entitled to a
reduction in his moral culpability by reason of ‘severe
deprivation’.
appellant argued that, while both co-offenders were entitled to a reduction of
their moral culpability by reason of the
co-offender’s reduction was off-set by the increased need for community
protection, whilst the appellant’s was not,
given his prior criminal
[25] I do not
accept this submission. Notwithstanding the increased risk of reoffending
consequent upon the impact of a deprived and
dysfunctional childhood which
enhances the need for community protection, the co-offender’s reduction in
moral culpability
(and its consequent moderation on general and specific
deterrence) was far greater than that of the appellant, and provided a clear
basis for the sentencing Judge to reduce the sentence to be imposed on the
co-offender to a significant degree.
Differences in involvement
in the offence
sentencing Judge observed that, aside from the differences in prospects of
rehabilitation, ‘there is not much between
the two offenders in terms of
involvement in the offences’.
[27] I consider
that there are some relevant differences in the co-offenders’ conduct
during the offending, which make the appellant’s
conduct more serious than
the co-offender’s. It was the appellant who broke the rear vision mirror
on the second vehicle whilst
armed with a hammer and a machete and after the
occupier had denied having its keys. This was undoubtedly designed to intimidate
the occupier in demand for the keys. It was the appellant who first walked up
the stairs of the premises towards the occupant, armed
with both a machete and a
hammer. The co-offender, armed with a tomahawk, followed. It was the appellant
who swung his machete towards
the occupant’s neck, stopping before
striking him, and who first demanded the occupant give them the keys. The
co-offender
raised his tomahawk and followed up the appellant’s threat
with his own. In the execution of these intimidating and threatening
was the appellant who took the lead and acted first and the appellant actually
swung his weapon towards the victim, while
the co-offender simply raised his
tomahawk over his head. These matters are a basis upon which to distinguish
between the involvement
of the two offenders in the offending and to find that
the appellant’s conduct was more serious than the co-offender’s.
appellant argued that, in oral sentencing submissions, the prosecutor had
disavowed the distinction they had put in writing
in the seriousness of the
conduct of the appellant and the co-offender. It was argued that, for this
reason, the Supreme Court treated
the co-offenders as ‘equally
[29] I reject
that submission. What the sentencing Judge said was that there was ‘not
much between the two offenders in terms
of involvement in the offences’.
That acknowledges that there was some difference between their involvement,
although it was
not extensive, as set out above, and is consistent with the
written submissions made by the prosecutor to the sentencing Judge that
culpability of both offenders was ‘largely the same’, with two
identified matters of difference. The matters referred
to above do provide a
basis for a not insignificant difference in the weight attributable to the
factor of involvement in the offending
in the sentences
Different discounts for the guilty pleas
sentencing Judge discounted the appellant’s sentence by 20%, and
discounted the co-offender’s sentence by 25%.
Once those discounts are
taken into account, the starting points for the total sentences were
imprisonment for five years for the
appellant, and five years and four months
for the co-offender.
appellant argued that no reason was given for the different discounts and none
was apparent, including the reason identified
by the respondent, being a lesser
degree of remorse on the appellant’s part, given what he said to the
writer of the supervision
assessment report.
[32] About the
appellant’s plea and discount, the sentencing Judge
It is disturbing to note that the explanation which [the
appellant] gave to the author of the s 103 report for this significant
was simply that he was bored and that he and his co-offender went
after the car for some fun.
He has spent time in custody presentence, such
that the commencement of any sentences which I impose should be backdated to 28
I accept that he entered early pleas of guilty to these charges, which had
significant utilitarian effect, as it did not require the
prosecution to conduct
a defended trial.
I also accept that his plea of guilty evidenced some
remorse for these offences and also relieved the victim of the necessity to give
evidence. I also accept that he expressed some remorse to the author of the
s 103 report. I will reduce by approximately 20 percent
the sentence that
would otherwise have been appropriate in light of the pleas of guilty.
[33] About the
co-offender’s plea of guilty and remorse, the sentencing Judge then
I also accept that the pleas of guilty entered by [the
co-offender] were early pleas, which again had utilitarian value and also
of some remorse. I will reduce the otherwise appropriate sentence by
approximately 25% because of his pleas of guilty.
supervision assessment report obtained in respect of the appellant provides as
[The appellant] agreed with the statement of facts and
stated he didn’t want to hurt the man and was just after the car for
fun. He stated he was in Palumpa visiting his sick grandmother at the time and
was bored and formed the intention with the co-offender
to look for a car to
When [the appellant] was asked how the man would have felt being threatened
with the weapons he stated ‘scared, I didn’t
want to kill
appellant argued that the failure to explain the differences in discount
‘bespeaks error’ and was ‘perhaps
the most telling sign that
the principle of parity had not been properly applied.
[36] On the
contrary, I consider that, in accordance with
the sentencing Judge
started with the proposition that a reduction of 25% will normally be given in
circumstances where there has
been an early guilty plea which is indicative of
true remorse and resipiscence. There was nothing before the sentencing Judge to
indicate that the co-offender’s early plea was not indicative of true
remorse and resipiscence. Consequently, a discount of
25% was appropriate.
contrast, there was evidence before the sentencing Judge that the
appellant’s early plea was not indicative of true
remorse and
resipiscence, namely what he said to the author of the supervision assessment
report. In that discussion, the appellant
was referred to the agreed facts of
the offending, which record that he was armed with two weapons and threatened by
words and action
to hurt or kill the victim. The appellant denied any intention
to do so, and said he wanted the car for some fun and because he was
While he acknowledged that the victim would have felt scared (which could be
construed as an expression of ‘some remorse’),
he said he did not
intend to kill him. What the appellant said could readily be construed as
minimising and/or justifying the seriousness
of the offending and its effects
upon the victim. So construed, these statements could rationally have satisfied
the sentencing Judge
that the appellant’s early plea was indicative of a
lesser degree of remorse and resipiscence than would have been found in
absence of such statements.
appellant referred to the character reference in which the appellant’s
aunt stated that the appellant ‘feels
bad for [the victim] and knows he
did the wrong thing, he told me on the phone that he is sorry’. What is
said there only attributes
to the appellant the statement that he is
‘sorry’, which is not an expression of remorse for the effects of
the offending
on the victim. What the character reference says carries very
little (if any) weight as an indication of true remorse and resipiscence.
statements of the appellant to the writer of the supervision assessment report
were a basis upon which to reduce to 20% the
25% discount normally afforded
where there has been an early guilty plea which is indicative of true remorse
and resipiscence. That,
and the sentencing Judge’s reference to these
statements as ‘disturbing’ only one sentence before he dealt with
the plea and the discount is a sufficiently clear indication that they were the
reason for the differences in discounts as between
the appellant and the
co-offender.
Difference in time to be served
[40] It is also
relevant to the operation of the parity principle that the appellant was ordered
to be released after serving 20 months,
while the co-offender was subject to a
non-parole period of 24 months.
appellant argued, effectively, that this difference between the sentences was
immaterial in considering whether the sentencing
Judge had misapplied the parity
principle. I do not accept that submission. The appellant has not submitted
(correctly, in my view)
that the sentence imposed on the appellant is outside
the range of appropriate sentences which could have been imposed for this
Consequently, there is no suggestion that the suspended sentence
imposed on the appellant would not be appropriate in the circumstances
required by
Sentencing Act 1995
(NT). In choosing
whether to proceed by way of a suspended sentence or a non-parole period, the
sentencing Judge must consider many
things including the minimum period of
imprisonment which must be actually served to reflect the seriousness of the
offending, and
the personal circumstances of the offender including any
prospects for rehabilitation.
The imposition of a suspended sentence for the appellant and a non-parole period
for the co-offender is one of the ways adopted by
the sentencing Judge to
acknowledge and allow for the differences between the two in terms of their
prospects of rehabilitation.
[42] As set out
above, there are numerous differences between the appellant and the co-offender,
some of which point towards a lighter
sentence and some of which point towards a
heavier sentence. Determining the extent to which these matters weigh in the
process when comparing the circumstances of co-offenders is, as with
most parts of the sentencing calculus, not a mathematical
I am not satisfied
that the ‘disparity’ presented by the same terms of imprisonment
imposed on the appellant and the
co-offender and the differences between the
appellant and the co-offender are either unjustified or significant, that is,
and not merely arguably excessive as required to permit this Court to
Disposition
[43] For the
above reasons, the appeal was dismissed.
HUNTINGFORD J:
[46] The appeal
is dismissed.
________________________
Bianamu v Rigby
[2021] NTCA
per Southwood J (Kelly J and Hiley JA agreeing).
AK v The Queen
[2021] NTCCA
per the Court.
Ibid at [49] per the Court.
House v King
(1936) 55 CLR
Bara v The Queen
Bara v The Queen
’) at [39] per the Court.
Ibid at [38]-[39] per the
Ibid at [57] per the Court.
TM v The Queen
(2017) 40 NTLR 58
TM v The Queen
’) at [26] per the
Ibid at [14]-[15] per the
Ibid at [29]-[32] per the
Bugmy v The Queen
249 CLR 571 (‘
I accept the respondent’s
submission that the sentencing Judge afforded a degree of mitigation to the
appellant in accordance
principles given the finding of his
exposure to unrest and interfamily violence in his formative years and the
statement, in the
segment of the sentencing remarks dealing with both offenders,
that some modification of general deterrence is justified due to a
reduction in
moral culpability for
SE v The Queen
[2022] NTCCA 9
per the Court.
Whitehurst v The Queen
[2011] NTCCA 11
per Riley CJ (Mildren and Martin JJ agreeing).
Bara v The Queen
per the Court.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (185 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter