URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCAT/2025/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:17:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lithium Developments (Grants NT) Pty Ltd v Secretary Appointed Pursuant to Section 49AA of the Mineral Royalty Act (NT) [2025] NTCAT 11 (20 August 2025)
Lithium Developments (Grants NT) Pty Ltd v Secretary Appointed Pursuant
to Section 49AA of the Mineral Royalty Act (NT)
DECISION NUMBER:
[2025] NTCAT 11
LITHIUM DEVELOPMENTS (GRANTS NT) PTY LTD
SECRETARY APPOINTED PURSUANT TO SECTION 49AA OF THE MINERAL ROYALTY ACT
MATTER TYPE:
Review Jurisdiction -
Taxation Administration Act 2007
2024-03777-CT
HEARING DATE:
07 JULY 2025
DECISION OF:
MARK O’REILLY
DATE OF ORDERS:
20 AUGUST 2025
APPEARANCES and REPRESENTATION (if any):
KEVIN STEPHENS
RESPONDENT:
HAMISH BADDELEY & RYAN SANDERS INSTRUCTED BY MELISSA FORBES
REASONS FOR DECISION:
27 June 2024, a delegate of the Commissioner of Territory Revenue issued a
royalty assessment for the Applicant under the
Mineral Royalty Act 1982
in an amount of $6,433,057.49. The applicant raised an
objection to the decision under section 109 of the
Taxation and
Administration Act 2007
4 October 2024, the Respondent Secretary, as decision maker under section
113 of the TAA allowed the objection in part and the royalty assessment was
by $1,030,582.24 (to $5,402,475.25).
proceeding is a review of the decision of the Secretary.
Frugtniet v Australian Securities and Investment Commission
(2019) 266 CLR 250
, Kiefel CJ, Keanne and Nettle JJ noted at
As Bowen CJ and Deane J held in
Drake v Minister for Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs,
however, and has since been affirmed by this Court in
v Migration Agents Registration Authority,
the AAT is not at large. It is
subject to the same general constraints as the original decision maker and
should ordinarily approach
its task as though it were performing the relevant
function of the original decision-maker in accordance with the law as it applied
to the decision-maker at the time of the original decision.
section 112 of the TAA the objector bears the burden of establishing that the
decision subject to the objection was wrong.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal must proceed on the basis that there is an onus on the Applicant to
establish some error on the part of
the delegate of the Commissioner. The
Applicant has not submitted otherwise.
Applicant relies on four grounds.
Ground 1: The Secretary used an inappropriate linkage factor to determine
spodumene direct shipping ore (DSO) pricing from spodumene
concentrate
Applicant argues that a linkage factor of 8.8 is appropriate rather than the
8.00335 factor applied by the delegate and affirmed
by the Secretary. The basis
of the Applicant’s argument is that the 8.00335 figure was based on a
single sale of DSO and is
not necessarily representative of market
my view the Applicant has not established any error on the part of the delegate
or the Respondent in relation to the value of the
linkage factor applied. The
linkage factor of 8.8 that was applicable in 2020 was based on the relative
value of DSO to concentrate
on the information known at that time. There is
nothing to suggest that the relative value will remain static. The Applicant
not contested the factual basis of the Respondent’s assertion
the 2017 linkage factor was based (sic) the 2017 type contract for which no
sales at all actually occurred. The 2017 agreement represented
‘futures’ type transaction, reflective of the parties’
predictions as at 2017 of what the prospective
value of DSO was
likely to be over a subsequent
I agree with the Respondent’s submission that:
while the 2017 figures may have been the best available data available in
2020, by October 2022 this was no longer the
fact that Core relied on a linkage factor of 8.8 to obtain the Ministerial
Declaration Regarding Saleable Mineral Commodity for
the Grant Lithium
Production Unit in 2020 does not amount to any representation that the linkage
factor would remain static. In my
view it was open to the assessor to apply a
linkage factor taking into account any comparable sale information known at the
of the calculation. The Applicant has not established any error on the
part of the delegate and this ground of review is dismissed.
Ground 2: The Secretary overstated the grade of the Spodumene DSO mined
from the Grants production unit during the royalty year, resulting
Secretary overstating the spodumene DSO revenue.
support of this ground the Applicant submits that the Spodumene produced during
the relevant period was of varying grades ranging
from 1.22% to 1.49%.
Notwithstanding the variations, the Secretary determined the linkage factor on
the basis of a provisional assay
of 1.51% lithium grade which was announced to
the Australian Securities Exchange on 3 October 2022. The Applicant submits
had the revenue been adjusted to the actual grades achieved, the revenue
amount would be reduced.
secretary considered that submission and was satisfied that “the delegate
did not determine the linkage factor based on
DSO with a specific grade of
1.51%, but in fact determined the factor based on DSO falling within a range as
per the C&D Agreement
Secretary further observed that the Applicant’s “submission implies
that DSO is valued based on an exact grade however
the documentation provided by
[the Applicant] suggests that industry practice is for DSO to be priced on a
grade range.”
Applicant has provided no counter argument to that of the Secretary. In my view
the Applicant has failed to establish any error
on the part of the original
decision maker to either the secretary or the Tribunal. I am not satisfied that
a valuation based on
a grade range is not acceptable practice or is an incorrect
method to apply.
relation to the grade of Spodumene DSO the Applicant also submits that the
original decision maker and the secretary erred by attributing a deemed sale
and consequent revenue to Spodumene produced in the months
of March and April
In those months the grade of the “DSO” fed into the DMS
plant was 1.27% and 1.22% respectively.
mineral Declaration defines Spodumene DSO as:
“a mineral commodity comprised of between 1.3% and 1.5% Lithium Oxide
O) with the balance comprised of gangue minerals and obtained by
mining, crushing and screening spodumene ore”.
On the basis of that definition the Applicant submits that the material fed
into the DMS plant in March and April was not Spodumene
DSO and should not be
assessed as such. Rather any liability for revenue should be based on any
resultant Spodumene Concentrate.
relevant Ministerial Declaration is dated 29 July 2020 and
Subject to the conditions set out below, and for the duration of the Term, I
declare that a mineral commodity comprising lithium oxide
ceases to be a saleable mineral commodity in relation to the Grants Lithium
Production Unit beyond the stage that it is in the
form of DSO.”
section 4 of the MRA:
“saleable mineral commodity,
in relation to a production unit,
means a mineral commodity, other than a mineral commodity treated or processed
to a stage declared
by the Minister, by notice in writing to the royalty payer,
at the stage at or beyond which it ceases to be a saleable mineral commodity
the purposes of this Act.”
do not accept the Applicant’s argument in this respect. The relevant
wording of the Declaration relates to a “mineral
commodity comprising
lithium oxide.” There is no suggestion that the material fed into the DMS
in March and April 2023 was
not such a commodity. In the process of refinement,
it necessarily went through and beyond a stage of meeting the DSO definition
ceased to be a saleable mineral commodity by virtue of the
Declaration.
2 of the application for review is dismissed.
Ground 3: The Secretary’s methodology for valuing spodumene DSO
based on a notational (sic) price for the month, rather than
on the realised
selling price was neither correct nor reasonable.
Applicant submits the saleable mineral commodity should be valued at the
realised selling price obtained Free On Board (FOB), Darwin Port, instead of
notional SC6 price for the month. In response the Secretary accepted
Section 4AA required valuation to occur at the precise time
of the deemed sale. While I agree that the realised sales price of the
provides evidence of the DSO’s value, the lag between the processing and
sales dates, which occurred during a period of
significant price volatility,
meant that the sales price
was not necessarily a reliable indicator of the
DSO’s value at the time of the deemed sale.
As such, the delegate’s approach of using the monthly average
FastMarkets SC6 index price (MB-LI-0012) corresponding to the
month the DSO was
fed into the DMS appears to provide a more accurate measure of value at the
precise time of the deemed sale, as
required by the
legislation.”
Mineral Royalty Act 1982
provides that:
Where a saleable mineral commodity produced on a production unit is used on
that production unit in the production of a mineral commodity
that is not a
saleable mineral commodity, the saleable mineral commodity so used shall be
taken to have been sold immediately before
the stage at or beyond which it
ceased to be a saleable mineral commodity, and royalty shall be payable under
this Act accordingly.”
my view the temporal aspect of section 4AA is clear. The royalty is to be
assessed on the value of the mineral commodity at the
time it is refined. I
agree with the Respondent’s reasons that:
[the Applicant] has not demonstrated that the FastMarkets price data provided
an inaccurate or unreliable measure of value during
the periods used by the
delegate. In my view, it is not sufficient that the realised price was lower
than the index price at the
time of the deemed sale. This price difference is
consistent with the significant market volatility during that period, and does
not establish that the index was inaccurate. I note that the same index relied
upon by the delegate was also relied upon by [the
Applicant] in establishing the
price of spodumene concentrate in the sales agreement with Yahua dated 22 March
2023 (clause 10).
This suggests that the Fast Markets price data is accepted by
industry participants as a reliable measure of
Applicant has not introduced any evidence to suggest that the price data relied
upon by the delegate was not an acceptable and
reliable measure of value. It is
not sufficient for the Applicant to propose an alternate method of valuation.
The Applicant has
not established any error on the part of the assessor or
secretary in applying the SC6 price for the month the commodity was fed
DMS. Ground 3 is dismissed.
Ground 4: The Secretary overstated spodumene DSO revenue by failing to
make proper allowances for haulage, storage and loading costs.
Applicant submits that the Secretary erred in determining the Spodumene
revenue on the basis of the FOB pricing without allowances for haulage,
storage and loading costs. Rather, submits the Applicant,
section 4AA of the
MRA together with the Ministerial Declaration require that the deemed sale
occurs within the production unit at
the time the DSO is fed into the DMS. That
price would be lower than the FOB Darwin Port price due to haulage and other
costs which
would be required to achieve FOB. Accordingly, the revenue would be
Applicant proffers as an alternative “reasonable valuation
(a) To determine the arm’s length revenue based upon a reliable Spodumene
Concentrate Index price, converted having regard
to a proper linkage factor
– which determines an arm’s length revenue for Spodumene DSO at FOB
Darwin Ports; and
(b) Deduct from that determined arm’s length revenue the costs of
transport, handling and storage from the FOB Darwin Port
to the Production Unit
– which determines an arm’s length revenue for Spodumene DSO at the
production Unit.
Applicant adopted an identical position in its objection to the original
decision of the delegate. The Respondent’s decision
of 4 October 2024
Paragraph 21 of
provides that a sale for the purpose of the
MRA occurs when ownership of the mineral commodity is transferred to the buyer
in accordance
with the sales contract. A sale determines the point at which
ownership passes to the buyer but it does not determine who is responsible
logistical costs associated with removing the commodity from the production
Paragraph 24 of
RG-MRA-004,
which specifically deals with gross value
in cases of sale prior to removal from the production unit, provides that
royalty is triggered by a sale and the transaction is at
arm’s length,
generally the FOB price obtained for the saleable mineral
commodities is taken as the gross value for gross production revenue
(emphasis added). This appears to support the view that
sales agreements are generally negotiated on a FOB or CIF basis, even where
saleable mineral commodity is sold prior to removal. CIF and FOB pricing
arrangements generally reflect industry practice, regardless
of the point at
which the sale occurs, and Core has not demonstrated evidence to the
its submissions to the Tribunal the Applicant has not addressed the reasons
provided by the Respondent for confirming the delegate’s decision.
Whether or not
the Applicant’s suggested basis of valuation is
reasonably open, there is nothing before me to suggest that the method adopted
by the original decision maker and reaffirmed by the Respondent was
59 and 60 of
provide that:
59. Where a saleable mineral commodity produced on a production unit is
further processed to a stage where, by virtue of the Minister’s
declaration, it ceases to be a saleable mineral commodity, the saleable mineral
commodity used in that further process shall be taken
to have been sold
immediately before the further process commenced and liability for royalty is
60. The saleable mineral commodity may be valued using the valuation methods
applicable for a mineral commodity removed without sale
to estimate or
approximate the value of the saleable mineral commodity deemed to be sold from
the production unit.
31 and following of
address liability for royalty triggered by
the removal of saleable material commodities without sale. Paragraph 31
provides that
the value of such commodities:
...is generally determined as follows:
(1) The open market value for the mineral commodities (see paragraphs 36 and
(2) or an amount that the royalty paper may establish and substantiate as
being the value to the royalty payer, which is labelled
“alternative value” in them RA (see paragraphs 38 to 43). If the
royalty payer does not establish such a vale,
the open market value will be
circumstances where the Applicant did not establish and substantiate an
alternative value, open market value was to be applied.
Paragraph 37 of the
Guideline provides that:
The following valuation methods will be accepted as a fair representation of
the open market value:
(1) The value published by a recognised commodities exchange (for example,
the London Metals Exchange, Perth Mint)
(2) Or the price received from comparable arme’s length sales made by
the royalty payer of the same or substantially similar
mineral commodity
(including quantity and quality) at the time of removal of the saleable mineral
commodity to be valued.
Respondent notes that:
“while neither of those methods of valuation were available in the
present case, it should be noted that either of these stipulated
methods would
then involve making an adjustment or allowance for
actual or hypothetical
haulage, storage or loading costs”
Rather, submits the Respondent, it was open and reasonable for the delegate
and Secretary to apply the mutually recognised linkage
factor as an appropriate
method. That method, as I understand it, was calculated by reference to the FOB
sale price.
accept the submission of the Respondent and note that the Applicant has not
addressed those arguments in reply. In my view the
Applicant has failed to
establish that either the original decision or the subsequent review by the
Secretary were wrong. Ground
4 will be dismissed.
dismissed each of the Applicant’s grounds for review and having found no
other error, I am satisfied that the decision
of the Respondent was the correct
and preferable one. I will make an order dismissing the
application.
20 August 2025
MARK O'REILLY
Respondent’s submissions
Decision of the Secretary
dated 4 October 2024 at page 6.
Decision of the
Respondent dated 4 October 2024 at page
Ibid at page
Ibid at page [9].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (12.8 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter