URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTSC/2025/46.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:23:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Westpac Banking Corporation v Eres [2025] NTSC 46 (24 July 2025)
Westpac Banking Corporation v Eres
[2025] NTSC 46
PARTIES: WESTPAC BANKING CORPORATION (ACN 007 457 141)
ERES, Linda Bernadette
TITLE OF COURT: SUPREME COURT OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: 2024-03087-SC
DELIVERED: 24 July 2025
HEARING DATE: 9 April 2025
JUDGMENT OF: Smyth A/AsJ
CATCHWORDS:
MORTGAGES – Default under a mortgage of real property –
Application for order for possession – Application for summary
determination for possession – Various grounds raised in opposition
– Application granted.
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
Law of Property Act 2000
National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009
Northern Territory Acceptance Act 1910
Supreme Court Rules 1987
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
Australian and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd v Comer
(1993) 5 BPR 11,
Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Limited v Oldroyd & Anor
[2025] NTSC 20
Bankstown Airport Ltd v Noor Al Houda Islamic College Pty
[2002] NSWSC 193
Bendigo and Adelaide Bank Ltd v Prichard
Burger King v Hungry Jacks Pty Limited
[2001] NSWCA 187
Collis v Bank of Queensland Ltd
[2021] VSCA 17
Consolidated Press
Holdings Ltd v Wheeler
(1992) 84 NTR 42;
DKLR Holding Co (No.2) Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Stamp Duties (NSW)
[1982] HCA 14
(1982) 149 CLR 431
Esso Petroleum Co
Ltd v Mardon
[1976] EWCA Civ 4
[1976] QB 801
Fancourt v Mercantile Credits Limited
[1983] HCA 25
General Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner for Railways
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125
Heller Financial Services v Solczaniuk
[1989] NTSC 36
Kerr v Sheriff of New South Wales
(1996) 9 BPR 16,215;
Latec Investments Ltd v Hotel Terrigal Pty Ltd
[1965] HCA 17
(1965) 113 CLR 265
Mabo and Others v Queensland (No. 2)
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
Westpac Banking Corporation
[2012] WASCA 152
National Australia Bank Ltd
[2012] VSC 14
Outback Civil Pty Ltd & Anor v Francis
[2011] NTCA 3
RHG Mortgage Corporation Ltd v Astolfi
[2011] NSWSC 1526
Secure Funding Pty Limited v Coughlin
[2009] NSWSC 384
v Police and Citizens Youth Club & Ors
[2013] NTSC 15
Sportsbet Pty
Ltd v Moraitis
[2010] NTSC 24
Walters v Morgan
(1861) 43 ER 1056
Westpac Banking Corporation v Mason
[2011] NSWSC 1241
, referred to.
Croft C & R Hay,
The Mortgagee’s Power of Sale
LexisNexis, 3rd ed, 2013).
Heydon on Contracts
, (Sydney, Thomson Reuters, 2019).
Rajapakse P & Senarath S,
Commercial Law Aspects of Residential
Mortgage Securitisation in Australia
(Palgrave Macmillian, 2019), ch 2.
Rajapakse R, ‘
Assessment of Law Relating to the Transfer of
Mortgagee’s Rights to the Trustee Issuer in Mortgage
Securitisation’
, (2007) 33(1) Monash Law Review.
Lilienthal G & Ahmad N. ‘
Colonial Land Title in Australia: a
meta-legal critical inquiry
’, (2019) 45(2) Commonwealth Law
REPRESENTATION:
Plaintiff: R Sanders
Defendant: Self Represented
Solicitors:
Plaintiff: HWL Ebsworth Lawyers
Judgment category classification: B
Judgment ID Number: Smy2507
Number of pages: 36
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Westpac Banking Corporation v Eres
[2025] NTSC 46
No. 2024-03087-SC
WESTPAC BANKING CORPORATION (ACN 007 457 141)
LINDA BERNADETTE ERES
CORAM: SMYTH A/AsJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 24 July 2025)
Plaintiff makes application for an order of possession in respect to the
property at 57 Eaton Place, Karama in the Northern
Property”) by originating motion dated 30 September 2024 and summons on
originating motion dated 30 September 2024.
practice for possession matters, proceedings are commenced pursuant to
Supreme Court Rules
(NT) which provides for a
special procedure. Although commenced by originating motion, the proceeding is
commenced in anticipation
of orders being made retrospectively dispensing with
the requirement to require an appearance, and authorising the plaintiff to
the proceeding by originating
The relevant orders are
designed in part to save time and expense for the parties.
[3] Subject to
further explanation below, the Defendant was duly served with the Court
proceedings and appeared in person. The Defendant
contests the
Plaintiff’s application, and the Plaintiff seeks summary disposition. In
respect to determining whether the matter
was amenable to summary judgment I
directed parties to distil their objections, and any replies, into informal
[4] In this
proceeding the Plaintiff has relied on the affidavits of: Manesh Fernando
promised 30 September 2024, Nora Minassian promised
27 August 2024 and 21
March 2025, Mark Wilson promised 25 November 2024, Alexander Manoel
promised 3 December 2024, and Teresa Hall
promised 4 December 2024,
de bene esse
for the purpose of the application. The Defendant
in turn relied on the affidavits of Linda Eres made 4 December 2024, 30 January
2025, 26 February 2025 and 6 April 2025, Bret Eres made 4 December
2024 which are similarly received
de bene esse
[5] Subject to
the Defendant’s issues raised below, the facts are set out as follows.
The Defendant is the registered proprietor
of the Property. On 18 November 2011
the Plaintiff, the Defendant and Brent Henry Eres (Mr Eres), entered into a loan
The loan agreement was secured by a mortgage over the
in favour of the Plaintiff
over the whole of the Property, executed by the Defendant on 21 December
2011. The Mortgage incorporated
provisions contained in the Memorandum of
Common Provisions (“MCP”) recorded in the Registrar General’s
as CP No. 372115. Pursuant to the loan agreement the Defendant agreed to
make certain monthly repayments. The MCP provides for
the circumstances of
default and action which would be taken thereafter.
February 2024 the Plaintiff issued, to the Defendant and Mr Eres, the
default notice and the exercise of power of sale notice
relevant to these
proceedings in respect to the Property. Those notices comprised:
(a) A combined default notice dated 20 February 2024 from the Plaintiff’s
solicitors indicating a default and demanding payment
of $38,368 and notice
pursuant to s 88 of the National Credit Code (“NCC”) (if
applicable);
(b) Notice of Exercise of Power of Sale given under
of Property Act 2000
(NT) indicating the amounts owing on the loans at as 15
February 2024 in the same amounts as the
[7] Mr Fernando
deposes that the Defendant has remained in default under the
Mr Manoel deposes that
the Defendant has been in default under the loan agreement and mortgage since
the period commencing circa
, and subject to further discussion below, on the basis of the
materials filed by the Plaintiff, in respect to service of the default
and notice of exercise of power of sale, I find that the Plaintiff would be
entitled to an order of possession on its application.
Preliminary Matters
(A) Service of the Proceedings
Defendant took issue at the hearing with not having been personally served with
the Court proceedings, indicating that the
only reason she became aware of the
proceeding was via the Court list. The affidavit of service, by Mark Wilson
made 25 November
2024, indicates service was executed, by delivery of the court
proceedings, by attaching them to the Defendant’s premises’
fence. The Defendant disputes she received notice and insisted that service
should have been personal. As I indicated to
the Defendant at hearing, by way
of initial ruling, whilst personal service is normally required, the
Court Rules
provide that an alternate means of service can be agreed as between
the parties (see
Rule 6.03(1)).
Clause 18 of the Loan Agreement (and clause E1
of the MCP) provides that Court documents can be served by leaving them at the
or last known address of the borrower/mortgagor. Thus, there was
agreement to alternate service. The Defendant disputed any agreement
basis that she was challenging the whole validity of the Loan Agreement/Mortgage
and therefore should not be taken to have
agreed to an alternate means of
service. The Defendant’s signature appears on the Loan Agreement and
Mortgage, and although
there are a considerable number of conditions, I find it
sufficient for the purposes of service, that there was agreement for the
documents to be served in the manner they had. The Defendant was served. If I
am incorrect in that regard, as I noted at
the outset of the hearing, the
Defendant had become aware of the proceeding, had participated in numerous
directions hearings and
had appeared on the day to put her case. The Defendant
was well aware of the proceeding, and had not suffered any detriment by any
purported lapse in personal service of the Court proceedings. If there had been
a purported failure to personally serve the proceedings
I would dispense with
the requirement to do so.
(B) The Co-borrower’s application
to be joined as Second Defendant
Defendant had made application for the joinder of the co-borrower as the Second
Defendant in the proceeding. The Co-borrower
was the Defendant’s husband,
and it was argued that his interests were similarly affected by the application
for possession
such that he should be joined as a party to the proceedings. The
mortgage lists the Defendant as sole mortgagor.
proceedings are commenced by special procedure under Rule 45.05. Unlike,
proceedings for recovery of land under Rule 53,
there is no specific Rule as to
who may be a defendant.
provides that each person in occupation of the land whose name the plaintiff
knows shall be a defendant. Rule 53.03
is similar in that respect to
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW) which provides for
service of proceedings for possession of land on the occupier, and provides the
opportunity to be added
as a defendant. For the purpose of this application I
am willing to accept that Mr Eres, is living at the Property with the Defendant,
at the marital home. The question is whether he should be joined as a person
who may be affected by the order for possession.
[12] Although
the Defendant and Mr Eres are co-borrowers under the loan agreement, they are
each individually liable for the full
amount of the loan. The mortgage is a
separate agreement under which the Defendant mortgaged her land to the
Plaintiff, in order
to secure her liability under the loan. In these
proceedings the Plaintiff seeks relief only under the mortgage, and does not
to enforce a term of the loan
As such it is
unnecessary to join Mr Eres to be named as a defendant by reason of being a
co-borrower.
[13] Furthermore,
a person co-residing with a mortgagor need not be named as a co-defendant for
that reason. The person currently
in possession of the land is the Defendant as
the owner in fee simple. A person co-residing with her does so as her guest and
their rights through her, claiming under her. In discussion of the
application of the rights of occupiers, under similar proceedings
possession, Courts have held that an occupier is a person who claims to be in
possession and who would have been the sort of
person to receive leave to defend
an application for ejectment under the old practice. A person claiming under
such a defendant
was not a person claiming possession. Thus, wives, licensees
etc were excluded. In
Secure Funding Pty Limited v Coughlin
, Schmidt AJ
held that the children of the owner were in no different a position to the
family members of other occupants, and had
no standing as defendants on the
basis that they were not occupiers of the
Kerr v Sheriff
of New South Wales
The purpose
of the "notification to occupier" is to make sure that it is received by the
persons who have the right to defend their
possession of the property, so that
person can intervene in the proceedings. It is not intended that every person
whose fate must
depend on the fate of the tenant must receive a notice.
Bankstown Airport Ltd v Noor Al Houda Islamic College Pty Ltd
in Eq said:
general rule is that "wives, children, servants, friends and visitors of tenants
or under tenants" (see Cole on Ejectment, (H
Sweet, London, 1857) at p84) are
not considered occupiers.
[15] Notwithstanding
there is no equivalent rule in the Territory, and that proceedings for
possession are commenced under the process
provided in Rule 45.05 not
Rule 9.06 is likely to apply in its ordinary way. That is, is Mr Eres a person
who ought to have been joined or whose presence
is necessary to ensure that all
questions in the proceeding are determined, or whether there is a question
arising between Mr Eres
and a party connected with a claim in the proceeding
which it is just and convenient to determine? In respect to the application
possession, the only basis on which Mr Eres would have to resist the application
would be on the basis he was an occupier, or
his possession was to be
[16] In this
matter, the Plaintiff’s application rests on its rights arising under the
Mortgage (incorporating the MCP clause
Property Act 2000
(NT) to take possession of the property on default. The
Defendant was the named mortgagor, for the purpose of the exercise of the
Plaintiff’s rights. For the purposes of this application I am satisfied
that the Defendant is the correct party and it is
not necessary for Mr Eres to
be joined. Notwithstanding that, I gave Mr Eres the liberty to address the
Court on various matters.
(C) Summary Judgment
[17] As noted
above, the matter proceeded on application by the Plaintiff for a summary
determination. The principles to be applied
are the same as those which apply
in respect to an application for summary judgment, notwithstanding an expedited
process was utilised.
[18] Although
the principles in respect to summary judgment are well established it is useful
to briefly restate them. The starting
position is that the power to summarily
dismiss an action is an exercise of the court’s inherent jurisdiction, to
protect itself
from an abuse of
On hearing the
application the Court may give judgment as is appropriate, unless the defendant
satisfies the Court of the claim,
or part of the claim, there is a question that
ought to be tried or there is some other reason to proceed to trial. The
is intended to apply only to cases where it is clear there is no real
question to be tried and where there can be no reasonable doubt
plaintiff is entitled to
The power to order
summary judgment must be exercised with exceptional
and will only be
enlivened where the plaintiff’s case is “so clearly untenable that
it could not possibly
As Luppino M
(as he was) stated in
Shew & Ors v Police and Citizens Youth Club &
A defendant
will be allowed to defend a case if there are facts which, if true, would
constitute a defence to the plaintiff’s
claim. The Court is reluctant to
try a case on affidavit where there are facts in dispute. An important issue is
whether the defendant’s
account of the facts has sufficient prima facie
plausibility to merit further investigation.
[19] The purpose
of the process is to prevent a defendant, who has no defence, from defending an
action merely to delay the plaintiff
in enforcing their rights. Summary
judgment is unavailable where relevant facts are in dispute between the parties
or some difficult
question of law has to be decided, and in such cases the
defendant is entitled to
[20] In respect
to discretionary relief, in
, Luppino M held:
extent that discretionary relief is sought, it may be inappropriate to grant
that on a summary judgment application because
all evidence may need to be heard
before the Court can decide whether the grant of discretionary relief is
appropriate.
(D) The Defendant’s Opposition to the Application for
Defendant raises seven points of dispute in respect to resisting the
Plaintiff’s application for possession (which
is incorrectly described in
some of the Defendant’s documents as the Plaintiff’s foreclosure
application), which are
set out below, under the headings adopted by the
parties. The points raised either directly challenge the validity of the
Plaintiff’s
application, for example by a challenge to the validity of
default notices, or indirectly, for example by challenge to the underlying
validity of the legal agreements, or more fundamental aspects upon which the
application for possession is based.
Omissions in the
registered mortgage giving rise to a constructive or resulting trust
[22] It was the
Defendant’s case that both she and Mr Eres contributed to the acquisition
of the Property and that both executed
the underlying mortgage documents with
the intention of being listed as co-owners. It was alleged that the intention
had been for
both the Defendant and Mr Eres to be listed as registered
owners. Why the Property was only in the Defendant’s name was
unexplained,
as the transfer of lot from the previous owner to new owners (i.e.
the Defendant) would have been required and should have been executed
that had been the intention. For some particular reason, which was unexplained
other than it was not their intention,
whilst both were co-borrowers, only the
Defendant was the registered owner and therefore granted the mortgage. The
Defendant claimed
that this was some kind of mistake/omission by the Plaintiff,
and that now, as a result, Mr Eres at least had an equitable interest
that mistake/omission. Whilst I would accept for the purpose of this
application that there may have been joint contributions
to the Property in
terms of contribution to the purchase price of the Property or loan repayments,
the evidence is the Defendant
was the sole registered owner of the Property and
as result she alone signed the mortgage instrument (as would be expected as the
sole registered owner). As stated above, if there was a mistake, the mistake
originated in not having the Property transferred into
both names originally.
It would normally be the role of the purchaser’s conveyancer or solicitor,
on instructions from their
client, to ensure the Property was properly
transferred into their names, not the mortgagee’s role, whose concern
focused on receiving the security and registering it. The mortgage
instrument was signed on the same date as the loan agreement.
It would seem
that the Defendant’s argument is that co-contribution to the purchase
price, or to the mortgage repayments,
should be found to have created a trust,
the Defendant holding the Property, in part, in trust for Mr Eres.
[23] Constructive
trusts are a creation by the Courts, recognised in certain situations, to
prevent the person legally holding property
from unjustly dealing with the
property to the detriment of the trust beneficiaries. They are imposed by law
against the wishes
of the settlor, which is not the case here. If a trust were
to arise it would be a resulting trust.
[24] It was the
Defendant’s case that somehow, due to the absence of Mr Eres’
name from the registered title, that a trust
should be implied, whereby he held
an equitable interest in the Property. Assuming however that a resulting trust
arose, the Defendant’s
case is that equity would not permit the Plaintiff
to enforce a mortgage against the Defendant in a manner that extinguished or
disregarded
Mr Eres’ equitable interest.
Latec Investments Ltd v Hotel
Terrigal Pty Ltd
was cited by the Defendant in
response, the Plaintiff submitted that the Plaintiff was the registered
mortgagee and had indefeasible title (absent exceptions
which do not apply).
That is correct.
Section 188
Land Title Act 2000
(NT) provides
that a registered proprietor of an interest in a lot holds the interest subject
to registered interests affecting the
lot but free from all other
[26] Taking the
Defendant’s case at its highest, even if Mr Eres had an equitable interest
in the Property and even if equity
could intervene in these types of
proceedings,
that interest would
be subject to the Plaintiff’s registered interest. Further, even assuming
there had been no alleged mistake
in the registration of ownership and the
parties intentions in respect to joint ownership had been carried out, and Mr
Eres had been
the joint registered owner and a joint mortgagor, his registered
interest as co-owner and as the mortgagor would still have been
subject to the
registered interest of the Plaintiff affecting the lot. That is, the Defendant
and Mr Eres would have been the Defendants
to the Plaintiff’s application
for possession. That Mr Eres may have an equitable interest, at best, in the
Property does
not protect that interest from the Plaintiff’s exercise of
its rights under its registered interest.
Latec Investments Ltd v Hotel
Terrigal Pty Ltd
, does not assist the Defendant in the circumstances. Even
if it were appropriate for these types of proceedings, I see no reason
equity would intervene in what appears to be at best, a case of competing
priorities between a registered legal interest and
an unregistered equitable
interest. The registered legal interest prevails. I do not find, even at its
highest, that the Defendant
has any defence, in this regard, in respect to the
Plaintiff’s application for possession. There is no relevant question to
be tried on this aspect.
The Plaintiff’s loss of standing
due to securitisation or assignment of its mortgage rights
[27] This aspect
relates the claim that the Plaintiff has “securitised” the
Defendant’s mortgage. The claim is
that the Plaintiff’s beneficial
interest in the mortgage has been transferred to a securitisation trust and as a
Plaintiff had received full or substantial value for the loan.
Consequently, it is claimed, the Plaintiff no longer enjoys the substantive
right to “foreclose”. In this context I assume the argument is the
Plaintiff no longer had a right to exercise its power
of sale, or receive an
order for possession.
[28] There are
numerous explanations as to how securitisation works. In general the position
appears to be:
a bank pools
selected housing loans and for a price transfers its rights under the relevant
loan agreements (and I presume mortgages)
to a special purpose vehicle trust
(SPV), which in turn, for a price, issues notes or bonds to institutional
investors. The rights
transferred by the bank to the SPV include the
bank’s right to receive principal and interest payments from the borrower,
bank’s right to exercise its power of sale under the terms of the
mortgage and the bank’s right to any mortgage insurance
payout in the
event of a default by the borrower. The transfer of the bank’s rights can
be effected by legal or equitable
assignment. If a legal assignment is used,
the bank’s rights would be vested absolutely in the SPV. If equitably
the SPV would be recognised in equity as having acquired those
mortgage rights, but not at law. At law the bank would remain the
legal owner
of its mortgage rights, holding them on bare trust for the SPV as trustees for
the bond holders. The mortgagor (or borrower)
is not a party to the sale
agreement and is not notified of its existence. For various commercial reasons
banks prefer to equitably
assign such rights. That is achieved by assignment of
the relevant rights, the debt or chose in action, short of complying with
absolute requirements for a legal
assignment.
[29] For the
purpose of this application, taking the Defendant’s case at its highest, I
will assume, there has been equitable
securitisation of the loan and/or mortgage
rights. In support I was referred to an extract from an
and another
, citing the case of
DKLR Holding Co (No.2) Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Stamp Duties
the latter case being
cited as authority that legal and equitable title cannot be split, and therefore
presumably any purported assignment
of an equitable interest of the mortgage was
not possible. That authority was in the context of stamp duty, it dealt with a
who held an estate in fee simple, who had attempted to transfer the legal
interest to another on trust, whilst retaining a beneficial
interest. The Court
held that an owner in fee simple does not hold two estates, a legal estate and
an equitable estate, he only
holds the legal estate, and could not transfer to
another the “bare” legal fee simple while purporting to retain the
equitable fee simple interest. In respect to that authority I note that it
deals with an owner of land in fee simple attempting
to transfer the legal title
to another whilst keeping an equitable interest in himself. It does not address
the specific transactions
which are subject to securitisation (as described
above), namely the assignment of a debt or chose in action (i.e. being certain
of the bank’s rights) which falls short of a full legal assignment,
resulting in an “equitable interest” vesting
the SPV, but the legal
interest remaining in the bank. As noted above, academic authors, including the
one relied on by the Defendant,
suggest that what results from securitisation is an equitable assignment of a
chose in action, that is, an assignment of the mortgagee’s
rights to the
SPV, falling short of the requirement of legal assignment, with the legal
interest remaining with the bank who may
hold that interest as trustee for the
[30] The issue
of equitable securitisation and its effect on these types of proceedings was
recently considered in this Court by Brownhill
Australia and New Zealand
Banking Group Limited v Oldroyd & Anor
[2025] NTSC 20
, where Her Honour
held at [32]-[33]:
Even if Oldroyd were able to establish as a fact
that the loan was ‘securitised’, the mortgage was registered and
registration
conferred on ANZ an indefeasible charge over the Property for the
amount due under the loan agreement. There is no evidence before
me that ANZ
gave the Oldroyds notice of any assignment of the loan agreement or the
mortgage, which is a prerequisite to an effective
assignment. Consequently,
whatever the position between ANZ and any third party so far as any equitable or
other interests in the
Property is concerned, the legal interests of the parties
to these proceedings are governed by the loan agreement and the registered
mortgage under which the Property is charged with the debt arising under the
loan agreement.
Any ‘securitisation’ of the loan or the mortgage is therefore
irrelevant in these proceedings.
[31] A number of
interstate authorities support were cited in support of that
I have reviewed those
authorities and agree with them. There is no authority in Australia, which I
have been referred to, which
has held that, even assuming equitable
securitisation, the legal effect would be different than that expressed by
Brownhill J (and
the other cases) above. There has been no legal assignment of
the loan or mortgage as required under the
Law of Property Act 2000
The legal rights, as exercised by the Plaintiff, even if exercised as trustee
for the SPV’s bond holders, are not diminished.
True it is that the
Plaintiff may be required to exercise those rights as trustee, and account to
the trust’s beneficiary
or beneficiaries, but that is a matter between
them. As stated above, whatever the position between the Plaintiff and any
party, so far as any equitable or other interests in the Property is
concerned, the legal interests of the parties to these proceedings
are governed
by the loan agreement and the registered mortgage, under which the Property is
charged with the debt arising under the
loan agreement. I see no impediment to
the exercise of the power of sale by the Plaintiff that would affect the
exercise of a discretion
to order possession.
[32] I do not
find, even at its highest, that the Defendant has any defence, in this regard,
in respect to the Plaintiff’s application
for possession. There is no
relevant question to be tried on this aspect.
[33] Consequently,
the Defendant’s application for early return subpoenas, filed 25 February
2025, addressed to Westpac Banking
Corporation (ACN 33 007 457 141), BNY Trust
Company of Australia Limited (Trustee of Series WST Trust) and Westpac
Securitisation
Management Pty Ltd (Trust Manager of Series WST Trust) in respect
to materials relating to the securitisation is dismissed.
Historic Defects in the Crown Title which constitutes a mere
“colour of title”
[34] This aspect
of the Defendant’s claim argued that the Crown’s original claim over
Australian land, by proclamation
and conquest, produced an imperfect chain of
title, amounting to mere “colour of title”, and as such did not
lawful title.
argued that the Crown’s title was “legally questionable” and
remained at odds with Indigenous sovereignty,
which pre-existed and continued
independently of colonisation. It follows, that if the Crown’s title was
imperfect then so
too was everything else that followed, including any estate
she owned and the Plaintiff’s right to enforce its security over
apparent inconsistency with the Defendant having originally purchased the
Property on the basis of the Crown’s legitimacy
to grant the land, and
under the Torrens system, and having been granted a loan from the Plaintiff on
the registration of mortgage
security, was explained by the Defendant as having
subsequently come to certain realisations since the Co-vid
The Defendant pointed
to a purported lease, said to between her and the Sovereign Tribal Nation of
Majagi, said to prevail over
any other interests and which reflected the true
nature of the arrangement in respect to the land on which the Property was
Defendant’s argument cannot be sustained, on the basis of legal authority
upon which I am bound to follow. In so far
as the Defendant’s argument
challenges the acquisition of sovereignty by the Crown, and therefore its
ability to grant title,
as stated in
Mabo and Others v Queensland (No. 2)
acquisition of sovereignty
"The acquisition of territory by a sovereign state for the first time is an
act of state which cannot be challenged, controlled or
interfered with by the
courts of that state."
This principle, stated by Gibbs J. in the Seas and Submerged Lands Case,
precludes any contest between the executive and the judicial
branches of
government as to whether a territory is or is not within the Crown's Dominions.
The Murray Islands were annexed by an
exercise of the prerogative evidenced by
the Letters Patent; a mode of acquisition recognized by the common law as a
valid means
of acquiring sovereignty over foreign territory. The recognition is
accorded simply on the footing that such a prerogative act is
an act of State
the validity of which is not justiciable in the municipal courts.
geographic area of what is now the Northern Territory was part of the colony of
New South Wales
until annexed to
South Australia in 1863
subsequently surrendered to and accepted by the Commonwealth in
[37] Further to
that argument, that the Crown’s basis to grant title to land is otherwise
questionable or that there is some
alternate or other system of land ownership,
must be rejected. Again, it was stated in
is not surprising that the fiction that land granted by the Crown had been
beneficially owned by the Crown was translated to the
colonies and that Crown
grants should be seen as the foundation of the doctrine of tenure which is an
essential principle of our
land law. It is far too late in the day to
contemplate an allodial or other system of land ownership. Land in Australia
been granted by the Crown is held on a tenure of some kind and the
titles acquired under the accepted land law cannot be disturbed....
The radical title is a postulate of the doctrine of tenure and a concomitant
of sovereignty. As a sovereign enjoys supreme legal authority
in and over a
territory, the sovereign has power to prescribe what parcels of land and what
interests in those parcels should be
enjoyed by others and what parcels of land
should be kept as the sovereign's beneficial demesne.
By attributing to the Crown a radical title to all land within a territory
over which the Crown has assumed sovereignty, the common
law enabled the Crown,
in exercise of its sovereign power, to grant an interest in land to be held of
the Crown or to acquire land
for the Crown's demesne.
[38] In so far
as a lease may exist over the Property, it is subject to the priority of any
prior registered interest (ie. the Plaintiff’s
registered mortgage).
[39] I find this
aspect does not raise a defence in respect to the Plaintiff’s application
for possession. There is no relevant
question to be tried on this
Non-disclosure, good faith and misrepresentation by the
[40] This part
of the Defendant’s claim related to securitisation as well. It was argued
that the Plaintiff’s failure
to disclose the securitisation to the
Defendant, constituted a breach of the implied duty of good faith in contractual
The case of
Burger King v Hungry Jacks Pty Limited
was referred
Alternatively, it was
argued that the failure to disclose securitisation was a misrepresentation, by
of the state of
affairs in respect to the loan/mortgage in terms of whether it would be
securitised (alternatively fraud was alleged).
I take the latter to be an
allegation that the Defendant was not informed of the securitisation (assuming
it happened).
[41] In respect
to any contractual breach of an implied duty of good faith, assuming one can be
implied, if the Defendant alleges
breach of contract then she is entitled to
bring an action for such and seek damages. That there may have been a breach of
does not affect the Plaintiff’s application for possession, given
the indefeasibility of the Plaintiff’s mortgage.
Additionally for the
reasons given below in respect to misrepresentation, and any duty to disclose
the alleged securitisation, I
do not find there is any credible argument that
fraud, in the required sense, would arise as an exception to indefeasibility.
fraud was referred to by the Defendant, it was referred to in the
context of fraud comprising securitising of the mortgage without
notifying the
[42] In so far
as the securitisation may amount to the transfer of the loan, clause 20 of the
Loan Agreement provides that the Plaintiff
may transfer the Loan Contract, any
security and the debts transferred to anyone else. Further, if the loan is
transferred consent
is given to the Plaintiff to give the transferee information
respect to the Mortgage (MCP C8). Those provisions are silent as to whether
notice is required. Certainly, in respect
to a legal assignment of a chose in
action or debt under
s 182(1)(c)
Law of Property Act 2000
must be complied with, that is, express notice must be given. Thus, provision
exists for transfer, the question is, assuming
for the sake of this application
there was a transfer of rights as part of securitisation, was there
non-disclosure significant enough
to raise an arguable case in respect to
opposing the orders for possession.
[43] A similar
issue was raised before the Victorian Court of Appeal in
Collis v Bank of
Queensland Ltd
where the Court
The Applicant
submits that the First Respondent securitised the mortgages without his
knowledge and therefore, the First Respondent
is no longer entitled to repayment
of the loan. The Applicant submits that the First Respondent committed fraud by
selling the mortgages
without notifying the mortgagor. The Applicant relies on a
public notice issued by Westpac Banking Corporation in which Westpac notifies
the public that various Westpac mortgages, including some mortgages from the
First Respondent, have been pooled into various trusts
to be sold to a third
party trustee. The notice goes on to state that the various trusts have hired
Westpac to service the loans
so that Westpac continues to collect mortgage
repayments and interest which it then passes onto the respective trusts. The
also states that the Westpac customer with a mortgage subject to this
scheme will not notice any material change. The Applicant also
submits that he
is concerned that the titles to the properties subject to the mortgages have
been destroyed by the First Respondent.
The First Respondent submits that no evidence was adduced showing that the
mortgages, the subject of the proceeding, have been sold
or assigned and
therefore the ground is without merit and legal basis.
In our opinion, this ground, not raised before the judge, is without merit,
as submitted by the First Respondent. No evidence was
adduced to support the
allegation. In respect of this ground, and many other grounds, the Applicant
relied on articles and other
publications without adducing the necessary
evidence. In any event, even if the loans provided to the Applicant were
included in
any securitisation plan, this would have no effect on the
enforceability of the loans and security with respect to the Applicant’s
obligations. The Applicant denied having received any notice of any assignment
of the loans and securities, a necessary pre-condition
to a legal assignment
Property Law Act 1958
. If there was indeed an equitable
assignment, the correct plaintiff is the original lender and mortgagee, in this
case the First
Respondent. The proposed ground is without merit and leave to
appeal is refused.
[44] I note,
notwithstanding the above, where the appeal proceeded on the basis that there
had been no evidence that the mortgage
had been sold or assigned, the Court of
Appeal held, even if the loan/mortgage had been included in an equitable
securitisation,
it would have had no effect on the enforceability of the loan
and security with respect to the Applicant’s obligations. I
have not been
referred to any other legal authority which may assist further. Again, there is
academic commentary to the effect
that a failure to notify a borrower that the
mortgagee rights to their loans have been assigned to the SPV, may constitute a
to “notify borrowers of a risk that their houses could be sold
through no fault of their own, would at seem at least to be
unconscionable”.
to see how borrowers’ homes could be sold through no fault of their own
and without their knowledge, when the exercise
of the mortgagee’s rights,
relevantly the exercise of a power of sale, requires fault (or default) by a
and notice to be
given. The exercise of the power of sale, even if exercised by the bank as
trustee under a securitisation arrangement,
would still need to be exercised
according to all of the usual legal requirements, including those which protect
mortgagors.
[45] In respect
to the issue of misrepresentation, as it is understood, the Defendant claims
that silence in respect to securitisation
of the loan/mortgage, presumably in
the circumstances leading up to entering into the loan agreement and mortgage,
amounted to misrepresentation
which in turn would give her a remedy in respect
to the relevant contracts. Generally, a misrepresentation will need to be a
statement of conduct, and in the absence of a special relationship
between the parties, non-disclosure of facts, even material and
important facts,
is not a misrepresentation. The general principle is, parties to contractual
negotiations are entitled to remain
silent and disclose nothing unless there is
a duty to disclose. It has been said: “The duty is not a duty to disclose
facts which the representee might consider material. It is only a duty to
disclose those which, if undisclosed, leave what is said
misleading”.
limited circumstances of this proceeding, on the limited evidential materials,
there was no evidence or allegation that securitisation
had been mentioned or
referred to at all in negotiations in respect to the loan agreement. In those
circumstances there is no prospect,
assuming there was securitisation, that the
failure to mention it would amount to an actionable misrepresentation. As
purchaser is not bound to disclose any fact exclusively within his knowledge
which might reasonably be expected to influence the
price...Simple reticence
does not amount to legal fraud, however it may be viewed my moralists. But a
single word or... nod or wink,
or a shake of the head, or a smile from the
purchaser intended to induce the vendor to believe the existence of a
non-existing fact
which might influence the price...would be sufficient ground
for a Court of Equity to refuse a decree for a specific performance
[46] Furthermore,
I agree with the Plaintiff’s submission that, in so far as any there is a
duty to disclose, there needs to
be circumstances giving rise to a reasonable
expectation that the information will be disclosed, and there is none. That is,
not reasonable for a bank to disclose all of its internal security and
financial arrangements, to its customers, particularly in
respect to where it
gets its money to fund its business. I find this aspect does not raise a
defence in respect to the Plaintiff’s
application for possession. There
is no relevant question to be tried on this aspect.
Breach of the
Defendant alleged breaches of the
(Cth). The basis of
this claim was not clear. Presumably, it arises through the issue of
securitisation and an allegation that,
in the process of securitisation, the
Defendant’s details would have been provided to the SPV. Taking this
allegation at its
highest, as noted above, the Loan Agreement and the MCP
provide for the provision of information to third parties in the event of
transfer of the loan or mortgage. Even assuming those provisions do not apply,
a breach of privacy would only give rise to a remedy
to make a complaint to the
relevant Privacy Commissioner and possibly seek
compensation.
A breach of
find this aspect does not raise a defence
in respect to the Plaintiff’s
application for possession. There is no relevant question to be tried on this
Issues with Default Notices
[48] This aspect
of the Defendant’s claim relates to issues concerning the Default notices
issued by the Plaintiff. As noted
above, a joint default notice/s 88 of the
National Credit Code
(“NCC”) and
Property Act 2000
(NT) Exercise of Power of Sale notice was served on the
Defendant. A default notice/s 88 NCC notice was also served on Mr Eres,
co-borrower. As I understand the Defendant’s argument, the claim is that
the notices were defective because they should
have been jointly addressed to
the Defendant and Mr Eres, rather than separately. There was no issue
taken as to the mode of service
(other than described above), but rather the
form. It was alleged that the failure to jointly address the notice was a
the notice provisions of the NCC. In response, the Plaintiff
submitted that there was no requirement to serve notices jointly.
of the NCC provides for the requirements to be met before a credit provider can
enforce a mortgage. In particular,
of the NCC provides that a credit
provider must not begin possession enforcement proceedings against a mortgagor
unless the credit
provider has given the mortgagor a default notice. The
Defendant is the mortgagor. Mr Eres was not the mortgagor and arguably did
NCC notice. The notice provided that it constituted a notice
issued under “Section 88 of the National Credit Code (if
applicable)”.
Given the notices were combined, the Defendant required
notice of default and a s 88 notice, and Mr Eres only required a default
it makes practical sense that each were provided with a notice separately.
There is no legal issue arising in that regard.
[50] In terms of
a default notice under the loan agreement, clause 18 of the loan agreement deals
with the provision of notices and
demands. It provides that “you will be
served”. “You” is defined to relevantly mean “any one or
of you, and where that is the case, each of you is individually liable for
the full amount”. There is no legal issue in respect
to the Defendant and
Mr Eres separately receiving default notices.
[51] I find this
aspect does not raise a defence in respect to the Plaintiff’s application
for possession. There is no relevant
question to be tried on this
Lender’s Mortgage Insurance
[52] This aspect
of the Defendant’s relates to an allegation that the lender’s
mortgage insurance (“LMI”)
is capable of having a relevant impact on
the Plaintiff’s application. The allegation, as far as can be discerned,
the Plaintiff’s application for possession somehow ignores the
receipt of LMI which has partially or fully compensated the
Plaintiff for its
loss, and therefore it should not proceed with the exercise of the power of
sale. The allegation being that the
Plaintiff has already been paid under the
insurance for the Defendant’s loan arrears, and further that the insurance
pay out the entire mortgage on default. Furthermore that, somehow, on
eventual sale of the Property, having received a payment under
the LMI, the
Plaintiff would be dishonestly double-dipping. To what end any of the issues
right to possession is not clear.
The issue of securitisation, which I have found to be irrelevant, is also
intertwined.
[53] The loan
agreement sets out provisions regarding the LMI. A fee for LMI appears in the
loan agreement. The Defendant and Mr
Eres were charged $7,308.95 for LMI, which
is standard practice. Above the execution clause on the Acceptance of the Loan
signed by the Defendant and Mr Eres, are the usual warnings about
entering into the agreement. They are not quite the “red
hands of Lord
Denning” but they are printed in a format that they bring the relevant
matters to the borrowers’ attention
and are included specifically on the
execution page. Included are provisions reminding borrowers to read the
contract so that they
know what they are entering to and what their obligations
are and a statement stating “do not sign this contract document if
is anything you do not understand”. LMI is provided at clause 9(c) under
“Costs, Fees and Charges” which
Lenders Mortgage
Insurance protects us – not you, the borrower. It provides protection in
case anything happens which entitles
us to sell the security property, and the
sale proceeds are insufficient to fully repay your loan. In this case we may
incur a loss.
We may recover this loss under our Lenders Mortgage Insurance
policy. Please note, however, that because you are not protected
Mortgage Insurance, you are still legally responsible for repaying the insurer
the amount outstanding under your Loan
Contract and any security.
response, it was the Plaintiff’s case that, had there been any payments
received in respect to LMI they would have been
applied to the loan balances,
and would have shown up as deductions on such balances, which they did
Additionally, even if
there had been payments made under the LMI, which was denied, such payments
would have occurred after mortgagor’s
default, and the order for
possession was capable of being sought even if subsequent payments were made
against the loan (even by
a third party), short of, presumably, the entire loan
being paid out. I agree. The LMI has no bearing on the issue of whether the
Plaintiff is entitled to possession. The Defendant may harbour theories about
when the LMI may be paid, and potential double dipping.
The Property has not
yet been sold and so any assessment as to whether there is a shortfall on the
loan as against the value of
the Property, and whether LMI applies in accordance
with the provision in the loan document, is moot. Additionally, issues as to
LMI and payment under insurance policies are matters between the Plaintiff and
its insurer. The fact of the matter is, the Defendant
had agreed to loan money
from the Plaintiff, she offered security for that loan, the loan has been
defaulted on, and the security
is now in peril. The Plaintiff may have had an
insurance policy (which under terms of the loan agreement was paid for by the
Defendant),
providing for insurance on default, against any shortfall between
the sale of the Property and the outstanding loan balance, but
that is not
something that relevantly bears on the Plaintiff’s right to possession.
[55] I find this
aspect does not raise a defence in respect to the Plaintiff’s application
for possession. There is no relevant
question to be tried on this aspect.
[56] Consequently,
the Defendant’s application for early return subpoenas, dated 25 February
2025, addressed to Westpac Banking
Corporation (ACN 33 007 457 141) in respect
to materials relating to the LMI are therefore dismissed.
Defendant also raised a number of other issues concerning specific provisions of
the loan agreement claiming they were “unconscionable
and unfair under
equity contrary to s 24 of the Australian Consumer Law”. Those provisions
(i) Clause C8 “unilateral transfer”: permits the Plaintiff to
transfer the loan without notice or consent. Clause C8,
“transfer”, is a provision of the MCP not the loan agreement. It
provides for the potential transfer of the
mortgage, the debt it secures and any
secured arrangement.
(ii) Clause 16 “default acceleration”: enables demand for full
repayment for minor breaches. This is a clause in the
loan agreement. It
provides for, on default, the acceleration of the whole loan amount if the
default continues for at least 31
days. The clause is subject to requirements of
the NCC in respect to acceleration.
(iii) Clause C6 “Excessive Fees”: Imposes disproportionate penalties
during default. Clause C6 of the MCP is titled
“Set Off” and
provides, if the mortgagor has money in any account with the Lender and is in
default, the Lender can use
it to pay secured amounts under the mortgage. The
provision removes the right of the borrower to set off of any moneys the Lender
owes the mortgagor against amounts the mortgagor owes under the mortgage.
[58] In respect
to the above, it is the Plaintiff’s case that none of the provisions are
relied on in respect to the application
and therefore the question as to whether
they are void or unenforceable does not arise. I agree. In so far as there is
with clause C8 of the MCP, the unilateral transfer provision, I do not
understand there to have been an actual transfer of the loan
or mortgage. If
this issue relates to the issue of securitisation, it is dealt with above. In
so far as there is an issue with
clause 16 of the loan agreement, default
acceleration, such a provision is standard in all such contracts and is
recognised as a
possibility in the
there is no legal basis for
claiming such a provision is invalid. In any event, the Plaintiff relies on the
failure of the Defendant’s
payment of the loan arrears in the relevant
default notices, not on any acceleration, for its right to possession. In so
there is an issue relating to excessive fees (i.e. clause C6), the
Defendant has not advanced that argument and the provision referred
to does not
appear, on its face, to refer to the correct provision.
Disposition
[59] On the
above basis, I find that the Defendant does not have a defence in response to
the Plaintiff’s application. There
should be summary judgment in favour
of the Plaintiff, in terms of the summons filed 30 September 2024.
[60] Therefore,
I make the following orders:
(1) Pursuant to Rule 45.05(2):
(a) the requirements of Rules 5.03(1) and 8.02 be dispensed with; and
(b) the Plaintiff be authorised to commence this proceeding by originating
motion in Form 5C.
(2) The Plaintiff to have possession of the whole of the land comprised in
Certificate as to Title Register Book Volume 742 Folio
847 more particularly
described as Lot 6179 Town of Sanderson from plan(s) S 81/0850 and known as 57
Eaton Place, Karama in the Northern
Territory of Australia.
(3) The Defendants two applications for early return subpoenas, dated 25
February 2025, are dismissed.
(4) I will hear the parties as to costs. If any application for costs is to be
made, it is to be made within 4 weeks of this decision,
with two weeks following
for any reply, and otherwise will be dealt with on the papers.
-------------------------------------
Otherwise described as Certificate
as to Title Register Book Volume 742 Folio 847 more particularly described as
Lot 6179 Town of
Sanderson from plan(s) S 81/085C.
As provided by Rule 45.05(4) the
relevant order under Rule 45.05(2) may be made on application after the
proceeding is commenced.
This type of expedited procedure does not prevent full
consideration of matters in dispute as illustrated in
Australia and New
Zealand Banking Group Limited v Oldroyd & Anor
[2025] NTSC 20.
Known as Points of Dispute and
Reply to Points of Dispute.
Registered Mortgage 766266.
Issued to both the Defendant and
Issued to the Defendant only.
Affidavit of Fernando made 30
September 2024 at paragraph [24].
Affidavit of Manoel made 3
December 2024 at paragraph [5].
Rule 53.03 provides:
Who to be defendant
(1) Each person in occupation of the land whose name the plaintiff knows
shall be a defendant.
(2) If the plaintiff does not know the name of a person in occupation, the
proceeding may be commenced without naming a person as
The right to the order of
possession arising under terms of the mortgage and
Property Act 2000
Secure Funding Pty Limited v
[2009] NSWSC 384.
Kerr v Sheriff of New South
(1996) 9 BPR 16,215 at 16,216
Bankstown Airport Ltd v Noor
Al Houda Islamic College Pty Ltd
[2002] NSWSC 193
, Young CJ in Eq at
Consolidated Press Holdings
Ltd v Wheeler
(1992) 84 NTR 42.
Fancourt v Mercantile
Credits Limited
[1983] HCA 25
General Steel Industries Inc
v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125
Outback Civil Pty Ltd &
Anor v Francis
[2011] NTCA 3
Shew & Ors v Police and
Citizens Youth Club & Ors
[2013] NTSC 15
Sportsbet Pty Ltd v Moraitis
[2010] NTSC 24
per Southwood
Heller Financial Services v
[1989] NTSC 36
Latec Investments Ltd v
Hotel Terrigal Pty Ltd
[1965] HCA 17
(1965) 113 CLR 265.
Which have been described as
common law proceedings. Rather the Defendant would likely need to bring
application for an injunction
restraining the exercise of the power of sale or
for some order for relief.
Australian and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd v
(1993) 5 BPR 11, 748; Also see Croft C & R Hay,
Mortgagee’s Power of Sale
(Sydney: LexisNexis, 3rd ed, 2013) at p 90:
“As the action for possession is a common law proceeding”.
see Rajapakse R,
Assessment of Law Relating to the Transfer of Mortgagee’s Rights
to the Trustee Issuer in Mortgage Securitisation
’, (2007) 33(1) Monash
Law Review.
As required for example under
Law of Property Act 2000
Rajapakse P & Senarath S,
Commercial Law Aspects of Residential Mortgage Securitisation in Australia
(Palgrave Macmillian, 2019), ch 2.. Also see Rajapakse P,
Assessment of Law Relating to the Transfer of Mortgagee’s Rights
to the Trustee Issuer in Mortgage Securitisation
’, (2007) 33(1) Monash
Law Review.
Authored by Leon Ashby entitled
“Quick Summary of the Repossession Rights Scam in
Securitisation”.
DKLR Holding Co (No.2) Pty
Ltd v Commissioner of Stamp Duties (NSW)
[1982] HCA 14
(1982) 149 CLR 431
See Rajapakse R,
Assessment of Law Relating to the Transfer of Mortgagee’s Rights
to the Trustee Issuer in Mortgage Securitisation
’, (2007) 33(1) Monash
Law Review at 155-156.
Westpac Banking
Corporation v Mason
[2011] NSWSC 1241
per McCallum J, where a
defence based on ‘securitisation’ of the loan and registered
mortgage was rejected and summary
judgment granted to the bank. Similarly, it
was held in
RHG Mortgage Corporation Ltd v Astolfi
[2011] NSWSC 1526
per Davies J that any defence to a bank’s claim to enforce its
mortgage based on securitisation must inevitably fail. See also
Westpac Banking Corporation
[2012] WASCA 152
National Australia Bank Ltd
[2012] VSC 14
Bendigo and Adelaide Bank Ltd v Prichard
[2021] QSC 179.
I was referred to an article,
Lilienthal G & Ahmad N. ‘
Colonial Land Title in Australia: a
meta-legal critical inquiry
’, (2019) 45(2) Commonwealth Law Bulletin,
pp 231-256.
Transcript at p 30.
Affidavit of Linda Eres made 26
February 2025, Annexure A, dated 1 August 2022.
Mabo and Others v Queensland
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
at 31 per Brennan J (“
Geographically established
through instructions to Governor Phillip in 1787 and Governor Darling’s
Commission of 1825, and
the fixing of the boundary of South Australia in 1836,
through letters Patent establishing the Province of South Australia in 1836,
Letters Patent erecting the Colony of Queensland in 1859, and Letters Patent
altering the western boundary of Queensland in 1862.
By Letters Patent dated
Northern Territory
Acceptance Act 1910
at pp 47-48
per Brennan J.
Burger King v Hungry Jacks
Pty Limited
[2001] NSWCA 187.
Esso Petroleum Co Ltd
[1976] EWCA Civ 4
[1976] QB 801.
See Transcript p
Collis v Bank of Queensland
[2021] VSCA 17
The author makes mention of
action under the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth). Rather, any proceeding
would likely commence under
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission Act 2001
As required by
Law of Property Act 2000
See Heydon JD,
, (Sydney, Thomson Reuters, 2019), p 563.
Walters v Morgan
at 723-724.
See affidavit of Fernando made
30 September 2024, annexure E which is details of the loan balance as at
20 June 2024, with arrears
of $47,667.
of the NCC which
requires certain things to be done by a credit provider before it can enforce an
acceleration clause.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (305 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter