URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCCA/2024/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:18:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The King v Hunt [2024] NTCCA 9 (27 August 2024)
The King v Hunt
[2024] NTCCA 9
PARTIES: THE KING
HUNT, Wayne Peter
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: CA 3 of 2024 (22312136)
DELIVERED: 27 August 2024
HEARING DATE: 16 August 2024
JUDGMENT OF: Grant CJ, Burns J and Riley AJ
CATCHWORDS:
CRIME – Appeals – Appeal against sentence – By Crown
against reduced sentence for likely hardship in prison –
By Crown against
Whether sentencing Judge erred in finding respondent’s time in custody
would be considerably more onerous than for other members
of prison population
– No error in sentencing Judge drawing inferences regarding the likely
impact of incarceration upon respondent
from medical evidence – Whether
sentence manifestly inadequate – Principles and purposes in sentencing for
driving causing death – Sentence did not provide sufficient
emphasis upon punishment, denunciation and general deterrence –
did not take sufficient account of fact and manner of taking of child’s
life – Sentence such as to shock public
conscience and engender sense of
injustice in both those associated with the deceased victim and wider community
– Appeal allowed
and respondent resentenced.
Criminal Code 1983
(NT) s 174F
Board v The Queen
[2013] VSCA 190
C v The Queen
(2013) 229 A
Demur v The Queen
[2014] NTCCA 15
Doudar v The Queen
[2021] NSWCCA 37
DPP v Church
[2005] VSCA 8
(2005) 42 MVR 420
DPP v Oates
[2007] VSCA 59
(2007) 47 MVR 483
Duong v The Queen
[2021] NTCCA 3
(2021) 288 A Crim R 566
v The Queen
[1994] HCA 49
(1994) 181 CLR 295
Griffiths v The Queen
(1977) 137 CLR
[2021] NTSCFC 2
(2021) 43 NTLR 7
[2017] NSWCCA 232
(2017) 81 MVR 427
R v Musumeci
(unreported, NSWCCA, 30 October 1997, Hunt CJ at CL),
[2014] NSWCCA 53
[2006] NTCCA 10
(2006) 161 A Crim R 414
[2015] NSWCCA 175
R v Verdins
[2007] VSCA 102
(2007) 16 VR 269
Queen v Kahu-Leedie
[2022] NTCCA 4
The Queen v Mossman
The Queen v Olbrich
(1999) 199 CLR 270
The Queen v Roe
[2017] NTCCA 7
(2017) 40 NTLR 187
, referred to.
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: L Babb SC (Director of Public Prosecutions) with LJ Auld
Respondent: A Abayasekara
Appellant: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Respondent: Northern Territory Legal Aid Commission
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 24
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
The King v Hunt
[2024] NTCCA 9
CA 3 of 2024 (22312136)
WAYNE PETER HUNT
CORAM: GRANT CJ, BURNS J & RILEY AJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 27 August 2024)
February 2024, the respondent was sentenced after he had pleaded guilty to one
count of dangerous driving causing death
contrary to s 174F(1) of the
Criminal Code 1983
(NT). The maximum penalty applicable to the offence
was imprisonment for 10 years. The respondent was sentenced to imprisonment
three years to be suspended after he had served three months upon entering into
a home detention order for a period of nine months
commencing immediately upon
his release from prison.
[2] This is a
Crown appeal against that sentence on the grounds: (1) that the sentencing Judge
erred in finding that the respondent’s
time in custody would be
considerably more onerous for the respondent than it would be for other members
of the community; and (2)
that ordering that the respondent’s head
sentence be suspended after three months upon him entering into a home detention
for a period of nine months was manifestly inadequate in all the
circumstances.
[3] The notice
of appeal originally included a further ground that the three year head sentence
imposed was manifestly inadequate
in all the circumstances, but that ground was
not pursued at the
circumstances of the offending
circumstances of the offending are not in dispute and the tragic consequences of
that offending are acknowledged by the parties.
offending occurred on 20 December 2022. On that day the respondent, who was
then aged 54 years, drove his RAM 1500 utility
motor vehicle to a supermarket at
Moulden. The vehicle was fitted with an aftermarket bull bar. The vehicle had
an automatic transmission
which was operated differently from automatic vehicles
which have a central gearstick. The automatic transmission in this vehicle
a rotary gearshift dial mounted on the dashboard. Gear selection was made by
rotating the dial to the required gear setting.
The configuration of the rotary
gearshift dial was that the “Drive” position was furthest to the
right while the “Park”
position was furthest to the left, with a
number of different settings between them.
followed the respondent’s arrival at the shopping centre was captured and
recorded by an exterior closed-circuit television
camera which was mounted above
the front entrance to the supermarket. The respondent parked the vehicle in the
parking bay closest
to the front doors of the supermarket with the bull bar of
the vehicle extending over the concrete walkway which ran around the perimeter
of the building in which the supermarket was located. He went into the
supermarket and purchased a bottle of iced coffee.
[7] When he
returned to his vehicle the respondent opened the front driver’s door and
reached inside. As he did so he dropped
the bottle of iced coffee onto the
ground and it rolled beneath the vehicle. He attempted to recover the bottle
but, because of
its location under the vehicle, could not do so. He returned to
the vehicle and, whilst leaving the driver’s door open and
without putting
his seatbelt on, reversed it back approximately half a metre. Unfortunately,
this did not allow him to recover the
bottle and he again returned to the
driver’s side of the vehicle. Whilst partially inside and partially
outside the vehicle,
with his seatbelt unfastened and with the door open, he
reversed it back another half metre.
[8] The vehicle
stayed stationary for about a second at which point the respondent mistakenly
turned the gear selector dial to the
right placing it into “Drive”
rather than, what should have been the case, moving it to the left and into the
position. The respondent then shifted his body to face
towards the open door as if to alight from the vehicle. The vehicle began
roll slowly forward. The respondent became aware that the vehicle was moving and
turned his body to return to the driver’s
seat at which point he applied
his foot to the accelerator instead of the brake causing the vehicle to lurch
forward and mount the
concrete walkway.
[9] Tragically,
an 11-year-old boy who had been in the supermarket with his uncle walked past
the front of the vehicle at that very
moment. As the vehicle lurched forward
without warning up onto the walkway, it pinned the child between the bull bar
and the exterior
wall of the supermarket with great force. A witness screamed
at the respondent to reverse the vehicle and it took him approximately
seconds to do so. When the victim was released he fell to the ground. As a
result of the impact he suffered catastrophic crush
injuries from which he died
a short time later. The respondent, seeing what he had done, walked away from
the vehicle into nearby
parkland where he remained until police and paramedics
[10] A roadside
drug test of the respondent indicated a positive result for tetrahydrocannabinol
(“THC”) and a subsequent
blood sample returned a reading for THC of
7.9 mg per litre of blood. Expert evidence received during the course of the
proceedings put the level of impairment of the respondent as a
consequence of the presence of THC at approximately equivalent to
the effects
experienced by a person with a blood alcohol concentration in the range of 0.05
to 0.1%. The expert report included the
following opinion:
effects produced by THC could have included reduced attention to the road and to
his driving, increased side to side vehicle movement
and increased driving
errors. THC also slows reaction time, particularly in situations requiring
complex decision-making, where there
are several alternative courses of action,
such as occur immediately prior to some accidents.
Subjective circumstances of the respondent
sentencing remarks record that the respondent was involved in a motorcycle crash
in 2008 which resulted in the amputation
of his right lower leg. He was fitted
with a prosthetic right leg connecting at the knee. The respondent also
suffered a closed
head injury in the course of the motor vehicle accident.
consequence of the amputation, in 2009 the respondent was granted a
driver’s licence with specific conditions which
included that he was only
to drive an automatic vehicle specially modified so that the accelerator pedal
was positioned to the left
of the brake pedal, rather than in the usual
configuration to the right. In 2020, the respondent purchased the RAM 1500
which has already been described above. At the time this offence was
committed, which was approximately two years after the respondent
had purchased
the vehicle, the accelerator pedal of the vehicle had not yet been altered to
comply with the condition of the respondent’s
[13] In the
aftermath of the motorcycle accident the respondent received many years of
treatment for both physical and psychological
conditions. The medical evidence
revealed that he suffered from an underlying condition of attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder
which had manifested in childhood hyperactivity with an
attendant learning disability. He also suffered from a mild neurocognitive
disorder which manifested in increased difficulty with learning and a tendency
to be easily distracted. In addition, the respondent
suffered from
post-traumatic stress disorder as a result of the motorcycle accident with a
secondary major depressive disorder.
Over the years he had also received
physiotherapy and chronic pain treatment for his physical injuries.
[14] In 2011,
the respondent suffered complications with his left leg (ie the non-prosthetic
leg) resulting in surgical treatment
and rehabilitation which required the use
of a wheelchair for six months. In 2013, he lost his employment, suffered
depression as
a result and sought treatment from a psychiatrist. The treating
psychiatrist provided a report to the Court for the purpose of the
proceedings. That report disclosed that the psychiatric treatment the
respondent received included inpatient treatment
at an interstate facility for a
few months in 2014. The respondent’s psychiatric condition had stabilised
by 2019, but following
the commission of this offence in December 2022 he
recommenced psychiatric treatment which was continuing at the time of sentence.
He suffered symptoms attributable to a severe post-traumatic stress during 2023,
although by the time of sentence they had gradually
decreased to a
“tolerable level” as a result of medication, therapy and support
from family and friends.
The sentencing proceedings
sentencing Judge accepted that the respondent was self-medicating with cannabis
due to chronic pain at the time of the offence.
After the offence he was
prescribed medicinal cannabis which has been effective in treating his chronic
pain and assists both with
sleeping and mitigating his psychiatric
conditions.
sentencing Judge also accepted that the respondent had a very good work record
and was a person of good character. He had
no criminal history. A number of
positive and supportive references were received into evidence for the purpose
of the sentencing
proceedings. The sentencing Judge concluded by reference to
those matters that the respondent’s prospects for rehabilitation
excellent and his risk of reoffending was “extremely low”.
determining the culpability of the respondent, the sentencing Judge noted that
the courts have recognised two broad categories
of offending of this kind.
First, there are those offences which involve momentary inattention or
misjudgement and, secondly, there
are those offences in which the offender has
driven in a manner which has shown a selfish disregard or a degree of
recklessness for
the safety of other road users and/or of passengers in the
offender’s vehicle. The sentencing Judge observed that when determining
into which category the offending fell, it was not appropriate to focus solely
upon the actions of the respondent in turning the
gear selection dial to the
wrong setting and applying force to the accelerator rather than the brake. In
our respectful view, the
sentencing Judge correctly found that the whole of the
circumstances must be taken into account in assessing the objective seriousness
of the offending and the moral culpability of the offender.
respondent’s decision to drive whilst affected by cannabis and the
respondent’s decision to drive a vehicle which
he knew was not suitably
modified as required by his licence conditions were both circumstances of
continuing default which subsisted
at the time of the commission of the offence.
The sentencing Judge accepted that the respondent was under the influence of THC
the time and this contributed to the errors made in selecting
“Drive” and depressing the accelerator instead of the brake.
the failure to modify the vehicle as required was not directly causally related
to those errors, it formed part of the aggregation
of factors to be taken into
account in assessing the recklessness of the respondent’s conduct.
[19] Having
regard to those factors, the sentencing Judge classified the offending as
falling within the second category of case described
above involving disregard
of other road users, intoxication and recklessness. However, it was noted this
was “not the most
serious example of cases” of its kind. The
sentencing judge adopted a starting point of imprisonment for four years, which
was reduced to three years to reflect the respondent’s early plea, his
acceptance of responsibility and his remorse. In the
course of determining the
structure of the sentence the sentencing Judge found that a period of
imprisonment was likely to be considerably
more onerous for the respondent than
it would be for other members of the community. On that basis, the sentencing
Judge determined
that there should be a short period of actual imprisonment,
followed by a period of home detention. In addition to the sentence
imprisonment, the respondent’s driver’s licence was cancelled and he
was disqualified from holding a licence for a
period of four years from the date
of sentence.
Custody considerably more onerous for the
[20] The first
ground of appeal pressed by the appellant is that the learned sentencing Judge
erred in finding that the respondent’s
time in custody would be
“considerably more onerous for [the respondent] than it would be for other
members of the community”,
as that finding was not open on the evidence.
Before addressing this ground it is appropriate to note that the appellant
comprehensive written submissions regarding the standard to be applied
where factual findings are challenged on appeal. It is submitted
Court erred in
Duong v The
in concluding that where
an appellant seeks to challenge a finding of fact made by the primary sentencing
Judge, the Court need not
be satisfied that the factual finding was legally
erroneous in the sense of being unreasonable or not open on the evidence. The
(at [24]) that it was the role of the Court to
conduct “a real review of the plea on sentence and the sentencing remarks
see whether the sentencing Judge erred in fact”, not confined to
“errors of fact which also constitute errors of law”.
[21] It is the
appellant’s contention by reference to intermediate appellate court
decisions in other jurisdictions, and to
the largely common form wording of the
relevant statutory provisions in the various Australian jurisdictions, that the
must establish that the sentencing Judge has fallen into legal error
in order to disturb a finding of fact on appeal. That presents
a more stringent
test for the appellant to satisfy in order to succeed on this ground of appeal,
and the respondent unsurprisingly
concurs with the appellant’s submission
in that respect. Notwithstanding the industry of the appellant and the force of
submissions, it is neither necessary nor appropriate to determine that
issue for the purposes of this appeal in the absence of a
proper contradictor
and in light of the conclusions we have reached on this ground which are
described below.
[22] Moving then
to the substantive challenge, the appellant submitted that the finding that the
respondent’s time in custody
would be “considerably more
onerous” than for other members of the community due to his
“physical disability”,
“mild cognitive impairment” and
“significant psychiatric illness” was not available on the evidence.
noted by the appellant that the comparison should be to other prisoners
rather than other members of the community, but nothing turns
distinction for present purposes.
conclusion was a significant consideration in the sentencing Judge’s
determination to suspend the respondent’s
sentence to imprisonment after
he had three months upon entry into a home detention order. The sentencing
Judge observed in that
I have decided that a period of home
detention alone would be insufficient to serve the purposes of general
deterrence and denunciation.
However, the period of actual imprisonment, while
necessary to reflect the seriousness of what you have done, needs to be balanced
with the other factors which call for the exercise of mercy. In particular, I
take into account your physical disability, your mild
cognitive impairment and
your significant psychiatric illness.
It is plain to me that a period of imprisonment is likely to be considerably
more onerous for you than it would be for other members
of the community. For
that reason, I consider that there should be a short period of actual
imprisonment, followed by a period of
[24] The onus
rested upon the respondent to establish on the balance of probabilities that his
time in custody would be more onerous
than that of the average
As was observed in
Doudar v The Queen
Generally, ill-health will only be a
mitigating factor where the evidence establishes that there is a serious risk
that imprisonment
will be a greater burden on the offender, by reason of that
ill-health, or where there is a serious risk that imprisonment will have
adverse effect on the offender’s
appellant submitted that the Court could not make a positive finding to either
effect in the absence of evidence as to how
the respondent’s personal
circumstances would adversely impact his custodial experience in a meaningful
It was the submission of the
appellant that in this case the evidence before the Court did not show a basis
for concluding that
the respondent’s time in custody would in fact be more
onerous and that the sentencing Judge’s conclusions were accordingly
“speculative” in nature.
[26] In reaching
her conclusions in this regard, the sentencing Judge relied upon evidence from
the forensic psychiatrist which was
received by way of written report. That
report provided the basis for the sentencing Judge’s findings in relation
to the nature
and progression of the respondent’s various physical and
psychological conditions which have been summarised earlier in these
reasons for
decision. In addition to historical matters concerning those conditions, the
report of the treating psychiatrist stated:
Mr Hunt commenced a new
episode of care from 22
of December 2023 after the tragic death of
a child pedestrian where Mr Hunt was the driver of the vehicle that struck the
He experienced severe PTSD symptoms throughout the course of 2023
including daily intrusive visual flashbacks of the accident, harrowing
of remorse and guilt, insomnia, frequent emotional stress responses and
recurrent episodes of suicidal ideation. The symptoms
have gradually decreased
to a tolerable level with an increase in the antidepressant and antipsychotic
doses in addition to exploration
and validation of emotions in safe therapy
sessions and the ongoing support of close family, friends and neighbours. He has
able to emotionally and mentally prepare himself for the outcome of court
proceedings.
[27] Contrary to
the submission of the appellant, the final sentence of that paragraph does not
suggest other than that the respondent
had given consideration to the prospect
of imprisonment and anticipated the likelihood of imprisonment. It does not
reflect on the
assessment of whether or not imprisonment would be more onerous
for him than other prisoners. The sentencing Judge also made reference
often experienced low moods which could last
from hours to days, and that his
wife was able to identify those times and spend time motivating him to undertake
different tasks
to assist with elevating his mood.
[28] It was the
submission of the appellant that the opinions given by the treating psychiatrist
did not refer to the likely custodial
experience of the respondent, and there
was no direct evidence of how his mental and physical condition (including the
his prosthesis) would be adversely affected by being in custody.
However, a finding in relation to the impact of imprisonment on
an offender does
not necessarily require specific expert or other evidence as to each aspect of
the offender’s likely adverse
response to the custodial environment. Given
the evidence of the physical and psychiatric conditions suffered by the
respondent,
it was open to the sentencing Judge to draw inferences as to the
likely impact of incarceration upon him. This does not involve speculative
reasoning, but rather the drawing of reasonable inferences from the
[29] The finding
of the sentencing Judge was that the respondent’s time in custody would
likely be more onerous for the respondent
than in the ordinary case, which
amounted to an assessment of the probability of future hardship and the relative
level of that hardship.
As the respondent submits, the submissions of the
appellant discount the role of inferential reasoning and fact-finding drawn from
what was known about the respondent’s various conditions, and the judicial
notice which may be taken of matters of common knowledge
in this locality
concerning the general conditions of
imprisonment.
It is, as the
respondent submitted, a predictive task for which evidence of actual hardship is
rarely available. This is particularly
so in the case of offenders such as the
respondent who have not experienced prison at the time of sentence.
described above, the sentencing Judge drew upon the information available from
the report of the treating psychiatrist and
from the home detention report to
reach her conclusions. The relevant findings were made by reference to the
combination of the physical,
cognitive and psychiatric illnesses suffered by the
respondent. Those findings included that the respondent had a physical
disability,
a mild cognitive impairment and a significant psychiatric illness.
Whilst the treating psychiatrist did not, and in all fairness
could not, provide
specific opinion as to how imprisonment would affect the respondent, it was
reasonable to infer that incarceration
for the respondent would be significantly
more onerous than it would be for other prisoners. As was observed in
Self-evidently, a prisoner suffering from (for
example) severe depression will find each day in prison more of a burden than
a person in normal
[31] Whichever
test might be applied in the assessment, we see no error on the part of the
sentencing Judge in drawing inferences
from the evidence regarding the likely
impact of incarceration upon the respondent. The inferences were unexceptional
and reasonably
available to be drawn from the primary
Manifest inadequacy
[32] The other
ground of appeal pressed at the hearing was that the suspension of the
respondent’s head sentence after serving
three months’ imprisonment
upon entry into a home detention order for a period of nine months was
manifestly inadequate in
all the circumstances.
principles relevant to Crown appeals against sentence are well established.
Such appeals should be a rarity and brought
only to establish some matter of
principle and to afford the Court of Criminal Appeal an opportunity to lay down
principles for the
guidance of courts in sentencing
When relying upon the
ground of manifest inadequacy, it is incumbent upon the appellant to show that
the sentence was clearly and
obviously, and not just arguably, inadequate. It
must be shown that the sentence is so disproportionate to the seriousness of the
offending as to shock the public conscience and demonstrate error in
Where manifest
inadequacy is found, the appellate court retains a residual discretion as to
whether the appeal should be allowed
and the respondent resentenced. In the
exercise of the residual discretion the Court must not take into account any
element of double
jeopardy in making the decision whether to allow the appeal or
impose another sentence.
[34] General
deterrence will be a primary purpose of the sentencing exercise when determining
an appropriate sentence for offences
of dangerous driving causing
That is especially so
where the driving was reckless and the moral culpability of the offender is
high. The other sentencing principles
which are relevant for present purposes
(a) the taking of a human life by driving a motor vehicle dangerously is to be
regarded as a crime of very significant seriousness,
and the real substance of
the offence is not just the dangerous driving, but the dangerous driving in
association with the taking
(b) a custodial sentence will usually be appropriate, except in cases where the
offender’s level of moral culpability is very
low in relative
(c) the driver’s moral culpability must be taken into account together
with the “objective dangerousness” of the
driving, and a person who
drives dangerously knowing of a risk associated with his driving will (all other
things being equal) be
adjudged more blameworthy than one who drives in the same
dangerous manner without that
(d) the primacy of general deterrence is such that, ordinarily, it outweighs
remorse or the rehabilitation of an
respondent had a high degree of moral culpability in this offending. He made a
number of regrettable and deliberate decisions
that put others at risk,
(a) not modifying his RAM 1500 motor vehicle in accordance with his licence
conditions if he proposed driving the vehicle;
(b) consuming cannabis so as to impair his ability to drive in the manner and to
the extent described by the expert witness;
(c) driving to the supermarket in the unmodified vehicle whilst impaired by the
THC in his system; and
(d) reversing the vehicle without being properly seated within it and without
being in proper control of it on more than one occasion.
deliberate and reckless decisions were then aggregated with the inattentive or
misjudged actions of the respondent in selecting
“Drive” and
depressing the accelerator instead of the brake to cause the tragic death of a
child. As the appellant submitted,
the conduct of the respondent was far
removed from a case of momentary inattention or misjudgement. There is no doubt
that the sentencing
Judge was correct to take into account the
respondent’s personal circumstances, including his physical and
psychiatric conditions,
lack of criminal history, demonstrated remorse and low
likelihood of reoffending. However, as Hunt CJ at CL observed in
The sentence must be seen to have a reasonable
proportionality to the objective circumstances of the crime, and persuasive
circumstances must not lead to inadequate weight being given to those
objective circumstances.
[37] In this
case, the suspension of the sentence after three months upon the respondent
entering into a home detention order for
a period of nine months was, in our
opinion, manifestly inadequate in all the circumstances. Such a sentence was
not proportionate
to the seriousness of the offending and did not provide
sufficient emphasis upon the need for punishment, denunciation and general
deterrence, or take sufficient account of the fact and manner of the taking of
the child’s life.
[38] Even where
the manifest inadequacy is such as to demonstrate error in point of principle,
as we have found, the appellate court
must carefully consider whether in the
exercise of the residual discretion this is one of those exceptional cases in
which the Crown
appeal should be allowed and the respondent
resentenced.
That is because
the finding that the sentence was manifestly inadequate by virtue of the head
sentence being suspended after three
months is sufficient in itself for the
purpose of providing guidance to sentencing courts in relation to offences
pursuant to s 174F(1)
Criminal Code
[39] The matters
informing the exercise of the residual discretion to dismiss an appeal, despite
inadequacy of sentence, include the
presence of unfairness arising from such
matters as delay, parity, the totality principle, rehabilitation and fault on
the part of
the Crown. In the present case, the respondent has already been
released from prison and is now serving his home detention order.
This provides
at least some basis for the contention that now returning the respondent to
prison would give rise to unfairness and
impact adversely on his rehabilitation.
However, as observed in
Everett v The Queen:
... inadequate
sentences also give rise to a sense of injustice, not only in those who are the
victims of the crimes in question but
also in the general public. ....
Inadequate sentences are also likely to undermine public confidence in the
ability of the courts
to play their part in deterring the commission of
similar vein, the New South Wales Court of Appeal stated in
It is in the public interest that an appropriate
sentence be imposed upon the Respondent, given the clearly erroneous sentence
at first instance. An important part of the jurisdiction to hear Crown
appeals is to ensure that there will be uniformity of sentencing,
which is of
great importance in maintaining public confidence in the administration of
The present judgment will serve to lay down or emphasise a number of
sentencing principles. However, it is appropriate for the Court
to proceed to
resentence the Respondent. This will serve to maintain public confidence in the
due administration of
earlier decision of the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal, Adamson J
(with whom RA Hulme and Davies JJ agreed) said:
Although the
principal purpose of the determination of a Crown appeal is to give guidance to
sentencing judges, the sentence actually
imposed on the respondent is still of
considerable importance. The need for specific deterrence in the present case
would not be
served by an exercise of the residual discretion.
Nor indeed would the need for general deterrence be fulfilled were the
residual discretion to be exercised. The general deterrence
of a sentence is not
to be measured solely by reference to its effect on putative respondents. One of
the purposes of incorporating
an element of general deterrence in a sentence is
to ensure that sentences accord with legitimate community expectations and that
public confidence in the administration of justice is maintained:
Markarian v
(2005) 228 CLR 357 at [82] per
[42] For those
same reasons, this is also a matter where the Court should proceed to
resentence. The sentence was such as to shock
the public conscience, and to
engender a sense of injustice in both those associated with the deceased victim
and the wider community.
Resentence and consequential
[43] As already
stated, the challenge to the head sentence imposed by the sentencing Judge was
not pressed during the course of the
appeal, and finding of manifest inadequacy
is limited to the suspension of the sentence after three months.
determining an appropriate sentence we take into account the matters referred to
in the original sentencing proceedings, including
that the respondent’s
time in custody will be more onerous than would be the case for other prisoners.
We also take into account
the additional material placed before this Court as to
the respondent’s circumstances subsequent to the sentence being imposed,
including the examples of the difficulties actually experienced by the
respondent when he was in custody. The additional materials
also include advice
that the respondent has suffered two seizures and, during the course of one,
suffered a fractured T9 vertebrae.
One seizure occurred in the prison and the
other when he was at home. In relation to the first, he was admitted to
hospital where
he remained for 12 days. The medical records reveal that no
cause for the seizures could be identified. It has not been suggested
conditions in prison contributed to the occurrence.
resentencing the respondent, we also take into account the fact that he will
have served more than three months on home detention
before his further
imprisonment in accordance with these orders.
[46] Having
regard to those matters, we make the following orders:
appeal is allowed.
sentence imposed by the Supreme Court on 16 February 2024 is set aside.
offender is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for a period of three years
commencing on 16 February 2024.
sentence to imprisonment is to be suspended after the offender has served a term
of imprisonment of 12 months, which is to include
the period of three months
already served prior to the offender’s release from prison on 15 May 2024
for the purpose of commencing
operational period of two years from the date of the offender’s release
after serving that 12 months’ imprisonment
is fixed for the purposes of
ss 40(6) and 43 of the
________________________
Although this ground of appeal was
not pressed at the hearing, the appellant maintains the position that the
sentencing standard
for the offence of dangerous driving causing death in the
Northern Territory is low when compared to other Australian jurisdictions.
Although the material before the Court in this appeal did not permit an
exploration of that contention, the appellant does not exclude
the possibility
that the issue will be pursued if an appropriate appeal vehicle arises in the
Duong v The Queen
[2021] NTCCA 3
288 A Crim R 566.
The Queen v Olbrich
199 CLR 270
at [20]-[25].
Doudar v The Queen
[2021] NTSCFC 2
(2021) 43 NTLR 7
C v The Queen
(2013) 229 A Crim R 37
Doudar v The
[2021] NSWCCA 37
See generally
(National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
s 144(1)(a).
R v Verdins
[2007] VSCA 102
(2007) 16 VR
The Queen v Mossman
40 NTLR 144
The Queen v Roe
[2017] NTCCA 7
(2017) 40 NTLR 187
Griffiths v The Queen
(1977) 137 CLR 293 at 310; and
Everett v The Queen
[1994] HCA 49
(1994) 181 CLR 295
The Queen v Kahu-Leedie
[2022] NTCCA 4
Criminal Code
DPP v Oates
[2007] VSCA 59
DPP v Church
[2005] VSCA 8
(2005) 42 MVR 420
Board v The
[2013] VSCA 190
R v Musumeci
(unreported, NSWCCA, 30 October 1997, Hunt CJ at CL).
Demur v The Queen
DPP v Oates
[2007] VSCA 59
(2007) 47 MVR 483
Board v The Queen
[2017] NSWCCA 232
(2017) 81 MVR
R v Musumeci
(unreported, NSWCCA, 30 October 1997, Hunt CJ at
R v Musumeci
(unreported, NSWCCA, 30 October 1997, Hunt CJ at CL) at 5.
[2006] NTCCA 10
(2006) 161 A
Everett v The Queen
[1994] HCA 49
(1994) 181 CLR 295.
[2015] NSWCCA
R v O’Connor
[2014] NSWCCA 53
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (235 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter