URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCAT/2025/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:17:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lock the Gate Alliance Ltd v Minister for Lands, Planning and Environment Imperial Oil and Gas A Pty Ltd [2025] NTCAT 12 (22 August 2025)
Lock the Gate Alliance Ltd v Minister For Lands, Planning and
Environment; Imperial Oil and Gas A Pty Ltd;
DECISION NUMBER:
[2025] NTCAT 12
LOCK THE GATE ALLIANCE LTD
MINISTER FOR LANDS, PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT
1ST RESPONDENT
IMPERIAL OIL AND GAS A PTY LTD
2ND RESPONDENT
MATTER TYPE:
Review Jurisdiction -
Petroleum Act 1984
2024-03720-CT
HEARING DATE:
07 AUGUST 2025
DECISION OF:
MARK O'REILLY AND LESLIE MCCRIMMON
DATE OF ORDERS:
22 AUGUST 2025
APPEARANCES and REPRESENTATION (if any):
R WHITE instructed by M FLORO
1ST RESPONDENT:
2ND RESPONDENT:
H BADDELEY instructed by K STEPHENS
REASONS FOR DECISION:
Ordinary Application arises within the context of the Initiating Application
brought by the Lock the Gate Alliance Ltd (the ‘Applicant’)
review of a decision of the Minister for Lands, Planning and the Environment
(the ‘Minister’) to approve an Environment
Management Plan
(‘EMP’) submitted to the Minister by Imperial Oil and Gas A Pty Ltd
(‘Imperial Oil’). In
its Amended Initiating Application dated 13
February 2025, the Applicant maintained, inter alia, that:
the principles of ESD [ecologically sustainable development], the Tribunal
cannot reasonably be satisfied that the Approval
Criteria have been
including because the EMP does not demonstrate that the activity will be carried
out in a manner by which the environmental impacts
and risks will be reduced to
as low as reasonably practicable and acceptable, including in relation to:
to aquifer connectivity;
to water supply.
Applicant seeks leave pursuant to section 46(2)(b) of the
Northern Territory
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2014
(the ‘NTCAT Act’) to
admit the following further evidence in the review proceedings:
2.1. Unattested
Declaration dated 18 March 2025 of Dr Ryan Vogwill;
2.2. Unattested
Declaration dated 18 March 2025 of Carina James.
Vogwill is a hydrogeologist with expertise in relation to groundwater modelling,
water resource planning and recovery of hydrologically
impacted ecosystems. Ms
James is the lessee of the pastoral lease at the Cow Creek Station, a property
affected by the operations
of Imperial Oil approved under the EMP.
Oil opposes the application to admit further evidence. The Minister takes no
position in relation to the substance of the
application but did make written
and oral submissions in relation to the Tribunal’s approach to section
46(2) of the NTCAT
Act and the decision of the Tribunal in In
Environment
Centre Northern Territory v Minister for Environment, Climate Change and Water
Security; Tamboran B2 Pty Ltd
[2025] NTCAT 8.
Oil holds exploration permits 167 and 168 issued under the
Petroleum Act
. On 13 January 2022, Imperial Oil, pursuant to
regulation 6
Petroleum (Environment) Regulations 2016
(the ‘PE Regs’),
submitted to the Minister for approval an EMP for the carrying out of a
regulated activity with respect
to the above-noted exploration permits.
to reg 8A(2) of the PE Regs, the Minister must publish, within 14 days of
receiving the plan, the EMP for public consultation.
This the Minister did and
the EMP was open for public consultation from 20 January 2022 to
17 February 2022. Regulation 8B of the
PE Regs provides: “Interested
persons may submit written comments on a plan published under regulation 8A to
the Minister no
later than 28 days after the date of its
publication.”
Applicant made written submissions on 17 February 2022 and also submitted three
expert reports. Ms James also made a submission
within the 28-day public
consultation period.
16 March 2022 and 2 October 2024, the Minister, pursuant to regulation
the PE Regs, required Imperial Oil to provide further information about matters
required by the PE Regs to be included in the
EMP. In addition, the Minister
requested advice from the Northern Territory Environment Protection Agency
pursuant to
section 29B
Northern Territory
Environment Protection Authority Act 2012
7 October 2024, the NT EPA provided its advice to the Minister, concluding that
the environmental impacts and risks of the EMP
activities were as low as
reasonably practicable and acceptable. On 22 October 2024, the Minister approved
the EMP pursuant to
regulation 11(3)(a)(i)
of the PE Regs.
relating to review
review of the Minister’s decision to approve an EMP falls within the
Tribunal’s review jurisdiction in
, Division 3 of the NTCAT Act. A
review under the NTCAT Act is not a hearing de novo, nor is the Applicant
required to identify errors
made by the Minister in approving the
The decision of the Minister
is reviewed on its merits
objective of the Tribunal to produce the “correct or preferrable
Environment Centre Northern Territory v Minister for Environment, Climate
Change and Water Security; Tamboran B2 Pty Ltd
[2025] NTCAT 8
, the Tribunal
Shi v Migration Agents Registration Authority
[2008] HCA 31
(2008) 235 CLR 286
, Kiefel J (as her Honour then was) at [140] discussed the
meaning of the term ‘correct or preferable decision’ in the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
(Cth) (‘AAT
Act’), which applies equally to the use of that term in 46(1) of the NTCAT
“Preferable” is apt to refer to a decision which involves
discretionary considerations. A “correct” decision,
in the context
of review, might be taken to be one rightly made. It is, inevitably, a decision
by the original decision-maker with
which the Tribunal agrees.
nature of administrative merits review was considered by the High Court of
Australia in the context of the AAT Act in
Frugtniet v Australian Securities
and Investments Commission
[2019] HCA 16
(2019) 266 CLR 250.
, Kiefel CJ,
Keane and Nettle JJ noted:
The question for determination by the AAT
on the review of an administrative decision under s 25 of the AAT Act is thus
whether the
decision is the correct or preferable decision. That question is
required to be determined on the material before the AAT, not on
the material as
it was before the original decision-maker. As Bowen CJ and Dean J held in
Drake v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
, however, and has
since been affirmed by this court in
Shi v Migration Agents Registration
, the AAT is not at large. It is subject to the same general
constraints as the original decision-maker and should ordinarily approach
task as though it were performing the relevant function of the original
decision-maker in accordance with the law as it applied to the
decision-maker
at the time of the original decision.
Depending on the nature of the decision the subject of review, the AAT may
sometimes take into account evidence that was not before
the original
decision-maker, including events subsequent to the original decision. But
subject to any clearly expressed contrary
statutory indication, the AAT may do
so only if and to the extent that the evidence is relevant to the question which
the original
decision-maker was bound to decide; really, as if the original
decision-maker were deciding the matter at the time that it is before
The AAT cannot take into account matters which were not before the original
decision-maker where to do so would change the
nature of the decision or, put
another way, the question before the original decision-maker.
relevant provision in the NTCAT Act relating to the admission of further
evidence in the exercise of the Tribunal’s review
46(2). That section provides:
A proceeding in the Tribunal’s
review jurisdiction will include:
(a) an examination of the evidence or the material before the decision maker;
(b) a consideration of any further evidence or material that the Tribunal
decides, in the circumstances of the particular case, to
admit for a rehearing.
conclusions may be drawn from the wording of section 46(2)(b) of the NTCAT Act.
First, the inclusion of the words “in the
circumstances of the particular
case” evidence the fact that the Tribunal’s decision to admit
further evidence or material
is not ‘at large’. Secondly, the
admission of further evidence or material is in the discretion of the Tribunal,
discretion is to be exercised with reference to the relevant provisions of
the NTCAT Act, the Act or subordinate legislation that
confers jurisdiction on
the Tribunal, and any relevant case law.
Applicant’s
submissions
Applicant submits that, on the basis of the High Court of Australia authority in
Shi v Migration Agents Registration Authority
[2008] HCA 31
(2008) 235 CLR 286
Frugtniet v Australian Securities and Investments Commission
[2019] HCA 16
and a decision of the AAT in
Rogers and Australian Securities and
Investment Commission
[2024] AATA 3161
evidence of matters
occurring after the original decision (including expert evidence drafted after
the original decision) may, indeed
should, be taken into account by the Tribunal
in the process of informing
Applicant maintains that the only decision before the Tribunal on review is
whether the EMP meets the approval criteria in regulation
11(2) of the PE Regs.
Contrary to the decision of the Tribunal in
Environment Centre Northern
Territory v Minister for Environment, Climate Change and Water Security;
Tamboran B2 Pty Ltd
[2025] NTCAT 8
, regulation11(2) contains no temporal
element. The admission of further evidence
or material will not change the
nature of the decision or the question before the original decision-maker.
Applicant submits that the Dr Vogwill’s evidence is relevant to the
question of whether the EMP meets the approval criteria
in the PE Regs.
According to the Applicant,
the Applicant’s further evidence
assists in the resolution of material issues in the EMP, such as whether planned
pose a risk to the surrounding environment and communities, whether
the approval of the EMP took into consideration principles of
ESD [ecologically
sustainable development] and ALARP [as low as reasonably practicable] and
acceptability, including impacts on GDEs
[groundwater dependent ecosystems],
whether the risk assessment is adequate to mitigate adverse impacts to
inter-aquifer connectivity,
and whether water supply was addressed in the EMP
appropriately. The Applicant’s further evidence assists the Tribunal in
determining
whether the Minister could have been reasonably satisfied that the
EMP met the statutory requirements ... and determining what is
now the correct
and preferrable decision in relation to the
Imperial Oil’s submissions
oral submissions, the representative for Imperial Oil maintained, contrary to
its written submissions, that whether the PE Regs
contains a temporal element is
not relevant to the resolution of the issues that arise in the application to
admit further evidence.
Imperial Oil argued that the admission of the evidence
of Dr Vogwill and, to a lesser extent, Ms James, would change the nature of
decision or question that was before the Minister.
to Imperial Oil, in allowing third party review proceedings, the legislature did
not intend the parties to the review to
engage in the exchange of extensive
expert evidence about the issues raised in the Applicant’s Amended
Initiating Application.
Such matters have been specifically considered in
Scientific Inquiry Into Hydraulic Fracking in the Northern Territory, Final
, April 2018, and, in these proceedings, the advice of the NT EPA
provided to the Minister on 7 October 2024.
Oil submitted that to allow the admission of the expert evidence of Dr Vogwill
would be contrary to the objective of the
Tribunal set out in section 10(d) of
the NTCAT Act to:
Ensure that proceedings are processed and resolved
as quickly as possible while achieving a just outcome, including by resolving
through high-quality processes and the use of mediation and alternative
dispute resolution procedures where appropriate.
In addition, the admission of Dr Vogwill’s expert evidence is
inconsistent with the underlying statutory framework in regulations
and 11 of the PE Regs, and the overriding object of the
Petroleum Act
of actively encouraging petroleum exploration and fracking.
Minister’s submissions
Minister’s written and oral submissions focused primarily on whether the
question before the Tribunal in the review proceedings
contained a temporal
element. Contrary to the conclusion of the Tribunal in
Environment Centre
Northern Territory v Minister for Environment, Climate Change and Water
Security; Tamboran B2 Pty Ltd
[2025] NTCAT 8
, [31], the Minister submitted
that the PE Regs “do not reveal a temporal element to the question before
the Tribunal”.
particular, the Minister submitted that the fundamental question before the
Tribunal in the review proceedings is whether, in accordance
regulation 11
of the PE Regs, the EMP meets the approval criteria in
regulation 9.
Regulation 11
does not disclose any statutory intention that the decision
is referrable to a specific point in time. Rather, the criteria is broad
unconfined as to any specific
In addition, the
Minister maintained that the further evidence the Applicant seeks to have
admitted is,
evidence relating to facts which were in existence at
the time of the original decision. It is not evidence of new facts or
circumstances
which have only come into existence since the original decision
was made. Ultimately, the question for the Tribunal remains whether,
circumstances of the proceeding, the evidence is relevant to a question in the
proceeding such that the discretion should
be exercised to admit that
Consideration
46(2)(b) of the NTCAT Act, as has been noted above, requires the Tribunal to
exercise its discretion to admit further evidence
or material with reference to
the relevant provisions of the NTCAT Act, the Act or subordinate legislation
that confers jurisdiction
on the Tribunal, and any relevant case law. Dealing
first with the
Petroleum Act 1984
and the Pet Regs,
section 3(1)
former stipulates that:
(1) The objective of this Act is to provide a legal framework that:
(a) encourages persons to undertake effective exploration for petroleum and to
develop petroleum so that the optimal value of the
resource is returned to the
Territory; and
(b) provides protection to the environment of the Territory; and
(c) promotes the principles of ecologically sustainable development.
Pet Regs sets out timelines within which the Minister must publish an EMP
(regulation 8A(2)), the time within which interested
persons may submit written
comments on an EMP (regulation 8B), and, if the Minister requires further
information from the interest
holder pursuant to regulation 10(1), the time
within which the Minister must make a decision under regulation 11(2) after the
holder submits a modified EMP in response to a resubmission notice
(regulation 11(3)). Further, regulation 11(1A) stipulates that
“Minister must take into account any comments submitted under regulation
8B when making a decision under subregulation
(2) in relation to a plan
published under regulation 8A”.
the time within which the Minister must make a decision whether to approve an
EMP can be extended through the issuance of a
resubmission notice, there is no
power or discretion afforded to the Minister under the Pet Regs of the
Petroleum Act 1984
to extend the 28-day period in regulation 8B for
public comments on an EMP. If the Minister had allowed the Applicant to submit
material it now seeks to submit outside of the 28-day period stipulated in
regulation 8B, arguably that would have constituted grounds
for a review of the
Minister’s decision. The Tribunal is being asked to consider material
that it was not open to the Minster
to consider.
whatever reason, the Applicant chose not to submit the material it now seeks to
have admitted in the review proceeding within
the timeframe stipulated in
regulation 8B of the Pet Regs. The decisions of the High Court in
Migration Agents Registration Authority
[2008] HCA 31
(2008) 235 CLR 286
v Australian Securities and Investments Commission
[2019] HCA 16
(2019) 266 CLR 250
not authority for the proposition that an interested person within the meaning
of regulation 8B may use the Tribunal’s
review jurisdiction to remedy a
failure to submit evidence or material it could have submitted within the
timeframe stipulated in
the Pet Regs.
Tribunal acknowledges, contrary to its decision in
Environment Centre
Northern Territory v Minister for Environment, Climate Change and Water
Security; Tamboran B2 Pty Ltd
[2025] NTCAT 8
that the time-frames in
the Pet Regs are not temporal in the sense that they preclude the Tribunal from
considering new evidence.
Such time-frames, however, are highly relevant to the
exercise of the Tribunal’s discretion to admit further evidence or
under section 46(2)(b) of the NTCAT Act.
, the High Court, as has been discussed above, noted that the
exercise of the Tribunal’s discretion to admit further evidence
material is not at large.
It is subject to the same general
constraints as the original decision-maker and should ordinarily approach its
task as though it
were performing the relevant function of the original
decision-maker
in accordance with the law as it applied to the decision-maker
at the time of the original
, Kiefel J noted that the “Tribunal has been said to stand in
the shoes of the
original decision-maker, for the purpose of its
To admit the
further evidence
of Dr Vogwill and Ms James would result in the
Tribunal making a decision on review in a different context to the Minister. The
would not be standing in the shoes of the Minister. Rather, it would be
standing in somewhat larger shoes.
making the decision whether to approve an EMP, the Minister was required to take
into account the public submissions submitted
within the time-frame stipulated
in regulation 8B of the Pet Regs. An exercise of the Tribunal’s discretion
to admit the further
evidence of Dr Vogwill and Ms James, which were not
submitted in accordance with the Pet Regs, would undermine the regulatory
under which the Minister, and the Tribunal, are required to operate.
allowing third party review proceedings, the legislature did not intend the
parties to the review to engage in the exchange of
extensive expert reports not
considered by the Minister in the original decision. In this proceeding, the
exercise of the Tribunal’s
discretion to allow further evidence or
material would change the nature of the decision or question that was before the
The Application should be dismissed.
Tribunal makes no order as to costs. This was an interlocutory matter and the
question of costs, if any, is a matter for determination
at the conclusion of
the substantive proceedings.
Accordingly, the Tribunal orders
Form 3 Ordinary Application to admit an Unattested Declaration dated 18 March
2025 of Dr Ryan Vogwill and an Unattested Declaration
dated 18 March 2025 of Ms
Carina James is dismissed.
no later than 4:00pm on 5 September 2025, the parties are to provide the NTCAT
registry with and electronic copy of agreed timetabling
orders for the filing of
written submissions in the substantive
proceeding.
22 August 2025
LESLIE McCRIMMON
and MARK O'REILLY
Kasper v Psychology Board of
Australia [No 2]
[2015] NTCAT 179
Shi v Migration Agents
Registration Authority
[2008] HCA 31
(2008) 235 CLR 286
, [140]-[142].
Shi v Migration Agents
Registration Authority
[2008] HCA 31
(2008) 235 CLR 286
, [140]-[142].
Northern Territory Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2014
Applicant’s Submissions
on Admission of Further Evidence filed on 23 July 2025, [18].
Applicant’s Submissions
on Admission of Further Evidence filed on 23 July 2025, [64].
First Respondent’s
Submissions on an Application to Adduce Further Evidence dated 1 August 2025,
First Respondent’s
Submissions on an Application to Adduce Further Evidence dated 1 August 2025,
First Respondent’s
Submissions on an Application to Adduce Further Evidence dated 1 August 2025,
Frugtniet v Australian
Securities and Investments Commission
[2019] HCA 16
(2019) 266 CLR 250
Shi v Migration Agents
Registration Authority
[2008] HCA 31
(2008) 235 CLR 286
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (12.8 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter