URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTRTCmr/2015/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:22:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jose & Varghese -v- Magriplis [2015] NTRTCmr 21 (21 April 2015)
REASONS FOR THE ORDER OF THE COMMISSIONER OF TENANCIES
INQUIRY - Thursday 16 April 2015
JOMAN JOSE & BINI VARGHESE ( ‘tenants’)
PANTELIS MAGRIPLIS & IRENE MAGRIPLIS
(‘landlords’)
RT1415-0479
is a determination of an application by the tenants dated 5 February 2015 in
respect of premises being 1/14 Budgen Street, Moil
in the Northern Territory of
Australia (‘the premises’), seeking order(s) under the
Residential Tenancies Act
(NT) (‘the Act’) as follows:
of the security deposit pursuant to section 113; and.
compensation
pursuant to section 122.
Notice of Inquiry dated 9 March 2015 was posted to the parties. The Inquiry was
conducted on Thursday 16 April 2015. The following
appeared at the Inquiry and
made submissions:
Jose and Bini Varghese the tenants; and
Marsh and Carolyn Wilson of Raine & Horne Darwin on behalf of the landlords.
evidence before the Inquiry consisted of the following materials:
documents submitted by the tenants in support of the application and kept on the
Commissioner of Tenancies file numbered RT1415-0479;
documents submitted by the landlords in response to the application and kept on
the file; and
oral evidence of the parties.
the basis of the above evidence I find there is a tenancy agreement between the
landlords and the tenants in respect of the premises
within the meaning of and
subject to the provisions of the Act. The key details of the tenancy agreement
are as follows:
Duration: Fixed term commencing 30 June 2013
and ending 28 January 2015
Rent: $480.00 per week payable fortnightly in advance
Security Deposit $1.960.00
tenancy agreement expired on 28 January 2015. The tenants vacated the premises
on 26 January 2015.
outgoing condition inspection was conducted on 27 January 2015 in the presence
of the tenants.
was common ground that during the course of the inspection a range of cleaning
requirements were drawn to the tenants’ attention.
it was common ground that the tenants were given the opportunity to attend to
these cleaning requirements with the understanding
that a final inspection would
be undertaken soon after this occurred to verify that items highlighted during
the course of the inspection
had been attended to.
tenants retained a set of keys in order to carry out the cleaning. These were
returned to the agent’s office before COB
on 27 January 2015.
outgoing condition report (OCR) arising from the inspection was sent to the
tenants on 28 January 2015 via post to the tenants’
last known residential
address and via email. It was common ground that this report reflects the items
discussed with the tenants
during the outgoing condition inspection undertaken
on 27 January 2015.
second inspection occurred on 29 January 2015. The date and time for this
inspection was drawn to the tenant’s attention.
The tenant indicated at
the Inquiry that they were aware of the second inspection but did not attend as
they did not see this as
being necessary given that they had attended to all the
cleaning requirements highlighted in the OCR.
a result of the second inspection it was felt that the cleaning requirements
highlighted in the OCR had not been attended to in
full and a quote was sought
from a cleaning contractor. No pictures were taken during the course of this
second inspection to show
the state of the premises against the items requiring
attention highlighted in the OCR.
the outcome in spite of the tenants being advised
that they would be contacted
on 30 January 2015 in this regard.
first time the tenants were made aware that the premises had not been cleaned to
the landlords’ satisfaction was when they
were served an RT08 Notice of
Landlord’s Intention to Retain Security Deposit on 2 February 2015. The
sum of $638.00 was retained
from the security deposit for the purposes of making
good damage ($165.00) and cleaning the premises ($473.00).
balance of the security deposit of $1,282.00 was returned to the tenants.
making good damage component
relates to the fact that one of the items
highlighted on the OCR and drawn to the tenants’ attention at the outgoing
was the need to remove pen marks from one wall. An attempt to remove
them in part had resulted in discoloration to the areas wiped
down. At the time
the tenants were advised that if the marks could not be removed it may be
necessary to have the wall repainted.
This was common ground at the
The tenants’ application for return of the
security deposit
tenants are seeking the return of the balance of the security deposit retained
by the landlords pursuant to the RT08 Notice. The
tenants argues that the items
drawn to their attention during the outgoing condition inspection and reported
in the OCR were attended
to in full and that it was therefore totally
unnecessary for the landlords to engage a cleaner.
the premises is not new and the internal paint is at least 8 years old. The
tenants argue that it is therefore to be expected
that removing marks will leave
visible streaks and as such the cost associated with the need to repaint the
wall should not be borne
by them as it should be considered fair wear and
The Inquiry
addition to the annotations on the agreed OCR regarding items requiring
attention, evidence presented to the Inquiry included a
series of pictures
provided by the landlords showing the state of the premises at the time of the
outgoing condition inspection that
were the subject of the discussions between
the agent and the tenants highlighting what required attention.
tenants provided a series of photographs taken after their cleaning efforts
(some of which match those provided by the agent)
to demonstrate that the
matters highlighted had been attended to. As mentioned at [12] there were no
pictures taken during the course
of the second inspection.
turn now to the legal requirements of the Act. Section 51(2)(b) provides that it
is a term of every tenancy agreement that, at the
end of the tenancy, the tenant
must return the premises and ancillary property to the landlord in
clean condition, allowing for
wear and tear
qualification of “reasonable wear and tear” means that a tenant is
not obliged to return the premises or ancillary
property in a better condition
nor, indeed, even in an equivalent condition to that in which the tenant
found the premises or ancillary
property at the beginning of the tenancy.
deciding whether premises and ancillary property are in a “reasonably
clean” condition, a comparison must be made between
the condition of the
premises and ancillary property at the beginning of the tenancy (i.e. when the
tenant took possession), as determined
by the ICR if any, accepted by the
parties under Part 5, and the condition of the premises and ancillary property
at the end of the
tenancy (i.e. when the tenant gave up vacant possession), as
determined by the OCR, if any, accepted by the parties under Part 12
51(4)(a) and (b)). Against this comparison must be measured the effect of
reasonable wear and tear during the term of the
tenancy (section 51(4)(c)).
my view, based on the evidence presented to the Inquiry, the premises were in a
reasonable condition at the end of the tenancy,
allowing for reasonable wear and
find that the landlords
entitled to retain the component of the
security deposit to clean the premises.
in relation to the pen marks on the wall in my view, based on the evidence
presented to the Inquiry, the premises were not
in a reasonable condition at the
end of the tenancy, allowing for reasonable wear and tear.
find that the landlords
entitled to retain the component of the
security deposit to make good damages to the premises, namely repainting the
walls damaged
by the pen marks.
The tenants’ application
for compensation
tenants are seeking compensation totalling $3,900 for three issues claimed by
the tenants to be breaches of the tenancy agreement
by the landlords. I deal
which each claim separately below.
Claim 1 – storage
charges ($1,800.00)
tenants rented the property on the basis of it being unfurnished. During the
course of the incoming condition inspection conducted
on 26 June 2013 a timber
TV cabinet located in the dining room was included on the incoming condition
report (ICR). The tenants made
an annotation on the ICR against this item as
“Kindly remove this since there is already an inbuilt
ICR was duly signed as being accepted by both parties (on 26 June 2013 by the
tenants and 28 June 2013 by the agent).
dimensions of this cabinet are (in imperial measurements) 6 feet x 5 feet x 2.5
was the tenants’ evidence that they notified the agent in writing to
remove the cabinet and that they received a written
response from the agent that
the landlords would remove the cabinet on 27 June 2013.
further email was sent to the agent on 25 March 2014 requesting that the cabinet
be removed.
cabinet was ultimately removed on 9 May 2014.
agent’s evidence was that the landlords continuously tried to find a buyer
for the cabinet with the tenants granting access
for potential buyers to inspect
the cabinet.
regard for the provisions of section 122 I cannot find that the tenants have a
valid claim for compensation. Whilst I understand
that the cabinet may have been
an irritant I cannot see how the tenants have suffered a ‘loss or
damage’ that would warrant
the payment of compensation.
tenants base their claim on seeking to charge the landlords for storing the
landlords’ property in the premises that they
were renting.
Claim 2 – stove not working
tenants’ evidence was that the stove was partially working which was
“mentioned” to the agent. The stove ultimately
ceased working
entirely and when this was reported to the agent it took over a week to replace.
The tenants argue that the stove
is an ‘emergency service’ and
should have been repaired sooner. The claim is for loss of access to the
agent’s evidence was that on 31 October 2013 the tenants advised the agent
that the cooking range in the stove was not working.
On 1 November 2013 the
tenant was advised that the matter had been brought to the landlords’
attention and the agent was awaiting
a response. A new oven and hotplates were
installed at the premises by the landlords on 11 November 2013.
25 March 2014 the tenants notified the agent that one of the stove elements had
stopped working. On 27 March 2014 the landlords
purchased a new stove which was
installed on 29 March 2014.
the basis of the evidence before me I find that the landlords have acted with
reasonable diligence (s. 57(2)(b)) in dealing with
this matter.
Claim 3 – door lock not
working properly and compromising security ($1,800.00)
tenants claim that the “back door” didn’t have any locks from
the beginning of the tenancy until the final inspection
and that this
compromised their security. The claim is for loss reflecting this lack of
security. The agent’s evidence was
that the ICR is annotated with the
following wording:
“chrome lockable from outside
agent stated that this meant that the door is self-locking from the inside and
requires the use of a key to get in from the outside.
The agent further stated
that nothing was mentioned by the tenants on the ICR or throughout the tenancy
of this being an issue.
further evidence was provided by the tenants in support of their claim. I note
that they bear the onus of evidence in support of
their application for
compensation.
the basis of the evidence before me I am unable to determine that the tenants
have a valid claim for compensation.
Accordingly, I order that:
to section 113, the Respondents return to the Applicants an amount of $473.00
withheld from the security deposit.
Applicants claims for compensation pursuant to section 122 are dismissed.
Dated this Tuesday 21 April 2015
Andrew Macrides
Delegate of the
Commissioner of Tenancies
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (122 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter