URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTADComm/2001/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:16:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Renouf, Ray v Australian Broadcasting Commission & Gary Gibson [2001] NTADComm 3 (14 September 2001)
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION COMMISSION
AT DARWIN IN THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
IN THE MATTER OF
Complainant
AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING COMMISSION
GARY GIBSON
Respondents
REASONS FOR DECISION
(Delivered 14 September 2001)
Mr David LOADMAN, HEARING COMMISSIONER
The Complainant in this
matter is a homosexual. He asserts that he has suffered ongoing discrimination
by the First and Second Respondents
in the work place on the ground of the
attribute of his homosexuality. He contends that the discrimination he alleges
him distress and humiliation. He consequently seeks by way of
remedy, amongst other things, compensation for loss and damage arising
conduct prohibited by the
Anti-Discrimination Act
(herein after referred
to as “the Act”).
Subsection 19
(c) of the Act prohibits a person discriminating against another on the ground
of the attribute of sexuality unless exceptions found
Act apply. Discrimination is defined in
of the Act. The Complainant
particularly relies on
subsection 20
(2) (a) which provides that
discrimination will take place if a person treats or proposes to treat
another person who has had, or is believed to have had an attribute
favourably than a person who has not, or is believed not to have, such an
Sexuality is defined in
of the Act to include the sexual characteristic or imputed sexual
characteristic of homosexuality. The Complainant also relies on
the provisions
(2) (a) (b) & (d) of the Act to allege that he has suffered
discrimination in the work area. The thrust of his case in that
respect was
that he had been employed with the First Respondent as a Television
Officer-Production Operations and that discrimination
on the grounds of his
homosexuality resulted in him being rostered to work in the video interchange
area at all times which deprived
him of the opportunity to develop his skills by
being rotated into other positions.
Complainant also complains of an atmosphere of homophobia being present in the
work place which the First and Second Respondents
have taken insufficient action
to dispel. That atmosphere is said to include the uttering of derogatory and
disparaging remarks
associates. The Complainant says that the behaviour was not discouraged by
employees of the First Respondent when they had a responsibility to do so. He
says the First Respondent is vicariously liable for
the discrimination that
arose from that failure.
The Complainant is
a forty-seven year old man. He was employed by the First Respondent in April of
1995 as a Television Officer-Production
Operations which is generally referred
to by the sobriquet TOPO. Mr Renouf described a TOPO as a “general
job” in television
production operations. It is apparently a multi
skilled position which involves rotation to a variety of areas of work, however
the evidence did not advance the job description of a TOPO beyond that.
The Complainant while remaining an employee
of the First Respondent has not worked at his place of employment since 20 March
In addition to the dispute Mr Renouf has referred to this tribunal, he
has made a workers compensation claim for a stress condition
that he claims to
have suffered since September 1997. In the early part of 1998 the First
Respondent was working in consultation
with doctors and other rehabilitative
personal to put in place a suitable return to work program for the
Complainant.
The Complainant’s
evidence in chief is set out in Exhibits C4 & C5 being Affidavits sworn by
him on 8 February 2001. Exhibit
C5 is an amended Affidavit that in all respects
is identical to Exhibit C4 but with four controversial paragraphs deleted by
Mr Renouf also gave additional oral evidence of instances of abusive
and discriminatory behaviour directed to him and of conversations
with management regarding that behaviour.
remarkable feature of this case is that the Complainant asserts he was unaware
of the fact that he was being discriminated against
until he was advised by a Mr
Michael Alsop in late 1997 that conduct amounting to discrimination had been
taking place for a considerable
period of time. Indeed Mr Renouf went as far as
to say that “...I was totally unaware of what the attitude was at the ABC
until I received a - you know, since this started, the Comcare thing and this
discrimination thing started”. By the “Comcare
thing” I take
the Complainant to be referring to his claim for compensation due to a stress
related injury that caused him
to be away from work in the period 8 September
1997 to 19 December 1997. Mr Michael Alsop had been the Complainant’s
supervisor for almost the entire time he had been in the employ of the
First Respondent. Apparently Mr Alsop took it upon himself
to tell Mr Renouf
“about all the things that had been going
According to Mr Alsop who was
called to give evidence by the Complainant he “ had never seen anybody
persecuted as much as Ray
Renouf was in my entire working life”. He went
on to say that “management should have stopped it but they did not”.
During the period of which Mr Alsop speaks, he was employed as part of
management of the First Defendant as the Complainant’s
supervisor. I had the opportunity to observe Mr Alsop giving evidence and being
cross-examined by both counsel for the
Respondents and counsel assisting me and
I have no hesitation in rejecting his evidence where it conflicts with any of
witnesses. I find his assertion that the Complainant had been
persecuted in the way he suggests, on all the evidence, entirely without
foundation. Further his failure to address the persecution that he says took
place within his immediate sphere of responsibility
over, according to him, a
period of years is completely unexplained on his own
The difficulty faced by the
Complainant is that almost all of his allegations and hence the success of his
application is directly
dependant upon this Tribunal accepting the
characterization of what took place in the work environment that is placed upon
I have been told by
Roxsean Edwards who gave evidence, that the Complainant was a “highly
emotive person”. That is also
the impression I gained from my
observations of him in the witness box and from the manner and style in which he
gave his evidence.
Without doubt the revelations of persecution relayed to Mr
Renouf by his superior Mr Alsop had a substantial impact upon the Complainant.
Any person with an appreciation of Mr Renouf’s disposition would expect as
much. The circumstances in which the conversations
allegedly took place between
Mr Alsop and Mr Renouf included a change in the relationship between Mr Alsop
and his employer. That
change was in November 1997. Mr Alsop accepted a
voluntary redundancy package and left the Australian Broadcasting Corporation.
I accept the evidence of Roxean Edwards as reliable and accurate.
Mr Alsop insists that he advised the
Complainant of the fact that he was being discriminated against in the work
place out of concern
for the Complainant’s well being. I do not accept
that explanation. The precise motive for Mr Alsop’s activities remains
somewhat unclear, but I am left to conclude that the mischief he engaged in
during his discussions with the Complainant regarding
discrimination in the work
place was entirely germane to his own personal agenda and utterly removed from
being in the interests
of Mr Renouf. I have been drawn to the conclusion that
Mr Renouf is very much the unfortunate victim of Mr Alsop’s mischief
that much of the evidence presented on behalf of the applicant is the product of
that mischief.
Another issue that arose in
the course of Mr Alsop giving evidence was the existence of a second set of
diaries kept by Mr Alsop in
the period he was employed by the First Respondent.
He said he maintained two sets of diaries. One set was kept only to record
“work roster matters” in. The second set was kept to record
detailed notes of conversations and telephone calls. Alsop
said that the
diaries were left open on the desk and that any member of staff could have
access to them. He said when he left the
employ of the First Respondent he did
not take the second set of diaries with him. The diaries have now gone missing
and although
tribunal was told that in those diaries there are written notes of conversations
regarding the discrimination, harassment and abuse suffered by the Complainant.
I am left to doubt whether there ever was a second
set of diaries after hearing
the evidence of Mr Alsop. None of the material which he now says was in them
was ever acted upon by
him. There was no practical need for a second set of
diaries. However Mr Alsop gave the reason that as a public servant of long
standing he thought “it wise to keep a set of relevant things that happen
to you ... in case you ever need it”. Mysteriously
the diaries went
missing shortly before he left his employment with the First Respondent. He
said in his affidavit, Exhibits C7&8,
“I went to find them before I
left my employment with the ABC and have been told they were lost”. In
his evidence he
said that prior to his departure “I was going to pick them
up earlier, I didn’t.” Roxean Edwards said that when
Mr Alsop left
the ABC he did not ask her for the diaries he had used. When she received the
complaint she went to the cupboard where
she “knew the diaries
were”. She wet on to say the diaries had been there since the departure
of Alsop. Edwards went
through the diaries and was unable to find any notes of
discussions Alsop had held with the Complainant. Ms Edwards was a careful
witness and I accept her account of her dealings with the diaries used by Mr
Alsop from 1995 to 1997 inclusive. The question of
whether or not there was a
second set of diaries does not need to be resolved but I highlight the issue as
another unsatisfactory
aspect of Mr Alsop’s evidence which has caused me
particular concern.
Although the
Complainant preferred to complain about his situation in a non specific manner
he did descend into particulars in relation
to a couple of instances of
behaviour he attributed to discrimination. One of those instances arose out of
a conversation allegedly
held between the Second Respondent and Mr Alsop in 1996
while they were outside the ABC building smoking during which it is alleged
the Second Respondent announced that “he hated poofters”. The
Complainant was told of the announcement by Alsop
in the period leading up to
Alsop’s departure from the employ of the First Respondent. When pressed
this rather startling announcement was made Mr Alsop
was vague and rejected the terms of his own affidavit. The following excerpt
from the evidence is
So you were out the back smoking and you say in your affidavit Mr Gibson
announced that he hated poofters?--- Yep
He just made this announcement?--- No. it wasn’t perhaps as blatant as
that there but there is definitely reference to homosexuals
or - and the word
“poofters” was used and has been used.
Were you talking about homosexuals at the time were you Mr Alsop?--- I
don’t remember what the subject was at the time when
it came up. We were
quite possibly talking about Ray at the time.
I see. You don’t recall though?--- No I don’t recall that
specific incident.
So you don’t recall the context of the conversation but you do have a
recollection that in 1996 Mr Gibson made the announcement
to you that he hated
poofters?--- Yes.
I see. And you don’t recall the context of the
conversation?—No.
You don’t recall whether for example you might have said: “Yes.
So do I”?--- No, I didn’t say that. In fact,
much to the contrary.
I have on occasions corrected Gary on that type of thing being said.
Well can we just stay with this incident. Some time after Mr Gibson
commenced, you say you protested then and there about this sentiment.
don’t recall what you said to him?--- Yes I do. It was words to the
effect that we have got to be very careful these
days what we say in the work
place, especially in relation to this matter, gay people, or whatever, generally
discriminating against
people in the work place.
So you now recall that’s what you said to Mr Gibson by way of
response?--- Well along those lines, yes. Sorry I don’t
remember the
exact words I used at the time, but to that
have already said that I do not accept the evidence of Mr Alsop and it is
apparent that in relation to a conversation he says he
specifically recalls he
is unable to provide any explanation for why it may have arisen. When closely
questioned he was prepared
to back away from the terms of the conversation set
out in his affidavit. It is another example of the unreliability of Mr
evidence. In contrast Mr Gibson denied that any such conversation
took place. I accept his evidence. He was a forthright witness
reason to suddenly announce to Mr Alsop, a person with whom he had a
“strained relationship”, that he “hated
poofters”. Mr
Gibson described Mr Alsop as a “gross individual” who had been the
subject of many complaints about
his managerial style, his abilities to prepare
a roster, and his ineffective management. I accept this testimony of Mr Alsop's
in the work place, particularly his displays of profanity before the
roster board situated in a corridor of the building and observed
Such facts lend some support for Mr Gibson’s assessment of the
The Complainant insisted that he had
made “many” complaints about discriminatory behaviour which he had
experienced directly
such as being called “
You fucking little
, persons “
laughing and giggling about ‘the
and comments being made like “
Oh careful,
don’t touch that. Rays touched it. You’ll get aids off it”.
He said he made those complaints to Ms Claire
Claire Witham’s affidavit was
admitted into evidence as Exhibit R21. Ms Witham was a conscientious witness.
In the period
1997 to April 1998 she said she spoke to Mr Renouf on many
occasions. During that period it was her evidence that the Complainant
make any complaint to her regarding any harassment or victimization he now
alleges he was experiencing on the basis of his
sexuality. She was very clear
that it was only after Mr Renouf had lodged his Comcare complaint that he made
any allegation on the
basis of his sexuality.
On 25 March 1998 a meeting took place to
discuss two issues of importance. The first was an incident that had apparently
20 March 1998 in which Renouf was in breach of technical procedures.
The second issue was the Complainant’s request that
he be permitted to
videotape operations in the interchange area in support of his Comcare claim.
Persons present at that meeting
were Mr Renouf, Ms Edwards, Mr Bowden and a Mr
Hathaway a representative of the Commonwealth Public Sector Union. It was
that meeting Mr Renouf first commented that he had experienced harassment
on the basis of his sexuality. Ms Witham regarded the
allegation as an
alarming statement. Efforts were then made by her to obtain some
particularization of the allegation so steps could
be taken to deal with it.
Try as she might Ms Witham was unable to obtain any further information from the
Complainant that would
allow her to embark on any investigation. The allegation
had, to use the vernacular, come out of the blue during the course of a
designed to settle matters unrelated to sexual
harassment.
Claire Witham had numerous
dealings with the Complainant during which he spoke volubly and negatively about
other people and the factors
that were having a bearing on his life. She
recalled that on one occasion he referred to the atmosphere in the Electronic
News Gathering
area as “blokey and homophobic” but the comment was
not made in the context of a complaint of harassment due to sexual
preference.
If Mr Renouf had suffered the sort of discrimination he now asserts I am
confident that he would have complained early
and often about it. I reject the
allegation that the Electronic News Gathering area was a homophobic
environment.
In 1997 the Complainant had
found himself in dispute with a Mr Anthony Furnell. The gravamen of that
complaint was an altercation
which had taken place between he and Mr Furnell and
in which Mr Furnell had berated Mr Renouf in front of colleagues in that part
the First Respondent’s operation known then as Australia Television.
There was some attempt by the Complainant to characterize
the incident as one
relating to sexuality. However the matter was resolved. Furnell later
apologized to Mr Renouf. At the time
there was no suggestion of sexual
discrimination arising from the incident and I do not propose to accept its
portrayal as having
any sexual connotation at this
The First Respondent had a
grievance procedure in place. Part of that procedure was to require a serious
allegation to be put in
writing. The obvious need for such a procedure was to
ensure the allegation was accurate so that if other employees were to be
that the subject matter of the complaint in specific terms be
put, so that
persons alleged to have been the perpetrators of the incident would be in a
position to respond to the specific allegations
made. I accept the evidence of
Ms Witham when she says that Mr Renouf was able to talk to her freely about
things that may have
been bothering him in the work place. I conclude that as
she was in contact with the Complainant on a daily basis in the period
through to 1998 for the purpose of dealing with issues regarding his Comcare
claim. It is inevitable, if there had been
any sort of discrimination in the
work place that affected the Complainant ,she would have heard about it from
him. That is particularly
so having regard to the fact that throughout the same
period Mr Renouf harboured a “belligerent attitude” towards the
First Defendant. I conclude that if any allegation pertaining to any sort of
behaviour the Complainant viewed as negative and therefore
in his interests to
complain about and was available to him he would have conveyed details of it to
his employer.
The other witnesses called by
the Respondents affirmed the position as outlined by Claire Witham. Roxsean
Edwards was an “harassment
nomenclature for a designated person to whom complaints about problems arising
in the work place
could be made. She gave evidence of what occurred at the 25
March meeting. She said that the Complainant had made what appears
to have been
a raft of non specific allegations. At one point she said he claimed to have
been approached by “senior people
for sexual favours”. I have no
doubt that if Mr Renouf had experienced such an incident it would have formed
part of the matters
brought before this tribunal for consideration. Incidents
of that nature, in the context of these proceedings, would not have been
overlooked if there was even the slightest substance to them in my view. Self
evidently no such allegation is made in these
proceedings.
Due to the problems associated
with finding work suitable for the Complainant to carry out consistent with
constructing a viable return
to work program in the context of his Comcare claim
Ms Edwards spoke to Mr Paul Bourchier. She asked him to make enquiries as to
whether personnel in the “transmission area” would have any
objections to Mr Renouf working in that environment. The
Complainant had
expressed a desire to work in the transmission area. However that part of the
broadcasting operation entailed working
in a pressured environment and Ms
Edwards was concerned that the position be assessed as suitable for the
Complainant to work in
given his stated medical diagnosis which included a
determination of whether he would get on with the people he would be working
with. That is the sort of enquiry that any person responsible, as Ms Edwards
was, for designing a return to work program for a member
of staff, would make.
I accept that the Complainant had made known his sexual preference and that
there could be no doubt of his
stated homosexuality by late 1997. I do not
accept that the enquiries made by Ms Edwards were for the purpose of
ascertaining whether
the personnel in transmission objected to gay men working
I accept the evidence of Ms
Edwards that the issue of a homophobic environment was mentioned by Mr Renouf in
the course of efforts
to get him back to work. The options available to
management to complete that task were few as almost every area had its problems
as far as the Complainant was concerned. The complaint that the work
environment at the ABC was homophobic was never made specific
which thwarted any
opportunity for management to undertake an investigation of the matter. It was
also made in circumstances where
the Complainant claimed the return to work
program required him to carry out menial work. I reject entirely the allegation
Complainant that there was a homophobic work environment at the First
Respondent’s work place. I have already referred to
the fact that the
Complainant is given to histrionics and I find that his allegations fall within
that expression of his character
and have no factual substance
whatsoever.
The Complainant also asserted
that he had suffered discrimination in that the employer had not provided multi
skilled rotation in
his position of TOPO. He said he had raised the problem
with Mr Gibson on many occasions. For his
Gibson told the tribunal that
Mr Renouf was very open about his sexuality. He gave evidence that he had
employed the Complainant.
He says he was never involved with rostering TOPOS
and denies giving instructions to Mr Alsop to roster Mr Renouf on interchange
all times thus depriving him of the opportunity to develop other skills. I
accept Mr Gibson’s account of his relationship
with the Complainant and
the duties that he carried out. Mr Renouf described Mr Gibson as a liar. I
reject that designation of
Mr Gibson and rely upon it only in so far as it is a
further example of the Complainant’s preparedness to make unfounded
allegations
against his fellow work mates when it suits him and without any
consideration for the consequences.
time prior to making a complaint to the Anti-Discrimination Commission did the
Complainant make a written complaint to his employer.
He was aware of the
procedure that where serious allegations were to be made they had to be reduced
to writing. Mr Renouf’s
explanation for not doing so is indicative of the
tenor of the rest of his evidence, “No, because I was - the way the ABC
I felt that if I put something in writing I would end up straight in
Court being sued for defamation”. The more likely explanation
is that the
Complainant well understood the allegations would be thoroughly examined by his
superiors and their lack of substance
would be readily exposed.
By the time Mr Renouf’s allegations
of sexual discrimination arose his relationship with his employer was under
severe strain.
Mr Renouf’s doctors cleared him to be able to carry out a
range of particular duties by 17 November 1997. Rather than return
interchange as a TOPO Mr Renouf decided he needed a break and went on annual
leave in February 1998 for a month. His return to
work in March of that year
saw a couple of altercations with other employees. One involved a Ms Rosemary
Church ( he was alleged
to have moved her microphone during a broadcast and she
“smirked” at him) and another involving a Mr Haslett (Mr Haslett
yelled at him to shut up). Neither of those incident’s included any
specific sexual discrimination of any type. The general
allegation that he had
been victimized due to his sexual preference at the meeting of 25 March 1998 was
made in circumstances where
he had left the work place in an environment of
continued disputation with the First Respondent and of his own motion had gone
extended leave. As can be seen from the minutes of the meeting, the
allegation of harassment due to sexual preference did not emerge
until late in
the meeting, almost as a second thought, and in the context of Mr Renouf being
reminded that if he was going to make
allegations of harassment they needed to
be formalized and put in writing. The evidence discloses that if such
allegations had any
foundation they would not have been left to emerge so late
and then only as a second consideration in the context of the
Complainant’s
litany of accusations. In May 1998 the Complainant made a
further Comcare claim which I understand has been
For the reasons I have outlined I
find that the Complainant has not been discriminated against in the work place
as a result of his
sexual preference. Accordingly I dismiss the application. I
will hear the parties upon the question of
Dated: 14 September 2001
DAVID LOADMAN
Hearing Commissioner
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (42 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter