URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTLC/2022/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:20:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sean Clancy v Simon Peters [2022] NTLC 18 (21 September 2022)
Sean Clancy v Simon Peters
[2022] NTLC
PARTIES: Sean CLANCY
TITLE OF COURT: LOCAL
NO(s): 21930513
DELIVERED ON: 21 September 2022
HEARING DATE(s): 9 & 10 November
DECISION OF: Greg Macdonald
CATCHWORDS:
Civil Law – Sale of Goods – Contracts – Mercantile
Agents - Bona fide purchaser – In the ordinary course of
Good faith – Whether purchaser obtained good title – Motor vehicle
Factors (Mercantile Agents) Act 1923
Factors (Mercantile Agents) Act 1923
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
Financial Transaction Reports Act 1988
Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd v Sprowles
[2001] NSWCA 305
(2001) 52 NSWLR
Mercedes-Benz Financial Services Australia Pty Limited v State of NSW
[2011] NSWSC 1458
Associated Midland Corporation v
[1983] 3 NSWLR 395
Project Blue Sky Inc. v Australian
Broadcasting Authority
[1998] 194 CLR 355
SZTAL v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
Magnussen v Flanagan
[1981] 2 NSWLR 926
REPRESENTATION:
Plaintiff: Mr H Baddeley
Defendant: Mr P Morgan
Plaintiff: DWF (Australia) & Roussos Legal
Defendant: Piper Ellis & Associates
Decision category classification: B
Decision ID
number: 018
Number of paragraphs: 34
IN THE LOCAL COURT
AT DARWIN IN THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY OF
Claim No. 21930513
Sean CLANCY
Simon PETERS
REASONS FOR DECISION
(Delivered 21 September
Judge Macdonald
27 April 2017 Mr Simon Christopher Peters (the Defendant) purchased a Ford
Falcon XY GT (the Vehicle) for $150,000 from Clayton
Bespoke Pty Ltd (the Agent)
at Woolloomooloo in Sydney (the Sale). Until 27 April 2019 the Vehicle was owned
by Mr Sean Clancy (the
Plaintiff), who had engaged the Agent to sell the Vehicle
on consignment.
Plaintiff’s original instructions to the Agent’s principal dealer,
Mr Bevan Clayton, in September 2015 were to list
the Vehicle for sale for
$300,000. The actual engagement, including delivery of the Vehicle to the
Agent’s possession, occurred
in October 2015, some 18 months prior to the
transaction the subject of the proceedings.
matters transpired, the Plaintiff ultimately instructed the Agent to sell the
Vehicle for $180,000 but received no monies from
any sale, authorised or
Those instructions
post-dated the actual sale of the Vehicle, of which the Plaintiff was unaware.
The Agent went into administration
on 25 September
Pleadings, the evidence and submissions
8 August 2019 the Plaintiff commence proceedings by filing a Statement of Claim
in the Local Court at Darwin. The Defendant filed
a Defence on 12 September
2019, which was followed by an Amended Statement of Claim on 3 September 2020
and an Amended Defence on
7 September 2020. The proceeding was ultimately heard
on 9 and 10 November 2020, and was assisted by counsel providing a Statement
Agreed Issues in Dispute, by way of aide memoir. Various allegations in the
pleadings were not ultimately pressed.
9 November 2020, the principle issue for determination was how
Factors (Mercantile Agents) Act 1923
(NSW) (the Act) should be legally
applied to the Sale. That is, having regard to the facts and circumstances
constituting the Sale,
was the Sale valid by application of
of the Act, such
that the Defendant obtained good title in purchasing the Vehicle. Alternatively,
did the facts and circumstances
of the Sale prevent the Defendant from relying
in defence of the relief sought by the Plaintiff.
a result of programming directions made prior to trial, evidence in chief was by
way of Affidavit, with cross-examination of any
witnesses required. The
Plaintiff’s Affidavits were sworn 10 January and 25 March 2020, with the
Defendant’s principal
evidence being sworn and filed on 5 February 2020.
In addition, Affidavits of Mr Bradley Clark sworn 4 February 2020, Mr Michael
Howard Selby sworn 16 March 2020, Mr Alistair Koenig sworn 28 October 2020 and
Ms Tamara Parker sworn 5 November 2020 were also filed
and received into
of the Plaintiff and Defendant, together with Mr Koenig and a Mr Altamonte
(below), were called for cross-examination. The Affidavits
of Mr Clark, Mr Selby
and Ms Parker were tendered by consent, with those witnesses not called for
cross-examination.
addition, shortly prior to trial on 5 November 2020 the Plaintiff served an
expert report of a Mr Anthony Altamonte, together with
interlocutory application
seeking to adduce that evidence. The evidence of Mr Altamonte was objected to,
with the three-page report
and associated brief on engagement being received as
MFI1. Mr Altamonte’s report sought to give evidence on what constituted
in the ordinary course of business
” in the context of motor
vehicle dealers, and the transaction the subject of the proceedings. He had in
excess of 30 years’
experience in the motor vehicle industry at the time
of writing the report and had been Managing Director of the “Alto
in New South Wales for approximately 25 years. That group comprises
15 motor vehicle dealerships selling 10 brands of volume, premium
vehicles, with a turnover of approximately 12,000 vehicles each
is no doubt that Mr Altamonte is an expert in the sale of premium and luxury
vehicles, and the manner in which a business selling
such vehicles would
ordinarily operate. That conclusion is on the basis of expertise rather than
qualification. The factual basis
on which Mr Altamonte’s opinion
concerning what constitutes “
in the ordinary course of
” was his extensive experience in the industry. In addition,
he also had the Defendant’s Affidavit sworn 5 February 2020
to provide the
factual basis for opinion relating to the particular transaction. I consider his
evidence is relevant to the issues
in dispute and does satisfy the requirements
set down in
Makita (Aust) Pty Ltd v Sprowles
[2001] NSWCA 305
(2001) 52 NSWLR 705
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
the potential unfairness of admitting his evidence so late in the piece, in my
conclusion the evidence should be admitted
with his report and answers in
cross-examination comprising part of the evidence. The report becomes exhibit
submissions of the Plaintiff and Defendant were filed with the Court on 10
November 2020, with the Defendant then providing
Further Written Submissions on
3 December 2020 and the Plaintiff also doing so on 10 December 2020.
Defendant bears the onus of proving the essential elements comprising
Act, on the balance of probability. Despite the significance of the issues in
the proceeding to each of the parties, it is
not my conclusion that the
principle strictly applies, including because it is the
Defendant who bears the onus. However, proof to the standard of reasonable
satisfaction is certainly required to rely on
of the Act.
and the relevant
of the Act provides;
5 Powers of mercantile agent
(1) Where a mercantile agent
is entrusted as such with the possession of any goods or the documents of title
to goods, any sale pledge
or other disposition of the goods made by the agent in
the ordinary course of business of a mercantile agent shall, subject to the
provisions of this Act, be as valid as if the agent were expressly authorised by
the owner of the goods to make the same:
Provided that the person
taking under the disposition acts in good faith, and has not at the time of the
disposition notice that the
person making the disposition has not authority to
make the same.
(2) Where a mercantile agent so entrusted continues in possession of goods
or of the documents of title to goods, any sale pledge
or other disposition,
which would have been valid if the entrusting had continued, shall be valid
notwithstanding the determination
thereof, provided that the person taking under
the disposition has not at the time thereof notice of such
determination.
, the issues for determination are, firstly, whether the Sale of the
Vehicle was made “
in the ordinary course of business
mercantile agent. Second, whether the Defendant acted at all times “
”. It is noted that a potential relationship exist as
between the two requirements, depending on the facts and circumstances
transaction. For example, extraordinary actions by a mercantile agent in the
conduct of any transaction could possibly give
rise to bad faith on the part of
a purchaser, or vice versa.
court was referred to 9 authorities, with the leading authorities being
Associated Midland Corporation v Sanderson
(1983) 3 NSWLR 395
Mercedes-Benz Financial Services Australia Pty Limited v State of NSW &
[2011] NSWSC 1458.
Defendant bears the onus of proof in relation to both the ‘ordinary course
of business’ and ‘good faith’
issues. In relation to the first
issue, may be noticed that the Act was passed in 1923 and modelled on earlier
English legislation,
and that both the term “
” and the extent of functions recognised by
in such persons
are very broad. It is also probable that the phrase “
ordinary course of business
” is ambulatory, and attracts a more
flexible and sophisticated meaning as the commercial world develops. This would
inconsistent with the proposition that the terms of an Act must also be
read and interpreted having regard to its context and
relation to the first issue, I accept that application of the phrase entails an
objective assessment.
That is both
and having regard to the facts and circumstances known to a
reasonable person in the position of the Defendant. Those conclusions
consistent with the interpretation and application of “
in the ordinary
course of business
” discussed in both
Associated Midland
Mercedes-Benz
requirement to prove that limb of
of the Act has regard to both the general
business conduct of the mercantile agent, and to there being nothing to lead a
minded purchaser “
to suppose that anything wrong is being
”. That is, ‘to objectively suppose that anything wrong is
being done’. There would also be no justification to
limit consideration
of whether “
anything wrong is being done
” simply to the
question of whether the mercantile agent had sufficient actual or ostensible
authority to dispose of the goods.
also explained the necessity to have regard to “
particular commercial area
” in which the Agent conducts business. It
is obviously essential in determining the issues to have appropriate regard to
constitutes the ordinary course of business of a motor vehicle dealer.
However, it is also my conclusion that the more apposite any
evidence is to the
particular business operation conducted by the Agent, the more relevant the
evidence may be to determining “
in the ordinary course of
”. That is, evidence concerning the nature, scale and
marketplace of the business conducted by the Agent may be most relevant.
relation to the ‘good faith’ issue, I consider such a finding must
be supportable both subjectively and
objectively.
That conclusion is
supported by the passage from
Associated Midland
faith connotes “honesty” and whilst negligence of itself, would not
establish an absence of good faith, lack of reasonable
care may, when coupled
with other facts and circumstances, lead to an inference that the purchaser was
suspicious and refrained from
inquiring because of a fear that he would become
aware of irregularity
The potential relationship or connection between the 'ordinary course of
business’ and ‘good faith’ requirements
(depending on the
relevant facts and circumstances) is noted, and that possibility can also be
relevant to ‘notice’.
To that extent, whether the court in
Magnussen v Flanagan
determinative.
Discussion and findings
relation to the ‘ordinary course of business’ issue, I consider that
three aspects of the Agent’s conduct in
the Sale require close
consideration.
Namely, the
ultimate purchase price of the vehicle and the manner that was informed to the
Defendant. Second, acceptance of one third
of the purchase price in cash. Third,
the cash component of the transaction being carried out in a room at a
Agent, through its principal dealer Mr Bevan Clayton, was intimately aware of
what communications had and had not been engaged
in with the Plaintiff, however
that information was confidential to those persons. The Defendant became aware
of the Vehicle in September
2016 and that the asking price at that time was
$235,000. On 27 and 28 October 2016 the Defendant met with the Agent’s
representatives,
Mr Clayton and its sales specialist, Mr
At that time, amongst
other things, he inspected and test drove the Vehicle, reviewed paperwork
including previous registration for
the Vehicle, and showed the Agent a XY GT
Ford Falcon which was superior in quality and value to the Vehicle, but which
had recently
sold for $195,000. Over 29 October 2016 through to 27 April 2017
the Agent and Defendant had various communications, mostly by email.
included on 29 October 2016 the Defendant detailed all aspects of the Vehicle
which he considered to be defects, then offered
to purchase the Vehicle for
$100,000 EFT and $45,000 cash. On 24 November 2016 the Agent emailed the
Defendant advising that the
plaintiff had reduced the asking price for the
Vehicle to $175,000. The Defendants response on 25 November 2016 was that he had
become aware of another superior vehicle “
which sounds like a
better deal than your revised offer
”, and concluded the email with
I’ll keep in touch
next contact was initiated by the Defendant on 4 February 2017, more than two
months later, enquiring whether the Vehicle had
been sold. The Agent’s
response was; “
Unfortunately not. The vendor is happy to wait for the
”. On 15 April 2017 the Defendant advised the Agent he was
aware from its website that the Vehicle had not yet sold, and that
he would be
in Sydney in a few weeks, and asked whether his previous offer of $145,000 could
be put to the Plaintiff again. The emails
in evidence indicate that less than an
hour later, the Agent responded; “
I spoke to the vendor, $165,000 is
now the price
”. The Defendant did not accept that counteroffer, and
pointed to what he considered to be significant defects and that similar
vehicles in mint condition were fetching $180,000.
22 April 2017 the Defendant increased his offer to $100,000 EFT and $50,000
cash. On 24 April 2017 the Agent responded; “
hard chat with the vendor and to my amazement he has accepted your offer of
$150,000. To proceed can you please supply me with
your driver’s license
so I can draw up a contract. Along with this could we arrange the EFT component
until you are ready to
collect the vehicle. Congratulations with the purchase
and persistence!
” The Defendant’s response on 25 April 2017 was;
Please send me the contract, once I have received and reviewed
I’ll EFT the money
”. On 26 April 2017 the Defendant also advised
by email that; “
I might swing over this afternoon to look over the car,
to ensure there has been no changes since my last visit and the Battery is
charged etc. After am satisfied I’ll transfer the
other communication occurred leading to the Defendant then attending and
inspecting the vehicle on 27 April 2017, signing
a contract, attending the
Commonwealth Bank and transferring $100,000 by EFT to the Agent, then meeting
the Agent at a room near
the foyer of his hotel in order to hand over the
$50,000 cash in final purchase monies. Various other aspects, including in
to the paperwork for the Vehicle and its collection from the Agent for
the purpose of transportation was also
extensive negotiations between the Defendant and the Agent over a period of
months, including various offers and counteroffers
and appreciable reductions in
the price, together with one increase on the part of the Defendant, all have the
hallmarks of a hardily
fought negotiation. That is particularly in the context
of the length of time the Vehicle had been on the market, and the specialist
goods and marketplace in which the Agent conducted business. The Defendant
clearly drove a hard bargain and was prepared to bide
his time, and was perhaps
more realistic in his understanding of market value of the Vehicle than was the
The evidence of Mr
Selby is particularly relevant in this regard, albeit that his evidence rises no
higher than to conclude that
the price paid by the Defendant was; “...
on the face of it, good value for the purchaser. However it is within the
price range that I would expect that particular type of
vehicle to sell for, at
Agent’s willingness to accept one third of the purchase price in cash was
not its usual business practice. However, this
aspect of the transaction arose
through the Defendant’s persistence in wishing to utilise cash savings as
part of the purchase
price, which position had been raised then consistently
maintained by the Defendant since October 2016. True it is that the Agent
perhaps have insisted the money be deposited to a bank account then transferred
by EFT (or even deposited directly to the Agent’s
account), however the
evidence of Mr Koenig was that the Agent had received cash for vehicles
on a number of occasions in varying and often large
”. I also accept Mr Koenig’s evidence that while employed
he believed he was working for a reputable car
evidence of Mr Altamonte also included that the vast majority of motor vehicle
sales within the Alto Group are financed one way
or another, which the subject
transaction was not. In addition, the Alto Group “
received cash payments in the form of deposits on vehicles, but that cash
payments of $10,000 or more were not accepted by
the Alto Group, due to
reporting requirements under the
Financial Transaction Reports Act 1988
Lastly, Mr Altamonte observed that; “
recent times
unusual for a reputable motor dealer to take $50,000 in cash for
vehicle payments
added) and that in the
circumstances proposed by the Defendant, he would at least arrange for the
purchaser to deposit the cash directly
into the Alto Group’s bank
scale, business model and market of the Alto Group’s operations is vastly
different to those which prevailed with the Agent.
It is also noted that the
subject Sale did not entail any financial or insurance component, leading to a
conclusion that the legislative
and regulatory requirements referred to by Mr
Altamonte are likely irrelevant. Although Mr Altamonte’s evidence is
relevant, I am unable to accord it significant weight in the
circumstances.
relation to the Defendant meeting the Agent at a room near the foyer of his
hotel to finalise payment for the transaction, no doubt
Mr Koenig was keen to
finalise that aspect, including due to the instructions he had received from Mr
Clayton. The EFT of $100,000
had already occurred, the cash was at the hotel,
and the security issues which must have existed throughout the Defendant’s
reliance on his cash savings persisted. Concluding the transaction at the hotel
in the circumstances could also not be considered
usual, but is explicable. Due
to the position and general credibility of Mr Koenig, and noting that with
hindsight he would “
” conclude aspects of the
transaction to be unusual, I prefer and accept his evidence.
most unusual aspect of the transaction was the Defendant’s insistence on
the use of cash for a significant portion of the
That is against the
background of the cash having been accumulated by the Defendant over a
significant period of time, and held in
a safe at his residence, and in
circumstances where he operated both a company bank account and a personal bank
In the final analysis,
the Defendant’s persistence in wishing to ensure that the purchase price
included a cash component has
a bizarre quality, including because I consider
the crux of the issue was a reluctance on the part of the Defendant to deposit
monies to a bank account. Although it was not the subject of specific or
pointed cross-examination, it may be open to conclude that
the Defendant’s
reluctance was the product of some improper motive.
even were that the case, in my view it would be irrelevant to the issues of both
‘ordinary course of business’
and ‘good faith’. The
Agent was entitled to receive cash, despite that EFT (and for that matter
financing) were the most
common means of payment in the industry. Secondly and
most relevantly, it is the Defendant’s good faith or otherwise in the
conduct of the transaction itself which is crucial. How the Defendant had come
to accumulate almost $50,000 in cash, and why he was
reluctant to pay those
monies through a financial institution, do not in my view bear upon the
Defendant’s
in his conduct and involvement in the
transaction.
my view, having regard to the evidence and the facts and circumstances of the
transaction, I consider the Sale was made by the
Agent in the ordinary course of
business, and that the Defendant acted in good faith in the Sale and had no
notice of the Agent’s
lack of authority.
therefore find that by the Sale effected 27 April 2017 the Defendant obtained
good and valid title to the Vehicle the subject of
proceeding.
Dated this 21
Day of September 2022
...................................................
Greg Macdonald
Local Court Judge
Paragraphs [44] to [55] of the
Plaintiff's Affidavit sworn 10 January 2020
Mercedes-Benz Financial
Services Australia Pty Limited v State of NSW & Anor
[2011] NSWSC 1458
Noting the application of
Oppenheimer v Attenborough & Son
[1907] UKLawRpKQB 176
[1908] 1 KB 221
in both and
Magnusson v Flanagan
[1981] 2 NSWLR 926
in the latter.
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 355
at 381, and
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34.
I note that at the time the Act
was drafted, the “reasonable person” suggested by paragraph [30] of
the Defendant’s
Further Submissions was not common in the law.
PP 400G to 401A and paragraphs
[89] to [92], respectively.
As to the second limb of that
paragraph, I note that it would be difficult to envisage any circumstance where
a purchaser had notice
of an absence of authority, but could nonetheless act in
good faith.
Supra p401E.
[1981] 2 NSWLR 926
Noting again that the
concept 'in the ordinary course of business' can, and in this case does,
incorporate acts and omissions of
the purchaser in the transaction.
For this part of the
decision, the term "Agent" should be understood as including either Mr Clayton
or Mr Koenig, or both.
Paragraphs [21] to [25] of
Defendant’s Affidavit sworn 5 February 2020. The reference to 2019 at [24]
is an obvious typographical
Noting that the Plaintiff
originally requested listing the Vehicle for $300,000 and ultimately was willing
to give instructions for
sale of the Vehicle in the sum of $180,000.
Affidavit of Mr Michael
Selby sworn 16 March 2020.
Paragraphs [15], [16] and
[18] of Affidavit of Alistair Koenig sworn 28 October 2020.
Paragraphs 3.3 to 3.12 of Mr
Anthony Altamonte’s statement of 5 November 2020.
The Plaintiff’s
Submissions and Further Submissions focussed on this aspect particularly in
relation to the ‘good faith’
(and associated ‘notice’)
On 27 April 2017 the
Defendant accessed his company account which then held a balance of in excess of
$850,000, and transferred $100,000
to the Agent. He also withdrew an amount in
excess of $5000 from a personal account in order to top up the cash component to
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (764 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter