URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTYJC/2022/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:24:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kerry Rigby v TU [2022] NTYJC 3 (6 December 2022)
CITATION: Rigby v TU [2022] NTYJC 003
Kerry Rigby
TITLE OF COURT: YOUTH JUSTICE COURT
FILE NO(s): 22128645, 22202900, 22136489, 22135573, 22139096, 22206050,
22206614, 22208477, 22219083, 22219059 & 22219060
DELIVERED ON: 6 December 2022
DELIVERED AT: Darwin
HEARING DATE(s): 19 & 20 July 2022
DECISION OF: Macdonald J
CATCHWORDS:
Criminal Law – Criminal Liability – Capacity –
– Various Offending – Defendant youth 12 years –
Rebuttable Presumption – proof beyond reasonable doubt –
“capacity to know that he ought not to do the act” – “at
the time of doing the act” – “knows
that his or her conduct is
wrong” – ‘material time’ –
Criminal Code
(NT) – ss 38 and 43AQ
Criminal Code Act 1983
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation) Act
RP v The Queen
[2016] HCA 53
[2019] NTCA
[2022] NTSC 51
R v F, ex parte Attorney-General
[1998] QCA 97
(1999) 2 Qd R 157
REPRESENTATION:
Police: Mr D Payne
Defendant: Mr P Crean
Solicitors:
Police: ODPP
Defendant: NAAJA
Decision category classification: B
Decision ID number: [2022] NTYJC 003
Number of paragraphs: 33
IN THE YOUTH JUSTICE COURT
AT DARWIN IN THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY OF
No. 22139096, 22136489, 22202900, 222128645, 22206050,
22206614, 22208477, 22219083, 2219059, 22219060.
Kerry Rigby
TU (a youth)
REASONS FOR DECISION
(Delivered 6 December
JUDGE MACDONALD
August 2021 the youth TU allegedly commenced offending against Territory laws.
He was 12 years old at that time. Between August
2021 and June 2022 TU allegedly
committed more than 25 offences generating in excess of 11 Youth Justice Court
(YJC) files (the Charges).
the age of TU, the Charges proceeded to a voir dire hearing over 19 and 20 July
2022 in order to determine the threshold
doli incapax
issue. That hearing
was conducted based on ‘agreed facts’ without admission of
liability, together with some other evidence,
in order to determine whether the
presumption against criminal liability was rebutted by the
prosecution.
the time of hearing, all charges on another file, 22205058, had been withdrawn.
There were also further charges on files 22135748
and 22136192, which included
aggravated robbery charges. The parties did not seek determination, in the
context of the preliminary
examination process, of the
doli incapax
issues in relation to those files.
Charges ranged across the generic descriptions of violence, stealing, criminal
damage, unlawful entry, go armed in public, unlawful
use of a motor vehicle, and
drive unlicensed.
The court had
the benefit of comprehensive and incisive oral and written submissions of
counsel, for which it is grateful.
to TU’s age, the offences alleged attracted the operation of either ss 38
or 43AQ of the
Criminal Code 1983
(NT) (Code), depending on whether Part
IIAA applied to the charge.
sections provide;
38 Immature
(1) A person
under the age of 10 years is excused from criminal responsibility for an act,
omission or event.
(2) A person
under the age of 14 years is excused from criminal responsibility for an act,
omission or event unless it is proved that
at the time of doing the act, making
the omission or causing the event he had capacity to know that he ought not to
do the act, make
the omission or cause the event.
43AQ Children over 10 but under
(1) A child
aged 10 years or more but under 14 years old can only be criminally responsible
for an offence if the child knows that
his or her conduct is
question whether a child knows that his or her conduct is wrong is one of
(3) The burden of proving that a child knows that his or her conduct is
wrong is on the prosecution.
court was referred to a number of authorities in argument on the question of
whether TU was
doli incapax
in relation to the Charges. Although dealing
with the common law rather than the sections,
RP v The Queen
highest authority of general
The leading Territory
authorities are
in relation to s 43AQ and
relation to s 38.
There is also the
long line of Queensland authorities referred to in
, concerning
s 29 of that State’s Code, which is in very similar terms to s 38.
38 requires that the court be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that a
relevantly accused youth “
ought not do the act
” for which they are charged, whereas s 43AQ
requires proof that the “
that his or her conduct is
” (emphasis added).
The former requirement is more easily satisfied than the latter, noting that the
word ‘seriously’ is not to be interpolated
into either
The 43AQ formulation was
relevant to only four of the Charges, concerning ‘criminal damage’,
with the s 38 test applying
to the remaining 21 charges the subject of the
Irrespective
of which criterion applies, some aspects of the principles laid down in the
authorities bear repeating. Namely, despite
one or more superior court
statements that the express words of relevant
doli incapax
sections speak
for themselves and need no
supplementation,
the extent of the
distinction between knowledge of (or capacity to know) the moral wrongness of an
act on the one hand and, alternatively,
a child’s awareness that their
conduct is merely naughty or mischievous, is significant.
of how objectively wrong or criminal a child’s acts may be, the
presumption of
doli incapax
cannot be rebutted solely by inference from
the seriousness of the acts.
evidence is required. Lastly, sufficiency of the evidence will vary depending on
the nature of the allegation and matters subjective
to the child. In particular,
their age; maturity; cognitive and social development; education; personal
experience and previous interactions
with the justice system; their family and
formative environment, and social and cultural background. Overall, the
court’s attention
must be directed to the intellectual and moral
development of the particular child, in the context of the offending
may be that the word ‘wrong’ is implicit in the reading of s 38, it
being the objective rationale for why a child “
ought not do
any particular act. Similarly, although a child need not be proven to recognise
the criminality of any act, or its objective
seriousness, I consider that the
wrongness to be appreciated by the child must on the evidence be clear and
cogent. In my view satisfaction
of the standard of proof will be well beyond
simple notions of “
mischievous
” (one or both of which any child may recognise
as ‘wrong’), and requires actual or imputed knowledge of a real
moral wrongness.
should also be noted that, regardless of whether s 38 or 43AQ applies, the
material point in time for assessment of the child’s
knowledge or
capacity to know
” is at the time of commission of the
offence. That is express in s 38, implicit in s 43AQ, and confirmed in the
authorities.
Although that must
extend to any clear premeditation or preparation to commit an offence, it is
apparent from the evidence in relation
to the Charges that the immediate and
present capacity of some neurodivergent children varies depending on the
circumstances of their
situation at any particular point in
A child may either
‘know’ or have actual ‘capacity to know’ an act or
omission is wrong in a calm or rarefied
setting, but not then when elevated or
dysregulated in the context of their
physiology.
In some cases these
differences are not the product of a conscious and intentional course by the
child, albeit that elevation or
dysregulation may be an inevitable result of
premeditated conduct.
be confidently concluded concerning this aspect of any child’s actions is
confounded by the propensity for young offenders
to deliberately seek out
stimulation and ‘excitement’ through engaging in anti-social and
risk taking behaviour, very
often in ‘peer-fuelled’
situations.
The Evidence & discussion
offending for which TU is charged and the issue of
doli incapax
determined arose over the period August 2021 through to June 2022. At the
commencement of offending TU was two years older
than the age at which the
presumption against criminal liability commences, and two years younger than the
age at which that presumption
gives way to a presumption of full legal capacity
to commit offences. From the point of 14 years of age, any lack of capacity must
be proven by the Defendant.
the last of the charges for which TU is charged, the differentials are close to
3 years and 1 year, he being 12 years and 11
months old at that
addition to the ‘agreed facts’, other evidence adduced at hearing
comprised school records produced by the Department
expert evidence of
forensic psychologist Dr Yvonne
and CCTV footage of
various incidents, together with some still photographs extracted from that
relation to the Department of Education records comprising Exhibit P4, from May
2016 to September 2021 TU had in excess of 70 adverse
behavioural incidents at
Milner Primary School. As time passed the incidents generally escalated in
severity or seriousness.
be noticed that many of those incidents involved bullying or violent behaviour,
for which TU was sanctioned or had corrective
action applied, in two instances
through suspension from
records also show that over the period 2016 to 2019 TU’s school attendance
was excellent. However, that started to decline
in 2020 and by 2021 was running
at 41%, less than half of what TU achieved in previous years. Lastly, and
perhaps of most relevance,
the Prosecution submissions properly highlighted
various aspects of TU’s school reports over 2019 to
Reading those reports as a
whole, a fair reading is that TU displayed various positive and appropriately
skilled attributes in his
schooling, but also presented with some very
significant challenges and limitations. Namely, in relation to inappropriate
cognition in several areas, self-regulation and control, and capacity
to focus and concentrate on prescribed tasks (other than sport)
sustained period. True it is that, following many of the adverse incidents, TU
was able to recognise the ‘wrongness’
and inappropriateness of his
behaviour, however it may be inferred that those insights existed once he was
calm and collected, rather
than elevated.
relation to the supportive statements contained in the school reports for the
relevant period, my definite impression is that the
reporting teachers and
Principal employed a strength-based approach towards positive reinforcement of
those aspects of TU’s
presentation and effort which were appropriate and
available. That was without seeking to varnish the difficulties and
inappropriate
behaviour, but was simply a matter of emphasis.
content of Dr Maxwell’s evidence, comprising Exhibits P2 and P3 and
supplemented by oral evidence, is perhaps of most
significance.
The party’s
submissions comprehensively highlighted those aspects of the expert evidence of
Dr Maxwell supporting a finding
doli incapax
is rebutted and,
conversely, why that finding was not proven. In the case of the Prosecution,
that included in the context of the
distinction referred to in
between capacity to know right from wrong as compared with unwillingness to
exercise self-control.
to the parties submissions on these aspects, such that Dr Maxwell’s
evidence need not be repeated in detail. However,
in summary the evidence is
that; TU has a diagnosis of ADHD which adversely affects and impedes his
regulatory capacity; has severe
impairment in some FASD domains; has cognitive
deficits in a range of areas and, at best, has a “
IQ; and is easily influenced and encouraged by dubious peers to ‘prove his
composite scores obtained following assessment of TU by Dr Maxwell and her
colleagues were “
” for the Full-Scale Intelligence
Quotient and “
extremely low
” for the General Ability
Aspects of TU’s
performance on testing were ‘normal’ or better, such as in the
processing speed sub-test, which
results bolstered his overall
However, TU’s
strength in the area of processing speed may be less straightforward than
appears. Dr Maxwell’s oral evidence
was that TU is capable of making
decisions very quickly, but that capacity is apt to both good and bad decisions,
due to being unable
to access “
cortical information
elevated or dysregulated. In such situations TU’s thinking, actions and
responses rely more heavily on brain stem
functioning, so ‘fight or
flight’, rather than the much more rational function of the cortex.
also note that answers given by Dr Maxwell in evidence, in response to questions
put by email and in oral evidence, were expressed
in terms of ‘
right from wrong
’. Dr Maxwell agreed that TU had the
” but did not state he had the capacity
”. That difference may well have been the product of
one or more of; the extent to which TU engaged when assessed; or did not
the full range of multidisciplinary assessment ideally available; or that Dr
Maxwell did not have access to the full suite
of education records or agreed
facts comprising the Charges the subject of the hearing. Although perhaps overly
semantic, I consider
a material difference between the two capacities referred
to exist. That is because in drafting s 38, Parliament may be said to have
intended the prosecution should be relieved of a burden to prove a child’s
actual knowledge of the moral wrongness of
any act, rather than simply that the
child had sufficient capacity to be taught the relevant moral wrongness, given
an optimal environment,
inputs and education. TU’s situation is a signal
example of how some difference may exist.
considering the evidence to determine whether the presumption has been rebutted,
it is appropriate to begin with the most recent
offending engaged in by TU. This
is not simply because that is when he was both most mature and attuned to
application of the criminal
justice system, due to having had significant
Significantly,
all of the offences across files ending 6614, 9083, 9060 and 9059
were committed under the guidance, assistance, tutelage and encouragement
TU’s mother and/or her partner. There is also other evidence, discussed
more fully below, of behaviours by each of TU’s
father and stepfather in
relation to TU or in his presence over the majority of his lifetime, which would
have had relevant adverse
effects. It may also relevant that, in addition to
more longstanding trauma, TU experienced a significant death in his family
prior to the commencement of the offending the subject of the charges,
and another in December 2021.
is clear from the ‘agreed facts’ for files ending 6614, 9083, 9059
and 9060 (and from other evidence) that the moral
compass instilled by those
adults in TU is so disorientated as to be directionless. Any qualifying
criterion, such as ‘wrong
by normal or ordinary adult standards’, is
unlikely to have held any relevance or meaning for TU in the
circumstances.
Although there is
no direct evidence of those standing in loco parentis having encouraged or
facilitated other earlier offending,
there is some evidence that parental
figures had also engaged in offending in TU’s presence. Regardless, the
immoral and criminal
context in which the offending on files 6614, 9083, 9060
and 9059 occurred has the ability to also inform offending earlier in
issue in relation to the charges on file ending 8477 is also readily determined.
In relation to the ‘criminal damage’
charge, the CCTV from 14 March
2022 at Casuarina shopping centre entrance shows TU casually kicking the glass
panel with the heel
of his foot, and then with his toe. Although s 43AQ applies
to contraventions of s 241 of the Code, such that recklessness can be
sufficient, I am not satisfied that TU appreciated the wrongness of even the
lesser fault element constituting the charge. It is
clear that not only did TU
not intend the damage his foot caused, but was apparently surprised when the
damage ensued. In relation
to counts two and three on file 8477, the actions of
TU and his co-offender in entering the Australia Post electronic delivery
and riding it around Milner streets for 25 minutes is a prime example of
youthful offending.
characterisation of ‘mischievous or naughty’ is
relation to the charges on files ending 8645, 2900 and 6050, all of the
offending constitutes either property crime or had its
genesis in that type of
offending. It is noted that TU was in care from 2016 through to 2020, during
which time he appeared to fare
quite well, but then deteriorated, possibly with
the assistance of peer
associates.
The considerations
set out at [10] above are, in my conclusion, particularly relevant to the
offending alleged across these files.
It is noted that, when confronted with
forensic evidence relevant to file ending 2900, TU sought to blame some other
person. Also,
that the unlawful use of the motor vehicle on file ending 6050 was
quite egregious in the context of TU’s age and diminutive
size, and all
offenders seeking to big-note themselves and their offending by uploading
footage to social media. Nonetheless, having
regard to the evidence as a whole,
I consider a reasonable doubt remains concerning TU’s capacity to properly
know the wrongness
of those actions, including in driving a stolen vehicle and
in the manner he did.
charges on files ending 6489 and 9096 are more problematic, including due to the
violent, protracted and persistent nature of
TU’s actions at Casuarina
Library on 25 September and 23 October 2021. The CCTV footage is particularly
graphic and disturbing,
with TU clearly being one of the prime movers in the
senseless and destructive offending. However, the apparent disparity between
TU’s age and that of various co-offenders is also relevant in the context
of Dr Maxwell’s evidence concerning TUs motivations
and responses in peer
group situations, including on the access and use of information and in seeking
approval or endorsement of
associates.
Despite that
features of TU’s offending point firmly to a conclusion that TU must have
had both the capacity to know and actually
known the moral wrongness of his
actions at the Casuarina Library, due to the documentary and expert evidence
referred to I consider
a reasonable doubt as to each of those matters
Prosecution has failed to rebut the presumption in relation to all charges on
the above files, such that TU is
doli incapax
on those files.
charges on file 22135573 remain. That incident occurred on 8 October 2021,
between the incidents comprising the charges immediately
above. At approximately
3pm, that day TU and at least three other youths were in the vicinity of the
Sabine Road shopping centre
in Milner. The relevant CCTV depicts TU walking up
the driveway to the Sabine supermarket bottle-shop, which is at the rear of the
store. He is clearly reconnoitring, including walking past the plastic curtained
entrance twice, looking in. On the second occasion
a female staff member emerges
from that entrance and engages with TU, the impression being that she tells TU
to go away. TU falls
from view briefly, with the woman remaining. He then
returns with three other youths and again peers through the plastic curtain,
distracting the employee, while another older youth (who is also known to the
court) examines a vending machine. The woman protests
those courses, immediately
following which a male staff member emerges from the plastic curtain causing TU
and the three other youths
to scatter, running in separate directions. All
youths were, for whatever reason, clearly fearful of what the male worker might
their retreat, TU and the older youth then sit on a raised walkway approximately
50 metres from the bottle-shop. After a
short time TU runs up behind a Linfox
freight truck which is exiting the bottle-shop driveway onto the side-street,
jumps onto its
rear bumper, and hitches a ride out of sight. The older youth
together with TU and another three youths then all reunite at the same
near the driveway entrance. Soon after TU breaks from the group and jogs up the
far side of the driveway, approaching but
keeping some distance from the
entrance, again clearly reconnoitring. TU was being obviously vigilant for any
staff emerging from
the bottle-shop entrance and I infer that his second
attendance at the bottle-shop was directed to obtaining something from that
location. He was carrying a knife in his right hand, partially concealed by his
forearm and, shortly prior to reaching the entrance
of the bottle-shop, TU
summonses the other four youths with a wave of his hand. They did not oblige or
join TU and instead maintained
their distance. Due to the presence of the knife,
this is the first point in time at which TU could be alleged to be
is then startled by two female staff emerging from the bottle-shop entrance into
the driveway, and produces the knife with the
blade pointed towards both women.
He then advances towards the women brandishing the knife, violently kicks an
empty cardboard carton
in close proximity to them, then further raises the knife
in a threatening manner and says something to the woman closest to him.
staff do not retreat and TU ‘circles’ them for a short time,
forcefully kicks the cardboard carton again in their
direction, then runs
actions in pulling the knife and violently kicking the cardboard carton twice
were standover tactics. His actions and words
were belligerent, bullying and
intimidatory, and were clearly and obviously intended to cause fear in the
employees, presumably in
the hope of achieving his unknown objective. In
addition, his actions in the lead up to revealing the knife and kicking the
were not random, haphazard or objectiveless. They were premeditated,
calculated and planned to some extent. Despite that, the group
of youths no
doubt discussed some of what TU planned to do, probably with some urging and
encouragement from them, TU was acting
predominantly alone. Although clearly
heightened and agitated immediately following the emergence of the two female
employees, up
until that point TU does not appear dysregulated or ‘out of
addition to the character of the offending depicted on the CCTV, being violent,
intimidatory and manipulative, I note other relevant
evidence adduced at
hearing. The school records contain various incidents in which TU had been found
to engage in bullying or violent
behaviour, and was consequently disciplined or
of most significance is the evidence that TU has witnessed and been subjected to
domestic violence, so has direct personal
experience of that threat in the home
environment.
It is acknowledged
that children subjected or witness to domestic violence may become inured to
violent behaviour, such that it is
normalised and, in due course,
In TU’s case the
evidence is that he is particularly attached to his mother and seeks out
situations in which he feels safe.
I accept that those factors are indicative of
the relevant trauma referred to, but also conclude that violence in the family
from a very young age (particularly that directed towards his mother)
naturally produced trepidation, anxiety and distress in him
at those times, such
that TU generally recognises the moral wrongness of inflicting threats and
violence on
prosecution having failed to rebut the presumption, the youth TU is
in relation to the Charges on files ending 8645, 2900, 6489, 9096,
6050, 6614, 8477, 9083, 9060 and 9059.
presumption of
doli incapax
is rebutted on file ending 5573.
will hear the parties in relation to directions on file
Most of the alleged offences
are generally characterised as objectively serious based on the prescribed
maximum sentence, including
various counts of assault, stealing, criminal damage
and unlawful entry. In addition to the 11 files referred to, the youth also
amassed two incidents alleging 'armed robbery' in November 2021. Those matters
are currently the subject of Preliminary Examination
Paragraphs 51 to 107
of the Defence Submissions and pp 9 to 11 of the Prosecution
Submissions.
The only charges
to which s 43AQ applied were 4 counts of damage to property contrary to s 241 of
RP v The Queen
[2016] HCA 53
[2019] NTCA 5
[2022] NTSC
Those tests applying to the
physical elements of the offence;
RP v The Queen
Despite several
references to the concept of “
(supra), it was common ground that the ratio of
applied the Charges.
ex parte Attorney-General
[1998] QCA 97
(1999) 2 Qd R 157
The common law resort to
ordinary or reasonable “
adult standards
generally the point of reference, together with proof of subjective knowledge
(or imputed knowledge);
RP v The Queen
(supra) at [11]. Where CCTV
captures the offending, as in many cases here, additional context is available.
RP v The Queen
(supra) at [12], including the premise that “[a]
child will more
readily understand the seriousness of an act if it concerns values of which he
or she has direct personal experience
For example,
(supra) at [25].
The expert evidence provided in TU’s case is an example of this
possibility.
The dichotomy
in analysis referred to in
(supra) at [43] is noted. In this
case Dr Maxwell’s oral evidence elaborated on TU’s capacity and
responses to situations,
including as to ‘self-control’ and
dysregulation, depending on external and other
An imperfect
analogy is the manner in which voluntary and involuntary intoxication is dealt
with in the Northern Territory; for example
ss 7, 43C, 43AF, 43AR and 43AV of
The circumstances
in which children in urban areas of the NT commonly or ordinarily offend is a
matter for notice under
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation)
Section 43D
of the Code, applying at least to indictable
Documents 1
together with 10 to 19, comprising NAPLAN results, reports from Milner primary
school, student enrolment records, incident
summaries, behaviour reports and
notices of suspension, became Exhibit P4. Documents 2 through to 9 inclusive of
Exhibit P4 were
not pressed to be admitted into evidence, due to that
documentation relating to TU when 10 years or younger. Those documents do not
comprise part of the Exhibit. Nonetheless, the NAPLAN results for 2018 reveal
some difficulties
Consulting NT report of 29 April 2022 became Exhibit P2, an email exchange
between the ODPP and Dr Maxwell of 15 July 2022
became Exhibit P3, with Dr
Maxwell also giving oral
Tab 17 of Exhibit P4
Documents 16 and 17
of section D of Exhibit P4.
I have had regard to the content of documents B10 to B12 of Exhibit P4 and DPP
submissions referable to those reports, despite the
numbering used, but note
that no records for 2021 or 2022 were produced.
That expert evidence
focussed on TU’s cognitive, intellectual and adaptive functioning,
relative to age-equivalent peers. Aide
Memoirs 2 and 3 were prepared by counsel
for the parties for the court’s
assistance.
(supra) at [43]
lowest being in verbal comprehension, where more than 99% of his age-equivalent
peers are more advanced. See also page 45 of
Meaning, respectively,
96% and 98% of TUs age-equivalent peers would better his results. Exhibit P2
– pp14 and 15.
P2 – pp 14 to 17
Exhibit P2 – pages 5 and 6. It may also be open to conclude that
TU’s time with his father in Tennant Creek had a deleterious
The High Court noted in
RP v The Queen
(supra) at [10] that the paradoxical result can be "
more warped the child's moral standards, the safer he is from the correctional
treatment of the criminal law
", citing Williams, “The Criminal
Responsibility of Children”
Criminal Law Review
Having all of the
hallmarks of peer group involvement, seeking out stimulation and 'excitement',
and risk-taking behaviour, including
to big-note
themselves.
Exhibit P2 -
page 7 of Dr Maxwell's report, noting that TU also self-placed back with his
mother frequently.
consider the evidence at page 20 of Exhibit P2 is particularly relevant in
determining the issue on these files. The issues referred
to at [10] above are
also in my view relevant.
Exhibit P2 – pp 6 and
A clinical discussion of
common effects is at pp 40 to 43 of Exhibit
Despite the incongruity
of the adverse behaviours ultimately produced in many male victims of domestic
violence, I consider the court
can take notice that serious conflict between a
child's parents (even at levels amounting to less than domestic violence)
results in an ongoing appreciation that such behaviour is morally
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (222 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter