URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTLC/2022/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:20:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Green v NT of Australia No. 2 [2022] NTLC 23 (7 November 2022)
Green v NT of Australia No. 2 [2022] NTLC 23 (7 November 2022)
Green v NT of Australia
[2022] NTLC 023
PARTIES: Leslie John Green
Northern Territory of Australia
TITLE OF COURT: LOCAL COURT
FILE NO(s): 21940174
DELIVERED ON: 7
NOVEMBER 2022
DELIVERED AT: DARWIN
HEARING DATE(s): 21, 22 and 23 JUNE 2021
JUDGMENT OF: JUDGE AUSTIN
CATCHWORDS:
Contract – terms and conditions of employment
– contractual obligation - incorporation express term – aspirational
statement – prevention of bullying and harassment in workplace –
implied common law term to provide safe and healthy
working environment –
scope of implied term –bullying and harassment and unreasonable management
The Public Sector Employment
Management Act 1993 (NT)
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
The Northern Territory Public Sector Fire and Rescue Service Act
Sullivan v Moody
[2001] 207 CLR 567
New South Wales
[2002] NSWCA 235
Sheldon v McBeath
(1993) Aust Torts Rep
Romero v Farstad Shipping (Indian Pacific) Pty Ltd
[2014] FCACF
Jones v Dunkel
(1959) HCA 8
; 101 CLR 298
Toll (FGCT) Pty Ltd v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 52
(2004) 219 CLR
Goldman Sachs JB Were Services Pty Ltd v Nikolich
[2007] FCAFC 120
[2007] 163 FCR
Koehler v Cerebos (Australia) Ltd
[2005] HCA 15
[2005] 222 CLR
Govier v The Uniting Church in Australia Property Trust (Q)
Hayes v State of Queensland
[2016] QCA 191
[2017] 1 QD R 337
Atanaskovic Hartnell Corporate Services Pty Limited (No 2)
State of South Australia v McDonald
[2009] SASC 219
REPRESENTATION:
Plaintiff: Ms Grimster & Mr Piper
Defendant: Mr Grove
Solicitors:
Plaintiff: Piper Ellis and Associates
Defendant: Ward Keller
Judgment category classification: C
Judgment ID number: [2022] NTLC 023
Number of paragraphs: 303
IN THE LOCAL COURT
AT DARWIN IN THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
No. 21940174
Leslie John Green
Northern Territory of Australia
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
7 November 2022
JUDGE AUSTIN
Plaintiff is claiming his employer, the Defendant, owed him a contractual duty
of care to protect him against a foreseeable risk
of harm arising out of his
employment. He claims the duty arises out of both an express term of his
contract of employment to prevent
bullying and harassment in the workplace
Clause 59.1
Partnership Agreement
and a common law
implied term to provide a safe and healthy working environment.
Plaintiff sued the Defendant for pecuniary damages arising out of the alleged
breach of the terms of the employment contract at
the workplace. There is no
claim for personal injury and the claim is based in contract.
Initiating Statement of Claim was filed by the Plaintiff on 28 October 2019. An
amended Statement of Claim was filed on 8 October
Defence was filed by the Defendant on 28 April 2020. An Amended Defence was
filed on 26 October 2020.
interlocutory application to amend the defence to add a limitation defence was
filed by the Defendant on 23 April 2021. I refused
that application on 17 June
Respondents rely on their amended defence and the Plaintiff on their amended
matter proceeded to hearing on 21, 22 and 23 June 2021. Multiple exhibits and
evidentiary material were tendered at the hearing
and Mr Green gave evidence.
The evidence of the Plaintiff was largely uncontested.
parties provided pre-trial and concluding submissions orally and in writing on
more than one occasion. The final written submissions
and replies were filed by
consent of the parties by 22 December 2021. Further leave was then sought by the
Plaintiff to file further
written submissions and a defence reply which was
consented to by the Defendant. These submissions were filed and served by 28
Plaintiff, Mr Green’s claim arises out of events which occurred when he
was employed by the Defendant as a Fire-fighter.
In late 2015 he was promoted to
the position of leading Fire-fighter to the Tennant Creek Fire-station. Whilst
there he raised concerns
with his superiors about his immediate supervisor, the
Officer in Charge of the Tennant Creek Fire-station, Mr Nathan Ferguson. Mr
Green complained to his superiors that OIC Ferguson’s conduct at work was
causing him concerns. As a result of the complaints,
Mr Green’s superiors
at the Alice Springs Fire-station dealt with the matters he raised.
Ferguson and Mr Green’s superiors subsequently initiated disciplinary
proceedings against him on or about 27 or 28 October
2016 and the Defendant
actioned those proceedings. Mr Green was suspended from duty during the
workplace investigation, and he sought
to defend the proceedings. On 16 December
2016 the Chief Fire Officer (CFO) made findings adverse to the Plaintiff which
in a disciplinary transfer of him on 12 April 2017, from his duties at
Tennant Creek as 2
Fire-officer to Alice Springs. His family moved
to Adelaide.
adverse outcome of the disciplinary proceedings was that Mr Green had breached
discipline in 4 ways in regard to 4 conduct allegations.
The Plaintiff appealed
the outcome of the disciplinary proceedings on 24 March 2017 to the
Sector Appeals Board
(the Board). On 14 March 2018 his appeal was successful
(written decision 18 May 2018) with the Board finding the Defendant had erred.
The findings against Mr Green were set aside in their entirety. Mr Green however
complains that the Defendant breached an express
term of his contract of
employment by failing to prevent bullying and harassment in the workplace and an
implied common law term
by failing to provide a safe and healthy work
environment.
Plaintiff’s case depends on him proving the existence and scope of the
alleged (1) Express term and (2) Implied Term of
his contract of employment and
(2) that those terms were breached by his employer, and (3) the breach caused
the Plaintiff to suffer
financial loss/damage that was reasonably
foreseeable.
Defendant says the Plaintiff’s claim must fail as 1) he cannot establish
on the evidence that
Clause 59.1
(Partnership Agreement)
(PA), has been expressly incorporated into his contract of
employment; 2) he cannot prove breach of the implied term; 3) he cannot
damages for breach of the common law implied term for economic loss as opposed
to personal injury; 4) the common law claim
is statute barred by s52 of the
(NT) and further 5) that his claim for breach of
contract for both alleged terms cannot include the disciplinary
proceedings.
the Plaintiff’s claim is actionable under an express term of the contract
is contingent amongst other matters, on firstly
determining whether clause 59 of
the PA is incorporated into his employment contract as well as ascertaining
precisely what conduct
the Plaintiff relies on as the Defendant’s bullying
and harassment in the workplace.
to the implied common law term to provide a safe and healthy work environment,
the Defendant concedes that term however the precise
scope of the term is to be
determined.
court must determine whether the Plaintiff can hold the Defendant liable for any
breach of an express term of the contract or
an implied term of the contract
from the fact: a) there was an alleged failure to action any complaint he made
of OIC Ferguson’s
conduct and b) arising from the workplace investigation
by the Defendant in connection with the process of the investigation of the
complaints by OIC Ferguson about him, the disciplinary
proceedings.
significant issue is whether the Plaintiff asserts that the Defendant has failed
to provide a safe system of work by not reasonably
managing the disciplinary
proceedings. If he has so pleaded, his claim may fail at common law. However if
he has not so pleaded then
his claim may be actionable at common law.
The issues in this case are
a) Is the Plaintiff employed under a contract of employment?
Clause s59.1 of the Partnership Agreement
2004 (PA) expressly
incorporated into his contract of employment;
c) What conduct is pleaded as the breach of contract by the Defendant?
d) Was the Plaintiff bullied and harassed by OIC Ferguson at work;
e) Did the Plaintiff complain to his superiors about OIC Ferguson’s
f) What was procedure (contractual) for the Defendant to manage workplace
complaints about bullying and harassment?
g) Did his superiors fail to prevent bullying and harassment by OIC Ferguson of
Mr Green by not managing his concerns about OIC Ferguson;
h) Was the Plaintiff bullied and harassed as a result of the disciplinary
proceedings?
procedure was the Defendant contractually obliged to comply with to manage the
disciplinary proceedings?
j) What weight is to be given to the
Public Sector Appeals Board Decision
in determining if the Plaintiff was bullied and harassed by the Defendant at
k) Has the Plaintiff proven that the Defendant breached the express term by a)
failing to prevent bullying and harassment of the
Plaintiff at work by not
dealing with his concerns about OIC Ferguson; and/or b) by not managing the
disciplinary proceedings as
contractually obliged to?
Implied Term:
the Defendant concedes there was an implied common law term of the
Plaintiff’s employment contract that the Defendant
would provide a safe
and healthy work environment, what is the precise scope of that term;
m) Can the Plaintiff rely on both the conduct of the supervisor OIC Ferguson;
the conduct of Mr Green’s superiors; and the
internal disciplinary
proceedings to ground the cause of action;
n) Has the Plaintiff pleaded that the Defendant has bullied and harassed him in
the workplace and failed to provide a safe system
of work by, amongst other
not reasonably managing the disciplinary proceedings
Sullivan v Moody
[2001] 207 CLR 567
State of New South
Wales v Paige
[2002] NSWCA 235
(2002) 60 NSWLR 371
preclude the existence of
a duty owed by an employer to an employee to take care in doing acts that might
injure an employee because
the acts are done in the course of a workplace
investigation
p) Has the Plaintiff limited his claim for breach of the implied common law
contractual term in such a way that the claim raises
only matters outside the
process of the investigation of the complaints against him i.e. the disciplinary
proceedings?
q) What is the significance if any of the Board’s findings;
r) Is the common law term only actionable for personal injury suffered at work
or is it actionable for pecuniary damages/economic
s) Is any common law claim under the implied common law contract term statute
t) If not statute barred, did the Defendant breach the common law term by
failing to provide a safe and healthy working environment;
u) Did the Plaintiff suffer financial loss as a consequence of any breach of
contract, express or implied term?
The Merits of the Application
The Plaintiff’s
Plaintiff’s case is the Defendant breached an express and an implied term
of the employment contract where the Defendant
a) Express Term (Partnership Agreement Clause 59.1) 2004:
reasonably practical steps to prevent harassment and bullying in the work place;
b) Implied Term (Common Law):
provide a safe and healthy system of work.
Plaintiff’s case is that the breaches of the express and the implied terms
of the contract are the 20 pleaded allegations,
set out in paragraph 5a) –
5t) (express term) and paragraph 7 (the implied term which relies on the same
particulars).
Plaintiff’s case is his cause of action in contract commenced in late 2015
or early 2016 when he was transferred to Tennant
Creek to commence his position
Fire Officer and there followed a continuous and cumulative
series of relevant events which constitute the breach of the terms of
employment contract and culminated in his appeal to the
Public Sector Appeals
) and the decision of the Board on 14 March 2018
), or his forced uplift from Tennant Creek by his employer on or
Plaintiff submits the evidence shows a continuing omission to take steps which
would have prevented a) or provided b) (the contract
terms above in paragraph
18). He asserts the breaches include the conduct of his direct supervisor OIC
Ferguson from late 2015 to
30 August 2016, his superiors subsequent failure to
prevent bullying and harassment in the workplace after he complained to them
disciplinary proceedings instigated by OIC Ferguson and his
superiors on or about 27 and 28 October 2016.
time of occurrence of the breach will turn on the construction of the particular
contract, see
. The Plaintiff claims
the notion of a continuing duty, as postponing the accrual of a breach of
contract in his case, due to nature
of the continuing duty as opposed to the
Defendant’s contention. The Plaintiff asserts the breach accrued on the
decision of
the Board on 14 March 2018 (Decision, written decision on 14 May
2016), or his uplift from Tennant Creek by his employer on or about
2017 as a result of the disciplinary transfer (which occurred earlier in
The Defendant’s Case
Defendant’s contention is that there are arguably distinct causes of
action pleaded in paragraph 5 and 7 of the SOC, accruing
each time the Defendant
did something alleged in paragraph 5 and 7 as particularised.
Defendant asserts the Plaintiff has not particularised a claim that facts and
circumstances from 27 and 28 October 2016 onwards,
(paragraph 5h) – t),
the subject of the disciplinary proceedings constituted bullying or an unsafe
work environment. The Defendant’s
case is the disciplinary proceedings are
not particularised in the Defendant’s claim as part of the bullying or
unsafe work
environment and that it is the conduct of OIC Ferguson alone,
(paragraph 5a) – g), that is particularised as the bullying,
with the last
breach occurring on 30 August 2016.
of how the Plaintiff’s case is particularised the Defendant’s case
is also that the facts and circumstances
particularised including the
disciplinary proceedings do not constitute bullying and an unsafe work
environment and the claim is
not made out.
Significantly
the Defendant asserts that:
a) The Plaintiff cannot rely on the disciplinary proceedings to ground his cause
of action to prove a breach of either the express
or implied term asserted;
b) There is no Express Term as contended by the Plaintiff in the contract of
employment;
Express Term (Partnership Agreement - Clause 59.1):
to take all
reasonably practical steps to prevent harassment and bullying in the work place;
Common Law Implied Term to provide a safe and healthy system of work is to
prevent foreseeable risk of
personal injury
and therefore the
Plaintiff’s claim for Economic Loss/Pecuniary Damages is not actionable at
Implied Term (Common Law):
to provide a safe and healthy
system of work.
d) Any common law action for damages is precluded by
Implied Term (Common Law):
to provide a safe and healthy system of
e) The Plaintiff has failed to prove any breach of either the express or implied
terms of the contract.
What Mr Green is alleging constitutes bulling and harassment and/or a
failure to provide a Safe and Healthy System of work
Plaintiff has nonetheless pleaded that, a) the supervisor OIC Ferguson’s
conduct is part of the alleged breach; and b) his
superiors conduct in failing
to act on his concerns is part of the alleged breach; and c) that the
Defendant’s conduct attributable
to the employer on or about 27 and 28
October 2016 and afterwards, the disciplinary proceedings against him, also
constitutes part
of the continuous breach of the Defendant’s contractual
Green relies on all this conduct as contributing to the bullying conduct and
says the Defendant failed to prevent such bullying
in the workplace and this
resulted in an unsafe work environment. The Plaintiff asserts a cumulative
remain of the view that while it may be arguable generally that the
Plaintiff’s case could be pleaded as separate and distinct
breaches or
causes of actions, the nature of this particular case is that the Plaintiff
alleges that the Defendant breached their
contractual obligations due to
multiple and cumulative acts/omissions attributable to the supervisor OIC
the employer as a continuous course of conduct. Isolated
incidents are not alleged as breaches of the terms of the
definition at law of what is required to prove
bullying and/or harassment
in the work place of and by its very nature usually and by necessity usually
requires more than just one isolated act and/or omission
by the offending party.
A workplace where an employee is subject to bullying and harassment or a failure
to prevent such conduct,
may constitute an unsafe and unhealthy work
environment.
terms bullying and harassment may by their very definition both at common law
and in statute variously defined, include
certain behaviours by a person or group of persons who act in an unreasonable
way towards another targeted person AND their behaviour
creates a risk to health
. An isolated incident of certain behaviour may constitute
offensive or unreasonable behaviour that is unacceptable in the workplace
without it being repeated it may not reach the threshold of bullying behaviour
or harassment unless it is repeated.
Plaintiff submits that the breaches of the express and implied terms occurred
over a period of time and had a cumulative effect.
He submits that taken as a
whole those breaches, viewed objectively, amount to a failure on the part of the
Defendant to discharge
the contractual duty of care owed to Mr
Defendant challenges the submission and argues that the disciplinary proceedings
are not part of the conduct or circumstances
constituting a failure to prevent
bullying and harassment in the workplace/or a failure to provide a safe and
healthy work environment
and cannot be relied on as pleaded.
Green’s grievance commenced in late November 2015 and continues to March
2018. All of the matters in evidence from the time
he arrived in Tennant Creek
and was supervised by OIC Ferguson provided part of the context in which the
objective assessment of
the conduct of the Defendant is to be made. However, in
considering whether there was any breach of the express term or implied
contractual
duty of care, it is appropriate to consider, those events commencing
in late 2015 as pleaded.
Plaintiff relies on the same conduct to support a breach of both the express and
implied terms as set out below.
The Plaintiff’s
Plaintiff’s evidence can be summarised as follows:
a) The Plaintiff commenced employment with the Defendant on or around 11
December 2005.
b) The Plaintiff was engaged as a permanent employee on a contract of employment
during his probationary period.
c) The Plaintiff signed a letter of offer on 19 February 2006
which referred to the terms and conditions of his employment as
contained in relevant legislation and the applicable Enterprise Bargaining
The Public Sector Employment Management Act NT (
Northern Territory Public Sector Fire and Rescue Service Act (
PFES), and the
Rescue Services Partnership Agreement 2004
(PA) as amended from time to
d) In November 2015 the Plaintiff was based in Alice Springs. He applied for and
was approved for a promotional transfer to Tennant
Creek in the position of
Fire Fighter.
e) The transfer was for a minimum period of two years and the Plaintiff was led
to understand his senior officers would approve a
five-year period in Tennant
It was the Plaintiff’s
intention to work in Tennant Creek for five years and be paid the benefits
associated with that posting
f) The Officer in Charge (
) at Tennant Creek was Nathan
g) The Plaintiff’s senior officers in Alice Springs, Acting District
Officer Kleeman and District Officer Letheby, were aware
of issues with OIC
Ferguson and warned the Plaintiff of those
h) They assured Mr Green they would be able to support him should OIC Ferguson
act inappropriately,
including by
telling Mr Green:
“If I had any issues in Tennant Creek, I was to report back to
[Acting District Officer Kleeman] or the District Officer, which
Letheby, when he returned into his normal position in the (District Office) in
Alice Springs because Tennant Creek falls
under the Southern
his arrival in Tennant Creek Mr Green returned to Alice Springs to meet with A/
DO Kleeman and / or DO Letheby on a monthly
and, among other things,
he said he provided reports regarding bullying and harassment personally by OIC
including in relation
to the following:
Ferguson directing Mr Green not to socialise with any volunteer fire fighters
(auxiliaries) or any police officers within Tennant
Ferguson withholding invitations for Mr Green to socialise with
incident involving OIC Ferguson holding a child in a stress position against a
fence at the fire station with an intention of teaching
‘discipline’;
told by OIC Ferguson it is ‘his town’ and he can kick Mr Green in
the balls if he wants to;
spoken to by OIC Ferguson like a
j) Mr Green gave evidence that he told DO Letheby about the incident with the
child at the fence but that he never heard anything
k) Mr Green said he raised the incident where OIC Ferguson said he could kick
him in the balls if he wanted on a trip to Alice Springs
to do the TAE course.
Green said his superiors said they would speak to Ferguson generally about his
behaviour not about a specific
m) Mr Green said that he told his superiors that OIC Ferguson said he could not
associate or socialise with auxiliaries and they
told him, something to the
effect of ‘that is not true you know what the rules are associate with
whoever you like’.
n) Mr Green said he also expressed concern to DO Letheby and Chief Fire Officer
(CFO) Spain about directions by OIC Ferguson to carry
out tasks outside of what
Mr Green understood to be the scope of the NTFRS duties, including assisting
with the local Speedway. His
evidence was that CFO Spain dealt with the issue
immediately and put a stop to the speedway assistance, though he did not
on who the CFO spoke to.
asserted he was told by OIC Ferguson that he should not have brought up with DO
Letheby and CFO Spain the issue of the Fire
Service providing Fire Suppression
at the Speedway at Tennant Creek and OIC Ferguson said that he would tell the
speedway at the
AGM that the speedway would not be able to function because the
2IC was too lazy to do fire
suppression.
p) Mr Green did not give evidence that he raised OIC Ferguson’s threats to
tell the speedway he was lazy and this further conduct
of OIC Ferguson with his
q) Mr Green also gave evidence about OIC Ferguson actively interfering with his
social life and withholding invitations to police
events however he stated he
did not raise this with his superiors and he sorted out his social life himself
and made his own friends.
r) Later in evidence Mr Greem said he did raise it with his mentor DO Kleeman
who told him he could socialise with whoever he liked
and to ignore Ferguson.
s) Mr Green gave evidence that OIC Ferguson spoke to him like a drill Sergeant
but he did not raise this with his superiors.
t) Mr Green gave evidence of at least two situations where it was apparent that
rather than addressing the issues A/DO Kleeman and/or
DO Letheby relayed the
complaints to OIC Ferguson which appeared to make him angrier and more upset
with him for going outside the
chain of command. Mr Green did not give evidence
that he told his superiors that OIC Ferguson was getting angrier with
u) Mr Green gave evidence that he spoke to his mentor A/DO Kleeman who was his
immediate superior after OIC Ferguson and he dealt
with some issues such as the
auxiliary issue and the socialising with police issue.
the other issues such as the speedway issue and the Emergency Services Issue
A/DO Kleeman directed him to raise those with DO
Letheby which he did.
w) Mr Green’s evidence was that telling his superiors was the process he
understood he should follow re workplace
Green said when he raised the issues with DO Letheby he said “I hear what
you are saying I will take them up with OIC Ferguson”
but there was no
offer of any meeting between the
y) In October 2016 OIC Ferguson and/or DO Letheby initiated disciplinary
proceedings against Mr Green. When he attended work on 27
October he was
informed he was under investigation and that a formal interview/meeting was to
be performed the next day and he could
have a support person attend with him.
z) On 28 October 2016 he was suspended from his employment from 28 October
aa) Mr Green defended the disciplinary proceedings and denied any
misconduct.
bb) The Defendant offered Mr Green an option to discontinue the disciplinary
proceedings against him without further action, if he
agreed to a transfer back
to Alice Springs, or to have an external investigator appointed to investigate
and for Mr Green to remain
in Tennant Creek while that
Green opted to remain in Tennant Creek and have an external investigator
dd) The evidence was that the Defendant determined they were not required to
have an external investigator appointed.
ee) The Defendant did not appoint an external investigator and proceeded to make
a decision that Mr Green had braced discipline and
make adverse findings against
Mr Green on all counts of alleged
misconduct.
ff) On 24 March 2017, after the decision of breach of discipline, the Defendant
advised Mr Green that he would be transferred to
Alice Springs on a disciplinary
gg) On 12 April 2017 that
hh) Mr Green’s wife and children relocated to Adelaide instead of Alice
Green returned to work in Alice Springs under DO Letheby in May
jj) Mr Green continued to defend the allegations of misconduct and appealed
pursuant to section 59A (b) of the
Public Sector Employment and Management
kk) Mr Green gave evidence that he left the Fire Service voluntarily on 5
Green denied committing any breaches of discipline. His evidence was ‘it
was a stitch
mm) Mr Green gave evidence that he asked the Board if he could go back to
Tennant Creek to finish his 5 year term as he wanted to
save money. However when
he moved back to Alice Springs it became clear to him the Board’s rulings
were not going to be followed
as DO Letheby introduced extra punishments on top
of CFO Spain’s and DO Letheby was still supplying misleading information.
Mr Green did not elaborate
nn) On 16 April 2018, after the Board’s decision and prior to the 18 April
deadline fixed by the Board where he was required
to notify the Defendant of his
election, Mr Green emailed CFO Spain about his concerns regarding returning to
Tennant Creek and stated
he would not be returning to Tennant Creek. CFO Mr
Spain replied with about ½ an hour. The Correspondence was tendered as
oo) The HR Department emailed him on 30 July 2018 and notified him of actions
taken as a result of the Board’s ruling. The
email became exhibit P13.
pp) Mr Green voluntarily resigned on 5 December 2019 and commenced employment at
QLD Fire and Rescue on 6 January 2020.
14 March 2018 the Board set aside the disciplinary decision and made further
directions, including:
a) that the Plaintiff be offered the option to return to Tennant Creek;
b) that the Plaintiff be offered the option to remain in Alice Springs;
c) that the Defendant pay the Plaintiff the relocation allowance pursuant to
bylaw 28 which was denied to him in April 2017;
d) that the Defendant pay to the Plaintiff the difference between his relocation
expenses for his family from Tennant Creek to Alice
e) that the Plaintiff’s leave entitlements be re-credited for the period 9
November 2016 to 15 April 2017;
f) that all relevant senior HR officers and any managers involved in supervising
the Plaintiff be notified of the Board’s decision
to set aside the
disciplinary findings and action;
g) that the Defendant organise training and performance management plan for
h) that the Defendant organise conciliation between the Plaintiff and Ferguson,
in the event
he chose to relocate to Tennant Creek; and
directions in relation to processes of the
Plaintiff alleged in written correspondence to the Chief Fire Officer on 16
April 2018, exhibit P12, that the Defendant did not
take steps to address the
unsafe work environment at Tennant Creek and that as a result Mr Green advised
him that he was unable to
including that it was a risk to his and his family’s mental
Green alleges that as a direct result of the Defendant failing to address the
unsafe work environment in Tennant Creek, he was
unable to resume his work at
that location and suffered economic loss October 2016 to December
financial loss of Mr Green is set out in exhibits P14 through P21 tendered in
these proceedings.
Defence Evidence
Defendant broadly denied the particulars in paragraph 5 of the ASOC in the
defence, but did not substantially challenge the evidence
in chief of the
Plaintiff in cross examination of Mr Green at the hearing.
Defendant did however challenge Mr Green about his knowledge of any complaints
regime at work at the time he started his employment
and during his employment.
The Defendant suggested to him that before the disciplinary proceedings were
instigated against him, he
did know about the procedure set out in the
Sector Management
Act (PSEMA) for making complaints about his employer or
the behaviour of fellow employees by seeking a review under s59 of PSEMA.
Green’s evidence was that he wasn’t aware he could make
complaint’s to his union about his employer but agreed
he became aware of
the existence of complaint’s and grievance policies and procedures through
his union as a result of what
happened to him at Tennant Creek His evidence was
that prior to the disciplinary proceedings he was under the impression he would
tell management and he’d figure it out from there as he wasn’t told
by Alice Springs how it worked
His evidence was that he only read the section of the PA where he got paid prior
to the disciplinary proceedings and he relied on
his union delegates. However Mr
Green agreed he did vote for the PA and was aware it was a negotiation.
Green was asked in cross examination whether he ever made a formal complaint
his superiors rather than just
relaying concerns to his superiors as set out above. Mr Green insisted that the
method of complaining
managers and supervisors and he believed he followed that process over many
years and he followed the expected
Green gave evidence he made a formal complaint to the CFO under s59 PSEMA after
the Board’s decision in his favour on 14
March 2018. The complaint was
allegations OIC Ferguson made
against him during the disciplinary proceedings. A
document was tendered as evidence of this complaint, exhibit P25. Mr Green also
tendered exhibit P26 dated 2 October 2018 which was a letter from the CEO
acknowledging the complaint was being taken seriously however
as it could be the
subject of confidential disciplinary proceedings Mr Green could not be privy to
any developments. Mr Green gave
evidence he believed his complaint resulted in
no action being taken.
Green also gave evidence about his understanding of his employer providing a
safe and healthy work environment not only through
the award by a psychologist,
a Chaplin visiting the station and peer support to workers, he spoke of ongoing
training regarding bullying
and messages from the Minister and the Commissioner
that bullying would not be tolerated. However Mr Green did not give details or
particulars about any training or education he received about bullying in the
workplace. He only made very general references in
his evidence and no
procedures or policies were put in evidence.
Defendant had the opportunity to call witnesses at the hearing but no evidence
was called by the Defendant nor was any evidence
tendered. The Defendant did
rely on the material tendered by the Plaintiff.
P12 and P13 tendered by the Plaintiff is evidence that records the
Defendant’s response to Mr Green’s assertion
that the Defendant made
no efforts to address the findings of the Board in the workplace around the time
of the decision in April
P12 shows that on 16 April 2018 approximately 30 minutes after receiving Mr
Green’s correspondence at about 5pm outlining
his complaint about the
Defendant not remedying the unsafe work environment he alleged existed at
Tennant Creek and notifying the
CEO of his decision to elect to stay in Alice
Springs as a result rather than return to Tennant Creek, the CFO Mr Mark Spain
an email acknowledging Mr Green’s email and stating that under no
circumstances would the Tennant Creek event be used to hinder
future prospects both within or outside of the NTFRS.
P13 is a formal written response from the Human Resource area of NTFRS dated 25
July 2018 which was forwarded to Mr Green
by the grievance section on 30 July
2018, documenting steps taken to formally address the Board’s findings and
directions.
This email outlined the education and notification steps taken
within the department and Alice Springs Fire-station to inform relevant
and supervisors of the outcome of the Board’s decision; performance
management of OIC Ferguson and that Mr Green’s
complaint against OIC
Ferguson was being actioned. It also documented a promotion of Mr Green via a
merit selection process.
Green did not put in any evidence about any complaint’s regime other than
Clause 59 in the PA. The Clause refers to a grievance
procedure under PSEMA. Mr
Green’s evidence was he did not make a complaint under PSEMA about OIC
Ferguson’s conduct until
after the Board’s decision.
What conduct is relied on to prove the express and implied
(Bullying conduct; failure to prevent bullying by superiors;
disciplinary proceedings)
Green contends that not only was he bullied and harassed by his immediate
supervisor OIC Ferguson, when he complained to those
superiors above him in the
manner he had been encouraged to do, they failed to prevent the bullying by OIC
Ferguson in the workplace.
Mr Green testified that he expressed concerns to
District Officer Letheby and Acting District Officer Kleeman about Ferguson but
nothing happened to stop the behaviour.
Green also complains that although the Defendant through its employees may have
genuinely held the belief that Mr Green required
some form of discipline, Mr
Green contends that that the adverse outcome of the disciplinary proceedings was
not reasonable and appropriate
and his employer failed to make the workplace
safe for him either after his disciplinary transfer from Tennant Creek to Alice
or on the date of the Board’s appeal decision.
Green also complains that once the disciplinary proceedings were instigated
the Defendant did nothing to intervene to stop the disciplinary
proceedings
and this contributed to the failure to prevent him being bullied
and harassed at work. In fact the Defendant through its employees
instigated and
prosecuted the proceedings to an adverse outcome. The Plaintiff relies on the
findings of the Board to support his
contentions and asks this court on the
evidence to make the same finding.
Green asserts that this conduct taken as a whole breached the contractual
obligation to prevent bullying and harassment and the
failure to provide a safe
and healthy work environment and was quite likely to cause Mr Green an injury
(in the form of a Psychological
disorder). I find it is a significant matter
that there was very little if any direct evidence about the existence of a risk
Green of injury or harm.
is contended in this case that that the Defendant has breached the contract in
the following ways:
a) Mr Green was bullied and harassed in the workplace personally by OIC Ferguson
between late 2015 and 30 August 2016;
b) Mr Green complained to his superiors, DO Letheby, A/DO Kleeman and CFO Spain
c) His superiors failed to take any action to investigate Mr Green’s
complaints about OIC Ferguson’s bullying conduct;
d) The Defendant compounded OIC Ferguson’s bullying conduct by pursuing
the disciplinary proceedings instigated by OIC Ferguson
on or about 27 and 28
October 2016 against Mr Green which resulted in the adverse outcome for Mr Green
in December 2016;
e) The Defendant did not intervene to stop the disciplinary proceedings;
f) The Defendant enforced the disciplinary transfer and uplifted Mr Green from
Tennant Creek as a result of the disciplinary proceedings
on 12 April 2017;
g) The Defendant failed to make the workplace safe for Mr Green to return to his
position at Tennant Creek after the Board’s
decision on 14 March 2018;
h) The disciplinary proceedings were unfair and should never have been brought;
Defendant failed to respond to Mr Green’s enquiries about whether they
would make the workplace safe for him to return to
Tennant Creek and on 16 April
2018 Mr Green notified the Defendant he could not return to Tennant Creek and
would be staying at Alice
conduct complained of by the Plaintiff is that OIC Ferguson specifically
personally bullied and harassed him in the workplace
between late 2015 and 30
August 2016 by
a) OIC Ferguson directing Mr Green not to socialise with any volunteer fire
fighters (auxiliaries) or any police officers within
b) an incident involving OIC Ferguson holding a child in a stress position
against a fence at the fire station with an intention
of teaching that child
‘discipline’.
told that OIC Ferguson can kick Mr Green in the balls if he wants
d) being spoken to by Ferguson like a “pre-drill
instructor”.
Green also testified he raised concerns with District Officer Letheby and Chief
Fire Officer Spain about directions by OIC Ferguson
to carry out tasks outside
of what Mr Green understood to be the scope of the NTFRS duties, including
assisting with the local
the Plaintiff asserted that the disciplinary proceeding were unreasonable
management action carried out in an unreasonable manner?
important issue to resolve is whether the Plaintiff has asserted that the
disciplinary proceedings
were unreasonable management actions carried out
in an unreasonable manner
and therefore constituted bullying and
harassment of the Plaintiff in the workplace and whether such action created a
risk to his
health and safety.
Plaintiff’s claim does as stated above, appear to raise matters outside
the process of the investigation of the complaints
made against him via the
disciplinary proceedings in that he does assert that as a result of the
disciplinary action the Defendant
failed to remedy what had become an unsafe
work environment by not implementing the Boards
directions,
Green’s claim is not be confined to those circumstances.
do find that Mr Green complains of a) the failure of the Defendant to properly
investigate workplace complaints made by him to his
superiors about OIC
Ferguson; and further b)
that he complains that the Defendant did not
intervene at any stage to stop the disciplinary proceedings and this should of
and he identifies particular steps in the process itself where this
could have and should have occurred
. He ultimately submits that the
disciplinary proceedings were wrongly brought.
in the case of
Romero v Farstad Shipping (Indian Pacific) Pty Ltd
the Plaintiff is asserting that
the process of the workplace investigation against him, the disciplinary
proceedings was not conducted
fairly and therefore constitutes unreasonable
management action which contributed to the failure to prevent bullying and
and/or contributed to an unsafe and unhealthy work
environment
. Mr Green’s
counsel in submissions stated:
Ms Grimster
: I would like to tell you about the process that was
undertaken by Ferguson Letheby and Spain in initiating the disciplinary
proceedings.
In prosecuting the disciplinary findings against Mr Green I would
like you to find that document (the Board’s written reasons
for decision
of 14 May 2016) relevant evidence that those things occurred. And I would like
the evidence of things occurred to be
found to be evidence of pleadings that
bullying conduct occurred over the course of November 2015 all the way through
to March 2018,
when the disciplinary process was overturned.
So the way I have pleaded it and the way the court should find that
we’ve pleaded our claim is that there was bullying conduct
course of time and throughout that course of time,
there were opportunities
for the Defendant to intervene and stop that bullying and harassment and they
didn’t. ....
: ... You want me to rely on their opinion or
want me to rely on the fact that a, b, c, d and e happened and at the end of the
day those matters did not justify in any way
shape or form any disciplinary
proceedings at all being taken against Mr Green?
Ms Grimster
: the latter your Honour.
Plaintiff’s written submissions (sought by the Court at the close of the
evidence) in the disclose that Mr Green also complains
that the Defendant failed
investigate or take steps to address the complaints by Mr Green (about
Ferguson’s alleged bullying conduct)
b) make any attempt to properly deal with the unsafe situation
disciplinary action
wrongly taken against the employee
c) It remained impossible for the worker to return to his contracted position as
the employer did not take any reasonable steps to
make the workplace safe for
him once the Board handed down its decision.
Green has asserted certain steps taken during the disciplinary proceedings
contributed to the bullying behaviour and the failure
to prevent bullying and
harassment in the workplace or an unsafe and unhealthy work environment as
opposed to just relying on the
outcome itself. Mr Green specifically
a) the institution of, and adverse outcome of the disciplinary proceedings
contributed to the
failure of the Defendant to prevent bullying and
harassment in the workplace and/or the creation of the unsafe and unhealthy work
environment
(the impugned conduct)
[para h Amended SOC]:
b) that during the workplace investigation itself, the suspension from duty
contributed to the impugned conduct, [para i Amended
c) that CFO Spain advising Mr Green in writing of the adverse outcome and
accusing him “
of demonstrating a lack of honesty; and a willingness to
provide false and misleading information
” contributed to the impugned
conduct [para k Amended SOC];
d) that CFO Spain advising Mr Green in writing of a disciplinary transfer and a
formal caution and giving him time to respond contributed
to the impugned
conduct [para k Amended SOC];
e) Mr Green being advised by the Defendant that his disciplinary transfer to
Alice Springs as would be actioned despite requesting
he not be transferred
contributed to the impugned conduct [para l, m, n, o Amended SOC];
f) Mr Green being transferred to Alice Springs contributed to the impugned
conduct [para p Amended SOC].
am satisfied Mr Green’s case relies on him proving that the disciplinary
proceedings were wrongly taken, that the Defendant
could have intervened to stop
the proceedings and did not and that they were unfairly conducted. As such he is
attacking the process
itself and not just the outcome as being unreasonable.
issue is, are his claims actionable under an express or implied term of his
employment contract?
Green does not specifically assert that there is a particular contractual duty
that the Defendant owed him to manage the disciplinary
proceeding in a
particular manner which was breached, he relies on the express and implied
contractual terms.
Background and
The Relevance of the Public Sector Appeal
Board’s Decision of 14 March 2018 (published May 2018):
the hearing the Defendant did not object to the tender of
Exhibit P7,
Public Sector Appeal Board Decision of 18 May 2016
which included
Agreed Facts
P24 as an attachment to the decision, for the purposes of
the damages assessment. The Defendant objected to the tender of the decision
generally and submitted the decision was not relevant to the Plaintiff’s
case regarding bullying and harassment. I disagree.
Plaintiff wants to rely on the decision to show that the disciplinary
proceedings as initiated and prosecuted by the Defendant
should never have been
commenced, were unfair and/or that the Defendant should have and could have
intervened to stop them at certain
steps along the way and did not do so.
already stated, I find, in effect the Plaintiff is asserting that the
disciplinary proceedings constituted unreasonable management
action carried out
in an unreasonable way
Green, the Plaintiff, gave evidence at the hearing and was cross examined by the
Defendant. During his evidence Mr Green was taken
to the statement of Agreed
Facts P24 which was agreed between the parties as the facts forming the basis of
the Appeal by the Plaintiff
Public Sector Appeals Board
Board) against the
NT Fire Rescue Service Disciplinary Proceedings
. I find that he adopted the document effectively in its entirety
and without objection during his evidence. He supplemented those
facts with oral
evidence which was unchallenged in Cross Examination. Documentary exhibits in
the form of emails and letters were
also tendered during his oral evidence
without objection.
find that Exhibit P7, including the
Agreed Facts P24
was admitted by
consent as part of the damages assessment for that purpose and as such as it was
admissible for one purpose it was
also admissible for other purposes. I also
find as submitted by the Plaintiff that the decision is relevant to prove:
a) there was an appeal by Mr Green against the disciplinary findings;
b) there was an outcome which found that the Defendant had erred and the adverse
outcome of the disciplinary proceedings was overturned
in its entirety; and
c) there were specific directions made by the Board to the Defendant.
also find however it is relevant to these proceedings not only that the Board
effectively made findings against the Defendant but
that the nature of those
findings were that Mr Green’s claim that OIC Ferguson’s complaints
against him were entirely
without merit were upheld. This assertion goes to Mr
Green’s claim before me.
findings of the Board in no way binds me to come to the same conclusions they
did about the disciplinary proceedings if that is
an issue I must determine.
the findings of the Board also in no way relieves this court of its obligation
to make its own decision about whether the
conduct alleged is proven,
constitutes bullying or harassment in the workplace or created an unhealthy and
unsafe work environment
or whether any cause of action lies as
The Use of the Board’s Decision (reasons
published 18 May 2018)
Plaintiff invites the Court to draw a
Jones v Dunkel
inference, that calling any of the persons involved would not have assisted the
Defendant’s case. The Plaintiff submits it
is therefore open to the Court
to make findings of fact on the basis of the Plaintiff’s evidence and
Significantly
Defendant did not put in any evidence at the hearing to contradict
the Agreed Facts P7
which formed the basis of the findings of the
Board’s decision. As such I find that I accept the Agreed Facts P7
as proven by the Plaintiff in these proceedings on the Balance of
Probabilities.
whilst I accept Mr Green’s unchallenged evidence on many material matters
that does not mean I accept all the assertions
he makes in the face of
contradictory evidence in the form of documentation or emails or most
importantly that his claim is made
14 March 2018 the Board handed down its decision. On 18 May 2018 the Board
published its reasons for decision. The reasons are
important to consider.
Throughout the decision the Board found that on the 4 occasions alleged by the
respondent the appellant did
not breach discipline and that the finding that he
did was unreasonable and the outcome for him was punitive and disproportionate
when looked at objectively. The Board found that the Defendant had erred in
finding the Plaintiff had breached discipline and set
aside the findings
Board also made particular reference to the suspension of the Plaintiff by the
Defendant from 9 November 2016 for 5 months until
his transfer on disciplinary
grounds from Tennant Creek to Alice Springs. The Board found at para [35] of the
written decision that
the suspension
was a disproportionate, unnecessary and
unreasonable response to the alleged breaches of discipline.
Board made the following findings in its concluding remarks at para
.. with a clear understanding by all concerned that the appellant
did not breach discipline, and
that the Respondent’s finding he had,
and the subsequent actions taken were unreasonable and
unnecessary
14 March 2018 the Board set aside the disciplinary decision and made further
directions, including:
for the Plaintiff to be transferred back to Tennant Creek:
Plaintiff be offered the option to return to Tennant Creek should he chose;
for the Plaintiff to remain in Alice Springs:
that the Plaintiff be offered
the option to remain in Alice Springs if he chooses not to return to Alice
of Relocation Allowance:
that the Defendant pay the Plaintiff the relocation
allowance pursuant to bylaw 28 which was denied to him in April 2017;
of uplift down lift difference to Adelaide:
that the Defendant pay to the
Plaintiff the difference between his relocation expenses for his family from
Tennant Creek to Alice
Re-crediting
of Leave Entitlements:
that the Plaintiff’s leave entitlements be
re-credited for the period 9 November 2016 to 15 April 2017;
Notification
of the setting aside of the Disciplinary Findings and the Actions
relevant senior HR officers and any managers involved in supervising the
Plaintiff be notified of the Board’s decision
to set aside the
disciplinary findings and action;
Training and Performance Management Plan for OIC Ferguson
Defendant organise training and performance management plan for Ferguson;
Conciliation:
that the Defendant organise conciliation between the Plaintiff and Ferguson,
in the event
he chose to relocate to Tennant Creek; and
of Initial Meetings
that the Defendant Should Review its
procedures for the calling of initial meetings regarding potential disciplinary
matters and
stated it was essential that an employee be provided well in advance
of the meeting (at least 24 hours) with an agenda and copies
of any supporting
documentation for the allegations in order that they can provide an adequate
response. The Board also emphasised
the need for decision makers to be mindful
at all times that decisions and actions taken must be
fair, reasonable and
proportionate to any breaches found. This is particularly so when suspension of
an employee is contemplated
to a support Person at Meetings
that the Guidelines for Support
Persons relied on by the NTFRS are outdated and have been superseded by the
PSEMA Employment Instructions
and do not mandate that Support Persons not be
involved or speak in the process. The Board
it seems likely in this particular matter
that a better outcome might have been achieved had the support persons from the
permitted to more actively assist in the process and a meaningful
dialogue been engaged in by all involved.
find that the Board was a) critical of the CFO’s decision, the findings
and the penalty imposed which was appealed by the
Plaintiff [para 45]; and b)
the Board was critical of the decision to suspend the Plaintiff during the
proceedings [para 35]; and
the Board also criticised the process of the
investigation of the complaints made by OIC Ferguson in and of itself
find that direction i) and j) are directions in relation to processes of the
was, also on my reading of the decision, a direct statement in para [39, 40]
that the CEO could have and should have taken other
action than the disciplinary
proceedings but did not do so:
[39]The directions of the Board for the OIC to participate in management
training and a performance management plan, is something
which the CEO could
have, and in the view of the Board, should have taken immediately upon learning
of this matter and the manner
in which the OIC and other officers involved were
conducting themselves in handling the situation.
[40]The correct reaction,
in the opinion of the Board
, should not
have been to permit the OIC and others to allow these relatively minor matters
to escalate to the point of disciplinary
action against the Plaintiff, but
instead for the Senior Management to look at the behaviours of the OIC with a
view to assisting
him in developing his leadership capabilities and
is an expression of the Board
that in their opinion
after conducting the
appeal hearing the CEO could have and should not have permitted the disciplinary
proceedings.
question for this court is whether I am able to come to the same conclusion
based on the Board’s decision and the Agreed
Facts tendered as evidence.
Essentially what is alleged on the evidence before me is that the disciplinary
proceedings or the action
as a whole constituted
unreasonable management
action carried out in an unreasonable manner
is important to note that Investigating alleged inappropriate work behavior in
accordance with established policies and procedures
is not bullying. Reasonable
Management Action is justified feedback or disciplinary action that is carried
out in a reasonable manner.
Management Action is considered reasonable if it is
fair, transparent, and consistent with established policies and procedures
it may unreasonable if the action is not justified, aggressive or
undertaken with malicious intent.
[2014] FWC 2014
, Commissioner Hampton said that
‘reasonable’ management action consisted of the following
a) The behaviour of those being accused of bullying must be management action
b) It must be reasonable for management to take that particular action
c) The action itself must be carried out in a reasonable manner
that case, the FWC stated that “the action doesn’t need to be
perfect or ideal; overall, it may still be reasonable,
even if particular steps
are not; and the action must be lawful and not ‘irrational, absurd or
ridiculous’. Furthermore,
“any ‘unreasonableness’ must
arise from the actual management action in question (rather than the
perception of it) and there must be an element of adherence to
established policies or procedures”.
something to constitute unreasonable management action the test is not whether
something is considered reasonable from the manager’s
point of view it has
to be objective. The test is also whether the management action was reasonable,
not whether it could have been
undertaken in a manner that was ‘more
reasonable’ or ‘more
acceptable’
Consideration
must be given as to whether the management action involved a significant
departure from established policies or procedures,
and if so, whether the
departure was reasonable in the
circumstances
the Fair Work Decision in 2015,
Amie Mac v Bank of Queensland Ltd &
FWC 774, Vice president Hatcher addressed the exception to bullying by
examining what could be determined as ‘Reasonable management
Action’. VP Hatcher stated that for management action to be unreasonable
it must be proven to have
“lacked evident and intelligible
justification such that it would be considered by a reasonable person to be
unreasonable in
all circumstances”.
this case there is some evidence from the Board’s decision that they were
critical of procedural steps the Defendant took
during the disciplinary
proceedings. The Board’s directions i)
Conduct of the Initial
Right to a Support Person
could be evidence that
the Board was critical of how the Defendant conducted Mr Green’s
proceedings as they recommended that
the Defendant review how those matters were
dealt with in the future. The Board also made specific findings at para [35]
the suspension of the Plaintiff in response to the nature of the
allegations of discipline allegations.
find however that there is insufficient evidence to show, regardless of this
criticism, whether during the process of the management
action there was
element of adherence to established policies or procedures
importantly a failure to do so by the Defendant, as no evidence was put before
the court on this point (other than the Board’s
decision). The criticism
falls short of making this finding.
although the CFO’s decision and the
adverse outcome
was found by
the Board on review to be unreasonable and inappropriate, on the evidence before
me I am unable to conclude that the
Plaintiff has proven that the management
“lacked evident and intelligible justification such that it
would be considered by a reasonable person to be unreasonable
circumstances
This is because although the Board was critical of
the evidential basis for the breach of discipline findings, the evidence falls
short of this court being able to determine if the instigation and continuation
of the management action meets this test.
Board’s opinion at para [39, 40] about the CEO intervening must be
scrutinised. I find the Board ultimately disagreed, in
hindsight with the
evidential basis for finding the conduct alleged breached discipline. Further
the assertions about the CEO are
not able to be tested in these proceedings.
is evidence in exhibit P8 that Mr Green through
United Voice
wrote to the
CEO Commissioner Kershaw on 26 October 2016 complaining of his treatment at the
initial meeting and that he had not
been afforded procedural fairness or natural
justice. However I am unable to make a finding that the CEO at that time was
fully appraised
of all the relevant circumstances and allegations such that it
was appropriate to proceed in the manner recommended by the Board
opinion at that point in time.
Mr Green’s assertions and perceptions of what was unreasonable are not
sufficient. Whilst there is no doubt that the
Board found that the outcome for
Mr Green was not reasonable or appropriate that is a different matter to whether
the process itself
Green relies on the facts that were tendered P7 that formed the basis of the
Board’s decision and on the decision itself.
The decision speaks to the
evidence relied on in the appeal hearing, the outcome and penalty being
unreasonable and inappropriate
on the facts as the Board found them to be after
their enquiry.
I find that the Board’s directions i) and j) do criticise the process of
the disciplinary proceedings and the Board was
particularly critical of the
decision to suspend Mr Green, I cannot substitute my own findings for the
Board’s opinion. I also
find that a careful reading of the Board’s
decision shows the Board fell short of making findings about the administration
of the process itself as being unreasonable and inappropriate as opposed to some
of the steps in the process and the outcome.
Board disagreed that suspension was warranted given the allegations raised and
commented that suspension should be reserved for
only the most serious cases.
This is a criticism of the judgment of the decision makers but not necessarily
of the process itself.
The Board overturned the disciplinary findings entirely
on the basis the evidence did not support that a breach of discipline occurred.
Again the Board criticised the findings as opposed to the
the Board expressed an opinion about their view of the correct reaction to OIC
Ferguson’s complaints at para [39-40]
by the CEO that is insufficient for
me to find that the whole process was unjustified or that OIC Ferguson’s
complaints were
motivated by malice. While Mr Green complained he was not
afforded Natural Justice initially and the Board made recommendations about
initial meeting, I am unable to conclude the ultimate findings of the Board were
on the grounds that Natural Justice was not
afforded to Mr Green.
if I concur with the Board’s factual findings I find in this case without
more evidence that I cannot simply adopt the
Board’s opinion at [para
39-40] and then extrapolate to make a finding that the process itself was flawed
on the evidence in
this case to the requisite standard to constitute
unreasonable management action. As such I find reliance on the Board’s
and the Agreed Facts does not assist the Plaintiff in this regard.
I am wrong about the evidence of the Board’s decision I find that the
Plaintiff has not proven the Defendant breached the
express term in any event as
he has failed to demonstrate that there was any contractual duty of the
Defendant to manage the disciplinary
proceedings in a particular manner such as
to ensure he was not bullied or harassed at work (
Romero v Farstad Shipping
distinguished).
he has not established that there was any real risk of injury as there is little
if any evidence of any risk of injury as
a result of the disciplinary
proceedings other than a reference to stress in the initial letter to the CEO in
exhibit P8. In fact
after this there is a distinct lack of evidence about any
such risk or the effect of the disciplinary proceedings and all the alleged
bullying conduct to Mr Green. I find he has not proven that the express term was
breached for these reasons.
What was the evidence about
the state of affairs after the Board’s Decision?
Mr Green asserts in his evidence that the Defendant did nothing to make the
workplace safe after the Board’s decision
such that he could not return to
Tennant Creek, I don’t accept that is the case based on his assertion. The
evidence suggests
otherwise. P12 and P13 document efforts to implement some of
the Boards’ directions.
of 16 April 2018 in the letter of the CFO, the evidence discloses that the
Plaintiff had elected to remain at Alice Springs. The
Plaintiff appeared to have
lost confidence in his employer at that time given his treatment by OIC Ferguson
and the Defendant throughout
the disciplinary proceedings and this is evidenced
by the allegations he made at that time in a formal complaint, exhibit P25,
the Board’s decision.
fact he did not elect to return to Tennant Creek is a significant matter. No
time limit was indicated by the Board in which the
Defendant was to comply with
the Board’s directions. Mr Green notified the CFO on 16 April, 2 months
after the decision and
1 month after the written reasons for decision. The
Defendant was entitled to a reasonable time to action the directions. Some of
the Directions were contingent on the Plaintiff making an election, such as the
Conciliation.
Performance Management
of OIC Ferguson
would inevitably have been ongoing and not able to be resolved in a 2 month
period. The payment of allowances and
re-crediting of leave would not affect his
work environment at Tennant Creek. The dissemination of the Board’s
decision and
directions is an important matter but the evidence is that CFO
Spain assured the Plaintiff he would not be adversely treated.
is no allegation that the Plaintiff’s work environment at Alice Springs
was unsafe or that he was subject to bullying
or harassment in that environment.
This is a relevant matter to mitigation of his loss and his claim for damages. I
also find that
on the evidence there is nothing to suggest that after that
Board’s decision he was treated adversely at Alice Springs and
exhibit P13
sets out that he had been successful for promotion. Some evidence was
forthcoming from about that promotion at the hearing
in relation to the
Plaintiff’s earnings but it was not explored in the context of him being
treated adversely or his career
prospects being limited.
find the evidence shows at the time the Plaintiff wrote the letter to the CEO on
16 April 2018, which was about two months after
the decision of the Board on 14
March 2018, the Plaintiff had determined he would not return to Tennant Creek
and notified the CEO
of this in writing. From at least that date, it was not a
requirement for the Defendant to remedy any unsafe work environment at
Creek in accordance with the Board’s directions as the Plaintiff had
elected not to return to that work environment.
Further it appears that he was
successful for a promotion around that time regardless of the outcome of the
disciplinary proceedings.
Relevant Terms and Conditions of Mr
Green’s Employment – is he engaged under a contract of
is disputed by the Defendant that the Plaintiff is engaged under a contract of
employment. Despite the Defendant’s position
regarding how the Plaintiff
was engaged, the hearing was conducted on the basis that Mr Green was employed
under a contract of employment.
do find on the evidence that Mr Green was engaged under a contract of
employment. Mr Green was originally engaged as a Fire-fighter
in accordance with
Letter of Engagement
: Mr Green gave evidence at the
that he was offered a
permanent contract of employment after he completed the recruit training course
and during his probation period.
He stated that he signed the letter of offer
dated 14 February 2006 agreeing to the content of the contract of his
employment. That
letter of offer was exhibit P1 at the hearing.
Green stated that his understanding was the conditions of his employment
relating to salary, hours of work etc... were not contained
in the letter of
offer which stated his conditions of employment could be found in the referred
to relevant legislation, the
NT Fire and Emergency Act
Regulations
as amended from time to time, and the
NT Public Sector Fire and Rescue Service 2004 Partnership Agreement
amended from time to time.
find that the
Letter of Engagement
of the Plaintiff must form the basis
of his contract. It is not disputed by the parties that if the respondent is
employed under
a contract that the
Letter of Engagement
does not contain
all of the contractual obligations. The letter of engagement
“This letter is to formally offer you permanent employment from 11
December 2005 as a Fire Fighter Recruit with the Northern
Territory Fire and
Rescue Service. Your commencement salary will be $47444.00 per annum”
letter goes on to make the appointment conditional on the Plaintiff being an
Australian Citizen or granted Australian Residency
“Your permanent employment will be in accordance with the Public
Sector Employment and Management Act (PSEMA) and the Northern
Territory Fire and
Emergency Act and the regulations as amended from time to time. Your employment
conditions are contained in the
PSEMA, the Northern Territory Public Sector Fire
and Rescue Service 2004 Partnership Agreement as amended from time to
find that it is not necessary to identify comprehensively all of the express
terms of Mr Greens contract of employment. To the extent
that the terms and
conditions were found in binding statutory Acts and regulatory or industrial
awards or agreement provisions it
is unnecessary to determine if they are also
incorporated into the contract of employment. The contract cannot contradict any
terms. However it is necessary to identify the important terms and
conditions of Mr Green’s contract and whether s59.1 of the
PA as amended
from time to time was incorporated.
find that many of the terms and conditions of Mr Green’s contract of
employment are found in PSEMA and the NTFE Act and the
corresponding
regulations. The PSEMA sets out a grievance process, which is referred to in
clause 59.3 of the PA, in fact Mr Green
availed himself of that process when he
appealed to the BOARD.
Defendant, despite purporting to dispute the contractual nature of the
relationship has not put in any evidence to contradict
the Plaintiff’s
Ultimately,
it is irrelevant whether the agreement between the parties is verbal or in
writing. The fact remains that the only evidence
is that the parties are bound
by a contractual relationship and that is the Plaintiff’s understanding.
The implication is that
if a party were to breach the contract of employment,
they find themselves facing a claim for damages arising from the breach of
contract. The Plaintiff in this case has alleged breach of an express term of
the contract.
Statutory Regulation of the
Contract of Employment
determination of the Plaintiff’s submission concerning the incorporation
of an Express Term in the contract of employment
and that clause s59.1 PA forms
part of the contract requires a closer analysis of the basis of the terms. What
is clear in this case
is that Mr Green’s employment is governed and
regulated by statutes such as
the NT Fire and Rescue Act
(NT), regulation and industrial awards such as
The Partnership Agreement
as amended from time to time which provides a variety of means by which
employees may be protected from abuses of power by the employer
and provides
means of redress to employees who are aggrieved by some conduct of the employer.
applicable statutory and regulatory context may be important in determining
whether the specific term is incorporated by reference
(as per the letter of
offer) as an express term in the contract and whether other terms are to be
implied into an employment contract
and its effect once so found.
Defendant asserted not only that the Plaintiff was not employed under a contract
of employment but that any contract of employment
did not include Clause.59.1 as
The Partnership Agreement 2004
as amended from time to time could only
include a reference to the original Partnership
Express Term s.59.1 of The Partnership
Agreement 2004 – what is the wording of Clause 59.1:
Plaintiff’s Statement of Claim includes a specific plea stating
Northern Territory Public Sector Fire and Rescue Service 2004 Partnership
Agreement (
NT Fire and Rescue Act
(NT) contained the terms and conditions
of the Plaintiff’s employment.
Specifically
the Plaintiff has pleaded at paragraphs 3, 5, and 10 of the Statement of Claim
as follows:
“3. The Plaintiff’s employment terms and conditions were
contained in PSEMA, The Northern Territory Public Sector Fire
and Rescue Service
2004 Partnership Agreement (
2004 Partnership Agreement),
as amended from
time. For the purposes of the employment contract, the
Partnership Agreement
, as amended from time to time included the Northern
Territory Public Sector Fire and Rescue Service Enterprise Agreement 2011 -2013
as in force from 14 September 2011 to 23 January 2017 and the Northern Territory
Public Sector Fire and Rescue Service Enterprise
Agreement 2013 -2017 as in
force from 14 January 2017 to 5 July 2019.
4. One of the terms of the Plaintiff’s contract of employment was
that the employer would take all reasonably practical steps
harassment and bullying in the workplace (the Enterprise Agreements paragraphs
59.1) specifically;
5. In breach of the term of employment referred to in paragraph 4 herein,
between about November 2015 and 14 march 2018, the Defendant
failed to take all
reasonably practicable steps to prevent harassment and bullying toward the
Plaintiff in the workplace. (The paragraph
then goes on to plead 20 particulars
of breach paragraph 5a)-t)....
8. As a result of the Defendant’s breaches referred to in paragraphs
5 and 7 herein, the Plaintiff suffered loss and damage.
(The paragraph then goes
on to plead particulars of damages in the order of $100000.00 with particulars,
though a schedule of amended
particulars was received at the
Defendant asserts however, that the PA cannot form the basis of the contractual
obligations of the parties. The Defendant asserts
the conditions of employment
are contained in the letter of engagement and the reference to the PA
“from time to time”
would not include any of the terms of the
Enterprise Agreement once it had been renegotiated over time.
is the Defendant’s case that the PA at the time of the Plaintiff’s
employment did not contain Clause 59 and was no
longer operable once the PA had
been renegotiated at the end of its term. The Defendant submits clause 59 of the
Enterprise agreement
operable in 2017 cannot be a condition of the
Plaintiff’s contract of employment.
have not been provided with a copy of the agreement which was in place at the
time of the letter of engagement in 2006. The Plaintiff
submitted that agreement
in place in 2006 is not relevant given that the letter of engagement includes
the partnership agreement
“as amended from time to
Plaintiff argued Clause 59.1 of the partnership agreement became part of the
employment contract as it is part of the agreement
as amended from “time
Defendant submitted that such an interpretation of the phrase “as amended
from time to time” is wrong and cannot include
subsequent renegotiated
agreements.
Defendant referred to the clause 6.2 & 6.3 of the agreement of 2007 –
2010 which state:
“6.2 The Agreement is a comprehensive Agreement and when it
commences operation the Northern Territory Public Sector Fire and
Rescue Service
Employees (Northern Territory) Award 2004 Partnership agreement ceases to
6.3 This Agreement replaces the Fire and Rescue Services
Employees (Northern Territory) Award 2001.”
Defendant submitted those clauses support a finding that once there is a
renegotiation of agreement then the old agreement ceases
to exist and therefore
any changes in the agreement are not an “amendment from time to
time” and cannot be imported into
the Plaintiff’s contract of
employment.
Alternatively
the Defendant submitted if the renegotiated PA did apply to the
Plaintiff’s employment then clause 59.1 was a
reflection of the
legislative requirement under Commonwealth legislation which is focussed on
preventing personal injury not creating
contractual obligations. The Defendant
argued clause 59.1 is only an ‘aspirational’ statement and not an
obligation which
can form the basis for a contractual obligation between
employer and employee.
the 2011-2013 partnership agreement clause 59.1 remained the same
the 2013-2017 agreement clause 59.1 is slightly different to take account of
change in legislation:
“59.1 All parties to the
agreement acknowledge the commitment to achieve and maintain a safe and healthy
work environment
and will take
all reasonably practicable steps to
prevent harassment and bullying in the workplace...”
cannot accept the Defendant’s argument. I refer to the decision of
Romero v Farstad Shipping (Indian Pacific) Pty
and find that in this
case the words of the letter of engagement specifically include the words
“as amended from time to time”
which is a precise and certain use of
language and is evidence that the intention of the parties is to not only to
refer to the current
PA at the time of the engagement of the employee but also
the PA as modified from time to time to incorporate future amendments and
agreements.
also cannot accept the Defendant’s argument as to do so would create an
untenable situation. A situation where a person, who
is employed during the
operation of an enterprise bargaining agreement and whose employment continues
over a period in which the
relevant enterprise bargaining agreement is
renegotiated would not be able to rely on the later agreement for his conditions
of employment.
you take that argument to its logical conclusion that would result in different
employees in a workplace having different conditions
of work (as set by the
enterprise bargaining agreement or award) based upon when they were employed.
That would undermine the whole
purpose of enterprise bargaining agreements or
find that the applicable clause is that in the most recent
Partnership
as amended.
to the argument about whether clause 59.1 was a reflection of the legislative
requirements under Commonwealth legislation which
is focussed on preventing
personal injury not creating contractual obligations and whether clause 59.1 is
only an ‘aspirational’
statement and not an obligation which can
form the basis for a contractual obligation between employer and employee, it is
to consider clause 59 in its entirety to determine if it is expressly
incorporated into the employment contract.
Is Clause 59.1
of the Partnership Agreement (2004) incorporated as an Express Term of the
Contract of Employment?
Defendant sought to distinguish between conditions of employment (as set by the
PA) and the contractual conditions.
Defendant argued that even if the conditions of the later PA applied to the
Plaintiff’s conditions of employment that did
not necessarily mean those
conditions becomes a contractual obligation which can form the basis for
contractual damages other than
for personal injuries. The Defendant argued that
the clause reflected legislative requirements and was not intended to be
contractually
binding and was only an aspirational statement.
the clause is incorporated as an express contractual term is dependent on the
parties intentions objectively ascertained.
The question is, what was the
understanding of the employer and the Plaintiff that the words in the letter of
engagement “would
have led a reasonable person in the position of the
(worker) to
Toll (FGCT) Pty Ltd v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 52
(2004) 219 CLR 165
Court said:
“the meaning of the terms of a contractual document is to be
determined by what a reasonable person would have understood them
to mean. That,
normally requires consideration not only of the text, but also of the
surrounding circumstances known to the parties,
and the purpose and object of
the transaction.”
am of the view that the Statement of Claim pleads that the PA, particularly
clause 59.1, becomes a contractual obligation which
the Defendant has breached
as particularised and that breach has resulted in the damages. The Plaintiff
must prove to the requisite
standard that the PA, particularly clause 59.1 does
form part of the Defendant’s contractual obligations as an express term
Mr Green’s contract.
this case, as already stated, I do find that the relationship of employer and
employee in Mr Green’s case was a contractual
relationship.
the past, the contract of employment has generally been well defined and
addressed specific items, such as leave, salary entitlements,
working hours,
confidentiality, etc. However, Recently the Court has been more inclined to
extend the contract of employment, and
incorporate additional terms and
conditions. In Mr Green’s case, these employment conditions are not
specifically stated in
the letter of offer, rather they are by found in the
which is referred to in the letter of offer about his employment
issue in this case is whether Mr Green’s contract of employment
incorporates all of the matters included in the PA
which is expressly
referred to in his letter of offer. This express referral to the PA is not
determinative of whether some or all
of the Agreement is incorporated into the
Contract of Employment but may be taken into account when considering the
intention of
the parties. Clearly some matters must be incorporated, such as
salary and leave entitlements etc... which are found in the PA
lends some weight to the Plaintiff’s argument that the reference to the
must be given due consideration
contracts of employment also incorporate various policies prepared by the
employer. These policies may refer to performance management
discipline or grievance procedures. They may also deal with Workplace Health and
Safety, bullying and/or harassment. Within
these policies, an employer will
often accept various obligations, as well as imposing obligations on employees.
For example, an
employer may promise to deal with an employee in a certain
manner, or to deal with a complaint made by an employee in a certain way.
certain procedures and policies can form the basis of such grievance
proceedings, this is not determinative.
the appeal case of
Goldman Sachs JB Were Services Pty Ltd v Nikolich
[2007] FCAFC 120
the Full Federal Court held that policies will generally only
be “contractual” in nature if “
a reasonable person in the
position of a promisee (the employee) would conclude that a promisor (the
employer) intended to be contractually
bound by a particular
.” In determining this, a Court will have regard to the text
of the policy, the surrounding circumstances known to the parties
purpose and object of the transaction.
Court found that policies which use words such as “will”,
“must” or “shall” when expressing
promises suggest a
contractual undertaking or promise. Conversely, policies which express
statements as “aspirations”
or “aims” will generally not
meet this test. The Court concluded that the statement:
“JB Were will
take every practicable step to provide and maintain a safe and healthy
environment for all people”,
embodied a contractual obligation and
should be interpreted as being a term of the contract of employment. The Court
dismissed the
appeal (although it upheld an ancillary appeal with regard to the
order for legal costs awarded to Mr Nikolich).
the existence of mutually actionable obligations in the PA or the clause coupled
with mandatory language lends some weight
to the Plaintiff’s argument that
it is the intention of the parties that the clause be incorporated as an express
term of the
contract in order to ensure that the parties prevent bullying and
harassment in the workplace and the Defendant achieve and maintain
healthy working environment.
refer to Chief Justice Black’s comments in
common law duty to provide a safe system of work which will be implied into a
contract of employment. It seems that the
implied obligation on an employer to
provide a safe place of work and safe system of work will always supersede any
drafting” within contracts or policy documents that
attempt to exclude employer liability.
the later decision of
Romero v Farstad Shipping (Indian Pacific) Pty
the Full Court of the
Federal Court found that a workplace policy, the
Workplace Harassment and
Discrimination Policy
), formed part of an
employee’s contract of employment and the employer’s failure to
follow the policy amounted to a breach
of contract. The contract was in the form
of a letter of engagement provided to the employee in January 2011. The letter
the following key sentence “
In addition, all [company]
policies are to be observed at all times
appeal the Full Court of the Federal Court found that although some aspects of
the Policy were merely aspirational, ‘
specific obligations were clearly
ascertainable and quite capable of precise identification
The court held the policy formed part of the employment contract
The language used in this instance, taking the Policy as a whole, makes it
clear that there is an expectation by the company that
there will be mutual
obligations. In return for the employee complying with the terms of the Policy,
the employer gives a responsive
assurance that complaints of non-compliance by
other employees will be treated in a certain way.
Full Court took into account surrounding circumstances including
a) the Policy was the subject of an education program at the time of, or
contemporaneous with, the offer of employment;
b) Farstad provided the Policy to Romero;
c) Romero was required to sign the Policy;
d) the benefit in the Policy was a benefit ordinarily conferred in employment
contracts; and
e) there was regular reinforcement of this and other company policies on an
ongoing basis.
relevant, in the Full Court's view, was the actual employment context including
the need to avoid problematic situations arising
for Romero if bullying and
discrimination were not precluded; and the importance, in the operation of
ships, of maintaining a calm
environment from a safety
perspective.
all, the court found that the company’s workplace
investigation
“fell short of the standard and procedure
promised under the
. The Court set aside the orders of the primary judge and
declared that the company had breached its employment contract with the
officer and found, amongst other things, the procedures adopted by the employer
did not comply with the policy in the workplace
investigation of complaints made
and there was a general failure to carefully and systematically investigate the
complaints made.
the 2013 -2017 agreement clause 59.1 is slightly different to take account of
change in legislation:
“59.1 All parties to the
agreement acknowledge the commitment to achieve and maintain a safe and healthy
work environment
and will take
all reasonably practicable steps to
prevent harassment and bullying in the workplace.
59.2 All parties to this Agreement acknowledge the NTPS Code of Conduct.
Pursuant to the Code, an employee
behave in a professional manner in
carrying out their duties and treat colleagues, supervisors and others in the
workplace with courtesy,
dignity and respect at all times.
59.3 An employee who is aggrieved by their treatment in employment
seek a review under section the PSEM Act.”
have already found that this is the wording of the Clause that the Plaintiff
submits is expressly incorporated into his contract
employment.
Northern Territory Public Sector Code of Conduct (NTPSCC) was not tendered by
the Plaintiff at the hearing however at the relevant
time, in 2015, the NTPSCC
arose under Section 16(2)(c) of the
Public Sector Employment and Management
(PSEMA) 1993 (the Act) and the Regulations. The objects of the Act
prescribed the Principles of Public Administration and Management,
Resource Management and Conduct. The NT Commissioner for Public Employment in
2015, Mr Ken Simpson, made rules, consistent
with the Act, relating to the good
management of the Northern Territory Public Sector (NTPS). These were known as
Employment Instructions
and included a Code of Conduct to be observed by all
public sector employees The NTPSCC was Employment Instruction Number 12 and
stipulated the minimum standards of conduct expected of public sector officers.
It stated that all public sector officers are bound
by the code.
have considered the historical NTPSCC 2015, referred to in clause 59.2 although
it was not tendered in the Plaintiff’s case,
as it was in force at the
time. There is no specific reference to bullying and harassment but there is
general reference to standards
of conduct that employees shall adhere to.
Consequences for failure to do so include breaches of
discipline.
59.3 refers specifically to an employee aggrieved of any workplace conduct
seeking a review under PSEMA, a legislative scheme.
The Defendant contends, it
is unlikely that clause 59 was intended to be expressly incorporated as a
contractual term because it
refers specifically to the legislative pathway for
an aggrieved employee to pursue workplace issues including complaints about
and harassment. Further there was and is already in existence
legislation and bullying laws, work health and safety, Commonwealth
occupational health and safety laws at the time of these
I don’t necessarily agree with the Defendant. I refer to the decision of
Romero v Farstad Shipping (Indian Pacific) Pty Ltd
where the full court of the
Federal Court of Australia held:
[55]The better view is to the contrary. The existence of legal obligations
on the part of both parties, might be thought to be a good
contractually binding the parties to a specific method as to the manner in which
those statutory obligations are to be
observed. The legislation necessarily
dictates that the obligations are serious, being an added reason why one would
expect the promises
to be binding.
[55]In situations where clear language is used and sufficient emphasis is
placed upon the need for compliance (implicitly by both
parties) with the terms
of a company policy, then especially where that goes to fundamental conditions
of employment, such as payment
and the method of compliance with external
statutory obligations, objectively viewed, the parties would be expected to
regard such
terms as contractually binding
this case clause 59 refers to legislatively mutual obligations as well as
obligations that could be contractually binding. The
NTPSCC referred to in
clause 59.2 goes to a compulsory
public sector code of conduct
goes to fundamental conditions of employment such as
conduct standards,
conflicts of interest and disclosure of wrongdoing
by all public sector
employees. The consequences of non-compliance with the code are stated to be
possible disciplinary proceedings.
NTPSCC refers to public sector officers being mandatorily obliged to comply with
the code. In relation to conduct the NTCC says
an employee ‘...
exercise proper courtesy, consideration and sensitivity and
act with fairness and equity in their dealings with members of the public and
with other employees.’
[Principles of Conduct NTCC
Partnership Agreement 2004
(PA) is referred to in the contract of
employment letter of offer, exhibit P1, and the letter states the
Plaintiff’s conditions
of employment are in the PA as ‘amended from
time to time’ (as well as in relevant legislation also referred to in the
letter). The Plaintiff argues this is evidence that the PA and specifically
clause 59 is expressly incorporated in the contract by
express reference in the
letter of offer.
wording of clause s.59.1 in the most recent version tendered, exhibit:
“59.1 All parties to the agreement acknowledge the commitment to
achieve and maintain a safe and healthy work environment
all reasonably practicable steps to prevent harassment and bullying
in the workplace...”
uses mandatory language which is some evidence of
an intention by both parties that the clause might be incorporated into Mr
contract of employment and was intended to be more than just an
aspirational statement.
the language in clause 59.2 is mandatory and the NTPSCC 2015 consistently uses
the words ‘an employee
The clause itself uses
mandatory language which suggests a contractually binding obligation on the
employee which can be contrasted
with the discretionary language of
where an employee’s can decide whether to pursue a remedy in clause
59.3 if aggrieved at work.
Clause 59.2 all parties to this Agreement acknowledge the NTPS Code of
Conduct. Pursuant to the Code,
an employee must behave
in a professional
manner in carrying out their duties and treat colleagues, supervisors and others
in the workplace with courtesy,
dignity and respect at all times.
Clause 59.3
uses the word ‘
context of an employee’s discretion to pursue a
I agree that the analysis of clause 59.1 and the clause as a whole, shows it is
may be more than an aspirational statement
due to the expression of the parties
intention evidenced by the mandatory language used and the mutual obligations
created such that
the conclusion is that not only was it within the
contemplation of the parties it is the only logical conclusion.
do find given the language used and the mutual obligations of clause 59.1 make
it likely that the clause is incorporated into Mr
Green’s contract of
employment as an express contractual term imposing obligations on Mr Green and
his employer, the Defendant
to adhere to maintain a state of affairs to provide
and maintain a safe and healthy work environment and to prevent
bullying/harassment
in the workplace by incorporating clause 59.1 of the
Partnership Agreement 2004
the Plaintiff has established what standards and procedures the parties are
required to adhere to in ensuring their contractual
obligations are met is
another issue.
If Clause 59.1 expressly incorporated did the
Defendant breach the clause by failing to prevent bullying and harassment of Mr
of whether clause 59.1 is expressly incorporated in his contract of employment I
find the Plaintiff has not established
on the evidence that there was a breach
of that term of the contract. I find the Plaintiff’s case falls short
evidentially.
of the Plaintiff’s difficulty is not establishing what standards and
procedures the parties are required to adhere to in
ensuring their contractual
obligations are met. However evidentially the impugned conduct has also not been
Has the Plaintiff established on the evidence that he
was bullied by OIC Ferguson and that when he complained to his superiors they
failed to act on his concerns?
short answer is no.
find the Plaintiff has not established on the balance of probabilities
there was a failure by the Defendant to prevent bullying and
harassment in the workplace by:
a) Failing to deal with OIC Ferguson after he complained to them; or
b) Failing to undertake any workplace investigation of his complaints to prevent
him being bullied by OIC Ferguson; and
c) Failing to prevent bullying through the disciplinary proceedings, by
intervening to stop them
Breach of the Express Term
Plaintiff sought to take the Court to the wording of clause 59.1 as an express
term but did not seek to explain how it was administered
in the contractual
environment. The evidence about the parties’ knowledge and or intention
regarding the standards and expectations
and mutual obligations relating to
preventing bullying and harassment in the workplace fell short. I find there is
a distinct absence
of evidence about the parties objective intention when
entering into the contract of employment or during his employment as to what
standard of conduct and behaviour was that was expected to be adhered to ensure
that clause 59.1 would be achieved and maintained.
Significantly
the Plaintiff did not seek to introduce into evidence any policies or procedures
prepared by the employer dealing with
Workplace Health and Safety, Bullying
and/or Harassment in the workplace or Investigation of Complaints. There is
usually well known
and established workplace practices procedures and policies
regarding bullying and harassment in the workplace. I find that as a
inference policies and procedures did exist however none were tendered in
evidence or relied on by the Plaintiff to prove
any breach of the express term.
Policies were tendered as evidence, exhibit P5 –
General Orders
Regional Station Appointments
and also referred to in correspondence,
Respect Equity Diversity Policy,
exhibit P 25.8
have considered the historical NTPSCC 2015, referred to in clause 59.2 although
it was not tendered in the Plaintiff’s case,
as it was in force at the
time. The Code of Conduct does provide some assistance. There is no specific
reference to bullying and
harassment but there is general reference to standards
of conduct that employees shall adhere to. Consequences for failure to do
include breaches of discipline. The language is mandatory. However for the
reasons set out I don’t find that any breach
The Evidence about bullying
evidence given by Mr Green about his understanding of the Defendant’s
obligation to provide a safe system of work is that
Mr Green understood the safe
workplace was achieved not only through the award but through the provision of a
psychologist and a
Chaplin visiting the station and the provision of peer
support. He also referred to the existence of ongoing training regarding
and that it was not to be tolerated, and that this was reinforced by
the Minister and the then Police Commissioner,
pressed in Cross Examination Mr Green stated his understanding of making a
complaint was to complain to his supervisors about
bullying in the workplace. He
stated he believed telling his immediate supervisor A/DO Kleeman and DO Letheby
was sufficient to have
his complaints heard and dealt with. He stated he had
lodged a s.59 formal grievance about OIC Ferguson’s bullying conduct
2018, at or after the time of the Board’s decision, but relied on his
union and lawyers to do the
and prior to that time
he did not know about that process because he was not told about it by Alice
P25 is a copy of the email grievance sent to CFO Spain on 16 April 2018. P26 is
the CFO’s response dated 2 October 2018
which referred to
The Respect,
Equity and Diversity Policy
. That policy was not tendered in court or made
available. The CFO also stated that the Plaintiff’s complaints were being
seriously, enquiries had been made and his complaint had the potential to
form the basis of disciplinary proceedings under PSEMA
so the CFO could not
provide the Plaintiff with any further information.
find that workplace Policies did, by inference, exist which purported to
regulate how grievances and complaints were to be managed,
including the
disciplinary proceedings against him; however they were not put in evidence by
the Plaintiff.
Green gave evidence about a process he said he was encouraged to follow to relay
his concerns about Ferguson to his superiors once
he was aware he was to be
transferred to Tennant Creek. He stated he did relay some concerns to his
superiors on several occasions.
Green listed several incidents of concerning conduct by Ferguson, however the
evidence about relaying such concerns to his superiors
lacked particularity and
detail about: when he spoke to them other than he visited Alice Springs after
being transferred to Tennant
Creek, where he spoke to them, who was present,
what was said, what the outcome was of the discussion and was of such generality
that I am unable to ascertain what the nature of any complaint was or if it was
a complaint at all.
Green’s evidence was that his initial complaints about Ferguson in 2015
and 2016 to his superiors at the Alice Springs Fire-station
were made informally
and were made when he went to Alice Springs. His evidence was that was how he
was encouraged to raise issues.
He complains that his superiors failed to
investigate his complaints about Ferguson’s conduct. He stated on some
he received responses about how to manage Ferguson’s conduct
such as to ignore Ferguson’s direction not to socialise
with certain
persons but that on other occasions he believed that his concerns were passed on
to Ferguson.
Green does not assert his complaints were in writing or formally documented in
any way to the Defendant but that they were raised
when he met with DO Lethby
and A/DO Kleeman at Alice Springs and one matter, the speedway matter was dealt
with directly by Spain
at Tennant Creek.
is significant given that Mr Green did not pursue the remedy under clause 59.3
in relation to raising his concerns about OIC
Ferguson. He suggests that his
superiors were obliged to act on his complaints. The evidence is that they did
act in a number of
ways to deal with Mr Green’s
complaints.
a) CFO Spain dealt with the speedway incident immediately and told OIC Ferguson
to stop support services. The Plaintiff’s evidence
did not disclose any
further complaint being raised regarding OIC Ferguson admonishing him about this
incident afterwards;
b) A/DO Kleeman advised him to take problems higher on occasion which he did;
c) DO Letheby spoke directly to OIC Ferguson about his conduct generally
presumably in an attempt to resolve any workplace issues.
evidence was he was aware that DO Letheby intended to speak to Ferguson, he did
not complain about this happening;
d) Mr Green’s evidence did not disclose he ever told his superiors about
any angry backlash he perceived from OIC Ferguson
after DO Letheby spoke to him
e) DO Letheby told him to ignore issues about socialising and Mr Green’s
evidence was that he got on with his social life after
a certain point and did
not raise some issues with his superiors.
evidence reveals his superiors did deal with his complaints after he raised
them. Mr Green’s evidence fell short as he did
not say he told his
superiors that OIC Ferguson was angry with him for going out of the chain of
command and complaining about him.
His evidence was also that he sorted his
social life out and took his superiors advice and ignored OIC Ferguson’s
and did not raise this issue again. He did not take the speedway
issue to his superiors again after the CFO dealt with the issue
so his superiors
could not have known about any backlash.
issue of OIC Green speaking to him harshly and threatening him may or may not
have been addressed however; I am unable on Mr Green’s
evidence to
determine when exactly he spoke to his superiors, what he complained about, when
they said they would speak to OIC Ferguson
and what outcome there was if any.
There is no chronology of his concerns and it is not possible to determine the
sequence of alleged
events. Mr Green’s evidence of his complaints lack
particularity, they are not formally recorded nor are they in writing and
is no evidence from the Plaintiff that he ever followed up with anybody about
any particular matter.
if OIC Ferguson’s conduct towards the Plaintiff was angry and
inappropriate on occasion causing Mr Green’s superiors
to speak to him, Mr
Green did not follow through and report to his superiors that OIC
Ferguson’s conduct was escalating towards
him. It goes without saying that
his superiors could only act on complaints they received. On his evidence Mr
Green did not take
the more serious matters to his superiors such as any
escalation or backlash due to him complaining about OIC
the Plaintiff gave evidence he was told on several occasions that his supervisor
would raise the matter with Ferguson as a
mechanism to deal with his concern. Mr
Green was not only aware this would happen but said it appeared that on occasion
occur. The matter which had specific detail was the issue about the
speedway which was actioned by the CFO on the spot while he was
at Tennant Creek
where Ferguson was told his officers were not to man the speedway from then on.
Ferguson then allegedly retaliated
against Green however his evidence was not
that he complained about the retaliation to his superiors.
was no evidence from any employee of the Defendant that Mr Green did raise
concerns with his superiors and that they were taken
as bullying and harassment
complaints that required investigation in the workplace, or that a workplace
investigation was instigated
or should have been and was not. The
Plaintiff’s complaint is that there was a failure to act which failed to
prevent him being
I find it could indeed be entirely possible to incorporate into a contract of
employment an express contractual term imposing
obligations on an employer to
adhere to certain standards and procedures including maintaining a state of
affairs where a workplace
is free from bullying/harassment by incorporating
clause 59.1 of the PA, the Plaintiff case falls short evidentially when it comes
to determining if that clause has been breached. Likewise regarding the
investigation with reasonable care of workplace complaints
manner of complaint about OIC Ferguson initially in 2015 and 2016, differs from
his later evidence that once the disciplinary
proceedings were instigated
against him, Mr Green then became involved with representatives from
who was able to assist him to defend the allegations. Through that
process he appeared to be given advice about the legislative scheme
he was being
pursued under. He then made a formal complaint against OIC Ferguson in 2018 for
bullying and harassment under the same
legislative scheme referred to in clause
59.3 of the PA. There is overlap with his complaints, see exhibit P25.
issue of any complaint being made and any process of complaint of OIC Ferguson
bullying or harassing the Plaintiff prior to the
instigation of the disciplinary
proceedings was that he made informal complaints at best through discussions
with his superiors believing
that was the mechanism to do so and that he did not
pursue any formal complaint under PSEMA as set out in clause 59.3. His evidence
was he was not aware of any grievance policy or referred to the code of conduct
and his evidence was that was because Alice Springs
did not tell him about that
despite referencing workplace training about bullying and having read the
Green did make complaints in writing through his representatives
United Voice’
during the disciplinary proceedings in 2018
justice and
could not answer the allegations being made against him without
adequate disclosure on at least one occasion and actively sought
to defend the
allegations made against him.
Green also wrote to protest the outcome of the disciplinary proceedings to the
CFO after his decision and the Police Commissioner
Reece Kershaw. The court is
also aware of a Grievance Process the Plaintiff availed himself of pursuant to
when he appealed the disciplinary decision. A copy of the
Board’s decision was tendered in evidence as Exhibit P7. The CEO
CFO declined to suspend the decision pending his appeal and enforced the
transfer to Alice Springs. The Defendant waited
for the Board’s
mechanism or a grievance mechanism is also referred to by the CFO in his
correspondence about Mr Green’s complaint however
Mr Green did not make a
formal complaint about OIC Ferguson until after the Board’s decision in
Conclusion bullying
conclusion I find that the evidence is not of a sufficient standard for me to
make a determination of the existence of the contractual
framework and the
that may have existed to manage bullying and harassment in the
workplace and to action or investigate complaints of such conduct.
I am unaware
of the standards and procedures promised by the Employer as a contractual
obligation, if there were any, to prevent
and to investigate any allegations of
bullying or harassment in the workplace other than that in clause
Green did not pursue the contractual remedy by seeking a review under clause
59.3, as he did not pursue his complaints about OIC
Ferguson under PSEMA, which
would have instigated an investigation of his complaints. He complains when he
raised his concerns with
his superiors they failed to investigate. He may
suggest that raising matters with his superiors is enough to trigger a clause
review if a term of his contract, however I don’t find that is the
case. Mr Green complained informally by raising his concerns
supervisors. There is no evidence about what standard Mr Ferguson and the
employees were expected to adhere to determine
if clause 59.1 was breached even
if the term was expressly incorporated.
is a lack of certainty and precision in Mr Green’s evidence about how,
when and in what manner and form he raised the
concerns with his superiors such
that I can’t be satisfied that he actually made complaints to his
superiors that justified
different action to that taken. I make my findings in
light of Mr Green’s evidence that most if not all of the concerns he
actually raised were dealt with in a particular manner with his knowledge. Mr
Green appears to complain that he was not satisfied
with what his superiors did,
however there is no evidence he pursued this further with his superiors.
Significantly, there is no
evidence he ever told them that OIC Ferguson was
become angry with him for going outside the chain of command or that his conduct
was escalating or retaliatory.
this case though I may conclude the specific clause s59.1 of the PA is
incorporated as an express term of Mr Greens’ contract,
in the absence of
additional evidence about the clause and any policies procedures or education in
the workplace about bullying and
harassment I cannot conclude that there has
been a breach of the express term as asserted.
also find that the conduct alleged as bullying conduct by OIC Ferguson is not
proven and importantly that the conduct of his superiors
alleged as failing to
prevent him from being bullied and harassed by OIC Ferguson has not been proven
by the Plaintiff to breach
the express term
to Disciplinary Proceedings
Mr Green’s case the breach asserted by him is that 1) his superiors failed
to prevent bullying and harassment by failing
to action his complaints about OIC
Ferguson and 2) the disciplinary proceeding against him contributed to the
bullying and harassment
in the workplace and the Defendant failed to intervene
to stop the proceedings when they had opportunity to do so. There is no evidence
that the complaints to the superiors triggered or grounded the disciplinary
proceedings. Mr Green did not assert this in evidence
and the facts grounding
the disciplinary proceedings were different to his complaints.
is no evidence that the proceedings were triggered as a result of malice or that
the complaints were connected in any way. The
Board’s findings do not go
this far. The case of
Romero v Farstad Shipping
can be distinguished in
this regard on the facts. In that case the relevant policy was found to be
expressly incorporated into the
contract. Ms Romero’s email to her
employer alleging certain conduct against her Captain was taken by her employers
as a complaint
and a workplace investigation was commenced which resulted in
allegations being made against her by her Captain. The court found
employer’s had breached their contractual duty to her by failing to follow
the workplace procedure for investigations
set out under the policy.
I find the Plaintiff is conflating 2 issues. One being the alleged failure to
prevent bullying and harassment by failing to
action or investigate his alleged
complainants made to his superiors about OIC Ferguson’s conduct; and two
by alleging the
disciplinary proceedings by the Defendant contributed to
bullying and harassment in the workplace as the Defendant failed to stop
disciplinary proceedings. I find that the only conclusion I can come to is the
Defendant asserts that the disciplinary proceedings
themselves constituted
unreasonable management action taken against him by his superiors. They are
different matters.
Green did not tender any procedure or policy or point to any contractually
binding process the Defendant was obliged to follow
that was breached in regards
to the disciplinary proceedings against him other than the express term as
failing to prevent bullying
and harassment. The Defendant was obliged to manage
the disciplinary proceedings reasonably under PSEMA and the law however, as
I find the evidence falls short of proving the management action was not
reasonable and that any breach has been proven of the express
term because it
was bullying of Mr Green by his managers.
the Plaintiff complains the manner of the workplace investigation against him,
the disciplinary proceedings was unreasonable
and inappropriate, he has again
failed to establish, other than by relying on the Board’s decision how
this constituted bullying
and harassment by the Defendant which breached a
contractual term.
Plaintiff did appeal the Decision of the CFO under s59A of PSEMA to the Board.
The Board’s decision does not lead to a conclusion
or finding that the
Defendant’s management action was unreasonable or inappropriate. The Board
made findings about the outcome
and the penalty imposed being unreasonable and
inappropriate and reversed the finding that he had breached discipline. The
also made certain directions with a view to financially compensating Mr
Green to some extent and attempting to remedy any reputational
damage he had
suffered in the workplace. Whilst the Board was also critical of the evidentiary
basis of the Defendant’s findings
critical of some of the processes
of the disciplinary proceedings
, the evidence falls short of me being able
to make a finding that the management action was unreasonable. The Directions
process don’t lead to the ultimate finding sought by the
Green did not tender any evidence other than the Board’s findings to
support this claim. I cannot make a
Jones v Dunkel
direction to fill in
the gaps of Mr Green’s case regarding this evidential shortfall and I do
not do so. I find these assertions
cannot be established in the absence of
further evidence about the conduct of such proceedings and any established
practices, processes
and procedural guidelines which should have been adhered to
and were not. Nor can I go so far as to make a finding that a lack of
fairness was not afforded to Mr Green or that OIC Ferguson’s complaints
were instigated by malice.
I am wrong about whether clause 59.1 is expressly incorporated, I find as set
out above, that there is insufficient evidence to
establish that the express
term has been breached by the Defendant without evidence of what procedures were
required to be followed
by the employer contractually to prevent bullying and
harassment in the workplace. Also and most significantly the evidence does
support a finding that the Defendant’s conduct breached the term as the
Plaintiff has not proven the Defendant failed to
prevent bullying and
harassment.
Plaintiff bears the onus to establish not only that the term is incorporated but
the scope of the term and that it has been breached
by the employer’s
conduct or failure to act. That has not occurred.
Implied Term of Contract: Foreseeability of risk of harm or injury
Plaintiff’s Statement of Claim includes a specific plea stating that there
is an Implied Term at common law in Mr Green’s
contract that the
Defendant Employer would provide a healthy and safe working environment
the contractual duty of care. The precise scope was not identified clearly at
the trial beyond this general expression, though some
assistance can be gleaned
from written submissions subsequently filed. The Defendant does not dispute that
this term is implied into
the contract at law however states that the precise
scope requires elucidation. I agree.
find as in the decision of
and it is properly conceded
by the Defendant, there is an implied term in the contract of employment that
the Defendant is to provide
a safe and healthy work environment. That implied
term includes an obligation and duty of care that the Defendant takes all
steps to prevent bullying and harassment in the workplace in order to
maintain that state of affairs.
Defendant asserts that the implied term can only be the basis for a claim for
personal injury because it has been implied by the
courts to protect workers
from risk of injury while working, not for pecuniary damages arising out of harm
other than personal injury.
The Plaintiff asserts otherwise and argues that the
obligation is not so confined and extends to economic loss suffered by a worker
where an employer fails to provide a safe system of work.
Plaintiff does not appear to resile from the requirement that the Plaintiff must
still establish that there is a ‘risk of
injury or harm’ to the
Plaintiff that must be established due to the Defendant’s failure to
provide a safe system of
work, however asserts that damages can be awarded for
harm caused of an economic nature as a result of the breach of the employers
contractual obligation to provide a safe system of work.
Plaintiff specifically eschews that he suffered any physical or mental injury
for the purposes of these proceedings, as a result
of the alleged conduct and no
evidence from any medical professional was relied on at trial. Some evidence was
led in the case regarding
the risk of the alleged conduct on the Plaintiff
mentally and on his family, but the majority of the evidence was on the
consequences
to him professionally and economically. Mr Green stated he did not
take any sick leaved during the relevant period and that he did
not lodge a
Worker’s Compensation Medical Certificate or a
of Fitness to Work.
exhibit P8 of 26 October, when Mr Green’s union representative wrote to
the CEO Commissioner Kershaw she referred to the
being genuinely
upset how this matter has been conducted as it has placed himself and his wife
under unnecessary stress.
Mr Green also referred to a risk to his family and
his own mental health should he have to return to Tennant Creek in his
correspondence
to CFO Spain on 16 April 2018, however he does not drill down to
any specifics about what that risk entails just makes a general
statement that
he is not confident that the culture of the fire service will change given his
past dealings with OIC Ferguson and
DO Letheby and his experiences of the
disciplinary proceedings.
Green gave evidence he was suspended from duty from 2 November 2016 for 4 months
and he did not speak to anyone during that time
as he was directed not to talk
He gave evidence he
was transferred to Alice Springs against his wishes and his family went to
Adelaide instead of accompanying him
to Alice Springs. He said he had gone to a
Doctor but gave no evidence of the impact of the alleged bullying by OIC
Ferguson; the
disciplinary proceedings or the adverse outcome; or the appeal
proceedings.
Green’s evidence was there was a need for the Defendant to remedy the
Tennant Creek work environment as his perception was
it was unsafe for him to
was the disciplinary proceedings
were a ‘stitch up’ and he did not
trust DO Letheby or the Fire Service to deal with him fairly at work regardless
the Board’s findings but he did not extrapolate that to any risk to his
mental health including whether he was labouring under
any ongoing workplace or
personal stress as a result of what was occurring.
is in fact a paucity of evidence about any actual or ongoing consequence to his
mental health or any risk to his mental health.
It appears on that Mr Green
sought to rely on the inference that there was risk to his mental health if he
was required to return
to the work environment under OIC Ferguson given the
allegations of the bullying conduct as a whole.
is an implied term of a contract of employment that the employer owes to each
employee a duty to provide a healthy and safe working
environment and to take
reasonable care to protect the employee against foreseeable injury arising out
of the contract of employment.
(I will refer to this duty as the implied
contractual duty of care, for convenience.) The content of the duty is the same
the duty itself is found in the contract of employment or in a tortious
duty of care.
The duty includes a duty to take reasonable care to avoid causing or
committing psychiatric injury to the employee,
if psychiatric injury
the particular employee
is reasonably foreseeable
The circumstance that it is a matter
of “general knowledge” that recognisable psychiatric illnesses may
be triggered
by stress does not lead to the conclusion that an employer must now
that all employees
are at risk of psychiatric injury
from stress at work
the case law makes clear it is not enough to say that there was a risk that a
psychological or psychiatric disorder might be triggered
by Mr Green being
stressed by the disciplinary proceedings? It is also insufficient for him to say
his perception was that if he
returned to Tennant Creek it would be a risk to
his Mental Health.
find in this case the evidence falls well short of the Plaintiff establishing
that in Mr Green’s case the employer was on
notice that there was a risk
to that particular employee that they might commit a psychiatric injury as a
result of the alleged conduct.
The risk is too remote and not established by Mr
The Scope of the Implied Term to Provide a Safe and
Healthy Work Environment – Does it include a Duty on the Employer to
the disciplinary proceedings in a fair way?
Plaintiff claims that they do not seek to expand the scope of the duty implied
(see submissions). Whilst there is no dispute about
the implication of a term
concerning a safe and healthy working environment I find the Plaintiff has in
fact sought to include in
the scope of this implied duty to make an argument at
trial that the Defendant breached this term of the contract by failing
undertake disciplinary proceedings in a fair way
Plaintiff has asserted in the pleadings that the disciplinary proceedings
actioned by the Defendant constituted bullying and harassment
against him in the
workplace, amongst other allegations. The Plaintiff specifically pleaded and
stated that the disciplinary proceedings
are part of the conduct alleged as
bullying and harassment and part of the failure to provide and safe and healthy
work environment.
Further the Plaintiff asserts the actions of the Defendant in
conducting the disciplinary proceedings culminated in the state of
whereby the workplace at Tennant Creek was unsafe.
Board’s findings were that the
adverse outcome of the disciplinary
proceedings were unreasonable and inappropriate
and certain actions needed
to be remedied by the Defendant. The Plaintiff alleges that the Defendant did
nothing to make good this
unsafe work environment thus making it unsafe for him
to return to Tennant Creek. The Board was also critical of some of the
Defendant’s
processes in conducting the disciplinary proceedings.
evidence led by the Plaintiff and the clarification of the issues (sought by the
Court via written submissions at the close of
the evidence) in the
Plaintiff’s submissions disclose that Mr Green also complains that the
Defendant failed to:
investigate or take steps to address the complaints by Mr Green (about
Ferguson’s alleged bullying conduct)
b) make any attempt to properly deal with the unsafe situation
disciplinary action
wrongly taken against the employee
c) it remained impossible for the worker to return to his contracted position as
the employer did not take any reasonable steps to
make the workplace safe for
him once the Board handed down its decision.
find that the Plaintiff seeks to have the implication of a term into his
contract of employment concerning a safe and healthy working
environment which
necessarily includes in the scope of that term that the Defendant was required
to undertake disciplinary proceedings in a fair way
given how he
has pleaded his case. He specifically asserts that the disciplinary proceedings
wrongly taken against the employee
his evidence he complained not only about the consequences of the disciplinary
proceedings, he complained about how they were
conducted, the fact he was not
afforded natural justice during the proceedings and the findings made against
him which caused him
to appeal as follows:
a) In October 2016 Ferguson and / or Letheby initiated disciplinary proceedings
against Mr Green and he was suspended from his employment
from 28 October
b) Mr Green defended the disciplinary proceedings and denied any
misconduct.
Defendant offered Mr Green an option to discontinue the disciplinary proceedings
against him without further action, if he agreed
to a transfer back to Alice
Springs, or to have an external investigator appointed to investigate and for Mr
Green to remain in Tennant
Creek while that
d) Mr Green opted to remain in Tennant
e) The Defendant did not appoint an external investigator and proceeded to make
adverse findings against Mr Green on all counts of
misconduct.
Green also pleaded his case in the same manner:
a) the institution of, and adverse outcome of the disciplinary proceedings
contributed to the
failure of the Defendant to prevent bullying and
harassment in the workplace and/or the creation of the unsafe and unhealthy work
environment
(the impugned conduct)
[para h Amended SOC]:
b) that during the workplace investigation itself, the suspension from duty
contributed to the impugned conduct, [para i Amended
c) that CFO Spain advising Mr Green in writing of the adverse outcome and
accusing him “
of demonstrating a lack of honesty; and a willingness to
provide false and misleading information
” contributed to the impugned
conduct [para k Amended SOC];
d) that CFO Spain advising Mr Green in writing of a disciplinary transfer and a
formal caution and giving him time to respond contributed
to the impugned
conduct [para k Amended SOC];
e) Mr Green being advised by the Defendant that his disciplinary transfer to
Alice Springs as would be actioned despite requesting
he not be transferred
contributed to the impugned conduct [para l, m, n, o Amended SOC];
f) Mr Green being transferred to Alice Springs contributed to the impugned
conduct [para p Amended SOC].
carefully reviewing the evidence and submissions I can only conclude that this
is the scope of the term given the case pleaded.
Employer owe an employee a duty to take reasonable care in the conduct of
workplace investigations?
the decisions of
New South Wales v Paige
became well established that an employer
does not owe an employee a duty
to take reasonable care in the conduct of workplace investigations not to cause
foreseeable injury
under an implied contractual duty of care to provide a
healthy and safe work environment
was anticipated that this decision might come under scrutiny in the recent
appeal in the matter of
Govier v The Uniting Church in Australia Property
to the High Court of
appeal the Court held at [66]:
[77]... That difference between this case and
has no bearing
upon the New South Wales Court of Appeal’s decision
that the proposed
duty by an employer to supply a safe system of investigation and decision-making
in relation to the incidents of
an employee’s contract of employment, as
opposed to a safe system of work in relation to the conduct of tasks
which an employee was engaged, would involve a novel category of duty of
to the High Court of Australia, found that in order to
consider whether the proposed duty was compatible with the legislative and
contractual context of the employment relationship, it was necessary to have the
employment contract in evidence along with any applicable
workplace policies. As
the contract and policies were not in evidence in the earlier proceedings, the
High Court found that a proper
consideration of the question as to the existence
and scope of any duty of care was not possible. Leave to appeal was revoked
effectively
disposing of the litigation.
the recent case of
Hayes v State of
the appeal court
held that the trial judge had erred in finding that no duty of care arose as a
consequence of the decision in
. The majority of the appeal
court found that
did not apply because the appellants made
“no complaint about the investigation itself”. Instead, it was
contended that
the appellants’ cases were based on a duty to support them
as employees while the investigations were carried. His Honor Dalton
...insofar as the appellants did not attack the fact of, or processes of,
the investigations, there was no incoherence or inconsistency
between any
administrative law concepts and the duty of care alleged. Nor was there any
inconsistency between the duty of care alleged
by the appellants and the
employer’s duty (common law in this case) to investigate the complaints
made by one group of employees
against another group of employees. My conclusion
therefore is that the principles in
did not stand in the
way of a duty of care arising.
find that unlike the decision of
Mr Green does make a
complaint about the investigation itself, the disciplinary proceedings. He
specifically particularises this process
as being part of the continuing breach
of the contract of employment which operated to constitute bullying and
harassment and created
an unsafe and unhealthy working environment.
Mr Green also complains of other matters concerning his employer’s
failures to take certain actions both before and after
the disciplinary
proceedings and related to the consequences of the disciplinary proceedings, he
does not confine his claim to these
find and conclude that the Plaintiff complains that that the Defendant failed
to undertake disciplinary proceedings in a fair way
constituted bullying and harassment and contributed to the unsafe and unhealthy
work environment.
find that the Plaintiff seeks to conflate the issues. He seeks to argue that the
Defendant failed to properly investigate his bullying
allegations against OIC
Ferguson. The Plaintiff further argues that
the Defendant then failed to
provide a safe system of investigating and decision making in the context of the
disciplinary proceedings
against him and this constituted bullying and
harassment as the management action taken was not reasonable.
finally, seeks to argue that subsequently this resulted in an unsafe system of
work in relation to the possible conduct of
his tasks at Tennant Creek such that
he could not remain there and perform his duties.
I find that the Plaintiff seeks to argue amongst other matters, the novel
category of duty of care addressed in both
which has been found not to be implied at
Plaintiff’s case the complaint is that the investigation itself (the
unreasonable management action against him) is
part of the bullying and
harassment and the cause of the damage.
the duty does not exist and secondly it is too remote. As such I find that his
claim is not actionable under the common law
implied contractual
PSEMA and the Grievance Process
Incoherence or
Inconsistency between any administrative law concepts and the duty of care
a breach of discipline under s.49 of PSEMA to be found the CEO of the Agency
must be satisfied under s49A on reasonable grounds
that an employee has
committed a breach of discipline. Further pursuant to s49A (3) the CEO
take disciplinary action unless satisfied a) the action is appropriate
and reasonable in the circumstances etc...
remedy for the wrongful exercise of the disciplinary power is to seek a review
of the decision of the CEO under s59 or appeal
the decision under s59A who
conducts a hearing de novo. Inherent in that process is the same requirements of
reasonableness and appropriateness
as set out in the preceding paragraph. Whilst
the rules of evidence do not apply the principles of Natural Justice and
Fairness do and are enshrined in the legislation.
statutory and regulatory framework in Mr Green’s contract of employment
provided restraints on the exercise of power by
the Defendant and by those
exercising supervisory or other powers under the PSEMA or the EBA
could affect Mr Green adversely.
existence of the means of redress can be taken to operate as a normative
influence on the behaviour of the Defendant and of others
in positions of
responsibility. Mr Green and his fellow employees are provided with means of
redress in those cases in which powers
are exercised unfairly, or are perceived
to have been exercised unfairly.
this way, employees such as Mr Green obtain the kind of protection to which, as
I understand it, the implied term sought to be
relied on is directed. The
statutory and regulatory context in which Mr Green was employed provided, by a
variety of means, for the
achievement of a balance between the Defendant’s
interests in discharging the obligations imposed by the
relevant legislation
and the employee’s interests in not being unfairly or improperly
doubt in any event that any such duty could be found to have been breached in
the circumstances alleged. That is because, in the
determination of the nature
and extent of any breach, account would have to be taken of the means of
grievance resolution and appeal
available to Mr Green. Even if he had been
treated unfairly or inappropriately, the statutory and award context evinces an
that his grievances should be addressed within the confines of the
employment relationship, making use of the procedures provided.
the reasons already given, I am satisfied that Mr Green’s contract of
employment did not contain the scope of the implied
term which he must be
contending, to take reasonable care in the conduct of workplace investigations
not to cause foreseeable injury
(personal or economic) under an implied
contractual duty of care to provide a healthy and safe work environment.
evidence before this court disclosed that Mr Green pursued, successfully, a
grievance process through the Public Sector Appeals
Board to a conclusion which
resulted in adverse findings being made against the Defendant and OIC Ferguson
in the context of the
employment relationship. Economic awards were also made in
Mr Green’s favour as were directions with a view to mitigate damage
reputation.
was not put before the court about any pursuit of any outcome as ordered by the
Board and this was not a trial seeking specific
performance of the Board’s
orders. Presumably such orders could have been sought by the Plaintiff if
necessary to enforce the
Board’s orders.
case pleaded is that the Defendant failed to fulfil their contractual
obligations to
maintain a state or condition of affairs
relation to both of the contractual terms alleged to have been breached by the
applicant failing to:
a) Achieve and maintain a healthy and safe working environment and take all
reasonably practical steps to prevent harassment and
bullying in the work place
(EBA clause 59 (express term); and/or
b) Provide a healthy and safe work environment (implied term).
evidence relied on by the Plaintiff to prove his case is that the cause of
action accrued when the Defendant breached the duty
by either uplifting him from
his position as lead fire-fighter at Tennant Creek as a result of the
disciplinary proceedings or due
to the third party intervention of the
Board’s decision,
such that the obligation became impossible to
that time the Board had delivered its decision under the grievance process Mr
Green pursued.
Breach of the Implied Term of the
Contract to provide a Safe and Healthy System of Work
any event I find that the Plaintiff has not established any Implied Term was
breached by the Defendant.
is contended in this case that that the Defendant has breached an obligation to
provide a safe workplace in the following ways:
a) The supervisor Ferguson bullied and harassed the Plaintiff personally at
b) The Defendant through his direct supervisors failed to take any action to
investigate Mr Green’s complaints about Ferguson’s
bullying conduct;
c) The Defendant compounded the bullying conduct by pursuing the workplace
investigation against him/the disciplinary proceedings
instigated by
d) The disciplinary proceedings were conducted in an unreasonable manner
resulting in an adverse outcome for Mr Green;
e) Mr Green had to appeal the disciplinary proceeding to the Public Sector
Appeals Board;
f) The Defendant failed to make the workplace safe for Mr Green by implementing
the Board’s findings after the Board’s
further allege that this conduct was quite likely to cause Mr Green an injury
(in the form of a Psychological disorder). I note
that I have already found that
there was very little if any evidence about the risk of psychological harm or
injury to Mr Green in
this case. This is a significant matter. Ultimately I
would have found if required to decide this issue that there is a lack of
establishing such risk and any risk was too remote and not
foreseeable.
the Defendant through its employees may have genuinely held the belief that Mr
Green required some form of discipline, Mr
Green contends that the disciplinary
proceedings were wrongly brought and the Defendant should have intervened to
stop them. As such
he does complain that the disciplinary proceedings were
conducted in an unreasonable manner and he does complain about the manner
conduct of the workplace investigation itself not just the outcome of
discharge of the implied contractual duty of care required the Defendant to take
account of Mr Green’s individual circumstances
Koehler v Cerebros
(Australia Ltd
[2005] HCA 15
; (2005) 22
at 57). When I
consider the overall circumstances of Mr Green from the dates from late 2015 to
his uplift date and/or the Appeal
Board decision, I must be able to conclude
that the Defendant was in breach of that implied contractual duty. It is alleged
the breach arises as a result of the cumulative nature of the breach of
contract as alleged.
evidence is that the respondent engaged in the disciplinary proceedings during
this time which resulted in his transfer to Alice
Springs and then the Appeal
Board’s Tribunal proceedings. Significantly the aspects of the
disciplinary proceedings allegedly
constituting the bullying, harassment and
victimisation which Mr Green complains of was then addressed in the Appeal
Tribunal proceedings, a grievance process open to the
is necessary to determine if the conduct complained of amounted to poor
management practices or inappropriate treatment that was
then resolved, albeit
through a grievance process, or whether it did constitute bullying and
harassment as complained of by Mr Green.
By his conduct Mr Green accepted that a
continuing contractual relationship with the respondent was possible and did
evidence attaches significance to the failure of the respondent to properly
recognise and cease the disciplinary proceedings brought
against him by the
supervisor OIC Ferguson. The case pleaded asserts that subsequent management
action, the disciplinary proceedings,
taken by the Respondent was not
appropriate or reasonable and as such the findings of the Respondent in the
disciplinary proceedings
also constituted bullying and
harassment.
at work happens when a person or group of people repeatedly behave unreasonably
towards another worker or group of workers
and that behaviour creates a risk to
health and safety.
management action that is carried out in a reasonable way is not bullying or
harassment. A manager can make decisions about
poor performance; take
disciplinary action; direct and control the way work is carried out. However,
Management action that isn’t
carried out in a reasonable or appropriate
way may be considered bullying. In this case the Plaintiff is alleging that the
OIC Ferguson personally bullied and harassed him, his superiors
failed to act on complaints he made about that bullying and the disciplinary
proceedings and findings against the Plaintiff are also bullying or a failure to
provide a safe and healthy work environment.
to whether that conduct and those circumstances constitute bullying and or
harassment in the workplace is one thing but whether
the conduct even if proven,
is actionable for alleged breach of contract is another.
discussed the evidential findings I have made about the Board’s findings
do not lead me to conclude that the management action
was unreasonable and even
if it was I find it is not actionable under the Implied Term. I cannot conclude
the process constituted
bullying and harassment in and of itself. The allegation
is it also contributed to an unsafe work environment. I cannot conclude
ground the breach the Plaintiff needed to establish that this conduct was quite
likely to cause Mr Green an injury (in the form
of a psychical or psychological
disorder) regardless of whether Mr Green suffered such an injury or not. I find
that there was insufficient
evidence led at the hearing by the Plaintiff to
establish this to the requisite standard. The Plaintiff bore the onus. There was
never any suggestion that Mr Green was at risk of any physical injury and only
fleeting and passing references to any impact on the
Defendant of risk of harm
of a psychological injury, however the Plaintiff did not address this issue, the
‘risk of personal
injury’ on the evidence.
the paucity of evidence in this case about the risk of injury to Mr Green if the
claim were actionable, which I find it is not,
I don’t find any breach
occurred as any risk is too remote.
Breach of the Implied
Common Law Term of the Employment Contract - personal injury and s.52 Return to
Work Act (NT): Statute Bar
Defendant in the present matter has conceded the existence of the implied common
law Contractual duty as a matter of law. The
Defendant asserts that the
Plaintiff’s claim is not actionable as the he cannot claim damages for
breach of the common law
contract of the implied term for economic loss as
opposed to personal injury. The Defendant also pleads preclusion to the
Plaintiff’s
case by reason of section 52 of the
(NT) (RTW) as any claim for common law damages is barred. The Plaintiff
submits the duty is actionable and is not abolished by the
NT worker’s
compensation legislation that abolishes common law rights.
Plaintiff relies on the recent authority of
Kelly v Atanaskovic Hartnell
Corporate Services Pty Limited (No 2)
FedCFamC2G 112
paragraph [103], Driver J also made findings confirming a common law breach
of contract is actionable notwithstanding the application of the NSW
respective work
health statutory scheme. It is important to note that the
NSW legislation and scheme differs from the NT equivalent in a number of
material ways.
Defendants in
asserted the Plaintiff was precluded from claiming
damages because of the operation of Division 3, the ‘Modified Common Law
Damages’, and especially because her injury did not reach the 15%
threshold. Ultimately, Driver J found that there was not
enough evidence to
establish Ms Kelly sustained any psychiatric injury. However, significantly,
even in the absence of any injury,
he found the Defendant “
breaching the Employment Contract by failing to protect Mrs Kelly from the harm
inflicted upon her by Mr Atanaskovic
Plaintiff submits that although the construction of section 52 of the RTW Act
(NT) differs from its NSW counterparts, the Defendant’s
proposition that
the Court is prohibited from finding a breach of contract because of s52 of the
RTW Act must be rejected. It is
not in dispute that in the NT, if a compensable
injury is sustained, no common law claim will exist for damages as a result of
injury. The Plaintiff submits that the
decision confirms that
it does not follow from s52 RTW Act that there can be no claim for breach of the
implied term in any circumstances,
and in particular, such a claim is actionable
where s52 does not apply,
such as in claims that are not founded on the
existence of a personal injury
the judgement of
State of South Australia v
the joint judgment
of the Full Court, Doyle CJ, White, Kelly JJ discussed a submission that
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
(SA), (WRC)
had the effect of precluding the Plaintiff Mr McDonald of his claim for
breach of his employment contract.
The court found that the claim was not
precluded on this basis.
appeal Court found that at the time the existence or otherwise of a compensable
disability had not been established by the means
contemplated by the WRC Act for
such a determination. The Appeal Court went on to find that the trial judge had
awarded damages for
a breach of the appellant’s employment contract,
specifically the implied term in the employment contract. The court
... [196] the liability of the Minister for the breach of contract did not
arise because of the occurrence of the compensable disability.
Conduct by an
employer of the general kind found by the Judge in this case may be repudiatory,
and give rise to a claim for damages
for breach of contract, even in the absence
of the occurrence of a compensable disability. Although it is usually the
of injury which brings breaches of the implied contractual duty of
care before the courts, an employer may breach that implied term....
Without the
breach causing any injury at all. If such breaches are sufficiently serious to
be repudiatory the employee may accept
the repudiation and treat the contract at
an end. It would be a strange result if s54(1) is construed as precluding one
from bringing a claim for damages for breach of contract following a
repudiatory breach by an employer resulting in an injury
precluding a fellow employee who had been subject to the same conduct by those
who had not suffered an injury
[197] Another way of making the point is to note that just as there can be
repudiatory breach of a contract of employment without
the occurrence of a
compensable disability, so also can there be a compensable disability without
there having been any breach of
contract at all.
Supreme Court decision appears to be authority for the proposition that in cases
where no injury is suffered by the Plaintiff
a breach of the employment contract
is not precluded under the relevant Work Health or Workers Compensation
legislation. The liability
in that case did not arise out of any personal injury
suffered by the Plaintiff but out of the employers conduct for breach of the
implied term of the employment contract.
evidence in Mr Green’s case is that, Mr Green did not suffer any physical
or psychiatric or psychological harm or injury
in the nature of a compensable
injury. There is simply no evidence that has been put before the court.
Regardless the Defendant seeks
to argue that the action is statute barred and
summary I find that in this case there is no evidence of Mr Green suffering any
injury though he relies on some evidence of risk
of some psychiatric or
psychological injury. I find that the Plaintiff asserts liability of the
Defendant arises from breach of the
employment contract and not as a result of
any personal injury suffered by Mr Green. Any damages are not to be assessed as
compensation for any injury suffered by the Plaintiff.
is my view that s52 would not preclude an action at common law for breach of
contract in this case given that Mr Green not only
did not suffer any injury but
that there is insufficient evidence of any foreseeability of risk of injury
established on the evidence.
However, I do not need to decide this issue in this
case as I rule that:
a) If the Express Term is incorporated into the contract;
b) The Plaintiff has not proven that the term has been breached by the Defendant
on the balance of probabilities; and
c) The Implied Term is not actionable at common law as the scope of the Implied
term sought to be relied on by the Plaintiff to ground
his cause of action is
not actionable at common law; and
d) The Plaintiff has not established on the evidence that any real risk of
injury to Mr Green existed and was not foreseeable.
I find the way the Plaintiff has framed his case means I cannot conclude the
Defendant’s conduct as alleged constitutes
bullying and harassment in the
workplace and/or it resulted in an unsafe and unhealthy work environment.
this case I do find that clause 59.1 is likely to be expressly incorporated into
the Plaintiff’s contract of employment due
to the use of clear, mandatory
and mutually binding language where the intention of the parties is easily
ascertainable. I also find
that there is an implied term of Mr Green’s
contract of employment, which is conceded by the Defendant, that the Defendant
provide and maintain a safe and healthy work environment.
I find the scope of the Implied common law term relied on by the Plaintiff
includes an assertion that the disciplinary proceedings
were wrongly brought or
were unfair and that cause of action is precluded at common
Significantly
I find the Plaintiff has not proven that there was any breach of the express
term if it is incorporated, or the implied
term of the contract as relied on.
prove that the Defendant failed to prevent bullying and harassment (express
term) and failed to maintain a safe and healthy work
environment (implied term),
the Plaintiff relies on the combination of OIC Ferguson’s conduct as
bullying; his superior’s
failure to act on his complaints and investigate
OIC Ferguson’s conduct to prevent the impugned conduct; and the
Defendant’s
institution and conduct of the disciplinary proceedings
against him to make out his claim. He alleges a cumulative breach of the
is insufficient evidence for me to conclude that OIC Ferguson’s conduct
alone constituted bullying and harassment of Mr
Green at work. I also find that
Mr Green cannot prove his superiors did not act on his complaints about OIC
Ferguson such that he
can prove a breach of any express contractual term or
implied term. Further I find he cannot rely on the disciplinary proceedings
prove the Defendant breached either the express or implied term of his
employment contract. The evidence does not disclose that
the disciplinary
proceedings themselves were a mechanism for bullying or harassing Mr Green at
Importantly
whilst I find the evidence of the conduct of OIC Ferguson towards Mr Green is
concerning behaviour at work, some of the
behaviour was not the subject of
complaints to his superiors on Mr Green’s evidence. A close analysis of
his evidence shows
that while the Plaintiff raised some matters with his
superiors he often failed to follow through with the issues that might have
evidenced OIC Ferguson bullying Mr Green by being angry and retaliatory towards
also find the Plaintiff’s evidence about OIC Ferguson’s conduct and
complaints he made to his superiors and what they
did as a result lacked
specificity and detail to allow me to make findings that the superiors failed to
prevent Mr Green being bullied.
I find the Defendant, through Mr Green’s
superiors did in fact act in most cases when Mr Green raised a concern with
often with Mr Green’s knowledge and with the intention to address
his concerns. There were significant shortfalls in the Plaintiff’s
evidence about what he actually communicated to his superiors as complaints and
his evidence was that he did not follow through to
complain about matters he
asserts amounted to bullying by OIC Ferguson. Mr Green’s complaints were
not in writing, the evidence
was not chronological and the review process set
out in clause 59.3 under PSEMA was not actioned or sought by Mr Green when he
raised matters with his superiors on an ad hoc basis. There is no
evidence he followed through with his superiors to see what the
outcome was of
concerns he raised and some of the more serious allegations of bullying were not
the subject of a complaint at all
to his superiors on his evidence.
his superiors acted on and how they acted is discussed in my reasons and my
ultimate conclusion is that the conduct of OIC Ferguson
complained of
his superiors fell short of the allegations of bullying made by Mr Green in his
evidence. Whilst there is no evidence that his
superiors conducted any workplace
investigation against OIC Ferguson as a result of Mr Green’s complaints, I
that this resulted in a failure to prevent bullying and
harassment in the workplace.
am unable to find that the process of the Defendant instigating and prosecuting
the disciplinary proceedings constituted bullying
of Mr Green, and the
Defendant’s failure to stop the disciplinary proceedings constituted a
failure to prevent bullying and
harassment in the workplace or that it created
an unsafe work environment. For the reasons already given I have found that Mr
does assert that the Defendant wrongly commenced and pursued the
disciplinary proceedings and they were unfair, or were unreasonable
action. Importantly Mr Green submitted that the Defendant had the opportunity to
intervene to stop the proceedings at
several stages and failed to do so.
evidence relied on which is primarily the decision of the Board and the Admitted
Facts do not go so far as to allow me to make
such a finding. This is despite
the fact the Board was critical not only of the adverse outcome for Mr Green as
being unreasonable
and inappropriate but was also critical of some of the
processes of the workplace investigation against him in the directions, i)
j) and the decision to suspend Mr Green during the proceedings. Regardless, I
find that there is insufficient evidence for me
to make the finding sought to
the requisite standard without more evidence about the accepted practices,
procedures and protocols
of such disciplinary proceedings that should be adhered
to during the conduct of such proceedings.
the disciplinary proceedings, as stated I find the Plaintiff has not proven on
the evidence that the Defendant breached
the express term of the contract of
employment if it is incorporated.
I find he is unable to rely on the disciplinary proceedings as being unfair as a
breach of the implied term of his contract
of employment to provide a safe and
healthy work environment as the cause of action does not lie at common law. He
also has not established
on the evidence that the process of the disciplinary
proceedings were flawed, they were wrongly brought, were unfair, or were
unreasonable
management action.
find Mr Green also asks this court to find that the outcome of the disciplinary
proceedings created an unsafe work environment under
the Implied Term as his
employer failed to make his workplace at Tennant Creek safe. The Plaintiff
asserts his cause of action accrued
on his uplift or on the board’s
decision. They are different contentions. The decision of the CFO that he
breached discipline
was made in December 2018. He appealed the decision in April
2017. The decision of the Board on 14 March 2018 overturned the disciplinary
outcome and made directions to the Defendant that required action, some
regarding the Tennant Creek workplace which directly affected
Mr Green and was
contingent on Mr Green’s elections.
the Board’s decision Mr Green worked in Alice Springs. Mr Green has not
given or tendered any evidence that he was bullied
or harassed during this
period or that his workplace was unsafe or unhealthy at Alice Springs. What he
has asserted is it was unsafe
to return to Tennant Creek during this
12 April 2018, 2 months after the Board’s decision, the Plaintiff had
determined it would be unsafe to return to Tennant
Creek and notified the
Defendant of this fact and that he would not be returning to Tennant Creek.
There is no evidence that the
Plaintiff had elected to return to Tennant Creek
before that date. I find Mr Green had lost confidence in the Defendant and
it was his view that the Defendant would not make Tennant Creek safe
for him regardless of any action or inaction of the Defendant
and thus he
elected not to return.
find the Defendant had determined to address some of the Board’s
directions and this is evidenced in the CFO’s email
to Mr Green of 16
April 2018 and the letter of 30 July 2018, Exhibit P26. I am unable to assess
what other measures were being implemented
or not at Tennant Creek as there is
an absence of evidence to this effect. A statement that Mr Green’s
election was not considered
before his letter of 16 April 2022 is not sufficient
evidence for me to conclude that the workplace at Tennant Creek was unsafe for
him to return to. I have no evidence before me about where OIC Ferguson was at
that time, who was at the Fire-station, how long it
would have taken for any
an election was made. Whilst
this court cannot speculate, the absence of
evidence about the state of affairs is relevant. Mr Green’s perception is
sufficient basis for this court to make a finding as sought by the
Plaintiff. I find that Mr Green’s election on the basis
he claims is not
is insufficient evidence for me to conclude that OIC Ferguson’s conduct
alone constituted bullying and harassment. Significantly
the Plaintiff relies on
the combination of OIC Ferguson’s conduct; his superiors conduct and the
Defendant’s institution
and conduct of the disciplinary proceedings to
make out his claim. For the reasons already given I find that the claim has not
Loss and damage
Plaintiff claims damages for the breach of Employment Contract. He contends that
he has suffered economic loss. Mr Green also
claims special damages for economic
loss, based upon the premature end of his promotion in Tennant Creek, his
compulsory uplift to
Alice Springs, his removal expenses and out of pocket
expenses in relocating his family to Adelaide not Alice Springs. He also claims
the salary difference from the forced relocation.
do not accept Mr Green’s claim for damages as I find he has not
established the Defendant breached his contract of employment
and that Mr Green
suffered economic loss as a result. Mr Green’s earning capacity was
approximately the same at Alice Springs
as in Tennant Creek and he was promoted.
It increased slightly and in 2020 he sensibly chose to resign his post and
relocate to QLD.
He has mitigated his loss and is gainfully employed at a higher
do not accept that Mr Green employment prospects or long term promotional
prospects have been adversely affected. He gained work
as a Fire-fighter and
then in another position. He is now earning more than he would have in that
I had found breach of contract I would only have awarded nominal damages for any
breach in any event. However, I will not award
any amount for economic loss as
no breach of contract has been proven.
will hear the parties as to
Sheldon v McBeath
Aust Torts Rep 81-209.
In that case, an architect breached the contract in the
design of the footings. The Court held that, in performing the contract,
was always the possibility (even if it were impractical) for the correction of
the mistakes to take place and the architect
had a continuing duty to do so. The
Court held that, in that case, the breach occurred when the contract ended and
the work handed
over - as it was from that time that the architect ceased to
have a role that would have allowed correction.
Exhibit P1; Transcript 21 June
Transcript 21 June
2021, p 9-10.
Transcript 21
June 2021, p15; Exhibit P6, ASOC, para
Transcript 21 June 2021,
p16; Exhibit P5; ASOC, para
Transcript 21 June 2021,
Transcript 21 June 2021,
p16; ASOC, para 5(b)
21 June 2021, p16-17; Para 5(b)
Paragraph 5(c)
Transcript 21 June
Transcript 21 June
2021, p24, 25
Paragraph 5(d)(iv)
ASOC; 21 Transcript 21 June 2021, p 17
Paragraph 5(d)(iii) ASOC;
23 Transcript 21 June 2021, p18, p
Transcript 21 June 2021,
Paragraph 5(d)(i)
ASOC; Transcript 21 June 2021,
Transcript 21 June
Transcript 21
June 2021; p.24
21 June 2021; p.24
para 5(f); Transcript 21 June 2021,
ASOC, para 5(g)
Transcript 21 June 2021,
Transcript 21 June
Transcript 21 June
2021, p27-28.
Transcript 21 June
2021, p68, Exhibit P7, para [51]; and Exhibit P12, para [45]
21 June 2021, p68,
Exhibit P7, para [52]
para 5(k-n); Transcript 21 June 2021, p70, Exhibit P7, para
ASOC, para 5(k-n);
Transcript 21 June 2021, p70, Exhibit P7, para
ASOC, para 5(p);
Transcript 21 June 2021, p70, Exhibit P7, para
43 Transcript 21 June
2021, p71 & 85; Exhibit P7, para [72]; 44 ASOC, para
46 ASOC, para 5(s);
Transcript 21 June 2021, p71; Exhibit
Transcript 21 June 2021,
Transcript 21 June 2021,
Transcript 21 June 2021,
ASOC, para 5(t).
Transcript 21 June 2021, p71 - 72; Exhibit
Transcript 21 June 2021,
p73 - 74; Exhibait P12, attachment to
ASOC, para 8;
Transcript 21 June 2021, p75 - 72; Exhibits P14 –
Transcript 22 June; p13
Transcript 22 June; p.
Paragraph 5(d)(iv)
ASOC; 21 Transcript 21 June 2021, p 17
Paragraph 5(d)(iii) ASOC;
23 Transcript 21 June 2021, p18, p
Transcript 21 June 2021,
Paragraph 5(d)(i)
ASOC; Transcript 21 June 2021,
ASOC, para 5(f);
Transcript 21 June 2021,
Transcript 21 June
2021; p.39 submission of Plaintiff’s counsel Ms Grimster; exhibit P12 and
Romero v Farstad
Shipping (Indian Pacific) Pty Ltd
[2014] FCAFC
Transcript 21 June 2021;
p.39 and submissions of Plaintiff’s counsel Ms Grimster on the weight to
be given to the
Public Sector Appeal Board’s
ASOC, para 5(t).
Transcript 21 June 2021, p71 - 72; Exhibit
@ para [51]
Department of Education & Training v Sinclair
[2005] NSWCA
Transcript 21 June 2021,
p 9-10; Exhibit P1 at the hearing of 21 June
Exhibit P1 –
Letter of Engagement of Plaintiff dated 14 February
Romero v Farstad
Shipping (Indian Pacific) Pty Ltd
[2014] FCAFC 177
Goldman Sachs JB
Were Services Pty Ltd v Nikolich
[2007] FCAFC 120
[2007] 163 FCR 62
per Black CJ at paragraph
Toll (FGCT) Pty Ltd v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 52
(2004) 219 CLR 165
Romero v Farstad
Shipping (Indian Pacific) Pty Ltd
[2014] FCAFC
Supra @ para
Transcript 21 June;
p. 24 Re-examination
Transcript 22 June; p.32
Transcript 21 June 2021:
Transcript 21 June
2021: p.64,65
Cerebos (Australia) Ltd
[2005] HCA 15
(2005) 222 CLR 44
per McHugh, Gummow, Hayne,
Callinan and Heydon JJ) [27] (McHugh, Gummow, Hayne and Heydon
Transcript 21 June 2021,
Transcript 21 June
2021, p68, Exhibit P7, para [51]; and Exhibit P12, para [45]
21 June 2021, p68,
Exhibit P7, para [52]
para 5(k-n); Transcript 21 June 2021, p70, Exhibit P7, para
State of New South
Wales v Paige
[2002] NSWCA 235
(2020) 60 NSWLR
Govier v The uniting
Church in Australia Property Trust (Q)
Hayes v State of
[2016] QCA 191
[2017] 1 QD R
The decisions of
can be distinguished.
on its facts
that the unsafe system of work was created and maintained by the conduct of A
personally and then by the failure to take
any action to prevent that conduct.
because the court found that there was an express term of the
contract of employment which the employer breached in the course of
workplace investigation by not complying with its own policy that had been
incorporated into the contract of
employment.
South Australia v McDonald
[2009] SASC
Ibid at [196-197]
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (0.999 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter