URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCCA/2025/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:18:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ebborn v The King [2025] NTCCA 2 (20 March 2025)
Ebborn v The King
[2025] NTCCA 2
PARTIES: EBBORN, Norman Edward
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: CA 7 of 2024 (22131124)
DELIVERED: 20 March 2025
HEARING DATE: 28 February 2025
JUDGMENT OF: Grant CJ, Blokland & Brownhill JJ
CATCHWORDS:
CRIME – Appeals – Appeal against conviction – Wrong
decision on a question of law
Whether tendency evidence admissible – Tendency evidence related to
charged sexual misconduct against an adult female and single
instance of sexual
misconduct against a child 12 years prior – Whether probative value of
tendency evidence outweighed danger
of unfair prejudice to accused – No
real danger of unfair prejudice to accused that could not be addressed by
directions –
Whether tendency evidence had significant probative value
– Tendency evidence did not have significant probative value –
Appeal allowed.
Criminal Code 1983
(NT) s 410, s 411
Evidence (National Uniform Evidence) Act 2011
Aravena v The Queen
[2015] NSWCCA 288
Astill v The King
BD v The Queen (No 2)
[2017] NTCCA 8
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Vic) v Roder
[2024] HCA 15
(2024) 98 ALJR 644
DKA v Western
[2017] WASCA 44
El-Haddad v R
[2015] NSWCCA 10
(2015) 88 NSWLR 93
Geraghty v The King
[2023] NSWCCA 47
Harris v The King
Hughes v The Queen
[2017] HCA 20
(2017) 263 CLR 338
IMM v The Queen
[2016] HCA 14
(2016) 257 CLR 300
Larsen v Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth)
McPhillamy v The Queen
[2018] HCA 52
(2018) 92 ALJR 1045
[2009] NSWCCA 121
Potter v The King
[2024] SASCA 108
Stubley v Western Australia
[2011] HCA 7
(2011) 242 CLR 374
The Queen v Bauer
[2018] HCA 40
(2018) 266 CLR 56
The Queen v Burton
[2013] NSWCCA 335
(2013) 237 A Crim R 238
Queen v Hoffman
[2021] NTSC 31
TL v The King
[2022] HCA 35
(2022) 275 CLR 83
referred to.
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: A Abayasekara
Respondent: PK Williams with LJ Auld
Solicitors:
Applicant: Northern Territory Legal Aid Commission
Respondent: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 48
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Ebborn v The King
[2025] NTCCA 2
No. CA 7 of
2024 (22131124)
NORMAN EDWARD EBBORN
CORAM: GRANT CJ, BLOKLAND & BROWNHILL JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 20 March 2025)
applicant was found guilty by a jury of three counts of sexual intercourse
without consent committed in 2021. The trial Judge
admitted as tendency evidence
both the evidence of the charged conduct and evidence of an indecent assault
committed by the applicant
in 2009 against a child who was not the complainant
in relation to the charged offences. The issues in the appeal were whether the
tendency evidence was admissible, which turned on whether it had significant
probative value and, if so, whether its probative value
outweighed the danger of
unfair prejudice to the applicant.
The charges, trial outcome and
proposed ground of appeal
applicant was charged on indictment with five counts relating to a single
occasion of offending alleged to have occurred on
19 September 2021. The charges
(a) causing damage to property, contrary to s 241(1) of the
Criminal Code
’) (Count 1);
(b) unlawfully entering a building with intent to commit an assault, with the
circumstances of aggravation that the building was
a dwelling house and the
entry occurred at night time, contrary to s 213 of the
Criminal Code
(Count 2); and
(c) three counts of having sexual intercourse without consent, comprised of
penile-vaginal penetration, fellatio and digital-vaginal
penetration, contrary
to s 192(3) of the
Criminal Code
(Counts 3, 4 and 5).
applicant pleaded not guilty to all counts. At trial, the jury found the
applicant not guilty on Counts 1 and 2 and guilty
on Counts 3, 4 and 5.
applicant sought leave to appeal against the findings of guilt on the single
ground that the trial Judge’s decision
to admit the tendency evidence was
Leave to appeal was
required because the proposed ground of appeal involved a question of mixed law
September 2024, the applicant’s application for an extension of time to
apply for leave to appeal was granted by a
single Judge, but the application for
leave to appeal was refused. Pursuant to s 429(2) of the
, the applicant applied for leave to appeal to this Court constituted by
three Judges. The application for leave to appeal and the
substantive issue were
heard together.
respondent opposed the grant of leave on the basis that the tendency evidence
was correctly admitted by the trial Judge. In
the alternative, but for the same
reasons, the respondent argued that if leave to appeal was granted the appeal
should be dismissed.
The Crown case
[7] The Crown
case at trial was that the applicant was 35 years old. He had a son
(‘R’) who lived with a friend of the
applicant (‘TO’)
and TO’s girlfriend (‘complainant’). TO was 20 years old and
the complainant was 21
years old. TO referred to the applicant as
‘uncle’. The complainant knew the applicant reasonably well in these
circumstances.
The applicant had visited the home shared by TO and the
complainant a number of times in the six months preceding the offending,
including an occasion one or two weeks prior to the alleged offending.
[8] On Saturday,
18 September 2021, the applicant went out in Darwin and was drinking. At one
point during the night, he saw the complainant
and they had a brief
conversation. The complainant later left with a friend.
[9] At around
5.00am on 19 September 2021, the applicant took a taxi to the home shared by TO
and the complainant. At 5.09am, the
applicant phoned TO, who was with R. TO told
the applicant they were not at home, the doors were locked and not to attend the
Six times between 5.02am and 5.20am, the applicant called the
complainant’s phone. She did not answer. She was at her home
and asleep in
applicant arrived at the home shared by TO and the complainant. He damaged a fly
screen by pushing it through so that he
could reach inside and unlock and open
the back door. That was the alleged offending the subject of Count 1.
applicant unlocked the door and went inside with the intention of assaulting the
complainant by touching her without her
consent. That was the alleged offending
the subject of Count 2.
applicant went into the complainant’s bedroom and found her sleeping. He
got into the bed and began having penile-vaginal
sexual intercourse with her.
She initially thought that the applicant was TO and lifted her buttocks to
facilitate the intercourse.
When she realised that it was the applicant, she
tried to push him off and said: ‘No’. The applicant persisted with
intercourse and said things like: ‘You like that?’. That was the
alleged offending the subject of Count 3.
applicant then forced his penis into the complainant’s mouth as she said:
‘No’ and tried to push him away
two or three times. That was the
alleged offending the subject of Count 4.
applicant kept trying to persuade the complainant to have consensual sex with
him. He told her TO was cheating on her and
‘fucking sluts out
there’. He then inserted two fingers into the complainant’s vagina
while she tried to push his
hand away. She said: ‘No, no, stop,
stop’. The applicant became more aggressive and digitally penetrated her
vagina more
forcefully. The complainant started crying and the applicant
desisted. That was the alleged offending the subject of Count 5.
[15] At some
point during the sexual assaults, the applicant went and retrieved a sex toy
which he had seen at the home previously
and asked the complainant to use it.
She declined. At another point, the applicant went and retrieved some lotion and
tried to massage
the complainant’s back. She kept telling him to stop and
said that he should not be doing what he was doing. The applicant
‘Did I get the wrong idea, Bub?’. He told the complainant to delete
the call log on her phone which showed that
he had called her and said:
‘I’ll leave you alone now.’ He then left the home.
[16] After the
applicant left, the complainant contacted TO and told him about the offending.
TO later messaged the applicant and
said he and the complainant would be
reporting the matter to the Police.
applicant went to the Police Station later that day and provided a statement,
admitting that he went to the home in the early
hours of the morning but stating
that, when no one answered the door, he left. He denied entering the home and
having sexual intercourse
with the complainant.
[18] Police
seized the complainant’s underwear and forensic testing revealed the
applicant’s DNA on the inside crotch
area and the outside of the
underwear. Sperm attributable to the applicant was also found on the outside
crotch area.
The applicant’s position at the trial
[19] At the
trial, the prosecution relied on the complainant’s evidence, comprised of
a recorded statement to Police and in-court
evidence received at a special
sitting conducted the day before the voir
complaint evidence from TO
and others, the DNA evidence, evidence of the phone calls to the
complainant’s phone and the call
log deletion, and the applicant’s
lie to Police about not having sexual intercourse with the complainant as
evidence of consciousness
of guilt. The prosecution also relied on tendency
applicant gave evidence at the trial to the effect that he had entered the home
and had consensual sexual intercourse with
the complainant. Defence counsel
submitted to the jury that the applicant had lied to Police because he was a
‘lying idiot’
who had tried to protect himself after being told the
complainant was going to the Police.
The tendency
Crown gave reasonable notice prior to the trial that it intended to rely on
tendency evidence to establish two tendencies,
being a tendency to:
(a) act in a particular way, namely
(i) attend the house of a friend or relative in the early hours of the
morning, uninvited;
(ii) persist in sexual conduct with a female occupant of the house despite
her protestations;
(iii) engage in sexual acts with a female occupant of the house despite the
impact it may have on the applicant’s relationship
with his close friend
or relative; and
(iv) in the aftermath of the assault, to engage in conduct designed to
avoid detection; and
(b) to have a particular state of mind, namely a willingness to engage in
sexual conduct with a female despite her protestations
and the impact it might
have on his relationship with a close friend or relative.
parties accepted that the second tendency was a feature or characteristic of the
first tendency.
evidence sought to be relied on to establish the tendencies comprised:
(a) evidence of the applicant’s conduct on 28 February 2009 in respect of
which he was charged with and pleaded guilty to an
offence of indecent assault
against a child (‘2009 conduct’); and
(b) evidence of the applicant’s conduct on 19 September 2021 which was led
to establish the applicant’s guilt on the
three sexual offences charged on
the indictment (‘charged conduct’).
[24] The 2009
conduct took place when the applicant was 23 years old. He had been at a bar,
drank a large amount of alcohol and became
intoxicated. At around 3.30am, he
left the bar and went to his friend’s house, arriving at around 4.00am. He
knocked on the
door. His friend was not at home. His friend’s 13 year old
sister (‘victim’) answered the door. The applicant had
victim for about 10 years as the applicant was friends with the victim’s
brother. She regarded him as a close family
friend. The victim let the applicant
in to the house. They both sat on the lounge and had a short conversation. The
applicant told
the victim he felt sick and needed to lie down. She said he could
sleep in her bed and she would sleep in her mother’s room.
The applicant
[25] The victim
took the applicant to her bedroom. He closed the door and lay down on the bed.
He asked the victim to stay and talk
to him. When she sat down on the bed, the
applicant told her she was beautiful and that he loved her. He reached over and
fingers on her ankle, then slid his fingers up her leg until reaching
her waistline. He then put his fingers on the outside of her
nightie and slid
them up her stomach to between her breasts. The victim stood up and walked
towards the door. The applicant asked
her to stay for another five minutes. He
asked her if she was a virgin and she said she was. He said: ‘I want to be
your first.’
She said: ‘That’s disgusting, you’re like a
brother to me.’
applicant stood up and approached her. He hugged her with both arms. He put his
hands on either side of her face and kissed
her on the lips. As she tried to
push him away, he leaned forward and tried to kiss her again. She covered her
mouth with her hand
and turned her head. He said: ‘You’ve got big
boobs for a 13 year old’. He put his hand onto her breast and squeezed
once. He put his hand onto her genital area. She squeezed her legs together. He
pulled his hand away and told her not to tell
anyone about what he had done. She
told him to leave. He did.
Crown’s tendency notice indicated that the tendency evidence related to
the following facts in issue, namely:
(a) whether the applicant had sexual intercourse with the complainant;
(b) that the applicant had sexual intercourse with the complainant despite his
relationship with TO;
(c) whether the applicant knew that the complainant was not consenting to
sexual intercourse or was reckless as to her consent;
(d) to rebut any alternative innocent explanation for his DNA being found on
the complainant’s underwear.
[28] The trial
Judge found that the tendency evidence ‘strongly supported’ proof of
the asserted tendencies, despite the
passage of time, because of the
‘unusualness’ of the conduct and its distinctly similar
The trial Judge also
found that the tendencies, if established, significantly increased the
likelihood that the applicant had the
state of mind and acted on it at the time
relevant to the charges, and that he committed the charged
[29] The trial
Judge also found that the risk that the jury might engage in rank propensity
reasoning was not great, there was no
real risk of the evidence about the 2009
conduct having much greater emotional impact (if any) on the jury than hearing
the evidence
the applicant from the use of the tendency evidence could be adequately
against by the usual warnings and directions to the
The nature of
an appeal and the proper approach
[30] This is an
application for leave to appeal under s 410(b) of the
Criminal Code
By s 411(1) of the
Criminal Code
, the Court would be obliged to
allow the appeal if of the opinion that the jury’s finding of guilt should
be set aside on,
, the ground of the wrong decision on any
question of law or that there was a miscarriage of
[31] Section
97(1) of the
Evidence (National Uniform Evidence) Act 2011
’) conditions the admission of evidence to prove that
a person has or had a tendency on the evidence having significant probative
[32] Section 101
precludes the use of tendency evidence by the prosecution in
a criminal trial unless its probative value outweighs the danger of unfair
prejudice to the accused.
position of both parties was that in an appeal from the admission of tendency
evidence the ‘correctness standard’
applies to the determinations
made under both ss 97 and 101 of the
We accept that to be
Significant probative value
General principles
[34] Section
97(1) of the
relevantly provides that evidence of the conduct of a
person, or a tendency that a person has or had, is not admissible to prove
a person has or had a tendency to act in a particular way, or to have a
particular state of mind, unless the court thinks that
the evidence will, either
by itself or having regard to other evidence adduced or to be adduced by the
party seeking to adduce the
evidence, have significant probative value.
[35] The term
‘probative value’ in the
is defined to mean the extent
to which the evidence could rationally affect the assessment of the probability
of the existence of
determining the probative value of the evidence for admissibility purposes, the
Court must proceed on the basis that the evidence
In other words, that
is a determination to be undertaken taking the evidence at its
[37] Tendency
evidence will have significant probative value if it could rationally affect the
assessment of the probability of the
existence of a fact in issue to a
significant extent.
significance of the probative value of the tendency evidence must depend on the
nature of the facts in issue to which the evidence
is relevant and the
significance or importance which that evidence may have in establishing those
So understood, the
evidence must be influential in the context of
fact-finding.
[38] In tendency
reasoning, the trier of fact reasons from satisfaction that a person has a
tendency to have a particular state of
mind, or to act in a particular way, to
the likelihood that the person had the particular state of mind, or acted in the
way, on the occasion in
, the High Court posited the evaluative task as
assessment of whether evidence has significant probative value in relation to
each count involves consideration of two inter-related
but separate matters. The
first matter is the extent to which the evidence supports the tendency. The
second is the extent to which
the tendency makes more likely the facts making up
the charged offence. ... In summary, there is likely to be a high degree of
value where (i) the evidence, by itself or together with other
evidence, strongly supports proof of a tendency, and (ii) the tendency
supports the proof of a fact that makes up the offence charged.
The facts in issue
accordance with the above general principles, the assessment of the probative
value of the tendency evidence turns on the
capacity of the evidence to prove
the alleged tendency and the extent to which the alleged tendency increases the
likelihood of a
parties accepted that, in this case, the appeal court should consider the
question of probative value at the time that admissibility
was determined,
rather than at the time the tendency evidence was adduced or retrospectively by
reference to what occurred in the
defence case in the
[42] There was a
question, however, as to what is meant by the phrase ‘fact in issue’
in the definition of ‘probative
value’ as that term appears in
s 97(1)(b) of the
. The parties were at odds about whether the
phrase refers to all of the elements of a charged offence or to only those
elements that
are not disputed by the accused.
applicant argued that the assessment of the probative value of the tendency
evidence was required to be considered in light
of the issues that were in
dispute, which excluded, in this case, whether the applicant had sexual
intercourse with the complainant.
It was argued that the applicant had clearly
indicated, by the time the prosecution’s application for a ruling on the
admissibility
of the tendency evidence was heard, that sexual intercourse with
the complainant was not in dispute.
, the High Court held that the facts in issue in a criminal
proceeding are those which establish the elements of the
The High Court also
observed that the probative value of tendency evidence will vary depending upon
the issue that it is adduced
to prove, and distinguished between a criminal
proceeding in which tendency evidence is adduced to prove the identity of the
for a known offence (which would almost certainly depend upon a close
similarity between the conduct evidencing the tendency and
the offence), and a
criminal proceeding where the fact in issue is the occurrence of the
appears to be an acceptance that the probative value of tendency evidence can
depend on the position taken by the accused
in relation to the elements of the
charged offence/s. However, that was not a matter expressly referred to,
unsurprisingly given
that the facts in issue in each of the charged counts were
the occurrence of the sexual conduct
respondent relied on the observations of Grant CJ in
The Queen v
to the effect that
the reference to a ‘fact in issue’ in the definition of
‘probative value’ is a reference
to the facts which constitute the
elements of the offences charged, together with such ancillary facts as are
relevant to those ultimate
facts, and it is not to be equated with a fact in
[47] In making
those observations, Grant CJ relied on the decision of the New South Wales Court
of Criminal Appeal in
The Queen v
In that case, the
respondent was charged with sexual intercourse without consent. Various
pre-trial rulings had been made by the
trial Judge and they were the subject of
the appeal. Justice Simpson (with RA Hulme J and Barr AJ agreeing) held that
evidence of
phone conversations between the accused and the complainant in which
the accused apologised to the complainant following the alleged
offending was
admissible and wrongly excluded by the trial Judge.
considering the application of s 137 of the NSW equivalent to the
, Simpson J considered whether the evidence was relevant within
s 55, which provided that relevant evidence is evidence that, if it
accepted, could rationally affect (directly or indirectly) the assessment of the
probability of the existence of a fact in issue
in the proceeding. Justice
Simpson held (at [148]) that a necessary first step in the assessment of the
probative value of evidence
is to identify any ‘fact in issue’ the
assessment of the probability of the existence of which is said to be affected
by the evidence. Her Honour held (at [148]) that:
The ultimate facts
in issue in a criminal trial are the facts that constitute the elements of the
offence charged. Often there will
also be issues about facts relevant to those
facts. ... In a criminal proceeding, ‘fact in issue’ is not
necessarily
to be equated with ‘fact in dispute’. That is because,
even if the accused person does not dispute the facts that support
one or more
of the elements of the offence, the obligation remains on the Crown to prove
each element beyond reasonable doubt. Moreover,
an accused person is not bound
by any pre-trial pleadings. Accordingly, in this case, the Crown was obliged to
prove each of the
three elements that constitute an offence against s 61I
[being sexual intercourse without consent]. They are therefore facts in
[49] Her Honour
went on to hold (at [150]) that:
The respondent’s apologies
are strongly suggestive of an acknowledgement that he had had sexual intercourse
with the complainant.
The evidence could therefore rationally affect the
probability of the existence of the first of the ultimate facts in issue [that
the accused had sexual intercourse with the complainant in the manner alleged].
It is not to the point that, by indicating, through
his counsel, that the
(disputed) issue in the trial would be consent, the respondent had impliedly
admitted that sexual intercourse
had occurred. First, as set out above, an
accused is not bound by pre-trial pleadings. Second, also as mentioned above,
whether the
facts that support an element of an offence are or are not disputed,
the obligation remains on the Crown to prove each element of
the offence beyond
reasonable doubt. The respondent’s acknowledgements – even if given
the benign alternative interpretation
– amounted to evidence strongly
probative of the first element.
applicant took issue with that approach in reliance on the decision of the High
Stubley v Western
In that case, the
appellant had been convicted of numerous sexual offences (rape and indecent
assault), said to have been committed
against two complainants who were his
patients during consultations when he was a psychiatrist. The trial Judge had
admitted evidence
from three other witnesses of uncharged acts of a sexual
nature between them and the appellant when they were his patients as
‘propensity
evidence’ under the West Australian equivalent of
ss 97 and 101 of the
[51] When the
appellant objected to the receipt of this evidence at the trial, his counsel
indicated that the appellant would admit
that he had been sexually intimate with
the complainants but would argue that the sexual acts were consensual. The High
that the evidence of the three other witnesses did not have
significant probative value because the trial was conducted on the basis
the complainants’ evidence that the appellant had sexual relations with
them in the course of consultations was not disputed.
majority of the High Court noted (at [64]) that the evidence of the three other
witnesses was not relied on by the prosecution
to prove that the sexual acts
against the complainants had occurred. The majority observed (at [65]) that
whether the appellant had
engaged in the sexual activity alleged by the
complainants was not a live issue at the trial. The circumstance that the trial
conducted from the outset on the basis that the complainants’ accounts
that the appellant had sexual relations with them in
the course of consultations
was not disputed ‘was material to the consideration of admissibility of
the evidence’ of
the three other witnesses for tendency purposes. In
particular, the probative value of that evidence to prove that the sexual acts
charged occurred, by demonstrating the appellant’s tendency to have sex
with his patients, ceased to be significant once it
was known that the
complainants’ evidence that the appellant had sex with them during
consultations was not challenged.
decision in
was not drawn to the attention of the courts in
. The language of the Western Australian
legislation considered in
is not materially different from the
language of ss 97 and 101 of the
. Both refer to
‘significant probative value’. The term ‘probative
value’, although used a number of times
in the Western Australian
legislation, is not defined. Nevertheless, there is no basis for treating the
term ‘probative value’
in that legislation any differently from the
same term in the
such that the High Court’s observations
should not be followed.
Victorian Court of Appeal has taken the same approach as was taken in
Larsen v Director of Public Prosecutions
the appellant was
charged with various offences relating to sending indecent communications via
the internet to a 12-year-old child.
The defence had indicated, at the time of
the ruling, that the only fact in issue in the trial would be the
accused’s awareness
with respect to the age of the child. The conduct
itself was admitted. The prosecution had sought to admit tendency evidence about
the appellant’s prior conduct of sending indecent communications via the
internet to a girl he knew to be 15 years old. The
Victorian Court of Appeal
held (at [7]) that the probative value of the evidence of prior conduct
‘must be judged by reference
to’ the narrowly defined issues which
were not admitted by the appellant. The Court held that evidence that the
appellant had
previously engaged in sexualised communications with a girl he
knew to be 15 years of age had very little probative force on the
issue of how
old he believed the complainant to be. Consequently, the evidence did not have
‘significant probative value’
within the Victorian equivalent of
s 97(1)(b) of the
. The Court expanded on this (at [18]-[22])
as follows:
Axiomatically, the probative value of a piece of
evidence can only be assessed by reference to the fact in issue to which the
is said to be relevant. In the present case, as already noted, the fact
in issue is very narrowly defined. It concerns the existence,
or non-existence,
in [the appellant’s] mind of a belief that [the complainant] was over 16
or under 18 (depending on the charge).
This is not a case like
, where the fact in issue was whether
the offending conduct had occurred at all. The defence position there was that
all of the allegations
were fabricated. Accordingly, the question before the
Court was whether proof of the accused’s tendency to act in a particular
way was probative of the fact that the offending conduct had occurred. It was
held that the accused’s tendency ‘to engage
opportunistically in
sexual activity with underage girls despite a high risk of detection’ had
substantial probative value
in relation to the facts there in issue.
In the present case, it is not in issue that [the appellant] engaged in the
conduct which constitutes the relevant offences. The evidence
communications with [the complainant], and of her being under 16, is not
disputed. The only issue in the case, as his counsel
confirmed in this Court, is
whether he can prove that at the time he engaged in that conduct, he believed
[the complainant] was over
16 or the prosecution can prove he knew or was
reckless as to the possibility she was under 18.
It follows, in our view, that the particular features of the sexualised
conduct which [the appellant] (admittedly) engaged have no
bearing on the
assessment of probative value. ...
Here, the prosecution has no need to prove that [the appellant] has a
tendency to behave in a particular sexualised manner. So much
is established by
the uncontested evidence of his communications in this case. The fact that the
communications with [the complainant]
were of the same character as the
communications with [the child] in the [prior] case says nothing about what [the
appellant] may,
or may not, have believed about [the complainant’s]
[55] In the more
recent decision of
Geraghty v The
the Court of Criminal
Appeal of New South Wales recognised (at [27]) that tendency evidence must be
assessed in the context of the
trial and of the other evidence to be called by
the prosecution. The Court held that the probative value of tendency evidence in
the form of prior convictions for importing drugs would have been of limited
probative value if the accused had admitted involvement
in the charged offence
of attempted importation of drugs but sought to limit or explain his role, but
of significantly greater probative
value if the accused had denied that he was
involved in any attempted importation. That constitutes a departure from the
previously adopted by the Court in
. However, the Court in
held that, at the time the trial Judge ruled on admissibility of
the tendency evidence, the prosecutor was not aware of the precise
which the applicant would seek to explain potentially incriminating evidence
concerning his activities. Consequently, the
Court held that the prosecution was
entitled to call all admissible evidence, and have its probative value assessed,
on the basis
that the defence would challenge all aspects of the prosecution
authorities adopt an approach by which the assessment of probative value of
tendency evidence does not turn merely on the
need for the prosecution to prove
all the elements of the offence such that the ultimate facts comprising those
elements are the
‘facts in issue’ in any criminal trial. Rather,
those authorities provide that the assessment of the probative value
of tendency
evidence can and should turn on the ultimate facts which the prosecution will be
required to prove and the evidence that
the prosecution will be required to lead
in doing so, subject to any position in relation to the proof of those ultimate
facts taken
by the accused and clearly disclosed to the Court at or by the time
the ruling on the admissibility of the tendency evidence is sought.
approach to the tendency provisions in the uniform evidence legislation has now
been adopted by two intermediate appellate courts,
is consistent with the
decision in
in relation to closely analogous provisions and must
be accepted as correct.
[57] In the
present case, the ruling on the admissibility of the tendency evidence took
place after the complainant had given a recorded
statement to Police which would
be admitted as, or as part of, her evidence-in-chief at the trial and had been
cross-examined at
a special sitting to record her evidence, which recording
would be played at the trial. The cross-examination led the prosecutor
that the applicant’s position was that sexual intercourse between him and
the complainant had taken place, with the
complainant’s
applicant’s counsel neither confirmed nor refuted that inference orally
during the voir dire.
applicant’s counsel did make a written submission to the effect that the
issues that characterise the case are, firstly,
lack of consent by the
complainant to sexual intercourse or, secondly, that the accused was reckless as
to the complainant’s
lack of consent, such that the 2009
result in a logical inference that the complainant ... did not consent to
intercourse or that the accused as reckless as
to her lack of consent. The
mental state to be considered in this case
and the activity of the accused
alleged to have taken place
in the presence of that mental state is a world
away from the mental state associated with indecent assault. [emphasis
submission was made in a single paragraph about two thirds of the way through 18
pages of written submissions. No oral submission
was made to the effect that the
probative value of the tendency evidence was limited because the fact of sexual
intercourse with
the complainant was not in dispute. That submission was also
made in the context of the applicant having previously made a statement
Police that he had not entered the complainant’s home and had not had
sexual intercourse with her, which the Crown was intending
to characterise as a
lie indicating consciousness of guilt.
[60] In the
circumstances of this case, while the prosecutor may have had an inkling from
the nature of the cross-examination of the
complainant and the single paragraph
in the defence’s written submissions that the fact that sexual intercourse
had taken place
would not be disputed, the defence had not clearly put that
position to the prosecution or the Court and the applicant had told Police
sexual intercourse had not occurred. In those circumstances, as matters stood at
the time of the voir dire hearing the prosecution
was entitled to call all
admissible evidence, and have its probative value assessed, on the basis that
the defence would challenge
all aspects of the prosecution case, including the
fact that sexual intercourse occurred.
[61] In any
event, as the defence submission set out above appears to acknowledge, even if
the occurrence of sexual intercourse was
admitted, the activity of the applicant
during that intercourse remained in issue. There were three charged instances of
sexual intercourse,
and the manner in which they were alleged to have taken
place, including the complainant’s alleged resistance and protestations
and the applicant’s alleged words and actions during and afterwards, were
all at least ancillary facts in issue relating to
the ultimate issues of the
complainant’s lack of consent and the applicant’s knowledge of or
recklessness as to it.
[62] For those
reasons, the assessment of the probative value of the tendency evidence must
include its capacity to affect the likelihood
of the fact that sexual
intercourse occurred between the complainant and the
Charged acts as part of the tendency evidence
applicant argued that it was an error for the trial Judge to permit the
prosecution to rely on the evidence relating to the
charged acts as tendency
evidence. In short, the applicant argued that, if this course was permissible,
it would follow that in a
criminal trial, the prosecution could rely on evidence
of a charged act alone to establish a tendency which could be used to establish
guilt on that charged act, which: (a) is circular and nonsensical; and (b) would
create an unanswerable position for the defence
given the identity between the
conduct and circumstances the subject of the tendency evidence and the conduct
and circumstances the
subject of the charged act.
respondent relied on the decision of the High Court in
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Vic) v Roder
In that case, the accused was charged with 27 child sexual offences in relation
to two complainants. The Crown relied on the 27 charged
acts and six uncharged
acts to support the existence of an alleged tendency on the part of the accused
to have a particular state
of mind and to act in a particular way in relation to
the two complainants. The accused accepted that the charged and uncharged acts
were cross-admissible as tendency evidence but sought a pre-trial ruling from
the trial Judge as to the form of the direction to
be given to the jury on the
standard of proof to be applied in relation to the charged acts for the purposes
of determining whether
the tendency was established. The trial Judge had
proposed that the jury be instructed to reason ‘sequentially’ by
deciding if the uncharged acts occurred, secondly considering the first
charged act by reference to tendency reasoning based on the
uncharged acts that
they accepted, and then thirdly applying those principles to the second charged
act based on the uncharged acts
and the first charged act if found proved beyond
reasonable doubt, and so on. The Director of Public Prosecution’s appeal
that decision was dismissed by the Victorian Court of Appeal.
upholding the appeal, the High Court rejected the Court of Appeal’s
conclusion that the trial Judge was correct that
the jury should be directed
that every charged act relied on as tendency evidence must be proved beyond
reasonable doubt before it
can be used as such. The High Court held (at [28])
that an alleged tendency is an intermediate fact that is to be proved in its own
right, and then deployed in aid of the proof of each charge.
[66] The High
Court also addressed an argument that the jury should be directed that, when
considering the respondent’s guilt
for each particular charge, they could
not use the direct evidence of the corresponding charged act as part of the body
of evidence
relied on by the prosecution to support the alleged tendency. The
Court rejected that argument (at [33]-[34]) and held (at [35]):
[T]his alternative submission overlooks the nature of tendency evidence and
tendency reasoning as explained above. Tendency evidence
has been described as
evidence that on ‘another occasion or occasions’ different to the
occasion the subject of the charge,
the accused ‘acted in a particular
If so described, the
direct evidence of a particular charged act would not be admitted as tendency
evidence in relation to that same
charged act. However, as already explained,
any assessment of whether evidence relating to ‘another occasion or
to a particular charged act has significant probative value for
the purpose of determining its admissibility as tendency evidence
undertaken ‘having regard to other evidence’, which includes the
evidence of that charged act. The jury’s
assessment of the weight or
strength of the evidence involves similar reasoning.
respondent argued that the effect of these observations from
that the evidence of a charged act can form part of the tendency evidence relied
on to prove a tendency used to prove that charged
applicant did not accept that proposition but acknowledged that consideration of
the evidence of a charged act is a necessary
feature of the evaluative task in
assessing the probative value of tendency evidence.
Potter v The King
was an appeal from conviction upon a ground asserting error in the admission of
tendency evidence, Doyle and David JJA (Kourakis
CJ agreeing) held (at [92])
that there was relatively strong evidence in support of the alleged
‘propensity’
included the complainant’s evidence of the four charged acts. The
Court’s acceptance of the evidence of charged
acts forming part of the
tendency evidence going to proof of those charged acts was confirmed in the
following passage: (at [114]):
[The appellant argued] that the judge
erred in giving directions that encouraged, or at least permitted, the jury,
when considering
each particular charge, to include the evidence of that charge
within the evidence said to support the existence of the propensity
relied upon
in proof of that charge. However, directing the jury in this way did not involve
any error. To the contrary, it was consistent
with the approach required by the
High Court in [
]. In rejecting an equivalent submission in that
case, the High Court said that in considering the significance of a propensity
a particular charged act, the jury should be told they may have regard to all
of the evidence in support of that propensity, including
the evidence of that
charged act.
applicant sought to distinguish the observations in
conclusions in
on the bases that: (i)
and other authorities referred to by both sides
concerned the admissibility of tendency evidence where there were multiple
acts occurring on different occasions and/or multiple prior acts
occurring on different occasions, as distinct from the present case
involved multiple charged acts occurring on a single occasion and a single prior
act. We do not accept that there is any material
distinction.
[71] First, as
the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal has observed, although the proposed
direction in
and the discussion of it by the High Court occurred in
the specific statutory context of
Jury Directions
(Vic), the significance of the decision extends beyond that
statutory context.
[72] Second,
none of the observations and reasoning about tendency evidence and the way it
may be used in
rests on the foundation that the
case involves multiple occasions giving rise to the charges and/or multiple
prior occasions of other
conduct. The High Court in
rejected (at
[27]) the submission that admitting direct evidence of charged acts to establish
a tendency and using that tendency
to establish the charged acts involved
circular or incoherent reasoning.
[73] It must be
accepted following the High Court’s decision in
, that: (a) a
jury may use the evidence of a particular charged act to prove a tendency which
may be used in proof of that charged
act; and (b) the jury’s assessment of
the weight or strength of tendency evidence involves similar reasoning to that
by a trial Judge in assessing its probative value. It must follow that
tendency evidence sought to be relied on by the prosecution
evidence about a charged act and, if so, the probative value of the tendency
evidence is to be assessed by reference to the evidence
any other evidence relied on as tendency evidence.
[74] Furthermore,
it must equally follow that tendency evidence sought to be relied on by the
prosecution may
evidence about a single charged act and, if so,
the probative value of the tendency evidence is to be assessed by reference to
evidence about that charged act and the other evidence relied on as tendency
[75] That is not
to accept that, on its own, evidence of a single charged act could be relied on
as tendency evidence to prove a tendency
which could be used in proof of that
single charged act. Evidence of a single charged act, without more, could not
sensibly be characterised
as tendency evidence.
[76] Consequently,
there was no error by the trial Judge in permitting the prosecution to rely on
the evidence relating to the charged
acts as tendency
Assessment of the probative value of the tendency
[77] At base,
both the 2009 conduct and the charged conduct comprised committing an offence or
offences of non-consensual sexual misconduct
against a female, the females being
different people.
, the High Court held (at [32]) that tendency evidence relating
to sexual misconduct with persons other than the complainant was not
affecting the assessment of the likelihood that the appellant committed the
offences against the complainant to a significant
, the High Court held (at [58]) that the mere fact that an accused
has committed an offence against one complainant is ordinarily
not significantly
probative of the accused having committed an offence against another
complainant. Before the requirement of significant
probative value will be met,
there must ordinarily be some feature of or about the offending which links the
two together, ie some
common feature of or about the offending.
, the High Court held (at [34]) that tendency evidence is not
limited to evidence exhibiting similarity, an underlying unity, pattern
modus operandi
. The High Court added (at [39]) that, commonly,
evidence of a person’s conduct adduced to prove a tendency to act in a
way will bear similarity to the conduct in issue, but the admission
of tendency evidence is not conditioned on an assessment of operative
of similarity with the conduct in issue.
[81] As regards
the second stage of the assessment of probative value, the High Court held in
(at [64]) that a tendency expressed at a high level of generality
might mean that the tendency evidence provides significant support
tendency, but it will also mean that the tendency cannot establish anything more
than relevance. In contrast, a tendency
expressed at a level of particularity
will be more likely to be significant.
[82] As set out
in paragraph [21] above, the tendencies alleged by the prosecution demonstrate a
level of particularity beyond a general
propensity to commit offences involving
non-consensual sexual misconduct against a female because they contain features
of similarity
in the circumstances and behaviour of the applicant at the
relevant times. It was these similarities which led the trial Judge to
conclusion that both the 2009 conduct and the charged conduct involved
‘turning up at the home of a close friend or relative
in the early hours
of the morning uninvited and, once inside, sexually assaulting a female occupant
of the house with what seems
to be a pretence or unfounded assumption that
sexual activity is or would be consensual, notwithstanding the victims’
and attempts to stop him, while persistently importuning the victim to
engage in activities of a sexual nature’, where the
applicant ‘was
prepared to do these things despite the closeness of his relationship to the
male householders and the obvious
risk to that relationship in each case’
and the applicant ‘took steps to avoid
detection’.
This conduct
was described by the trial Judge as ‘bizarre’, ‘unusual’
and ‘strikingly similar’.
applicant argued that it was erroneous to list and compare factual similarities
between the 2009 conduct and the charged
conduct where the tendency was
described by adding ‘general factors’ that have by themselves little
significance. Reliance
was placed on the observations of Howie J (with McColl JA
and Grove J agreeing) in
O’Keefe v The
In that case, the
alleged tendencies were to frequent secluded bushland locations where vulnerable
females might be located; to verbally
and/or physically threaten such females to
get them to comply with his demands; to have a particular interest in their
breasts; to
sexually assault them against their will; and to do so knowing they
were not consenting or willing to participate. In that context,
Howie J made the
observation (at [62]) that tendency evidence obtains no more probative value
simply by adding general factors to
describe the tendency that have by
themselves little significance. His Honour held that much of the description of
the tendency was
surplusage and the four attributes were in truth only one,
namely a tendency to sexually assault females in secluded locations with
particular interest in their breasts. The facts in issue in that case went to
identification – whether the appellant was
the man who had committed the
11 charged offences against four different women on different occasions in
bushland. The tendency evidence
comprised the evidence led to establish the
charged acts.
[84] Justice
Howie held (at [65]-[66]) that a tendency to sexually assault females in
secluded locations did not have significant
probative value to establish the
issue of identification, and the addition of ‘bushland’ in the
tendency was of no particular
significance. Further, the tendency did not gain
significant probative value by the additional fact that the appellant had an
in the victims’ breasts, as it was not ‘peculiar’
that a person with a tendency to sexually assault females had
a particular
interest in ‘what is the most prominent part of the female anatomy’.
applicant argued that a number of the features of the alleged tendency in the
present case are of no particular significance
because they are found in many if
not most instances of sexual intercourse without consent. It was said that
post-offending steps
to avoid detection, protestations or attempts by the victim
to stop the accused, a persistence with the conduct despite those efforts
the risk of damage to a close relationship by the offending are all common in
offences of this nature.
respondent submitted that simply because a feature of the alleged tendency, as
found in the conduct the subject of the tendency
evidence, is a common feature
of the charged offending does not deprive the tendency evidence of significant
probative value. Further,
it was submitted that this issue should not form part
of the assessment because it relies on the trial Judge’s assessment and
experience of what is common or usual in such offending. We cannot accept either
submission in the circumstances of this case.
[87] If the
alleged tendency is described by reference to features that are commonplace in
offending the subject of the charges, the
alleged tendency can have little
probative value beyond establishing that the accused has previously committed a
criminal act or
acts characterised by commonplace features of the kind with
which the accused is charged. In this regard, the Victorian Court of
recently observed
tendency is expressed in terms that are too wide,
generic or commonplace
it may lose its force as proof of the facts in issue beyond establishing that
the person was a person who had engaged in criminal
acts in the past and
therefore the kind of person who might do so in the future. [emphasis added]
[88] That need
for specificity is reflected in the colourful example given by Leeming JA in
El-Haddad v R
... the specificity of the tendency directly
informs the strength of the inferential mode of reasoning. It is easy to see
is, for example, one thing to say that a man has a tendency to steal
cars; that says something, but not very much, as to whether
particular car the subject of a charge. It is quite another to say that a man
has a tendency to steal black European sports
cars and then set them on fire, if
the fact in issue is whether that man stole and burnt a black
[89] To adapt
that example to the present circumstances, the probative value of a general
tendency to steal cars is not significantly
increased by supplementing it with
reference to commonplace features of offending of that type such as the cars
being hotwired, the
cars being stolen from outside the owners’ residences
and the conduct being undertaken at night in order to avoid detection.
[90] However,
different considerations may arise where the accused has previously committed a
criminal act or acts against the same
complainant as the offence with which the
accused is charged. Evidence of that nature may, in the context of sexual
offending, establish
a specific sexual interest in the complainant, or may, in
the context of violent offending, establish a specific antipathy or animus
towards the complainant, and therefore have some significant probative value as
proof of the facts in issue. Similarly, evidence
that an accused has a sexual
interest in children will, because of the particularly transgressive nature of
that interest, ordinarily
have significant probative value as proof that the
accused has committed a child sexual offence, although there is now a statutory
presumption of the significant probative value of that type of evidence created
by s 97A of the
respondent's submission about the dangers which present in the use of a trial
Judge’s experience to assess whether
a feature of a particular type of
offending is commonplace is inconsistent with the respondent’s
preparedness to embrace this
trial Judge’s assessment of the
applicant’s conduct in the circumstances of the 2009 conduct as
and ‘bizarre’. Determining something to be
unusual is the obverse of determining something to be commonplace and involves
the application of the same criteria and processes. In assessing the probative
value of tendency evidence, a trial Judge is both
qualified and entitled to
consider and determine whether features of the tendency asserted are commonplace
or unusual.
[92] In the
conduct of that assessment in the present case, we consider that protestations
or attempts by the victim to stop the offender
from sexually offending, a
persistence by the offender with the conduct despite those protestations or
attempts, blandishments by
the offender to persuade a consensual encounter (ie
‘an unfounded assumption that sexual activity is or would be
consensual’),
and taking steps in the aftermath to avoid detection, are
all relatively common features of offences of this nature. The risk of
a close relationship by the offending is also not uncommon in sexual offending
generally, where the offender is often known
to the victim, and is quite common
in sexual offending against children, where the victim is often the child of the
partner, relative or friend. The reflection of these
commonplace features in the alleged tendencies and asserted similarities reduces
the probative value of the tendency evidence in proof of the facts in
applicant also argued that the alleged tendencies were artificially constructed
by reverse engineering from the facts, relying
on observations of the Victorian
Court of Appeal in
Harris v The
That case involved six
charges of sexual offending against three young girls, being the
appellant’s two daughters and the daughter
of his partner. The tendency
evidence was the evidence to be led in proof of the charged offences and other
uncharged acts. The alleged
tendency was a sexual interest in his biological
children and the children of his partner in his care aged between 4 and 16 years
and a willingness to engage in sexual misconduct of a particular kind against
them (touching their genitals, bottom or breasts and
watching them naked or
partially undressed) in particular circumstances (at home when other adults were
not present, when intoxicated
and having created opportunities to see them naked
or partially undressed).
[94] The Court
observed (at [56]-[57]) that when a tendency is described ‘with an eye to
capture the charged acts’ an
issue will be whether the formulation of the
tendency is too specific, in the sense of being tied to the very facts in issue
which ‘cannot meaningfully be said to constitute a single tendency to
act or think in a particular way’. That was said
to be a problem which
often arises ‘where the tendency is, in effect, reverse engineered from
the facts’. The Court said
that tendency reasoning starts with the
tendency and its power is that it explains or makes a person’s conduct or
mind more likely, including by explaining what might be thought to be
entirely improbable events based on ordinary human experience.
It entirely
undermines that process if the prosecution starts with the facts of the charge
and constructs a tendency to fit them.
‘problem’ of reverse engineering from the facts in issue is present
here. The problem is that the alleged tendencies,
taken together, cannot
meaningfully be said to constitute a single tendency to act or think in a
particular way. On the other hand,
the alleged tendencies must be taken together
to support the assertion of significant probative value because, individually,
are too general and/or too commonplace to be meaningful for the reasons
already described.
problem with the description of the tendencies is exacerbated and facilitated by
the fact that the tendency evidence comprises
the evidence in proof of the
charged offences and a single prior occasion of sexual offending. The tendency
has been described to
reflect the common circumstances that the two instances of
conduct occurred in the home of a close friend or relative, without an
invitation to attend that home, against a female occupant, in the context of a
close relationship between the applicant and a close
friend or relative and the
potential damage to that relationship, and was followed by conduct designed to
avoid detection.
[97] Where only
one prior instance of conduct is relied upon, it is possible to select multiple
distinct features in the prior conduct
or its circumstances which are in common
with the facts in issue, which is less open where multiple instances of prior
conduct are
relied upon to establish the tendency. The force of apparent
similarities between the single prior instance of conduct, the tendency
described by reference to them, and the facts in issue is diminished in such
circumstances.
[98] Speaking
generally, it stands to reason that a single prior instance of acting in a
particular way would have a lower probative
value in establishing a tendency to
act in that way than numerous prior instances of acting in a particular way. It
must follow that
the significant number of similarities between the conduct or
circumstances of a single prior instance and the charged offending
obscure the important fact that the probative value of the tendency evidence
rests on the charged conduct and a single
prior instance of conduct.
[99] It is also
well-recognised that a single incident some years before the charged offending
may provide a weaker foundation than
might have been the case for a tendency
sought to be proved by evidence of multiple instances of relevant conduct or
conduct that
had occurred in closer temporal proximity to the event in
The probative value of
tendency evidence is strengthened by close proximity in time between the
instance/s of prior conduct and the
and weakened by the
passage of time between the two, at least where the accused’s opportunity
to act on the tendency in the
interim is not limited in any material
[100] In the
present case, there was a gap of 12 years between the prior conduct and the
charged conduct. There was no evidence to
suggest the applicant had acted on the
alleged tendency in the interim, or that there was any limitation on his
opportunity to do
so. That gap considerably weakens the force of the inference
that the applicant had a tendency in 2009 which was still present in
2021. It is
also relevant that the applicant was a young man of 23 years of age at the time
of the 2009 conduct and a 35-year-old
man at the time of the charged offending.
The inference as to the persistence of the alleged tendency is potentially
impacted by
the effects of aging and maturity.
[101] It is with
the above matters in mind that the ‘stark differences’ asserted by
the applicant between the nature of
the two episodes of conduct in 2009 and 2021
must be considered. Those differences are, most notably, that the victim of the
conduct was a 13-year-old child whereas the complainant was an adult, and
the 2009 conduct involved less serious sexual impropriety
in the form of
stroking, kissing and touching of the breasts and genitals over clothing,
whereas the charged conduct involved serious
sexual impropriety in the form of
penile-vaginal penetration, fellatio and digital-vaginal penetration.
[102] There are
also other differences between the two sets of conduct, which are arguably
material. For example: (a) in 2009, the
applicant simply arrived at the home,
whereas in 2021 he called the male occupant of the premises, was told not to go
to the home,
and then made a number of attempts to contact the complainant
before arriving at the home; (b) in 2009, he was invited into the home
female victim, whereas in 2021 he entered the home without any such invitation
and, on the Crown case, broke in; (c) in 2009,
he spoke to the victim for some
time before touching her, whereas in 2021 he climbed into bed next to the
sleeping complainant and
began having sex with her; (d) in 2009, he sought to
persuade the victim with a form of flattery, whereas in 2021 he sought to
the victim by denigrating her partner’s fidelity to her.
balance, we consider that the tendency evidence does not have significant
probative value.
[104] We do not
accept as significant the extent to which an indecent assault on a 13-year-old
child and the alleged rape of a different
adult woman 12 years later support the
tendency, effectively, to engage in unwanted sexual acts with a female occupant
of the home
of a friend or relative despite the risk of damage to a close
relationship with that friend or relative. That is so because of the
differences referred to above, the gap of 12 years during which the alleged
tendency was able to be but was not acted upon,
and that the conduct relied on
for tendency purposes comprised the charged conduct and a single prior instance
of conduct. The similarities
identified by the prosecution were both commonplace
features of that general type of offending and facilitated by there being only
single prior instance of conduct. When those similarities are properly
considered, the only real commonalities or link between
the two instances of
conduct is that the applicant has committed offences comprising sexual
misconduct against two different complainants.
As the High Court has stated,
that is not significantly probative of the applicant having committed the
charged offences.
Danger of unfair prejudice to the
determination makes it strictly unnecessary to consider the application of
s 101 of the
. We will do so only briefly.
applicant relied, in particular, upon two matters said to establish that the
probative value of the tendency evidence did
not outweigh the ‘danger of
unfair prejudice’ to the applicant. Those matters were identified by the
High Court in
(a) that the jury may give the tendency evidence disproportionate weight by
failing to allow that a person who has a tendency to
have a particular state of
mind, or to act in a particular way, may not have had that state of mind, or may
not have acted in that
way, on the occasion in issue; and
(b) that the jury’s assessment of whether the prosecution has discharged
its onus may be clouded by the jury’s emotional
response to the tendency
[107] As to the
first matter, we do not accept that there was any real risk of that kind because
the tendency evidence is comprised
of the charged offending and a single prior
instance of conduct with the significant gap between the two. The jury would
necessarily
have to grapple with that gap when considering whether the tendency
evidence established the tendency, making it unlikely that they
would fail to
consider whether the applicant had the state of mind or acted on the tendency at
the time of the alleged offending,
or that they would over-estimate the
likelihood of his giving effect to, or acting in accordance with, that
[108] As to the
second matter, noting that the 2009 conduct was an indecent assault comprised of
stroking, kissing, and touching of
breasts and genitals over clothing, and not
egregious sexual misconduct or abuse which would cause the jury to feel strong
against the applicant, who was charged with serious sexual offences,
we consider that any risk of an irrational emotional response
to the tendency
evidence regarding the 2009 conduct because the victim was a child of 13 years
old could be adequately addressed
by appropriate warnings and directions to the
Disposition
[109] As set out
above, we have concluded that the tendency evidence was inadmissible for that
purpose and wrongly admitted and relied
on by the prosecution at the trial. The
wrongful admission of evidence over objection constitutes a wrong decision on a
of law within the second limb of the common form appeal provision. The
applicant submitted that he lost a fair chance of acquittal
by reason of that
error, with the consequence that his convictions should be set aside and a
retrial ordered.
respondent did not address the consequences of a conclusion that the evidence
was wrongly admitted. In particular, the respondent
did not submit that this
Court should dismiss the appeal in the application of the proviso on the basis
substantial
miscarriage of justice has actually occurred. The
respondent may therefore be taken to accept the consequences pressed by the
in the event error is found.
setting aside of the convictions and a re-trial has been necessitated in this
case by the prosecution’s reliance on
tendency evidence which was marginal
or borderline. As the High Court observed in
... [T]he open-textured nature of an enquiry into whether
‘the court thinks’ that the probative value of the evidence
‘significant’ means that it is inevitable that reasonable minds
might reach different conclusions. This means that
in marginal cases it might be
difficult to know whether an appellate court might take a different view of the
significance of the
tendency evidence from a trial judge. This might result in
the setting aside of any conviction and an order for a retrial. ... [T]he
potential consequence of a new trial in cases where a conviction is overturned
due to the wrongful admission of tendency evidence
which was borderline should
be a matter taken into account by the prosecution in assessing, perhaps
conservatively, what tendency
evidence it will rely
[112] We make
the following orders:
application for leave to appeal is allowed.
appeal is allowed.
re-trial is ordered.
_______________________
The trial Judge delivered written
reasons for that decision. See
The King v Ebborn
[2023] NTSC 10.
Criminal Code,
Pursuant to
Evidence Act 1939
The King v Ebborn
[2023] NTSC 10
The King v Ebborn
[2023] NTSC 10
The King v Ebborn
[2023] NTSC 10
That ground is subject to the
qualification in s 411(2) of the
Criminal Code
that even if the
point raised by the appeal might be decided in favour of the appellant, the
Court may dismiss the appeal if it considers
that no substantial miscarriage of
justice has actually occurred.
The Queen v Bauer
[2018] HCA 40
(2018) 266 CLR 56
’) at [61] per the Court in relation
to the issue of ‘significant probative value’ and at [63], [72]-[82]
in relation
to the issue of the danger of unfair prejudice.
, Dictionary, Part 1
Definitions.
IMM v The Queen
[2016] HCA 14
257 CLR 300
’) at [49]-[54] per French CJ, Kiefel, Bell
and Keane JJ.
Hughes v The Queen
[2017] HCA 20
(2017) 263 CLR 338
’) at [16] per Kiefel CJ, Bell,
Keane and Edelman JJ.
Ibid at [41].
McPhillamy v The Queen
[2018] HCA 52
(2018) 92 ALJR 1045
’) at [26] per Kiefel CJ,
Bell, Keane and Nettle JJ.
See, for example,
[2023] NSWCCA 47
per the Court.
Ibid at [39].
Ibid at [7].
The Queen v Hoffman
[2021] NTSC 31
') at [18].
The Queen v Burton
[2013] NSWCCA 335
(2013) 237 A Crim R 238
’) at [18].
Stubley v Western
[2011] HCA 7
(2011) 242 CLR 374
Larsen v Director of Public
Prosecutions (Cth)
[2020] VSCA 335.
Geraghty v The King
[2023] NSWCCA 47.
Appeal Book (‘AB’)
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Vic) v Roder
[2024] HCA 15
(2024) 98 ALJR 644
Potter v The King
Being the term used in the
South Australian equivalent of ss 97 and 101 of the
Astill v The King
per the Bell CJ (Stern JA and Button J agreeing).
The King v Ebborn
O’Keefe v The
[2009] NSWCCA 121
, particularly at [62].
Harris v The King
per Niall, Boyce and T Forrest JJA.
[2015] NSWCCA 10
(2015) 88 NSWLR 93
Harris v The
[2024] VSCA 43
See, for example
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth)
[2020] VSCA 335
[2015] NSWCCA 288
TL v The King
[2022] HCA 35
McPhillamy v The Queen
[2018] HCA 52
(2018) 92 ALJR 1045
Taylor v The Queen
[2020] NSWCCA 355
Geraghty v The Queen
[2023] NSWCCA 47
Pursuant to ss 411(3) and
Criminal Code
and in accordance with the principles described
BD v The Queen (No 2)
[2017] NTCCA 8
and the authorities
there cited.
This reflected an observation
made by the Western Australian Supreme Court of Appeal in
DKA v Western
[2017] WASCA 44
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (335 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter