URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCA/2024/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:16:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Motor Accidents Insurance Board v Motor Accidents (Compensation) Commission [2024] NTCA 5 (10 October 2024)
Motor Accidents Insurance Board v Motor Accidents (Compensation)
[2024] NTCA 5
PARTIES: MOTOR ACCIDENTS INSURANCE BOARD
MOTOR ACCIDENTS (COMPENSATION) COMMISSION
TITLE OF COURT: NORTHERN TERRITORY COURT OF APPEAL
FILE NO: AP 3 of 2023 (21903729)
DELIVERED: 10 October 2024
HEARING DATE: 10 November 2023
JUDGMENT OF: Grant CJ, Barr and Huntingford JJ
CATCHWORDS:
GUARANTEE AND INDEMNITY – Indemnities – Conditions precedent
– Construction – Right of person to be indemnified
Whether Supreme Court erred in giving judgment for respondent against
appellant on basis that interim benefits paid by respondent
to victim of motor
vehicle accident for attendant care services within the scope of indemnity
conferred by
Motor Accidents (Compensation) Act 1979
(NT) – Whether right to indemnity only applies to compensation paid in
conformity with formalities imposed under Act –
Term ‘payable’
requires legal entitlement with legally enforceable obligation to pay –
Trial judge erred in finding
substantial compliance with certification
requirement – Trial judge erred in finding compliance with certification
requirement
not mandatory – Trial judge erred in finding interim benefits
for attendant care services within the scope of indemnity –
Motor Accidents (Compensation) Act 1979
Motor Accidents (Compensation) Regulations 1984
(NT) reg 4F
Attorney-General v Arthur Ryan Automobiles Ltd
[1938] 2 KB 16
Christopher Chronis Designs Pty Ltd v Citadin Pty Ltd
(1997) 8 BPR
Forrest & Forrest Pty Ltd v Wilson
[2017] HCA 30
(2017) 262 CLR 510
Grocon Constructors (Victoria) Pty Ltd v APN FF2 Project 2 Pty Ltd
Kurnell Passenger & Transport Service Pty Ltd v Randwick City
[2009] NSWCA 59
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
South Eastern Sydney Area Health Service v
Gadiry & Anor
[2002] NSWCA 161
(2002) 54 NSWLR 495
Victorian WorkCover Authority v
Esso Australia Limited
(2001) 207 CLR 520
referred to.
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: B Roberts KC with R Bönig
Respondent: S Fitzpatrick with J Ingrames
Solicitors:
Appellant: Finlaysons
Respondent: Hall & Wilcox
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 34
IN THE COURT OF APPEAL
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Motor Accidents Insurance Board v Motor Accidents
(Compensation) Commission
[2024] NTCA 5
AP 3 of 2023
MOTOR ACCIDENTS INSURANCE BOARD
MOTOR ACCIDENTS (COMPENSATION) COMMISSION
CORAM: GRANT CJ, BARR and HUNTINGFORD JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 10 October 2024)
appellant is the administrator of Tasmania’s compulsory third-party motor
accident insurance scheme. The respondent
is the administrator of the
counterpart scheme in the Northern Territory. This is an appeal from a decision
of the Supreme Court
giving judgment for the respondent (as plaintiff) against
the appellant (as defendant) on the basis that interim benefits paid by
respondent to the victim of a motor vehicle accident for attendant care services
came within the scope of the indemnity conferred
in favour of the respondent
against the appellant by
Motor Accidents (Compensation)
(NT) (‘MAC Act’).
appellant was established by
Motor Accidents (Liabilities
and Compensation) Act 1973
(Tas). As a designated Government Business
Enterprise it is a body corporate by virtue of
Business Enterprises Act 1995
respondent was established as a corporate entity by s 4 of the
Insurance Office Act 1979
(NT), and was called the ‘Territory
Insurance Office’. It continued as the same corporate entity in accordance
Motor Accidents (Compensation) Commission Act
, but re-named the ‘Motor Accidents (Compensation)
Commission’. It administers the no-fault motor accidents compensation
scheme established by the MAC Act
and pays statutory benefits in
accordance with that scheme.
convenience and ease of understanding, in these Reasons the respondent will be
referred to as 'the Commission' and the appellant
will be referred to as 'the
[5] Pursuant to
s 38 of the
MAC Act, the Commission is entitled to be indemnified by
various categories of third party in respect of ‘statutory benefits’
paid to another person in relation to death or injury arising from a
‘motor accident’. Section 38(1) of the
MAC Act, which is the
relevant part for these purposes, provides:
A person (the
indemnifier
) is liable to indemnify the Commission for statutory benefits
paid to another person in relation to death or injury arising from
accident if:
(a) the motor accident was caused by, or arose from, the use of a motor vehicle
registered in another jurisdiction; and
(b) the indemnifier is:
(i) a person who would, assuming this Act had never existed, have been liable
in damages, in tort or contract, for the death or
injury arising from the motor
accident; or
(ii) a person who is liable to indemnify such a person for that liability under
an insurance contract or a statutory insurance scheme.
[6] Section 38(1)(b)(ii)
of the MAC Act is concerned with motor accidents involving a motor vehicle
registered under a compulsory
third party scheme in another jurisdiction in
which the driver of that vehicle would, but for the Northern Territory’s
scheme, be liable for damages at common law in respect of death or
injury caused in the accident. The term ‘motor accident’
in s 4A(1) of the
MAC Act to mean ‘an occurrence:
(a) caused by or arising out of the use of a motor vehicle; and (b)
resulting in the death of,
or injury to, a person.’ The term
‘statutory benefits’ is defined in s 4 of the
mean ‘compensation or other benefits
particular type of statutory benefit for injuries received on or after
1 July 2014 are interim benefits for attendant care
services. The term
‘attendant care services’ is defined in s 4D of the
Act in the following terms:
Attendant care services
(1) Attendant care services are personal and household services reasonably
required by an injured person as a result of the injury.
(2) However, attendant care services do not include:
(a) medical and rehabilitation services; or
(b) nursing care; or
(c) services provided in, or provided while the injured person is in, a
hospital, nursing home or other institution for the treatment,
rehabilitation or
care of injured persons.
(3) In this section:
household services
services of a domestic nature (including cooking, house cleaning, laundry, and
gardening) for running and maintaining the injured
person's household.
personal services
services for the essential and regular personal care of the injured person.
[8] Eligibility
for interim benefits for attendant care services is governed by s 18BD(1)
MAC Act, which provides:
Eligibility for interim
benefits for attendant care services
(1) Benefits for attendant care services are payable under this section to or
for the benefit of an eligible person if:
(a) the eligible person suffers an impairment as a result of an injury received
in, or as a result of, the motor accident; and
(b) the person requires attendant care services in consequence of the
impairment; and
(c) the criteria prescribed by regulation for this section are satisfied.
regulation referred to in s 18BD(1)(c) is reg 4F of the
Accidents (Compensation) Regulations 1984
(NT) (‘Regulations’),
which is extracted and discussed later in these Reasons in the context of the
grounds of appeal.
The proceedings at first instance
[10] On 22 July
2016, Stella Sullivan suffered severe injuries in a motor vehicle collision
which occurred in the Northern Territory
between a vehicle in which she was
travelling as a passenger and a Land Rover vehicle which was registered in
Tasmania and driven
by Douglas Cooper. The Land Rover was towing a Millard
caravan at the time of the collision. Mrs Sullivan subsequently made a claim
benefits under the MAC Act and received various payments, including interim
benefits for attendant care services.
[11] It was an
admitted fact in the proceedings at first instance that the Board had insured Mr
Cooper ‘in respect of any liability
incurred by him in respect of the
personal injury to a person resulting directly from a motor accident involving
the motor vehicle
The Commission
pleaded that, assuming the
MAC Act never existed, Mr Cooper was a person
who would have been liable in tort for Mrs Sullivan’s injury, loss and
The Commission claimed an
order that the Board indemnify it pursuant to s 38 of the
‘for all payments made to, for and behalf of Mrs Sullivan from
13 September 2016 to 21 November 2018, totalling
$1,348,617.74’.
[12] The Supreme
Court found that the Commission had established that Mr Cooper’s
negligence had caused the collision. The relevant
finding was that he had driven
without due care, skill and attention, and had failed to maintain effective
control of his vehicle
and caravan.
On the basis of that finding, the Supreme Court gave judgment in favour of the
Commission in the sum of
$1,342,083.99.
A substantial part
of the judgment sum was constituted by payments made by the Commission,
purportedly pursuant to s 18BD of the
MAC Act, for interim benefits
for attendant care services.
Issue on appeal
[13] The central
issue in this appeal is whether the payments of interim benefits for attendant
care services made by the Commission
came within the scope of the indemnity
conferred by s 38(1) of the
MAC Act. The Board’s grounds of
appeal are all directed to that central issue, and may be summarised as
(a) The court at first instance erred in finding that there was no relevant
statutory restriction on indemnity (at [100]), whereas:
(i) s 38 of the
MAC Act confines the indemnity to ‘statutory
benefits’ properly payable under the Act; and
(ii) interim benefits for attendant care services are payable only if the
criteria prescribed by reg 4F of the Regulations are satisfied.
(b) The court at first instance should have found that the prescribed criteria
were not satisfied in that:
(i) the prescribed criteria required both that the person has suffered an injury
of a kind listed in Schedule 1 and either that the
criteria set out in Schedule
1 for the injury are satisfied and the person’s condition is not permanent
and stable, or that
exceptional circumstances exist which warrant the payment of
(ii) the criteria set out in Schedule 1 for the claimant’s injury were not
satisfied given the absence of a medical assessment
meeting criteria 1 or 2 for
brain injury;
(iii) the Commission had failed to prove the existence of exceptional
circumstances warranting the payment of benefits;
(iv) the Commission had failed to obtain a certificate from an approved medical
specialist that satisfies the requirements of reg
4F(4) of the
Regulations;
(v) the Commission had failed to prove that it was satisfied that the criteria
in reg 4F(1) of the Regulations were met on the date
it assessed the
claimant’s eligibility as required by reg 4F(5) of the Regulations.
(c) The court at first instance erred in equating medical reports with a
certificate for the purpose of reg 4F(4) of the Regulations
(at [119]), and
in finding that such certification was not mandatory (at [120]).
(d) The court at first instance erred in conflating the entitlement of the
claimant to obtain or retain the benefit of the disputed
payments with the
Commission’s right to make a claim for indemnity under s 38 of the
MAC Act (at [108] and [120]), in circumstances where the Commission’s
failure to comply with the statutory requirements affected
only the claim for
Board’s position on appeal turns on the contention that, on a proper
construction of s
38(1) of the
MAC Act, the indemnity is
confined to benefits which are properly ‘payable’ under the Act.
That contention is put on the
basis that the term ‘statutory
benefits’ is defined in s 4 of the
MAC Act to mean
‘compensation or other benefits
under this Act’.
Counsel for the Board submits the word 'payable' operates in this context such
that the Commission’s
right to indemnity only applies to compensation paid
by the Commission in conformity with the formalities imposed under the MAC
The submission follows that
the right and obligation is not attracted merely because compensation was
incurred or paid by the Commission.
Eligibility conditions for
the payment of interim benefits
injuries received on or after 1 July 2014, attendant care services are regulated
under Part 4, Subdiv 2 of the MAC
The subdivision makes
provision for ‘short-term
and ‘interim
inter-relationship between the three kinds of benefits can be summarized
briefly. Short-term benefits are payable whenever the
injured person has not
been assessed as eligible for either interim or long-term attendant care
However, short-term
benefits are only payable for a maximum period of one year after the date of the
motor accident.
Interim benefits
are payable for a period of up to three years from the date the injured person
makes a claim,
but are not
payable where long-term benefits are
They apply pending a
determination as to whether the injured person is entitled to long-term
benefits. The Commission must determine
whether an injured person who is
receiving interim benefits is entitled to long-term benefits prior to the expiry
of the applicable
Long-term benefits are
payable for life.
extracted above, s 18BD(1)(c) of the MAC Act provides that the eligibility
conditions for the payment of interim benefits
for attendant care services
include the criteria prescribed by regulation. Regulation 4F of the Regulations
4F Eligibility: benefits for interim attendant care
(1) For section 18BD(1)(c) of the Act, the prescribed criteria are:
(a) the person has suffered an injury of a kind listed in Schedule 1; and
(b) either subregulation (2) or (3) applies.
(2) This subregulation applies if:
(a) the criteria set out in Schedule 1 for the injury (excluding any
requirements as to the permanency of the injury) are satisfied;
(b) the person’s condition at the date of assessment is not permanent and
(3) This subregulation applies if subregulation (2) does not apply but,
in the opinion of the Commission, exceptional circumstances
exist in relation to
the person which warrant the payment of benefits for attendant care
(4) The Commission must obtain a certificate from a medical specialist
approved by the Commission stating:
(a) the medical specialist has assessed the injured person; and
(b) whether the person has suffered an injury of a kind listed in
Schedule 1; and
(c) if the person does have such an injury, whether, at the time the certificate
is given, subregulation (2) applies.
(5) For the avoidance of doubt, in assessing whether a person is eligible for
benefits under section 18BD, the Commission must be
satisfied that the
criteria in subregulation (1) are met on the date the Commission assesses
the person's eligibility.
(6) In this regulation:
medical specialist
means a medical practitioner who holds specialist
registration under the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law in a
speciality that is relevant to the injury.
[17] Regulation
4F of the Regulations conditions the entitlement to interim benefits under
s 18BD(1) of the MAC Act on the claimant
having an injury that is
‘not permanent and stable’ at the date of assessment, other than in
‘exceptional
circumstances’.
requirement for a specialist assessment and certificate under reg 4F(4) is
for the purpose of determining whether the claimant's
condition is not permanent
and stable, because if the condition is permanent and stable then a
determination must be made as to long-term
[18] The central
argument raised in the Board’s case below, and on appeal, is that although
the Commission may have paid interim
benefits for attendant care services in
purported pursuance of s 18BD of the MAC Act, those benefits were not
because the conditions precedent to payment of such
benefits imposed by s 18BD(1)(c) of the MAC Act were not met. The Board
that the Commission failed to obtain a ‘certificate’ for
the purposes of reg 4F(4), which the Board contends was a mandatory
provision. That failure is said to have resulted in a consequential failure by
the Commission to properly satisfy itself of the prescribed
criteria in
reg 4F(1)(b), when read together with reg 4F(2)(b) or reg 4F(3),
and consequently, a failure to be satisfied –
as required by
reg 4F(5) – that the criteria in reg 4F(1) had been met on the
date the Commission assessed the injured person’s
eligibility. The
‘criteria prescribed by regulation’ for s 18BD were thus not
satisfied, with the ultimate consequence
that interim benefits for attendant
care services under s 18BD(1) were not ‘payable’ in the
relevant sense.
Meaning of ‘payable’
first question which arises is what meaning is properly accorded to the term
‘payable’ which appears in the definition
of ‘statutory
benefits’ in s 4 of the
MAC Act to mean ‘compensation or
other benefits
under this Act’. In
Christopher Chronis
Designs Pty Ltd v Citadin Pty
Young J considered the
meaning of the word ‘payable’ in a commercial lease which stated
that the rent for a particular
year ‘shall be the current rent ...
provided ... that the current rent so determined shall not be less than the
minimum rent
payable during the immediately preceding 12 [month] period’.
His Honour held that rent which was ‘payable’ was
‘rent which
can be demanded and, if not paid, sued
Victorian Court of Appeal cited
Christopher Chronis
with approval in
Grocon Constructors (Victoria) Pty Ltd v APN FF2 Project 2 Pty
observing as follows
(at [115]):
Christopher Chronis
demonstrates that the meaning
of ‘payable’ can be responsive to the point in time at which it is
applied to a cost. At
an early point in time, a cost for which there is a legal
liability to pay, but which has not yet been paid, can be described as
‘payable’. At a later point in time, once the cost has been paid, it
can still be described as a cost that was payable
under the contract.
[21] The Court
added (at [118]):
It is clear that, when one considers the meaning
of ‘payable’ from a limited grammatical perspective, it does not
the same meaning as ‘paid’ and cannot be interpreted as such.
From this limited perspective, ‘payable’, when
used in a commercial
contract, refers to an amount which a person has a legally enforceable
obligation to pay.
[22] On proper
construction, the term ‘payable’ in s 4 of the
similarly requires that there be a legal entitlement with a corresponding
legally enforceable obligation to pay. Accordingly,
compensation and other
benefits are not ‘payable’ under the MAC Act unless there is a legal
liability to make payment.
It falls then to consider whether there was
compliance with the matters which condition the liability to pay interim
benefits for
attendant care services under the MAC Act.
substantial compliance with certification
[23] The trial
judge found that the Commission assessed Mrs Sullivan’s eligibility for
short-term benefits and commenced to
pay short-term benefits on 14 October 2016,
and that ‘those benefits were converted to interim benefits on 13 June
[24] The trial
judge found further that the Commission had obtained ‘an appropriate
certificate or certificates for the purposes
of Regulation 4F(4)’. In
making that finding, the trial judge noted that there was no prescribed form for
the certificate,
and in default accepted the ordinary meaning given by the
Macquarie Dictionary as follows: ‘... a writing on paper certifying
truth of something.’
trial judge referred to
Interpretation Act 1978
which provides that strict compliance with prescribed forms under an Act is not
necessary and that substantial or sufficient
compliance will suffice, and then
reasoned by analogy that ‘a number of reports’ tendered by the
plaintiff substantially
met ‘the description of certificate and
sufficiently address[ed] the injury and criteria in Schedule 1 of the
Regulations’.
[25] The reports
referred to by the trial judge were specified in a footnote as ‘Exhibit
P 23, in the description on imaging
of brain abnormalities; Exhibit
P 15 and FIM assessments; Dr McCarthy’s report as a rehabilitation
physician’.
appear that the reference to exhibit P 23 was incorrect, and that the trial
judge was actually referring to exhibit
That exhibit
contained the following radiologists’ reports of brain imaging.
(a) The report of a CT scan of Mrs Sullivan’s brain performed 9
September 2016 (some seven weeks post-accident) which contained
a conclusion
that the ‘Hypodense area within the left frontoparietal lobes with
overlying craniotomy is in keeping with a recent
(b) The report of an MRI performed on 12 September 2016 which referred to the
medial edge of the left frontoparietotemporal region
demonstrating
‘diffusion restriction’.
(c) The report of a brain CT performed on 15 September 2016 which contained
the following:
Left frontoparietotemporal craniotomies again noted with underlying mild
dural thickening.
The left MCA territory infarct involving the left frontal and parietal lobes
is now of lower density, in keeping with expected
No haemorrhagic transformation.
There is a tiny SDH overlying the left frontal lobe – not significantly
changed from the previous
No new areas of intracranial haemorrhage.
Evolving left MCA infarct, without evidence of haemorrhagic
transformation.
Tiny left frontal SDH – stable.
No new intracranial haemorrhage.
[26] It may be
accepted that the evidence contained in exhibit P 25 demonstrated brain
imaging abnormalities at a point in time approximately
two months after the
accident, but the significance of any one such abnormality in the assessment of
whether the injured person suffered
an injury of a kind listed in
Schedule 1, and whether the injured person’s condition was permanent
and stable, is unclear on
the face of the
[27] In drawing
the conclusion concerning substantial compliance with the certification
requirement, the trial judge also made reference
assessments’ contained within exhibit P 15. The FIM or Functional
Independence Measure instrument is a basic
indicator of disability. Mrs Sullivan
was administered an initial test on 25 October 2016. She scored a total of
43 out of 90, with
10 scores of 2 or less indicating ‘complete dependence
on assistance’. The test results indicated that she had suffered
extremely severe traumatic brain injury from which she was unlikely to recover
functional independence in most activities
A second FIM
assessment was made by an occupational therapist in March 2019. Mrs Sullivan
scored a total of 46 out of 90 on testing,
with 10 scores of 2 or less
indicating complete dependence on assistance. She had made little progress with
functional independence
since the FIM assessment carried out in October
Again, those assessments
did not directly address whether the injured person suffered an injury of a kind
listed in Schedule 1, and
whether the injured person’s condition was
permanent and stable.
[28] In drawing
the conclusion concerning substantial compliance with the certification
requirement, the trial judge also appears
to have relied on a report or reports
of Dr Kathleen McCarthy, rehabilitation physician, who had been engaged to
undertake the management
of Mrs Sullivan’s rehabilitation. In her report
dated 30 October 2016,
McCarthy stated (inter alia):
Mrs Sullivan is a 72 year-old woman
who was injured while on holiday in the Northern Territory. ...
Her most significant injury was that of traumatic brain injury complicated by
left middle cerebral artery infarct, and seizures. ...
She initially had a subdural haemorrhage that required operative evacuation
on 2 August 2016. Complicating this she had a seizure
with status epilepticus
and was found to have middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion at this time. She
required intubation and ventilation
with difficulty weaning from
ventilation.
Despite initial poor neurological progress, Mrs Sullivan has improved
significantly in terms of behaviour, cognition, mobility and
speech. She has
substantial language issues with expression in particular but also
comprehension.
[29] In her
subsequent report, dated 16 November 2017, Dr McCarthy expressed the opinion
that Mrs Sullivan had reached ‘maximal
medical improvement’, for the
purposes of determining her impairment. Dr McCarthy explained that this did not
mean that Mrs
Sullivan could not make further gains from her rehabilitation
program, but that the gains would be ‘slow and small in increment’
and would need many months if not years to
It may be noted that by
the time Dr McCarthy expressed that opinion, the Commission had been paying
benefits for interim attendant
care services for just over five months.
[30] On this
appeal, the Commission argues that a ‘certificate’, being an
undefined term, ‘takes its ordinary meaning
and can include a medical
However, the
requirement for the medical specialist’s certificate is satisfied only if
the relevantly approved medical specialist
certifies as to the matters set out
in reg 4F(4). The requirement is for one document: ‘
certificate’. The document need not be headed in any particular way
provided that the medical specialist writes words to the
certify that ...’. Alternatively, if the document is headed
‘Certificate’, then the medical specialist
could satisfy the
requirement by writing words to the effect, ‘I state that ...’ or
‘I confirm that ...’.
It must be possible for a person to read the
document and to be left in no doubt that it is a certificate or clear statement
the matters required by reg 4F(4) to be the subject of the
certificate.
[31] The purpose
of the reg 4F(4) certificate is to have the medical specialist draw
together and assess the possibly diverse strands
of medical and other
information about an injured person and state whether that person has suffered a
Schedule 1 injury and, if so,
state whether reg 4F(2) has application
because the person’s condition is not permanent and stable. On the
material in evidence
below, the Commission did not obtain a certificate from a
medical specialist approved by the Commission which stated that Mrs
condition at the date of the assessment was not permanent and
stable. Moreover, there was no evidence that the Commission was satisfied,
required by reg 4F(5), that the criteria in reg 4F(1)(b) read with
reg 4F(2)(b) were met. In those circumstances, the Commission
have been lawfully satisfied that the eligibility conditions for the payment of
interim benefits for attendant care services
In the context of a
carefully formulated and regulated statutory scheme, it is not enough to say
that the injured person obviously
qualified for some form of attendant care
services, or that it was immaterial whether benefits were paid on an
or ‘long-term’ basis.
[32] For these
reasons, the trial judge erred in finding that the Commission had obtained
‘an appropriate certificate or certificates
for the purposes of
Regulation 4F(4)’ based on the fact that it was in possession of the
various medical reports and other
documents described above.
Whether certification a mandatory requirement
[33] The trial
judge also appeared to accept the Commission’s alternative submission that
the certificate was ‘not part
of the criteria for
eligibility’.
Commission makes a similar submission on this appeal, namely, that
reg 4F(4) does not require the certificate to be obtained
in order for the
respondent to be satisfied of the prescribed
However, that
submission fails to take into account the significance of the certificate. The
mandatorily expressed requirement to
obtain the reg 4F(4) certificate
creates an essential step in the prescribed process by which the Commission may
satisfy itself that
the criteria referred to in reg 4F(1) are met.
[34] The trial
judge dealt with the issue in the following
Regulation 4F(4)
states the Commission must obtain a certificate from a medical specialist
stating that the medical specialist has
assessed the injured person who had
suffered an injury of the type described within the Schedule 1 criteria. The
defendant argued
the requirement to obtain a Certificate is mandatory and strict
compliance is required as s 18BD(1)(c) states benefits are payable
‘the criteria prescribed by regulation for this section are
satisfied’. Regulation 4F(4) states ‘the Commission
must obtain
a certificate from a medical specialist approved by the Commission’. The
defendant emphasises the mandatory nature
of the word ‘must’
[Defendant’s written submissions at [73] citing Mildren AJ in
v Bardon & Anor
[2018] NTSC 9
concerning the mandatory nature of
‘must’ used in
Personal Violence Restraining
Orders Act 2016
I accept there is an expectation of compliance when the word
‘must’ is used by the legislature. The consequences of
non-compliance
are not however always clear cut. So much is made clear in the
often quoted
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[[1998] HCA 28;
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
] where it was observed:
An act done in breach of a condition regulating the exercise of a statutory
power is not necessarily invalid and of no effect. Whether
it is depends upon
whether there can be discerned a legislative purpose to invalidate any act that
fails to comply with the condition.
The existence of the purpose is ascertained
by the reference to the language of the statute, its subject matter and objects
consequences for the parties of holding void every act done in breach of
the condition.
The context and statute as a whole and the objectively ascertained intentions
of the legislature if there is failure to comply are
all relevant matters.
[35] The trial
judge ultimately decided that, if she had erred in finding that the Commission
had obtained a reg 4F(4) certificate,
such failure to comply with the
‘apparent mandatory condition’ did not result in invalidity. The
trial judge reasoned
that it was highly unlikely that invalidity was the
legislature’s intention ‘given the Act is for the benefit of an
claimant likely to need attendant care services’. The trial judge
further reasoned that the structure of the regulation did
not readily lean to a
reading that would treat the certificate as a condition precedent to the
validity of payments, when the person
was ‘otherwise eligible’.
Finally, the trial judge considered that there was nothing in the relevant
regulation to indicate
that payments would not be paid as a consequence of any
non-compliance, in contradistinction with reg 4K(5) which specified
circumstances
in which benefits would not be payable for building
alterations.
Project Blue Sky
, the majority held that invalidity in the exercise of a
statutory power depended upon whether there could be discerned a legislative
purpose to invalidate any act that failed to comply with the relevant statutory
condition. The majority rejected the earlier mandatory/directory
validity (and the further test of whether there had been ‘substantial
compliance’ with a directory requirement),
observing that a better test
for determining the issue of validity was to ask whether it was a purpose of the
legislation that an
act done in breach of the provision should be invalid.
However, the majority observed that the statutory provision then under
consideration
was not one which imposed ‘essential preliminaries to the
exercise of [the] functions’ of the respondent Authority.
Forrest & Forrest Pty Ltd v
a majority of the
High Court referred with approval to a line of authority that, where a statutory
regime conferred power on the
executive government to grant exclusive rights to
exploit the resources of the State, the regime would, subject to any provision
to the contrary, be understood as mandating compliance with the requirements of
the regime as essential to the making of a valid
However, that was not the
sole basis for the Court’s conclusion that the exercise of power by the
administrative decision-maker
was invalid. The majority distinguished the case
from that considered in
Project Blue Sky
, for reasons explained in the
following passage (emphasis by underlining
Project Blue Sky
, this Court was concerned with whether a statutory
requirement that an administrative agency perform its functions in a manner
with Australia's obligations under any convention or international
agreement to which Australia is a party was intended to invalidate
an act done
in breach of the requirement. The majority in
Project Blue Sky
strongly influenced in reaching a conclusion in the negative by the
consideration that the requirement in question regulated
the exercise of
functions already conferred on the agency, rather than imposed
preliminaries to the exercise of those functions. Their Honours were also
influenced by the circumstance that the provisions
did not have ‘a
rule‑like quality which [could] be easily identified and applied’,
many of the obligations relevant
in that case being ‘expressed in
indeterminate language’
. Also important to the decision was the
consideration that ‘public inconvenience would be a result of the
invalidity of the
act’, especially if those affected by
non‑compliance were neither responsible for, nor aware of, the
non‑compliance.
The present case is readily distinguishable. A consideration of ‘the
language of the statute, its subject matter and objects,
and the consequences
for the parties of holding void’ acts done in breach of the Act, reveals
that ss 74(1)(ca)(ii), 74A(1)
and 75(4a) imposed
essential preliminaries
to the exercise of the power conferred by s 71 of the Act. That this was
so was made clear by both the express
terms and the structure of the provisions
as sequential steps in an integrated process
leading to the possibility of
the grant of a mining lease by the Minister. These provisions were not
expressed in indeterminate
terms: they imposed rules which could be easily
identified and applied. In addition, any inconvenience suffered by treating the
requirements of the Act as conditions precedent to the exercise of the
Minister's power would enure only to those with some responsibility
non‑observance, whereas (as will be explained) the contrary view would
disadvantage both the public interest and individuals
who were within the
protection of the Act. Finally, and importantly,
Project Blue Sky
not concerned with a statutory regime for the making of grants of rights to
exploit the resources of a State.
relevant statutory scheme created by the MAC Act also imposes an essential
preliminary to the payment of interim benefits
for attendant care services which
is expressed in rule-like terms as part of a sequential step in an integrated
process for the payment
for different categories of attendant care services.
Moreover, although the scheme under consideration in
Forrest & Forrest
Pty Ltd v Wilson
was not perfectly analogous, the scheme under the MAC Act
has the common feature that it prescribes a process for the payment from
financial resources of the Northern Territory. Pursuant to s 30C of the
MAC Act, all benefits payable under the Act are paid by the Commission out
of the Motor Accidents (Compensation) Fund continued by
Motor Accidents (Compensation) Commission Act
. All assets of the Fund are
the property of the Northern Territory and are held by the Commission on behalf
of the Territory.
The Fund is
thus public money.
statutory regime under consideration in this case establishes ‘essential
preliminaries’ for the assessment of
entitlement to payment of benefits
from the Motor Accidents (Compensation) Fund. For these reasons, the trial judge
erred in finding
that compliance with the requirement for certification was not
a mandatory requirement under the legislative scheme.
certification a precondition to right to indemnity
conclusion that the trial judge erred in finding substantial compliance with the
certification requirement, and erred in
finding that certification was not a
mandatory requirement in any event, does not necessarily determine the issue on
appeal. This
is not an application for judicial review of the exercise by the
Commission of its functions under the MAC Act.
The relevant question on
appeal is whether compensation by way of interim benefits for attendant care
services was ever ‘payable’
and hence within the scope of the
indemnity conferred by s 38 of the MAC Act.
Board’s contentions in that respect are summarised in the following
passage in its written
submissions:
it is not sufficient for the purpose of the indemnity under s 38 that the
injured claimant might have had a ‘moral case’
to receive a
particular entitlement if it be an entitlement that is outside the operation of
the scheme provided for under the MAC
Act. A payment in that circumstance might
be made by the Commission on an
basis, but it will not trigger
the indemnity under s 38 to the extent of any such payment not otherwise
properly payable under the
Act. Likewise, apposite to this case, where there are
formalities prescribed under the MAC Act for the claimant’s entitlement
compensation, and those formalities have not been observed by the Commission, it
follows that the relevant entitlements were,
to that extent, not payable under
the MAC Act for the purpose of the definition of ‘statutory
benefits’ and, therefore,
the operation of the indemnity under section 38.
Any failure by the Commission to observe the requirements under the MAC Act does
not adversely affect the interests of the claimant who has received a payment in
such circumstances, but only the right of recovery
of the (defaulting)
Commission under the right of indemnity.
[42] Conversely,
the Commission contends that the principal issue on this appeal is whether any
failure on its part to obtain a certificate
for the purposes of reg 4F(1)
‘will (or may) result in benefits not being payable to an injured person
under s 18BD’.
contention must be rejected to the extent that it suggests that the appeal is
concerned with the entitlement of the injured
claimant to retain the
compensation received by her. As already stated, the issue on appeal is whether
payments made by the Commission,
purportedly pursuant to s 18BD of the MAC
Act, were ‘statutory benefits’, that is, ‘compensation of
other benefits
payable under [the] Act’, and hence within the scope of the
s 38(1) indemnity.
Commission contends further that the approach contended for by the Board is to
read the provisions of the Act ‘backwards
from the point of view of the
indemnity claim, instead of forwards from the payment of benefits’. That
contention would seem
difficult to reconcile with the fact that the function of
the trial judge was, and the function of this Court on appeal is, to determine
whether the right to indemnity has been triggered, and, if so, the extent of
that right. The extent of the right to indemnity is
not necessarily coextensive
or commensurate with the benefits which had been paid. The Commission’s
submission in that respect
continues as
[Board’s] contentions would construe the Act and Regulations in favour of
the insurer of an interstate driver at fault,
over the intended beneficiaries of
the Act – injured Territorians and visitors on Territory roads – and
the respondent
charged with providing for their care and the financial
sustainability of the scheme. Alternatively, the appellant asks the Court
interpret the provisions in different ways depending on whether the party
advancing a case is an injured person or a prospective
indemnifier.
submission must be rejected to the extent that it suggests that, as a matter of
statutory interpretation, this Court should
interpret s 38(1) of the MAC
Act in a manner which takes into account the fact that the interstate driver was
at fault and which
favours the Commission’s position as administrator of
the no-fault scheme under the MAC Act. There is no ambiguity in s 38(1)
the MAC Act, and resort to a purposive approach to the interpretation of the
section does not assist the Commission. Although
the obvious purpose of
s 38(1) is to allow the Commission to obtain indemnity in an action in debt
deriving from a damages claim
in tort or contract, the indemnity is limited to
‘statutory benefits’ paid by the Commission. By express definition,
that is compensation or other benefits ‘payable’ under the Act. The
indemnity is not ‘for all monies paid’,
or ‘for all monies
paid in good faith’. The statutory language is clear and the outcome is
not unjust or capricious.
Commission also contends that this Court should not accept ‘an
unnecessarily strict construction of the MAC Act and
Regulations by which it
would be forced to deprive otherwise eligible persons of statutory
That submission
is ill-founded. As the Board says, on the construction it presses any failure by
the Commission to observe the requirements
under the MAC Act does not adversely
affect the interests of a claimant who has received a payment in such
circumstances, but only
the right of recovery of the Commission under the
statutory indemnity. The Commission would face very substantial obstacles in
prosecuting
any claim for the recovery of monies paid to an injured person (or a
third party service provider) on the basis that the Commission
had itself failed
to comply with the statutory requirements which conditioned such payments.
[46] Leaving
aside the issue of benefits already paid, if a claimant is eligible to receive a
particular category of statutory benefit
under the terms of the statute,
adherence by the Commission to the prescribed process does not deny those
benefits to that claimant.
construction of the MAC Act and Regulations which would require adherence to
those statutory processes has no effect on the rights
of injured claimants.
Rather, it simply reflects the need on the part of the Commission to comply with
its statutory obligations
before making payment of public money. Those
obligations apply
in circumstances where the Commission may
seek indemnity from a third party pursuant to s 38 of the Act, in order to
ensure that
whatever compensation or other benefits paid are ‘payable
under [the] Act’.
Commission seeks to rely on the principle that, even in the absence of
ambiguity, the provisions of beneficial legislation
‘must be beneficially
construed so as to provide the most complete remedy of the situation with which
they are intended to
While it may be
accepted that the principle applies in relation to the interpretation of those
parts of the MAC Act relating to an
injured claimant’s rights, it has no
application in relation to the provision which creates the Commission’s
indemnity against a third party insurer.
Commission also relies on s 12(1) of the MAC Act (and the following
subsections) to argue that those provisions ‘make
clear that it is the
respondent which is responsible for determining, in accordance with the Act and
Regulations, whether, and how
much, a person is entitled to be paid by way of
statutory benefits’.
unclear how that argument advances the Commission’s case. As the Board
points out,
the no-fault scheme
created under the MAC Act is both the source of the power for the Commission to
make payments and the mechanism
by which entitlements are regulated. Section
12(1) provides that ‘[t]he right of any person to, and the amount of, a
under this Act shall be determined by the Commission, and regulations
under this Act may prescribe the manner in which any such determination
[49] Section 7(a)
Motor Accidents (Compensation) Commission Act
, which is also invoked by
the Commission in support of this submission, simply states that one of the
functions of the Commission
is ‘to administer the MAC scheme in accordance
Motor Accidents (Compensation) Act 1979
.’ There is nothing
in the statutory provisions identified by the Commission which provides licence
for it to depart from (or
not be bound by) the Regulations.
Commission submits that once it has undertaken an assessment process, and a
benefit has been assessed and paid, there is
no scope for reconsideration of the
process at the suit of an
indemnifier.
submission, the Commission relies on s 38(8) of the Act, which provides
that the Commission may recover an indemnity under
s 38 as a debt owed to
the Commission by the indemnifier. However, any right of recovery is necessarily
subject to the limitation
imposed by the text of s 38(1) when read with the
definition of ‘statutory benefits’ in s 4 of the MAC Act.
Commission seeks to address that limitation by reference to three authorities
which are said to in support the proposition
that all that is required to be
shown to make out a right to indemnity in this context is that a statutory
benefit has been paid.
Each of the three decisions concerned an employer’s
right of indemnity against a third party for compensation paid to an injured
worker. It should be noted at the outset that in none of these cases was there
an issue about whether the payments made by the employer
were payments otherwise
than in accordance with the provisions of the relevant workers’
compensation legislation.
[52] The first
authority relied on is the decision in
Attorney-General v Arthur Ryan
Automobiles Ltd
was whether an employer could bring a second
action for indemnity in respect of compensation which continued to be paid after
action for indemnity had been resolved by the plaintiff’s
acceptance of a payment into court. It was held that each payment
compensation gave rise to a separate right of action. As Slesser LJ observed
(emphasis by underlining
The language
of the section makes it quite clear to my mind that the condition on which the
indemnity arises is primarily that the
workman has been paid.
That payment
must be in respect of compensation under the Act
, and the injury must be
caused in circumstances creating a liability in some person other than the
employer. But the actual claim
arises only when the payment is made in fact; and
each payment gives rise to a separate right of action, which will succeed or
not succeed according to whether the conditions laid down in the section
are or are not satisfied. .....
The more reasonable, and I think proper, view ... is that each time there is
a payment, there arises a liability to pay indemnity,
if the conditions are
[53] Similarly,
Scott LJ stated with reference to a second or subsequent action for indemnity
(emphasis by underlining
question of liability that the third party will thereafter be entitled to raise
will be in connection with the payments by
the employer to the workman on [sic]
any suggestion that the payment made at any subsequent date was not a payment in
with the provisions of the Workmen’s Compensation Act.
Otherwise – and this is the ordinary case –
it will simply be a
question of ascertaining what was the amount that became payable at subsequent
dates and was paid
pursuant to the words of s 30, sub-s 2, by the employer
to the workman.
[54] On their
face, those statements stand contrary to the Commission’s submission that
all that is required to make out the
indemnity is that a statutory benefit has
been paid. At the very least, they provide no support for the Commission’s
in that respect.
[55] The second
authority relied on by the Commission is the decision in
Victorian Workcover
Authority v Esso Australia
The issue decided
in that case was whether, in addition to indemnity for compensation paid,
damages in the nature of interest could
be awarded pursuant to the Victorian
Supreme Court Act
. The Commission relies specifically on a passage in
which the majority cited
Arthur Ryan
and stated (emphasis by underlining
Some of the
indemnity provisions in worker’s compensation statutes have been
interpreted as conferring distinct rights of action
against the tortfeasor which
arise when each compensation payment is made by the employer or insurer and
which will succeed
if the other conditions laid down in the provision are
unclear how this statement is said to advance the Commission’s argument.
The underlined words serve as a reminder
of the observations in
that the indemnity is confined to compensation paid under the Act, or
amounts payable in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
[57] The third
authority relied on by the Commission is the decision in
South Eastern Sydney
Area Health Service v Gadiry &
The issue decided in
that case was whether and to what extent the
Limitation Act
adversely affected an employer’s right of recovery against a third party.
It was held, consistently with
Arthur Ryan
Victorian WorkCover v
, that the indemnity provision in the
Workers Compensation Act
(NSW) created a distinct right of action against a tortfeasor when each
compensation payment was made by the employer. The effect
was that, although the
recovery of some amounts sought by way of indemnity was statute barred, the
recovery of amounts paid at a
later time was not statute barred. This case
provides no support for the Commission’s submission in the present appeal.
[58] The final
proposition advanced by the Commission is that ‘the use in
words that correspond to a term defined in
should not be construed as
inviting litigation by an indemnifier of every step of the respondent’s
conduct of its statutory
The Commission
relies in that respect on the decision in
Kurnell Passenger & Transport
Service Pty Ltd v Randwick City
This was another
case in relation to indemnification proceedings by an employer against a third
party. The specific issue was whether
the putative tortfeasor could require an
injured worker (who was not a party to the indemnification proceedings) to be
examined for the purposes of establishing the limit of the indemnity.
The majority held that such an examination was extraneous to
the statutory
purpose of the particular legislative provision, which obliged the worker to
submit to examination by a medical practitioner
if required by the employer.
That provision was designed for an entirely different purpose and operated in
claims for compensation
rather than indemnity
proceedings.
[59] There is no
analogy between the position advanced by the Board on this appeal and the
circumstances under consideration in
Kurnell Passenger & Transport
In any event, the construction of s 38(1) of the MAC Act propounded by the
Board would not operate as an invitation for an indemnifier
to litigate every
step of the Commission’s conduct. Even if it did operate as such, the
Commission’s
is irrelevant to the determination of
whether compensation or other benefits paid by the Commission were
‘payable’ under
the Act so as to come within the scope of the
Conclusion and orders
[60] For the
reasons described above, compensation for interim attendant care services was
not ‘payable’ at the time those
payments commenced on 13 June 2017,
and did not subsequently become ‘payable’. As a consequence, the
interim benefits
for attendant care services paid by the Commission to the
injured person did not come within the scope of the indemnity conferred
favour of the Commission against the Board by s 38(1) of the
[61] Accordingly,
the following orders are made.
appeal is allowed.
judgment entered for the respondent on 3 May 2023 in the sum of $1,342,083.99 is
is entered for the respondent in the sum of $895,176.28.
question of costs is reserved, with liberty to make application in relation to
the issue of costs within 28 days of the delivery
of this judgment in the event
that orders as to costs are not agreed.
________________________
Second Amended Statement of Claim,
par 4; Second Amended Defence, par 4.
Second Amended Statement of Claim,
Motor Accidents (Compensation)
Commission v Motor Accidents Insurance Board
[2023] NTSC 40
That amount was in “claim 4
of 2019”: see
Motor Accidents (Compensation) Commission v Motor
Accidents Insurance Board
[2023] NTSC 40
Appellant's written submissions, 26
June 2023, pars 24-25.
MAC Act, s 18BA.
MAC Act, s 18BB(2).
MAC Act, s 18BC(2).
MAC Act, s 18BD(3)(b).
MAC Act, s 18BB(1)(c).
MAC Act, s 18BB(2).
MAC Act, s 18BD(3)(b).
MAC Act, s 18BD(2).
MAC Act, s 18BD(4).
By combined operation of
reg 4F(2) and (3). In the present case, reg 4F(3) was not invoked
because the Commission did not form an
opinion or make a determination in
relation to ‘exceptional circumstances’.
Regulation 4E(2).
Christopher Chronis Designs
Pty Ltd v Citadin Pty Ltd
(1997) 8 BPR 15,659.
may be noted that Young J held that, in the context of the clause of the
commercial lease in which it appeared, the phrase extended
to the rent that had
actually been paid in the preceding 12 month period.
Grocon Constructors
(Victoria) Pty Ltd v APN FF2 Project 2 Pty Ltd
[2015] VSCA 190.
Motor Accidents
(Compensation) Commission v Motor Accidents Insurance Board
[2023] NTSC 40
Motor Accidents
(Compensation) Commission v Motor Accidents Insurance Board
[2023] NTSC 40
. In support, the trial judge also cited
Joam v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2002] FCA 107
Motor Accidents
(Compensation) Commission v Motor Accidents Insurance Board
[2023] NTSC 40
Motor Accidents
(Compensation) Commission v Motor Accidents Insurance Board
[2023] NTSC 40
The brain imaging reports were
annexed to the affidavit of Scott William Moss sworn 19 June 2020, at exhibit
P 25, and appear as
sub-exhibits SWM-16, SWM-17 and SWM-18 to that
affidavit. Counsel for the plaintiff at trial made specific reference to those
at par 22.34 of their written submissions dated 11 August 2020.
The ‘MCA’ is the
middle cerebral artery.
An ‘SDH’ is a
subdural hematoma.
In Schedule 1 to the
Accidents (Compensation) Regulations
, Item 2 (dealing with brain injury)
specifies as one alternative criteria that the injury has resulted in the
eligible person having
‘a significant brain imaging
abnormality’.
Exhibit P 15, affidavit of
Judith Courts sworn 22 November 2019, par 12, and exhibit JC-2.
Exhibit P 15, affidavit of
Judith Courts sworn 22 November 2019, par 49.
The report was annexed to the
affidavit of Judith Courts sworn 22 November 2019, exhibit P 15, and appears as
exhibit JC-3 to that
Exhibit P 15, exhibit JC-3, AB
Respondent’s written
submissions, 13 October 2022, par 48.
As already stated, there was no
evidence that the Commission was of the opinion – in the alternative, as
required by reg 4F(3)
– that exceptional circumstances existed
warranting the payment of benefits for interim attendant care services. It is
ground on this appeal that the Commission did not hold that opinion.
Motor Accidents
(Compensation) Commission v Motor Accidents Insurance Board
[2023] NTSC 40
Respondent’s written
submissions, par 50.
Motor Accidents
(Compensation) Commission v Motor Accidents Insurance Board
[2023] NTSC 40
Motor Accidents
(Compensation) Commission v Motor Accidents Insurance Board
[2023] NTSC 40
. Reg 4K(5) specifies that benefits for building alterations are
not payable unless an occupational therapist approved by the Commission
certifies that the building is appropriate for the injured person or is capable
of being altered so that it is appropriate for the
injured person and the
Commission has approved the proposed alterations before the alterations are
Forrest & Forrest Pty Ltd
[2017] HCA 30
(2017) 262 CLR 510.
Ibid at [64].
Ibid at [62]-[63], citations
Motor Accidents
(Compensation) Commission Act
s 16(2)(a).
Appellant's written submissions,
Respondent’s written
submissions, par 9.
Ibid, par 23.
Respondent’s written
submissions, par 51.
Although a claimant has no legal
entitlement to enforce payments of compensation where the prescribed criteria
have not been met,
if the Commission is dilatory in obtaining a certificate
under reg 4F(4) a claimant could compel the Commission to do so by
application
for an order in the nature of mandamus or by recourse to the review
provisions of the MAC Act (Part 6, Divs 2 and 3).
Ibid, par 52, referring to
Thompson v Groote Eylandt Mining Co Ltd
[2003] NTCA 5
(2003) 173 FLR 72
Ibid, par 38.
Appellant's written submissions
in reply, 25 October 2023, par 13.
Respondent’s written
submissions, par 62.
Attorney-General v Arthur
Ryan Automobiles Ltd
[1938] 2 KB 16.
Attorney-General v Arthur
Ryan Automobiles Ltd
[1938] 2 KB 16
Ibid at 23.
Victorian WorkCover Authority
v Esso Australia Limited
(2001) 207 CLR 520.
Ibid at [18] per Gleeson CJ,
Gummow, Hayne and Callinan JJ.
South Eastern Sydney Area
Health Service v Gadiry & Anor
[2002] NSWCA 161
(2002) 54 NSWLR 495
[22]-[24] and [40]-[42].
Respondent’s written
submissions, par 63.
Kurnell Passenger &
Transport Service Pty Ltd v Randwick City Council
[2009] NSWCA 59.
Ibid at [102]-[103] per Basten
JA (Giles JA agreeing at [1]).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (364 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter