URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTLC/2023/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:20:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Inquest into the death of Bernard Hector [2023] NTLC 3 (24 February 2023)
Inquest into the death of Bernard Hector
[2023] NTLC 3
TITLE OF COURT: Coroners Court
FILE NO(s): D0158/2021
DELIVERED ON: 24 February 2023
DELIVERED AT: Darwin
HEARING DATE(s): 17 - 19 January 2023
7 - 8 February 2023
FINDING OF: Judge Elisabeth Armitage
CATCHWORDS: Death in custody, self-inflicted hanging, Local Court
‘At Risk’ Practice Direction, adequacy of care and assessments,
access to health services and missed appointments, Aboriginal Mental Health
First Aid, prison staffing
REPRESENTATION:
Counsel Assisting: Kelvin Currie
Counsel for Department of
Corrections: Taylah Cramp
Counsel for Department of Health: Michael McCarthy
Counsel for the family of the deceased: John Lawrence SC
Judgment category classification: A
Judgment ID number:
[2023] NTLC 3
Number of paragraphs: 74
Number of Pages: 30
IN THE CORONERS COURT
AT DARWIN IN THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY OF
No. D0158/2021
In the matter of an Inquest into the death of:
BERNARD HECTOR
ON: 30 AUGUST 2021
AT: DARWIN CORRECTIONAL CENTRE, HOLTZ
Judge Elisabeth Armitage
Introduction
Hector was born in Timber Creek in the Northern Territory of Australia on 14
April 1990. He passed away on 30 August 2021,
aged 31. He was the third eldest
of four children born to Colleen Long and Pieman Yamyurri Hector. He is survived
by two children;
a boy aged 10 years and a girl aged 11 months. His family have
given us permission to use his name. His mother, Colleen, his Aunties
brother, attended the inquest and were supported by the Coroner’s grief
counsellor. We acknowledge their loss and their
grief, and express our sympathy
and condolences.
father passed away when he was about two years and Bernard moved from Timber
Creek to Katherine to live with an Aunt. He attended
MacFarlane Primary School
and Katherine High School, completing year nine. He then attended St
John’s boarding school in Darwin.
He briefly worked at Mistake Creek
Station in Western Australia but returned home after his grandmother passed
away, in about 2010.
Thereafter, Bernard mainly lived with his mother and
extended family in Katherine.
was an issue for him and on numerous occasions he was taken into protective
custody for intoxication. He was placed on at
least three Mandatory Residential
Treatment Orders (“MRTO”). On 16 September 2014 he went to
Stringybark, Top End Health
Service, for three months. On 6 August 2015 he went
to Saltbush for a little over three months. In May 2016 he was subjected to
another MRTO for three months. In August 2020 he was court ordered to attend
Venndale Rehabilitation Centre.
was also imprisoned on a number of occasions. On 31 January 2017 he was arrested
for aggravated assault and other charges
and later convicted and sentenced to 18
months imprisonment with a non-parole period of 13 months. He was released on
parole on or
parole on 2 August 2018. He moved to Western Australia in 2019 and
arrested and convicted of aggravated assault and sentenced to 12 months
imprisonment. On 28 December 2020 he was convicted
of aggravated assault and
sentenced to a further 4 months prison. On 9 July 2021 he was arrested and he
was on remand when he passed
away from self-inflicted hanging.
his death was a “death in custody” an inquest was mandatory and his
“care, supervision and treatment” while
in custody must be
investigated. Additionally, relevant recommendations must be made with respect
to the prevention of future deaths
in similar circumstances.
prevalence of suicide in the Northern Territory
is not just a risk for prisoners and Correctional and Health services. Its
terrible impact is felt across the breadth of the
Northern Territory. In 2020
there were 44 deaths by suicide in the Northern Territory, in 2021 there were 46
deaths, and in 2022
there were 51 deaths, and for each year death by hanging was
the most common means.
In the most
recently published NCIS statistics, the rate of suicide is significantly higher
in the Northern Territory (20.4 deaths
per 100,000) as compared to any other
10.5 for SA
and 6.3 for Vic), a trend which remains consistent with previous
Nationally: there are on
average 9 suicide deaths each day; suicide death rates for males are higher than
for females across all
age groups; and Indigenous people commit suicide at
double the rate of non-Indigenous people and at a younger
do not raise these statistics gratuitously. I raise them to remind agencies
dealing with Aboriginal clients that the risk of suicide
is real, prevalent, and
significant. Policies and procedures to address the risk should be regularly
reviewed to ensure that they
are current, reflect best practice, are
appropriately resourced, and adopt recent learnings. To this end, links to the
most recent
Suicide Prevention Australia Fact Sheets specific to Men and First
Nations people are included.
Male-Suicide-Fact-Sheet.pdf
(suicidepreventionaust.org)
First-Nations-Fact-Sheet.pdf
(suicidepreventionaust.org)
His mental health history
had a number of interactions with mental health services during his lifetime.
7 December 2011 he was referred to TEMHS because he was having trouble sleeping
and was hearing voices. However, on review he was
reported as having no suicidal
26 September 2014, while at Stringy Bark, he was referred for a mental health
assessment as he was having trouble sleeping due
to bad dreams. He was treated
with Olanzapine and his sleep gradually improved.
23 November 2015, while at Saltbush, he reported hearing voices, having
nightmares, and was suspicious of others. He was reported
to be difficult to
engage, erratic of speech, cautious and isolated. A mental health assessment was
recommended but he refused. On
24 November 2015 he was observed to be talking to
himself, having trouble sleeping and was described as “detached.” He
was placed on 15 minute observations. On 25 November 2015, he was referred to
Cowdy Ward for a mental health assessment for possible
psychosis. He was
discharged on 27 November 2015 with no mental illnesses detected. His discharge
summary records the following,
Bernard was observed closely for
signs of psychosis and affective symptoms. None were observed on repeated
interviews and observation
on the ward. He was not given any psychotropic
medication and no signs of psychosis, depression, anxiety disorders, BPADF,
OCD, or a personality disorder were observed during his stay. He
repeatedly stated he just wanted to go back to Katherine to be with
and was ‘frustrated’ for being at Stringy Bark
...No abnormal perceptions, no FTD, no delusions, no thoughts of harm to self
and others, positive plans for future, oriented, reasonable
judgement and
5 September 2017, while he was serving a term of imprisonment, he was placed
‘at risk’ due to hearing voices and having
thoughts of self-harm. He
was put on observation and was reviewed by the Forensic Mental Health Service
team (“FMHS”)
the following day. In their first assessment he is
reported to have said, “he was placed at-risk because he wanted to hurt
himself. Says he still has those thoughts today” and it was decided by the
At Risk Assessment Team (“ARAT”) that
he should remain ‘at
risk’. He was assessed again on 7 September 2017 by a Mental Health Nurse
He did report that he was thinking of harming himself
yesterday and that he had thoughts of jumping over the first level balcony he
stated he was feeling angry with himself for hurting his family and because he
keeps doing it (hurting family).
States that he has no plan or intention to harm himself or other now. States
he woke up and said to self, no more of doing this -
meaning he is not going to
harm himself as he does not want to hurt family more.
He said that he feels safe in the sector and now wants to spent time with
family. I am ready to move forward.
States he has future goals to get work and help his family Acknowledged that
alcohol is a problem for him when not in prison.
States he stopped drinking in January this year but restarted prior to
current index incidents. Declined link to AOD services.
Appearance: Medium build Aboriginal male, short hair. Seated in AT RISK gown
and appearing stated age, cooperated in interview process
superficially.
Behaviour: Sat calmly on the edge of the bed throughout, elbows on knees and
eyes mostly downcast.
Reasonable eye contact no psychomotor agitation or retardation evident.
Speech: Softly spoken, slow speech however coherent.
Mood: Affect flat but warmed up as assessment continued, stated his mood is
good and he feels strong.
Thought Stream: clear and coherent.
Thought Content: Nil unusual themes all content was appropriate to the
Thought Form: Connected to time and place, Nil pre-occupation or reported
concerns. No themes of persecution or reference, feels safe.
No evidence of
thought block.
Perception: Nil reports of any hallucinations, auditory of visual. No overt
responses to unseen stimuli.
Cognition: No apparent cognitive impairment. Good range of vocabulary.
Insight: Good.
Declined to talk to psychologist, rather continue to speak with Chaplin who
is currently engaged
Self: denies current thoughts or plans to harm himself by jumping off the
first level of the sector area.
Today not expressing any explicit plans to hurt himself and states "no more
doing this." States he has no plan or intention to harm
himself and has future
goals and direction.
Others: Did not report any plans to hurt anyone and stated that he feels safe
in Sector 5.
From others - Denies that others want to hurt him or that he wants to hurt
others, denies payback issues.
on that final assessment the Mental Health Nurse recommended that he be taken
off ‘at risk’ and later that day the
ARAT removed his ‘at
risk’ status.
from time-to-time there were concerns about his mental health and he was
referred to TEMHS or the FMHS for assessments, on
each occasion he was
not to be suffering from any mental illness or disorder
, any assertion to
the contrary is incorrect. There were no further contacts with the TEMHS until
his final imprisonment.
His arrest and initial mental health
assessments
Friday 9 July 2021, Bernard was arrested and taken to the Katherine Watch House
on charges that included Aggravated Assault and
Sexual Intercourse without
Consent. He was denied bail and remanded to appear in the Katherine Local Court
on Monday 12 July 2021.
While on remand at the Katherine Watch House he was seen
by a Registered Nurse on 9, 10 and 12 July 2021 (and declined to be seen
July 2021). The Registered Nurse recorded that on each health review he denied
thoughts of self-harm and noted that he was
eating his meal and engaging with
other prisoners. As he had cold-like symptoms he was swabbed for COVID-19 and
was required to wear
a mask when engaging with other persons. There is ample
information to find that his care, treatment and supervision in the Katherine
Watch House was adequate.
going into court on Monday, Bernard spoke to his North Australian Aboriginal
Justice Agency (NAAJA) duty lawyer in private.
In contemporaneous notes his
lawyer recorded that he kicked a chair and said, “I’m going to kill
myself when I go to
prison. I’m going to hang myself. Tell my mum.”
When the matter was dealt with in court it was adjourned to 20 September
and his lawyer said, “I’m also asking Your Honour to mark Mr Hector
‘at risk’ of self-harm.” Although
the audio of the proceedings
is of poor quality it is possible to hear the Judge reply, “done.”
13 July 2021, Bernard was taken to the Darwin Correctional Centre (“the
prison”). He was seen by a Registered Nurse
at 2.17pm. The Registered
Nurse recorded in the Patient Care Information System (“PCIS”) that
Bernard was placed ‘at
risk’ by the court and that he “was
hesitant to say why but officers said for self-harm reasons.” She also
that he was “somewhat quiet.” She initiated an ‘At
Risk’ Care Plan and sent a referral to FMHT. He was housed
risk’ observation cell at the Medical Centre in Sector 2 and was monitored
by CCTV and 15 minute observations,
which were recorded.
FMHT referral was received and actioned by a Clinical Nurse Specialist
(Forensic) (“Mental Health Nurse”) employed
with TEMHS who provided
an affidavit and gave evidence in the inquest. On 14 July 2021 he commenced
Bernard’s mental health
assessment with a review of the patient records,
including records held in the Community Care Information System
which includes TEMHS records), PCIS (which includes primary
health care records) and the Integrated Offender Management System
which includes records maintained by Correctional Services).
He did not have access to records held by the various rehabilitation
centres. In
his affidavit he said,
From my review of those records, I noted that
Mr Hector had no current mental health diagnosis, and was not on any medication,
that he was known to FMHT through prior presentations in 2015 and 2017,
and had previously been diagnosed in 2015 with a mental /
behavioural disorder
due to harmful alcohol use. Since that time, Mr Hector had not come into contact
with mental health services
and had not required case management. Mr Hector had
been admitted into the IPU on 25 November 2015, due to an alcohol use disorder,
however only for a period of two days. Mr Hector had attended alcohol
rehabilitation at Stringybark.
I also noted Mr Hector’s forensic history, including that he was
currently remanded for sexual-related charges, with a Court
hearing scheduled
for 20 September 2021, and that he had six previous episodes of incarceration.
The prison environment was therefore
one Mr Hector had some familiarity
Bernard that took about 15 minutes. Both the nurse and
Bernard wore COVID-19
masks. In his affidavit the Mental Health Nurse described the assessment and his
Mr Hector was very friendly during my assessment of him. I
recall that he engaged well with me, made good eye contact with me, and
displayed a generally happy or positive disposition. Mr Hector appeared settled.
There were no signs of distress at all.
One of the first questions I asked Mr Hector was why he had been placed
‘at risk’. He said to me that,
“I was just angry that I
didn’t get bail, that was why I mentioned in Court that I would hurt
myself. I am not stupid.
I am not going to hurt myself. I just didn’t want
to go to prison.”
Initial anger at being in prison is something I see almost every day as a
Clinical Nurse Specialist (Forensic). People often become
frustrated when they
are not released on bail, particularly if they believe that they will be bailed,
because that is what their
lawyer has told them, for example. I recorded in my
notes that Mr Hector was ‘coherent and logical in conversation’.
When I asked how he was feeling currently, Mr Hector stated that he was
‘feeling alright now, however felt angry at court when
he was remanded by
the court and expressed he will harm himself.’ Mr Hector ‘maintained
that he made the statement out
of frustration’. I asked him about the
threat of self-harm on a number of occasions during our discussion, and he
that it was just because he was angry. Further, in response to my
questions, Mr Hector ‘denied [that he had] any intent or
plan at the time
of making the statement’.
Mr Hector informed me that he was feeling safe and was supported by family
and a friend in his prison block. I do not now recall who
those persons were,
however it was pleasing to know that Mr Hector had support within his block at
the prison. I considered Mr Hector
having family and a friend within the block
to be a protective factor. I discussed the circumstances in which Mr Hector had
to be arrested, and he informed me that he had been heavily using alcohol,
prior to his arrest. I discussed a referral for Mr Hector
to the AOD Service,
and he said he was happy to engage.
Mr Hector reported no signs of psychosis or mental disturbance during the
assessment, and I did not observe any. Mr Hector did not
present as irritable or
aggressive. He reported eating and sleeping well and denied any thoughts of
harming himself or others.
Mr Hector repeated that “
Yes I will be safe
” if he was
returned to the block.
I recorded the following by way of mental state examination for Mr
Medium build Indigenous male, short curly hair. Wearing a face mask and at
risk attire engaging well in assessment. Good eye contact.
Speech is normal in
tone and volume. Coherent and logical. Euthymic in mood, bright and reactive.
Was appropriate, Nil pre-occupation
or reported concerns. No themes of
persecution or reference, feels safe. No evidence of thought block. Nil reports
of any hallucinations,
auditory or visual. No overt responses to unseen stimuli.
No apparent cognitive impairment. Insight and Judgment reasonable.
My impression was that Mr Hector was not experiencing a severe or enduring
mental illness or major mood disorder. Rather, he had experienced
a situational
crisis when confronted with the prospect of a period of incarceration, and he
had voiced his frustration. That crisis
appeared to have resolved. Mr Hector
denied having any thoughts, plan or intent to harm himself, guaranteed to me
that he would be
safe on the block, and reiterated to me that he had family and
a friend to support him there, which I considered to be a protective
My plan for Mr Hector was as follows:
Discuss in ARAT, suggest remove at risk
Refer to AOD
Does not require ongoing follow up with FMHT
Consider close to FMHT
My assessment of Mr Hector was that he was engaging well with me, was very
friendly, in no distress at all, and was clear in his statement
that the threat
of self-harm was made only out of frustration. He assured me that he had family
in the prison to support him, and
he had been in prison before, so he was aware
of how to navigate the system. Mr Hector had previously been placed ‘at
however that had not resulted in a need for ongoing mental health
support, and there had been no reports of actual self-harm. Mr
completed his previous sentence without any further reports of not coping or
anger, after the prior ‘at risk’
episode. Mr Hector had no psychotic
illness that could potentially cause him to harm himself. He presented as
someone who was understandably
frustrated at the disruption to his normal life
and the prospect of being in custody. I did not consider him to be at a higher
of self-harm than other people within the prison. There was no reason to
say that he needed to remain ‘at risk’. Based
on that assessment of
him, I recommended that Mr Hector’s ‘at risk’ status be
I did not consider that follow up or case management from the FMHT was
required, as Mr Hector did not display any signs of mental
illness or major mood
disorder. We provide tertiary care to people in prison, and Mr Hector did not
demonstrate a need for that level
of intervention. In the event that Mr Hector
subsequently showed concerning behaviour, he could be re-referred to our team
management reconsidered.
the assessment, the Mental Health Nurse recommended to the ARAT that Bernard be
removed from his ‘at risk’ status.
The ARAT met and the team members
unanimously decided that Bernard could be taken off ‘at risk’, which
occurred at 1.50pm
that day. Bernard was moved from the ‘at risk’
cells into medium security residential housing (Sector 5). The following
July 2021) the FMHT met to discuss Bernard’s case. They decided to close
his FMHT case and determined that no further
follow up was
Issue: Is the procedure for being marked ‘at
risk’ at court adequate or could it be improved?
his lawyer saw Bernard in the Katherine Court House interview rooms he told her
“I’m going to kill myself when I
go to prison. I’m going to
hang myself. Tell my mum.” However, these statements were not recorded in
the ‘at risk’
documentation that accompanied him to the prison. The
next day when he was asked at the prison by the Registered Nurse why he was
‘at risk’ he was quiet. The following day, when he was assessed by
the Mental Health Nurse, he said
“I was just angry that I
didn’t get bail, that was why I mentioned in Court that I would hurt
myself. I am not stupid.
I am not going to hurt myself. I just didn’t want
to go to prison.” The Mental Health Nurse had no other information
question the accuracy of this account and proceeded with the assessment.
his evidence the Mental Health Nurse agreed that it would have been preferable
to have accurate information about the reasons why
Bernard was placed ‘at
risk’ by the court, and agreed that had that information been available he
would have asked Bernard
maintained that in this case the specific information would not have changed
outcome of his assessment because on either version he was aware the concern was
self-harm but when he was assessed he was not
showing any signs of mental
illness, distress or thoughts of self-harm.
its Northern Territory Duty Lawyer Handbook, NAAJA provides its lawyers with
guidelines for seeing a new client in court cells.
If a lawyer has concerns that
a client might hurt themselves they are guided as follows,
times you will encounter in custody might seem to be at risk of suicide or
self-harm. Include clients who say they feel they
don’t get bail or
clients who react very badly once they stop at the school are not well equipped
to deal with these situations
or ascertain whether a client is at risk. However
sometimes we are required to do so
There are obligations in relation to prisoners at risk. In the Court of
Summary Jurisdiction, under a practice direction of 9 February
2007, counsel for
a defendant should disclose to the court any information available that the
defendant may be ‘at risk’
of suicide or self-harm if remanded in
Making such notifications is part of our duty to the court and so overrides
our obligation of client confidentiality.
You should, however, tell a client that you are required to notify the court
soon for their welfare before you do so.
You should be conscious that if a prisoner is marked ‘at risk’ by
the Court, it means he or she will be held under observation
and this is very
intrusive amongst other things. Clients may therefore not wish to be marked
‘at risk’ and it is sometimes
a difficult call to make. If in doubt,
speak to your manager or a senior practitioner urgently.
Court Practice Direction 12 regulates the court’s practice and procedure
concerning persons who may be ‘at risk’
of harm when remanded into
custody. Relevantly, it provides that a person will be considered ‘at
risk’ of self-harm if
the person is, inter alia, suicidal. In those
circumstances,
12.6 Where there is information available to a
prosecutor or counsel for a defendant indicating that a person may be at risk of
or self-harm, at risk of harm from a medical or physical condition, or at
risk of harm from another prisoner or prisoners if that
person is remanded into
custody or sentenced or committed to a term of imprisonment, that information
should be disclosed to the
Court as soon as possible.
12.7 Where such information is disclosed to the Court, it may order that:
12.7.1 the defendant may be at risk in one or more of the respects referred
to in 12.2; and
12.7.2 all persons responsible for the custody of the defendant be advised
that the defendant may be at risk in one or more of those
respects and be
provided with the information available to the Court in relation to the
defendant’s “at risk” status,
including relevant medial or
psychological reports.
12.8 Where the Court makes an order under 12.7, the presiding Judge must sign
an order using the Prisoner at Risk Form and place it
on the court file.
guidelines seemingly envisage the judge being provided with all the information
that forms the basis for an opinion that the
person should be marked ‘at
risk’. However, at Bernard’s court appearance the information that
formed the basis
for concern was not offered by the lawyer nor sought by the
judge. In my experience, a brief and subtle exchange between counsel
judge concerning ‘at risk’ applications is not uncommon and may in
fact be the norm. Local Courts are busy places.
The court rooms are often full
of lawyers, family members, other defendants and members of the public. In such
a public forum, defence
counsel are likely reluctant to disclose distressing and
personal information about their client. Were they to do so, their client
shamed and such disclosures might trigger an adverse reaction or outburst from
their client in the court room. In addition,
given the pressing demands of the
court list, defence counsel might also feel reluctant to request closure of the
court so that private
information can be discussed. It is likely that judges
share those concerns. Although it is normal to order a transcript when a person
is marked ‘at risk’, transcripts of such brief exchanges between
counsel and the judge provide no insight as to the grounds
for the order.
Additionally, audio recordings often fail to record exchanges in busy and noisy
court rooms and so transcripts run
the risk of not accurately reflecting what is
the basis or reasons for an ‘at risk’ application were reduced to
writing, this might alleviate concerns about broadcasting
such information in
open court. A simple form could be provided as part of the courts Practice
Direction for any concerns to be documented
in writing. Commonly, such a form
might be completed by defence counsel whose concerns are raised because of
observations of their
client’s behaviour outside the court room. However,
the judge or prosecutor could also complete such a form if they observed
concerning behaviour. One (or more) forms outlining the basis for concern could
then be attached to the ‘at risk’ order
thereby more accurately
informing prison and health staff as to the reasons for the order.
it may have made no difference to this assessment, all the Corrections and
Health witnesses agreed that the provision of accurate
information disclosing
the basis for a court ‘at risk’ order was preferable and desirable
moving forward.
Issue: Was it appropriate for Bernard to be
removed from his ‘at risk’ status?
Should he have been referred to Mental Health Services for further follow
up and review?
the inquest Bernard’s family challenged the adequacy of the assessment
conducted by the Mental Health Nurse. Additionally,
they were concerned that
there was no FMHT follow up of Bernard after he was removed from ‘at
was submitted, for example, that the assessment was potentially inadequate
because there may have been a failure to communicate
between Bernard and the
Mental Health Nurse. However, the evidence did not support that submission.
Although English was not Bernard’s
first language he was educated beyond
year 9 in English speaking schools; there was evidence on the brief of his
excellent hand writing;
his interview with and statements of concern to his
lawyer were in English; and his recorded dealings with Health and Correctional
services over the years were all in English. There was no evidence that in any
of his dealings of him ever requesting or being assessed
as requiring an
interpreter. Although English was not the first language of the Mental Health
Nurse, he had completed his Masters
in Mental Health Nursing at an Australian
university, he had a minimal accent, and communicated eloquently in English when
as a witness.
was also submitted that communication was possibly inhibited because the nurses
and Bernard were wearing COVID-19 masks. However,
as Bernard had
cold-like-symptoms, masks would have been required in all clinical settings, in
or out of custody. Further, the Mental
Health Nurse did not consider that the
masks impinged on their communication or the efficacy of his assessment. His
recorded interactions
with Bernard support that impression.
evidence established that the Mental Health Nurse was well qualified and
appropriately experienced to undertake the assessment.
All the relevant health
records were accessed and considered by the Mental Health Nurse. In particular,
as part of his assessment
he considered Bernard’s previous referrals to
TEMHS and the FMHS, the reasons for, and the outcomes of, those interactions.
After reviewing the records the Mental Health Nurse conducted an in-person
assessment. The 15 minute observation sheet records that
at 9.30am Bernard was
looking out the window, 9.35am he was talking to FMH (Forensic Mental Health),
(but there is no note of when
the nurse entered between 9.30 and 9.35) and
records that at 9.45am the conversation was complete. The Mental Health Nurse
that the assessment took about 15 minutes. Whether the assessment took
10 minutes, 15 minutes, or somewhere in-between, the contents
of the assessment
was contemporaneously documented, including Bernard’s responses and the
nurse’s observations of his
demeanour. Although the in-person assessment
was not lengthy, the Mental Health Nurse also considered the 15 minute
observation sheets
that had been maintained since Bernard’s reception into
the ‘at risk’ cell. The 15 minute observations did not
identify any
concerning behaviours, distress, or any other indicators of mental disorder or
illness. There was a well-founded and
documented basis for the Mental Health
Nurse’s opinion, that there was no mental illness or major mood disorder,
no thoughts
or plans to hurt himself, and Bernard’s stated belief that he
was safe “on the block” with “family and friend
support”. There was no evidence that indicated the assessment was anything
less than adequate and appropriate.
recommendations of the Mental Health Nurse, that Bernard be removed from
‘at risk’ and that he be referred to Alcohol
and Other Drugs
(“AODS”) were not final decisions. Each of these recommendations
were subject to consideration by the
ARAT, a multidisciplinary team comprising
of staff from Prison Health, FMHT, a Corrections Officer who has direct contact
prisoner and other relevant stakeholders such as AODS. Any decision by
the ARAT to remove a person from ‘at risk’ must
be unanimous. The
ARAT considered the recommendations and the basis for them, and decided to
remove Bernard from ‘at risk’
and refer him to
addition, there was a separate FMHT clinical review meeting the following day
which considered the recommendation of the Mental
Health Nurse that Bernard
“did not require ongoing follow up with the FMHT”. The FMHT noted
that his AODS referral had
been accepted, and given that there was no mental
illness identified, that he had no current plans to harm himself, that he
as settled, was familiar with the prison and had family and friends
there, it was determined that the FMHT referral could be closed
without further
follow up, and consistent with the level of care he would have received in the
There is no evidence to
indicate that those decisions were not appropriate on the available information,
or that relevant information
was missed.
even though his initial referral to FMHT was closed, that did not prevent
Bernard from being referred again if his feelings
or circumstances changed.
His housing and security classification
he was moved out of the ‘at risk’ cells an Immediate Needs/Risk
Assessment (“IRNA”) was conducted to
record information relevant to
his management in the prison. He was assessed as suitable for placement in the
Induction Unit and
was moved there. On 21 July 2021 a Security Classification
and Transfer Eligibility (“SCATE”) assessment was conducted,
reviewed his Prisoner’s Institutional File, IJIS, IRNA, Custodial
Assessments and IOMS, and he was classified as medium
security. In accordance
with the short transition period recommended by RCADIC 175, on 28 July 2021 he
was moved to Sector 6, which
provided low and medium security classified
accommodation.
His passing
the evening of Monday 29 August 2021, Bernard was locked in his accommodation
wing along with other inmates. CCTV from the corridor
records him leaving his
room on three occasions for a short period of time but he does not appear to
interact with any other person.
At 11:11pm Bernard re-entered his room which is
the last time he is seen alive. The CCTV does not record anyone else entering
room until the next morning. From the CCTV footage it appears that all of
the prisoners had their green towels hung over the door
windows throughout the
night of the 29/30 August 2021.
approximately 11pm and for a period of at least an hour, a banging noise was
heard by some of the prisoners in Bernard’s
block. It is not certain where
the noise came from and it was not reported to the prison
next morning (30 August 2021) Bernard was missing from the morning muster and
inmates went to raise him. At approximately 8.15am
the CCTV records inmates
knocking on Bernard’s door and trying to turn the doorknob. Three
correctional officers are recorded
approaching and unlocking the door with a
key. One officer immediately made a call on her radio and ran from the room. The
two officers entered the room. Two minutes later, nurses and additional
staff arrived and entered the room. Paramedics arrived 19
minutes after the room
door was opened.
the prison officers unlocked Bernard’s door they saw that he had wrapped a
green sheet around his neck at one end and had
secured the other end to the top
of the bunk bed. His feet were touching the ground and the bed sheet was holding
him in an upright
position. An officer cut the sheet with a Hoffman tool and
lowered Bernard’s body to the ground. His body was stiff and cold.
Although the officers could not find a pulse they commenced cardiopulmonary
resuscitation. Additional staff who entered the room
were wearing body worn
video recorders which captured the resuscitation attempts including the use of a
defibrillator and adrenaline.
Hand written notes were maintained which also
recorded those efforts. Shortly after the paramedics arrived they declared life
The autopsy
autopsy was performed on 31 August 2021. A ligature abrasion with three scratch
abrasions were evident on the neck. There were
no other traumatic injuries. The
only drug detected in his body was paracetamol. The opinion as to the medical
cause of death was
by hanging.
Issue: Was it appropriate for
Bernard to be housed in Sector 6 in a room on his own with a bunk bed?
As prison officers do not conduct health and safety checks of
prisoner’s in Sector 6 during the night shift, should there be
surveillance of Sector 6 rooms?
family were concerned that Bernard was not checked on in person overnight by
prison officers or by CCTV in his room,
and that he was isolated in a room on
his own that contained a risk for hanging, namely a bunk bed.
on the information contained in his IRNA, the removal of his ‘at
risk’ status, and his SCATE assessment, Bernard
was found suitable to be
accommodated in low-medium classified accommodation. Deputy Commissioner David
Thompson explained that the
living arrangements in Sector 6 are
“normalised” with the aim of providing suitably classified prisoners
greater autonomy
and responsibility, which in turn is intended to promote their
rehabilitation and reintegration back into the community. In Sector
6 prisoners
are housed in accommodation wings. During the day during any lock-down periods
the prisoners have access to a kitchen
and communal living area. At evening
muster the prisoners are provided dinner and a breakfast pack and secured in
their accommodation
wing which consists of 6-8 rooms (at the time capable of
sleeping two per room in bunk beds), a shared bathroom, and a shared secure
outdoor sleeping/veranda area. Prisoners are not locked in their rooms and can
move around their accommodation wing at night. They
can lock their own rooms
from the inside if they wish. A locked room can be opened from the inside or
with a key from the outside.
Prison officers have keys but prisoners do not.
Prison officers do not check on the prisoners during the night but each room has
an intercom if any of the prisoners need to contact the prison staff. The room
doors have a window but prisoners often covered this
with a towel to increase
their privacy. There is CCTV of the corridor in the accommodation wing but not
inside the rooms. The accommodation
wing is unlocked again each morning for
rooms are designed for two persons, depending on prison numbers they may be
occupied by one person only. However, as everyone
is free to move around the
accommodation wing, including at night, the inmates are not physically isolated
from each other. Additionally,
as inmates can choose to sleep in the outdoor
sleeping area instead of their allocated room, even when rooms are shared there
no guarantee there will be two persons actually occupying their allocated
room on any given night.
the night of his death, although Bernard was allocated a room on his own, the
evidence establishes he was not isolated from other
prisoners and had a means of
accessing prison staff.
was explained by the Deputy Commissioner that the “normalised” or
“therapeutic” environment of Sector 6
is not compatible with the
removal of all potential hanging points. Further, the “normalised”
environment, which permits
congregation of prisoners at night, does not support
individual safety checks on prisoners overnight. In this context, the efficacy
of health and safety checks as a means of preventing suicide was discussed and
it was noted that death can occur swiftly and health
and safety spot checks that
occur in other sectors have their own limitations when it comes to deterring,
detecting or preventing
safety concerns were raised in the
Inquest into the death of Vernon
, in those findings
former Territory Coroner Judge Cavanagh said,
53. It was explained
by the Commissioner that there is a balance that needs to be struck in the low
security areas of the prison.
The balance is between normalising the living
conditions for inmates and minimising hanging points.
54. There are many hanging points in the rooms and the communal areas. Having
doors on the rooms and allowing free access around the
inside and outside of the
housing block inevitably means that there are hanging points. In addition, the
bunks, the table and chair
in the room create additional hanging points.
56. Where that balance should be struck is not a matter for this inquest. It
is a policy decision for Correctional Services who are
expected to be experts in
such areas or able to access that expertise. If there are good reasons to
question those decisions that
can be done.
Bernard’s family questioned where the balance should be struck, I
understand the conditions in Sector 6 are a response
by Correctional Services to
RCADIC recommendation 173, namely, that initiatives directed to providing a more
humane environment through
introducing shared accommodation facilities for
community living, and other means should be supported, and pursued in accordance
with experience and subject to security requirements. I accept that
considerations of privacy in bedrooms and bathrooms are sufficient
why low risk prisoners should not be subjected to constant CCTV surveillance.
Socialisation with other prisoners
housed in Sector 6, prisoners are always able to mix with other prisoners but
they can also choose to be alone in their rooms.
Bernard spent some of his time
mixing with others, and some of his time alone in his room. Wesley,
Bernard’s brother, was also
in Sector 6 when he first arrived. Wesley said
that Bernard never talked to him about hurting himself, and was shocked when he
the news of his passing.
described himself as “like a brother” to Bernard. He said they grew
up together and their families are related.
Simon said that when Bernard first
arrived in prison he was initially ok but later became quiet and was not
himself. He explained,
“Oh a bit, I seen him bit worried. And
you don't like, before he usually just talk to me but I like, to me like it
him anymore, you know, bit different. He’s been like thinking
described himself as Bernard’s cousin-brother (their grandfathers were
brothers). He was sharing a cell with Bernard
from approximately 20 August 2022
until 25 August 2022. Lawrence said that Bernard was worried about receiving a
long sentence and
was concerned that he might get a sentence of 6-7 years. He
said that Bernard said “the devil is in me” and “I
soul to the devil” and played the Ouija board. Lawrence told him not to
play that game. He also recalled that Bernard
twice spoke about suicide and made
a hand gesture that he was going to hang himself. Lawrence told him to
“stop it” and
to “cut it out”. Lawrence said he told
another prisoner, Barry, about it. Police did not speak to Barry until 10 August
2022. At that time he could not recall any conversations with or about Bernard,
save to say that when in prison together they passed
the time of
described Bernard as his big cousin brother. He had known Bernard since he was
12 and they had grown up together. Ernest said
that he and other family
regularly socialised with Bernard at the prison. Bernard was generally happy and
chatting with his relations.
He talked with them about his Ouija board. Most of
the prisoners told him “not to muck around with it”. Ernest said he
did notice a change in Bernard’s behaviour, that he became “a bit
quiet for a bit”. He asked Bernard if he was
ok and “he looked at
me” and replied “I’m all right [and asked] for teabag and
shared a room with Bernard from 25 to 27 August 2021. He said that Bernard
seemed normal and that he had normal conversations
with him. Bernard was not
allocated another roommate after Isiah and was then in the room by himself but
was still mixing with the
other prisoners. On the afternoon of 29 August 2021
Ernest said that he saw Bernard joking and laughing with another inmate, Simeon.
Simeon said he was Bernard’s cousin brother and described him as mostly
happy, though on occasions he was “quiet”
and he got worried for
him. Another inmate, Lucas, saw Bernard on 29 August 2021 and said he was
“happy” and “smiling
around us” that morning and
Issue: As he had spoken of suicide to at least one
other prisoner, and other prisoners had noticed a change in his behaviour, why
was this not reported to the Corrections Staff?
How might prisoners be encouraged to recognise and report concerns they
might have about themselves or others?
ability to live and socialise with other prisoners, particularly family members,
is considered to be a broadly protective factor.
One of the reasons Bernard was
housed in Sector 6 was because he had family members there. The combination of
proximity, familiarity
and time, also provides opportunities for fellow inmates
to observe changes in each other’s thoughts or behaviour. In
case, some prisoners noticed a deterioration in his thoughts and
behaviour pointing to a possible increased risk of self-harm. However,
not appear that they encouraged him to speak with Corrections or Health staff,
and nor did they report their concerns for
him. Although the other prisoners did
not say why they did not report their concerns to staff, there may well be
reasons for their
reluctance to do so. Some may be naturally disinclined to get
involved in what is perceived as another person’s business. In
the onerous conditions of being placed ‘at risk’ may be a
disincentive to self-report or report on others.
Alternatively, there may be no
one a prisoner is comfortable reporting to.
would be much safer for prisoner’s, such as Bernard, if his fellow
prisoners felt able to communicate such matters. While
it might be easy to
imagine less intrusive ways of supporting prisoners than putting them in an
isolation cell, any alternative approaches
would have to be balanced against
risk, and it might be difficult to mitigate the impact of the ‘at
risk’ process. Nevertheless,
there may be ways to encourage prisoners to
not only recognise concerning behaviours, but to also recognise that they should
be reported
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Mental Health First Aid, 14 hour course,
“teaches members of the public how to provide
culturally appropriate
assistance to an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander person who is developing a
mental illness or is in a
mental health crisis. The course is designed for the
public to learn how to give the initial
assistance...”
In addition to
providing strategies on to how to assist a person directly, the training also
teaches how to encourage the person
to get professional support and when the
intervener should seek professional
delivery of Aboriginal Mental Health First Aid to Correctional officers is a
positive step and a testimony to its accepted efficacy.
But, particularly for
persons like Bernard who do not confide in the staff, it may not always be staff
that identify the signs of
potential crisis. In her evidence the Director of
Medical Services, Top End region, Dr Ruth Derkenne, said, “...the only
person...who
did detect that there was a change in Mr Hector, was his friends.
So that if we can introduce a system that enables his friends and
family to be
able to speak out and seek help, then we consider this is the best change that
we can make to the system to prevent
this from happening
Accordingly,
it may be of assistance if a version of the Aboriginal Mental Health First Aid
training was made available to the prisoners
who have greater opportunities to
notice changes in each other’s behaviour. Given the difficulties of
mitigating the risks
associated with housing prisoners in a
“normalised” environment discussed earlier, perhaps consideration
should be given
as to whether such a course should be a prerequisite to
receiving a medium-low classification? One can imagine further benefits of
a course being undertaken by prisoners. In addition to potentially reducing the
risk of suicide inside the prison and promoting
positive cultural change,
similar benefits may transmit back to Aboriginal communities when prisoners who
have received the training
are released.
is also plausible that prisoners might be disinclined to report on their own or
others well-being, because there is no one they
feel comfortable reporting to.
Aboriginal prisoners may find it culturally safer and be more inclined to report
personal matters
to another male Aboriginal person. On the evidence it was not
clear precisely how many Correctional Officers are Aboriginal, but
four Prisoner
Support Officers and the Cultural Engagement Program Coordinator are Aboriginal.
There are 5 Aboriginal nurses and
two Aboriginal Health Practitioners (with
recruitment underway for a third). Accordingly, Corrections and Health combined
identify 12 Aboriginal
for a prison population of
approximately 1244 prisoners, of whom 83% are
Aboriginal.
Prisoners are able
to access nurses on the block when they attend for medication rounds, but it is
not clear on the evidence whether
prisoners understand that they can report
mental health concerns to the nurses, nor whether rounds are conducive for those
of conversations. I understand that while there is an aspiration to
recruit Aboriginal persons to both general and specific positions,
recruitment
is challenging. Corrections and Health should continue to endeavour to recruit
Aboriginal Prison Officers, Aboriginal
Prisoner Support Officers, Aboriginal
Health Workers, and Aboriginal Liaison Officers and ensure that their Aboriginal
are utilised throughout the prison and are available to all prisoners.
Elders Visiting Program might provide another avenue for prisoners to voice
concerns. There was some evidence that some Visiting
Elders assist in training
staff in Cross Cultural training and Aboriginal Mental Health First Aid but
there was no evidence as to
whether the Visiting Elders are themselves trained
in Aboriginal Mental Health First Aid. COVID largely prevented Elders from
the prison so Bernard did not have the opportunity to engage with or
benefit from their visits. However, I consider that the Elders
Visiting Program
provides an important avenue for communication and connection and the program
should continue to be supported and
promoted throughout the prison.
Referral to the Alcohol and Other Drugs Program
discussed with Bernard at his assessment, on 14 July 2021 the Mental Health
Nurse made a referral to the Alcohol and Other Drugs
Prison In-Reach Program
(“AODPIP”) and the AODPIP records confirm that the referral was
received by them and allocated
to a team member that day.
Derkenne, provided an affidavit dated 21 July 2022 and gave evidence at the
inquest. Concerning the AODPIP referral she explained,
2021, Alcohol and Other Drugs Prison In-Reach Program (PIP) sent an acceptance
letter to Mr Hector, through DCC’s
support services. The letter
You have been accepted into the service and one of our clinicians will
book a time as soon as possible to talk to you. If your referral
please see your Prison Support Officer. We look forward to meeting you.
On 26 July 2021, an appointment was scheduled with PIP. However, Mr Hector
could not attend because the industries sector had shut
down due to staff
shortages within Corrections.
On 30 July 2021, Mr Hector failed to attend a scheduled appointment with the
PIP team. The team were notified that this was because
Sector 5 had been locked
down intermittently throughout the day. The appointment was rescheduled.
On 1 August 2021, Mr Hector was scheduled for an Adult Health Check, as part
of his initial reception screen, however there is no
record of this having
On 4 August 2021, a PIP Senior Clinician waited 45 minutes for Mr Hector to
arrive to a scheduled appointment, before requesting prison
staff “to call
PIP office if client arrives.” The appointment was rescheduled.
On 10 August 2021, a PIP Senior Clinician became aware of an opportunity to
see Mr Hector in the resource area of Sector 6. They asked
staff to use meeting
room one in order to complete Mr Hector’s intake. This occurred, and Mr
Hector was assessed as suitable
for the Early Recovery Skills groups. Mr Hector
was added to the waiting list for the next group, which was anticipated to start
in three weeks’ time.
10 August 2021 the AODPIP intake assessment was completed by the PIP Senior
Clinician. Her contemporaneous notes record that during
her assessment she
engaged with Bernard and detected “no abnormal behaviour”. She
recorded that his affect was “relaxed”,
his cognition was
“memory intact, oriented to TPP”,
his thoughts were
“clear and logical” and his speech was of “normal rate and
volume.” She noted that Bernard
“keeps to himself” in prison
and that he had no current mental health issues though he “sometimes feels
a bit down.
Situational (prison).” In addition she recorded that he told
her he had no “recent/current suicidal ideation/suicidal
Follow up medical assessments
was scheduled to attend his day 5 Adult Health Check on 19 July 2021 and
further Adult Health Checks were scheduled for 1,
4, 13 and 24 August 2021 but
none proceeded because of lockdowns, staff shortages, and medical
prioritisation. On 25 August 2021
Bernard was seen by a nurse and given a
COVID-19 vaccine and some paracetamol to take as required. This was the last
medical visit
Bernard had before his passing. The nurse recorded
O: client looks well, alert and cooperative,
denies feeling unwell at time of vaccination.
eating and sleeping well.
Issue: Were there missed opportunities for Corrections and/or Health staff
to assess Bernard and perhaps identify a change in his
mental health?
If so, how can the system be improved?
his 5 day adult health check and several medical call ups in addition to the
delay in his AOD assessment was not ideal and
it was conceded that opportunities
to assess him were lost. His care and treatment during the period of missed
appointments was less
than it should have been and the reason for the missed
appointments and how that could be improved were significant issues. Although
there was one diarising error, and some appointments may have been cancelled due
to medical prioritisation, the majority were missed
due to there being
insufficient Corrections staff. Insufficient staff meant that there was either
no one to escort Bernard to his
appointments or resulted in lockdowns in the
areas where the appointments were to take place and the appointments were
There was poor communication between Corrections staff and AOD staff
concerning the missed AOD appointments. The COVID pandemic was
spite of delays, on 10 August 2021 he was seen by the Senior Clinician in the
Prison In-Reach Program for his AOD assessment who
went out of her way to ensure
the assessment was completed. Although he admitted to her that he was feeling
down at times and not
wanting to go ‘at risk’ again, she said that
he was not presenting as distressed, he was relaxed, oriented, clear and
logical. He told her he was not thinking of suicide or hurting himself and he
did not wish to speak to anyone from mental health.
If he had answered yes to
thoughts of self-harm or suicide she said she would have immediately referred
him to FMHS. She was an experienced
and well qualified counsellor and I accepted
her evidence that there were no identified concerns for Bernard on the day of
her assessment.
Dr Derkenne acknowledged the limitations of point-in-time assessments. A persons
circumstances may change after any assessment or
period of monitoring. As
discussed earlier, she considered that it was important to ensure that there are
processes in place that
encourage prisoners to support each other and report
concerns. As I understand the evidence, Care Plans developed by Health staff
consultation with a prisoner are designed to assist prisoners to identify the
supports available to them and how to access them.
I understand that Care Plans
are commenced upon reception and should be developed further on Day 5 health
, which Bernard missed.
However, even in light of missed appointments, Dr Derkenne said that the care
that Bernard received was certainly
not less than he would have received in the
community as required by section 82
Correctional Services Act,
readily recall similar issues with delays and cancellations being experienced in
the community as GP and hospital services were
retracted due to COVID.
impact of staffing issues and lockdowns were issues clearly relevant to
Bernard’s care while being held in custody. Accordingly,
disappointing that these issues were not squarely addressed in the
Correction’s Incident Review. I was told the solution
to the problem was
the recruitment of more officers via a rolling recruitment and training drive
which was well underway. When specific
and limited information concerning
staffing at the prison was directly requested for four particular days,
Corrections provided the
total prisoner population and the actual numbers of
Correctional Officers present during day shift for each of those day. Albeit
crude analysis, the information revealed that:
on 13 July 2021
there were 7.18 prisoners per Correctional Officer on duty,
on 29 August
2021 there were 12.29 prisoners per Correctional Officer on duty,
on 17 January
2023 there were 7.5 prisoners per Correctional Officer on duty,
on 8 February
2023 there were 8.8 prisoners per Corrections Officer on duty.
Accordingly,
although recruitment is an apparent priority for Corrections, the measures
adopted to date, at least so far as these
numbers reveal, have not improved the
situation, and COVID cannot be blamed. Given that staffing seems to be an
endemic problem in
the prison, in any future inquests I would expect Corrections
to provide a considered analysis of whether, and if so how, staffing
issues have
positively or negatively impacted the care, supervision and treatment of the
person while being held in custody.
the staffing issue may take some time to rectify I was told that there were
other changes designed to rectify the problem of
prisoner’s missing
medical and therapeutic appointments. In particular, I am told there is a new
“flow chart” for
Corrections staff to follow designed to ensure that
prisoners who need to access the health centre are prioritised even in lock
, and that Corrections and
Health were committed to working together to enable prison health clients to
attend scheduled health appointments
during lockdowns.
to section 34 of the Coroner’s Act, I find as follows:
(i) The identity of the deceased was Bernard Hector born 14 April 1990 in Timber
(ii) The time of death was between 11.11pm on 29 August 2021 and 8.15am on 30
August 2021. The place of death was Room 3 Block 6B,
Sector 6, Darwin
Correctional Precinct, Holtz, Northern Territory.
(iii) The cause of death was self-inflicted hanging.
(iv) The particulars required to register the death:
deceased was Bernard Hector.
deceased was of Aboriginal descent.
deceased was a prisoner and not employed at the time of his death.
death was reported to the Coroner by the Darwin Correctional Precinct
cause of death was confirmed by Forensic Pathologist, Dr Bjorn Swigelaar.
deceased’s mother was Colleen Long and his father was Pieman Yamyurri
Recommendations
that the Chief Judge of the Local Court of the Northern
Territory amend Practice Direction 12 to provide that written reasons are
accompany an ‘at risk’ order.
that the Commissioner of the Northern Territory Correctional
Services make available Aboriginal Mental Health First Aid Training
that in accordance with RCADIC recommendation 178, that
Corrective Services make efforts to recruit Aboriginal staff not only as
correctional
officers but to all employment classifications within Corrective
Services, and endeavour to ensure that their Aboriginal employees
are utilised
throughout the prison and are available to all prisoners.
the Commissioner of the Northern Territory Correctional
Services and the CEO of the Northern Territory Department of Health together
ensure that all prison health clients attend scheduled health
appointments.
Dated this 24 day of February 2023
ELISABETH ARMITAGE
TERRITORY CORONER
Records of the Office of the
Coroner NT, the rate of increase is less than I had understood at the date of
NCIS Fact Sheet June
2022; May 2021
NSW Suicide Monitoring System, Report 24
https://www.health.nsw.gov.au/mentalhealth/resources/Publications/sums-report-aug-2022.pdf
Data to August 2022; according to Suicide Prevention Australia, Stats and Facts,
ABS 2021 Causes of Death Data males are around
3 times more likely to die by
suicide than females and the median age of death by suicide for Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander
people was 30.2 across Australia, more than a decade
younger than the median death by suicide for the general population of 44.8
T165 Dr Ruth
[2018] NTLC
Hart LM, Kitchener BA, Jorm
AF and Kanowski LG,
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Mental Health First
Aid Manual.
ed. Melbourne: Mental Health First Aid Australia;
2010, at iii
Northern Territory
Aboriginal Justice Agreement 2021-2027 p13, citing ABS (2020) Table 14, ABS
website 5 February 2021
According to the New Reception Prison Health Flow
T217, Dr Derkenne
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (415 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter