URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCA/2025/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:16:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sparks NT Pty Ltd v Angkerle Aboriginal Corporation [2025] NTCA 9 (4 September 2025)
Sparks NT Pty Ltd v Angkerle Aboriginal Corporation
PARTIES: SPARKS NT PTY LTD
(ACN 159 163 390)
ANGKERLE ABORIGINAL CORPORATION
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: AP 3 of 2025 (22528001)
DELIVERED: 4 September 2025
HEARING DATE: 13 August 2025
JUDGMENT OF: Grant CJ, Huntingford J & Riley AJ
CATCHWORDS:
COSTS – Security for costs – Legal nature of the plaintiff
– Plaintiff is a company – Relevant factors –
Impecuniosity
Whether error in determining reason to believe that plaintiff corporation
unable to pay defendant’s costs if defendant successful
sufficient to establish
prima facie
case that plaintiff would be unable
to pay defendant’s costs if successful – Evidentiary burden shifted
to plaintiff
to establish it would be able to pay defendant’s costs
– Bald assertions in affidavit evidence insufficient for that
– Sufficient estimate of the defendant’s costs made to determine
threshold issue – Whether error in exercise
of discretion to order
security for costs – Governed by principles in
House v The King
– No material error in findings of fact – No error in taking into
account considerations – No error of principle
– Decision not
“unreasonable or plainly unjust” – No error in assessment of
quantum – Application for
leave to appeal allowed and appeal
Corporations Act 2001
Supreme Court Rules 1987
(NT) r 62.02
Anchung Pty Ltd v Northern Territory of Australia
[2015] NTSC 76
Arnold v Queensland
[1987] FCA 148
(1987) 73 ALR 607
Attorney-General (Botswana) v
Aussie Diamond Products Pty Ltd
[2009] WASC 299
Bailey v Beagle
Management Pty Ltd
[2001] FCA 60
(2001) 182 ALR 264
Beluga Developments Pty Ltd v
Sobel Investments Pty Ltd
[2010] VSC 303
Buckley v Bennell Design &
Constructions Pty Ltd
(1974) 1 ACLR 303
Cornelius v Global Medical
Solutions Australia Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWCA 65
(2014) 98 ACSR 301
DGR Global Ltd v
[2025] QCA 122
Drumdurno Pty Ltd v Braham
[1982] FCA 161
(1982) 42 ALR 563
Green v CGU Insurance Ltd
[2008] NSWCA 148
(2008) 67 ACSR 105
Hydrocool Pty Ltd v
Hepburn (No 2)
[2010] FCA 285
Jazabas Pty Ltd v Haddad
[2007] NSWCA 291
Mannix Electrical Pty Ltd v Belport Pty Ltd
[2019] SASC 159
(2019) 134 SASR
Octocane Pty Ltd v SRJ Property Development Pty Ltd
[1999] SASC 231
Rimhart Nominees Pty Ltd v Glenent Pty Ltd
[2009] SASC 267
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: C Ford SC
Respondent: S Heidenreich
Solicitors:
Applicant: De Silva Hebron
Respondent: Povey Stirk
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 22
IN THE COURT OF APPEAL
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Sparks NT Pty Ltd v Angkerle Aboriginal Corporation
[2025] NTCA 9
No. AP 3 of 2025 (22528001)
SPARKS NT PTY LTD
(ACN 159 163 390)
ANGKERLE ABORIGINAL CORPORATION
CORAM: GRANT CJ, HUNTINGFORD J & RILEY AJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 4 September 2025)
[1] On 17 April
2025, an Associate Justice of this Court (
the primary judge
) made orders
that the applicant, Sparks NT Pty Ltd (
), pay into the Supreme
Court Litigants Fund account the sum of $90,000 by way of security for costs in
proceedings in which Sparks
was the plaintiff and Angkerle Aboriginal
Corporation (
) was the defendant. Sparks’s claims against AAC
were stayed pending compliance with that order.
[2] Sparks now
seeks leave to appeal against the order that it pay security for costs. Leave to
appeal is required pursuant to
Supreme Court Act 1979
(NT). The principal proposed ground of appeal is that the primary judge erred in
mistaking facts, taking into account irrelevant
matters, failing to take into
account relevant matters and acting contrary to principle, and, further, that
the decision was unreasonable
or plainly unjust such that it may be inferred
that there was a failure to exercise the discretion properly. In support of that
Sparks particularised ten matters set out in the proposed notice of
Factual and procedural background
[3] In February
2024, Sparks commenced proceedings in the Supreme Court seeking relief against
AAC by way of specific performance
of a contract entered into between Sparks and
AAC in November 2023. In the alternative, Sparks sought an order for damages.
arose out of a contract between the parties for the design and
construction of a solar power plant at Standley Chasm in the Northern
of Australia. A second plaintiff in those proceedings, Leonard Pratt, also
sought relief in respect of an asserted defamation.
[4] Sparks made
an application for summary judgment which, following a hearing, was dismissed on
17 May 2024. On 10 July 2024, the
parties participated in a mediation which
resulted in the parties entering into a settlement deed (
relevantly provided:
(a) upon AAC transporting certain listed equipment to a location nominated by
Sparks within 30 days of the date of the Deed the
parties would take all steps
necessary to discontinue the proceedings by consent with no order as to costs;
(b) each party would bear the cost of transporting the equipment in equal
(c) each party would bear its own costs of and incidental to the proceedings.
[5] Following
the settlement AAC delivered the equipment to Sparks but, on 30 September 2024,
Sparks advised AAC that it did not consider
the matter settled. Thereafter
Sparks obtained leave to amend its statement of claim to remove the previous
claims for specific performance
and damages and remove Mr Pratt as a plaintiff.
[6] The amended
statement of claim pleaded a fresh cause of action alleging that the parties had
entered a deed of settlement which
included implied terms that the equipment to
be transported was worth at least $363,000 and had been stored safely by AAC,
a generator which formed part of the equipment had recently been
serviced. Those terms were said to be implied as a matter of law
nature of the Deed and by virtue of representations made at the mediation. It
was then pleaded that AAC breached the implied
terms of the Deed and that the
representations were misleading or deceptive because the equipment was worth
substantially less than
had been represented and had not been stored
appropriately or recently serviced. Sparks sought damages for breach of the Deed
alternatively, for misleading and deceptive conduct contrary to the
Australian Consumer Law
[7] AAC filed a
defence and counterclaim to the amended statement of claim denying liability,
joining issue and seeking enforcement
of the terms of the Deed by discontinuance
of the proceedings.
November 2024, Sparks advised AAC that it wished to sell the generator and AAC
consented to this course on condition that
the proceeds of the sale be paid into
court. Sparks responded that it did not intend to pay the proceeds of sale into
November 2024, AAC conducted a search of the Australian Securities &
Investment Commission (
) and Creditor Watch databases in relation to
Sparks. These searches revealed Sparks was in default to the Australian Taxation
in the amount of $833,695.41 and had been in default since at least May
2024. On 6 December 2024, AAC requested that Sparks pay security
for costs into
court but Sparks refused to do so.
[10] In those
circumstances AAC made application to the Court for an order for security for
costs in the sum of $201,243.50. On 17
April 2025, the primary judge found a
prima facie
case that Sparks would be unable to pay AAC’s costs if
its defence was successful, and that discretionary considerations warranted
order for security for costs in the amount of
application for leave to appeal and the substantive appeal were heard together.
Sparks submitted there were errors of law
made at each of the three stages of
the evaluation. Those stages were described by the applicant as the threshold
stage, the discretionary
stage and the quantum stage.
threshold stage
62.02(1)(b)
Supreme Court Rules 1987
(NT) relevantly
62.02 When to give security
(b) the plaintiff is a corporation ... and there is reason to believe that the
plaintiff has insufficient assets in the Territory
to pay the costs of the
defendant if ordered to do so;
(e) ...; or
(f) under an Act or the
Corporations Act 2001
the Court may require
security for costs,
the Court may, on the application of a defendant, order that the plaintiff
give security for the costs of the defendant of the proceeding
and that the
proceeding as against the defendant be stayed until the security is given.
[13] By way of
complement to that provision,
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) provides:
Where a corporation is plaintiff in any action or
other legal proceeding the court having jurisdiction in the matter may, if it
by credible testimony that there is a reason to believe that the
corporation will be unable to pay the costs of the defendant if
successful in
his, her or its defence, require sufficient security to be given for those costs
and stay all proceedings until security
[14] Sparks
submitted that in considering the threshold issue the primary judge “erred
in discounting to zero the uncontested
value of Sparks equipment of
$778,950”. It was submitted that the primary judge wrongly dismissed the
entire value of those
assets because there was no independent verification in
the form of an insurance policy or listing on a balance sheet, and because
the possibility of the assets becoming subject to some security interest and/or
depreciation before judgment. This, it was said,
ignored the assets of Sparks in
the Territory, reversed the onus of proof by requiring Sparks to verify the
value of the assets and,
finally, did not consider the amount of AAC’s
potential costs when deciding that Sparks’s assets were insufficient to
meet those costs.
[15] Although
the decision whether the threshold requirement has been made out is evaluative
rather than discretionary in nature,
the fact that the assessment is necessarily
conducted on a preliminary basis and on limited materials means that any appeal
such a decision is governed by principles similar to those in
. There is an area of decisional freedom in which the identification
of error requires more than that the appellate court would have
different conclusion. It requires a finding that the primary judge’s
assessment of the threshold requirement miscarried
evidence relating to the financial position of Sparks was provided in an
affidavit made on information and belief by the
legal practitioner acting for
the company in the proceedings. The affidavit included a second-hand assertion,
presumably on instructions
from an unnamed principal, that Sparks had assets to
the value of $778,950 consisting of various trailers, storage tanks,
demountables
and vehicles. There was no evidence regarding the condition of
those items, how they were valued or whether they were the subject
of any charge
or encumbrance. The available evidence before the primary judge was sufficient
to establish the following matters:
(a) Sparks had no real property in the Northern Territory;
(b) the amount of $833,695.41 had been payable by Sparks to the ATO since at
least May 2024 with no details of any payment plan
or how such a plan might
impact on Sparks’s financial position;
(c) in May 2024, Sparks’s tax default was entered on the public Creditor
Watch database, there had been a significant decline
in Sparks’s credit
rating, and the Creditor Watch report estimated that Sparks had “a greater
than 20% chance of default
within the next 12
(d) in November 2024, Sparks sold the generator and retained the proceeds
rather than paying them into court in accordance with
AAC’s written
(e) the value of the assets claimed to be owned by Sparks was “baldly
stated” on information and belief with no proof
of valuation or resale
(f) the statement of the Sparks’s income for 2022–2023 contained no
detail of its expenditure for that period and was
almost two years old; and
(g) other than an estimate of current income (not expenditure) for the 2024
year, there was no substantial evidence as to Sparks’s
circumstances.
[17] In the
reasons for decision, the primary judge correctly identified the source of the
power to order security for costs in the
circumstances of this matter by
reference to
Corporations Act
Supreme Court Rules
The primary judge correctly identified that it was
necessary for an applicant for such an order to enliven the court’s
by identifying a rational basis sufficient to establish a
case. On the basis of the evidence identified above, the primary judge
concluded that there was a
prima facie
case made out that Sparks would be
unable to pay the costs of AAC if it was successful in its
In determining whether
there was “reason to believe” that Sparks might be unable to meet an
adverse costs order, the
primary judge correctly applied a standard less
rigorous than “satisfaction” of that matter but higher than a mere
[18] The onus of
proof rests throughout upon the party seeking security and the threshold issue
is whether there is “credible
testimony” demonstrating “reason
to believe that the corporation will be unable to pay the costs of the defendant
successful in his, her or its defence”. However, once the evidence
presented on behalf of the applicant has satisfied that
threshold, the
evidentiary burden shifts to the party resisting the order for security for
costs to establish that it will be able
to pay the defendant’s costs or
some other reason or reasons why security should not be granted. In the present
case, Sparks
sought to do that by the affidavit evidence described above.
However, as the primary judge observed, the bald assertions made in
affidavit evidence were insufficient for that purpose. They fell well short of
attracting the weight which might be attached
to statements prepared by a
responsible firm of accountants familiar with the company’s business
[19] In the
absence of evidence adduced by Sparks which contradicted, or at least explained,
the other evidence before the Court in
relation to its apparently parlous
financial situation, there was a sound evidentiary basis for the primary judge
to have reason
to believe that Sparks would be unable to pay the costs of AAC in
the event of a successful defence to the proceedings. The primary
judge did not
ignore Sparks’s contention and evidence that it had assets in the Northern
Territory but, rather, considered
the evidence relating to those assets to be
inadequate for the reasons disclosed. It is open to a court to draw that
inference in
circumstances where a plaintiff corporation has produced
insufficient evidence of its financial position and no evidence or insufficient
evidence of the financial ability and willingness of the corporation’s
principals or shareholders to meet any adverse costs
In doing so, the primary
judge did not reverse the onus of proof which remained on AAC throughout.
[20] Finally, in
relation to the threshold stage, Sparks complained that the primary judge did
not consider the amount of AAC’s
potential costs of the proceedings in
deciding that Sparks’s assets were insufficient to pay any adverse costs
order in the
event the defendant was successful in its defence of the
proceedings. It was submitted that the question of the ability to pay the
defendant’s costs cannot be determined without an assessment of the likely
quantum of those costs. No authority was provided
to support that contention. In
any event, in this case the primary judge had evidence from AAC that its
estimate of future costs
was $201,243.50 and a skeleton bill of anticipated
costs was provided in support of that estimation. In addition, Sparks had
that an appropriate figure would be $18,756 notwithstanding it
estimated that its own future costs assessed at the same time would
amount of $90,000.
[21] While the
primary judge did not make express reference to the quantum of the
defendant’s costs in that part of the reasons
for decision which
considered whether the discretion had been enlivened, an assessment of the
likely quantum of the defendant’s
costs was made and described later in
the reasons for decision. That assessment was no doubt in the primary
judge’s mind and
consideration in determining the question whether there
was reason to believe that Sparks’s assets would be insufficient to
those costs. In determining the quantum of the defendant’s costs, the
primary judge adopted the observations made in
Anchung Pty Ltd v Northern
Territory of Australia
following terms:
Those principles, insofar as they are relevant to
the current case, are;
Court is to determine an adequate amount for security having regard to the
nature of the claim, which is an amount that is neither
illusory nor oppressive;
amount ordered does not have to be a pre-estimate of the actual costs;
is appropriate to factor in contingencies such as the possibility that the
action will settle at some stage.
The usual starting point in
determining what is an adequate amount is to estimate the likely costs incurred
to date ... and the likely
costs to be incurred until the matter is
considering quantum the primary judge noted that precision is ordinarily neither
necessary nor possible and that an amount
assessed for security is not
ordinarily intended as a pre-estimate of the actual amount of party/party costs.
The objective is to
find a reasonable estimate of the defendant’s costs
that the plaintiff, if unsuccessful at trial, would be ordered to pay to
defendant. The primary judge then considered the broad description of the work
required and the estimates provided by AAC in
relation to such work and came to
a figure just under $100,000 from which he deducted $10,000 for costs which may
be incurred in
respect of the counterclaim. The primary judge concluded:
In my view applying the principles stated above to the facts of
this case, an order for security for costs is appropriate. In terms
quantum of the order, noting I am not obliged to fix an amount reflective of the
full estimated costs and that I can have
regard to contingencies, an adequate
amount is $90,000.
[23] We see no
error on the part of the primary judge in proceeding in the manner described in
the reasons for decision notwithstanding
the lack of any express reference to
quantum when determining the threshold issue.
The discretionary
[24] It was
submitted on behalf of Sparks that there were a number of factors which should
have militated against the exercise of
the discretion to make an order that it
pay security for costs. In making those submissions, Sparks acknowledged that
appeal against an exercise of discretion should be determined is
governed by the principles found in
House v The King
. To succeed on an
appeal against the exercise of the discretion, Sparks must establish that the
primary judge fell into material
error in the making of a finding of fact upon
which the decision was based, in taking into account irrelevant considerations,
not taking into account material factors or in some other matter of
principle. If no specific error can be established, error may
only be inferred
if the decision is “unreasonable or plainly unjust”. Sparks relied
on several matters in support of
its assertion of error of that type.
[25] First,
Sparks submitted that by the time of the application for security for costs an
“unexplained” delay of 10 months
had passed from the commencement of
proceedings, pleadings had closed, a summary judgment application had been heard
and determined,
the mediation had been held and the mediation agreement
“purportedly” performed. Sparks submitted further that the primary
judge erred in concluding that the claim by the second plaintiff, Leonard Pratt,
provided a partial explanation for the delay. The
reasons for decision refer to
that matter and note that the defamation proceedings were “linked to
allegations made against
(AAC)”, however this was largely a matter of
narrative and context. There was no exposition by Sparks of whether, or if so
how, that contextual discussion contributed to error in the findings regarding
[26] In dealing
with the question of delay the primary judge referred to the history of the
proceedings and noted that, following
the unsuccessful summary judgment
application and the successful mediation, the original claims were
“abandoned” (in
the sense of not being pleaded or pursued) and
replaced with a new claim seeking damages for breach of the terms of the Deed or
deceptive and misleading conduct contrary to the
Australian Consumer
The primary judge observed that although the security for costs
application was made late in the “original” proceeding,
relatively early in what was referred to as the “new” proceeding and
at a time when AAC maintained the conduct
of Sparks first reasonably gave rise
to suspicions as to its financial circumstances.
[27] There were
additional matters which supported the conclusion reached in relation to the
question of delay. The initial proceedings
were commenced in February 2024. Once
proceedings had been commenced there was activity relating to the pleadings
followed by an
application for summary judgment which was made in March 2024, 13
April 2024 and not determined by dismissal until May 2024. Shortly
the matter was referred for mediation which was conducted in mid-July 2024 and
initially considered to be successful.
The equipment was delivered in accordance
with that resolution in September 2024 and it was not until 30 September 2024
that Sparks
advised AAC that the condition of the equipment was unacceptable and
it would be suing on the deed of settlement. In addition to
those matters, the
information concerning Sparks’s tax default did not become publicly
available until May 2024, which coincided
with the dismissal of the summary
judgment application and the referral to mediation. Given that progression of
events, it was explicable
and not unreasonable for AAC to await the outcome of
both the summary judgment application and the mediation before considering the
need for an application for security for costs. That the latter process had
failed was not apparent to AAC until the beginning of
October 2024.
[28] This was
not a case in which the application for security for costs gave rise to
prejudice to the plaintiff because it interrupted
late-stage trial
preparation
, and nor was it an
application made at a point in time where the greater portion of the costs of
the proceedings had already been
. The substantive
hearing was not imminent. On the other hand, it was a case in which AAC only
became aware, and only had cause to
become aware, of Sparks’s potential
impecuniosity later in the
proceedings
, and in which the
length and future conduct of the proceedings was not foreseen at the time the
parties were engaged in the mediation
process prior to its
. It is accepted that
participation in an alternative dispute resolution process may have a bearing on
the timing of an application
for security for
, as will circumstances in
which the parties are engaged in “intense activity” in relation to
the initial pleading process
and an application for summary
. There was also no
suggestion in this case that Sparks would not have gone ahead with the
proceedings if the application for security
for costs had been brought at an
earlier stage.
[29] Having
regard to those principles, the primary judge accepted the explanation for the
delay proffered by AAC and concluded it
was not a determinative factor weighing
against the application.
concluding it is apparent that the primary judge had in mind the evidence
provided to the Court of the information acquired
from the Creditor Watch
by the dealings in relation
to the generator in November 2024. They were
relevant considerations in the exercise of the discretion. Contrary to the
made on behalf of Sparks, the delay was explained and the explanation
accepted by the Court. No error has been made in the fact-finding
exercise in
that respect, the primary judge did not act upon a wrong principle, and the
conclusion concerning delay is not itself
unreasonable or plainly unjust.
[30] The second
assertion of error made by Sparks in relation to the exercise of the discretion
is that the primary judge failed to
address or give weight to the suggestion
that AAC had adequate security in the form of the equipment which had been
returned to Sparks.
There are two difficulties with that submission. The first
is that evidence of the value of the equipment or any representation in
to that value was not admitted into evidence before the primary judge and there
has been no appeal from that aspect of the
proceedings. The second is that the
basis of the “new” claim is that the equipment was “worth
substantially less”
than any estimated value discussed during the
mediation and its value is either unknown or solely within the knowledge of
Indeed, during the hearing of this appeal it was submitted that the case
for Sparks at trial would be that the property has no present
[31] These were
matters adverted to by the primary judge in the reasons for
In discussing the
value of the equipment returned, the primary judge noted the claim by Sparks
that there had been a misleading or
deceptive misrepresentation made during the
mediation that the equipment was worth $363,000. That recognises Sparks’s
in the litigation that the equipment is not worth that amount, and the
claim for damages reflects that position. The primary judge
noted further that
the defence filed by AAC in the proceedings does not admit that the equipment is
worth $363,000, or that it is
worth anything at all. The primary judge noted
further that at least some of the property had subsequently been sold. The
judge concluded that he was unable to find that the assets were worth
$363,000 or that any value in the property would be maintained
until after
trial. No error has been made in the fact-finding exercise in that respect, the
primary judge did not act upon a wrong
principle, and the conclusion concerning
the value of the equipment is not unreasonable or plainly unjust. In fact, it
would arguably
have been in error to attribute value to the equipment given the
present state of the pleadings and evidence.
[32] The third
assertion of error made by Sparks in relation to the exercise of the discretion
is that the primary judge accorded
undue weight to the proximity of trial. It
was submitted that the primary judge proceeded on the basis that this issue was
the primary
consideration in the exercise of the discretion, when the proper
approach was to consider the proximity of the trial in the context
of the delay
in making the application. The relevance and significance of that matter has
already been dealt with in the context
of delay. In any event, the primary
judge’s only reference to that consideration was that he was “not
persuaded that
this matter is so close to trial that security for costs should
not be ordered”.
observation was made after the primary judge had canvassed and dealt with the
other discretionary factors militating in favour
of and against the making of an
order for security for costs, including delay. That was a final consideration,
and the primary judge’s
reference to the matter did not purport to give
that issue primacy and was not in error.
[33] The fourth
assertion of error made by Sparks in relation to the exercise of the discretion
is that the primary judge erred in
concluding that the merits of Sparks’s
case were “somewhat neutral”.
What the primary judge
found in that respect was that although much will turn on evidence and argument
in the substantive proceedings,
he was prepared to accept that Sparks’s
and reasonably
As AAC submitted on appeal, when considering applications of this type courts do
not descend into the merits of the parties’
respective cases unless there
is a very high probability of success or failure. Otherwise, the prospect of
success or failure is
of little relevance. In this case the claim was not said
to be frivolous or the defence doomed to failure, and nor could it be said
either was certain to succeed. In those circumstances, the primary judge was
quite correct to find that the strength of the
case was a neutral factor in the
exercise of the discretion.
[34] The fifth
assertion of error made by Sparks in relation to the exercise of the discretion
is that the order made was oppressive.
It had been submitted to the primary
judge that security in any amount would be oppressive because it would require
Sparks to sell
equipment or assets which would then seriously hinder its ability
to earn income. This was not supported by direct evidence from
Sparks and such
evidence as was provided was insufficient to support such a claim. The primary
judge found that to determine whether
an order for security would
“hinder” Sparks’s performance of contracts and ability to
generate income which could
be applied to prosecuting the proceeding the Court
would need to assess evidence of Sparks’s financial and contractual
That was not possible in the absence of evidence to that effect.
Similarly, there was a paucity of evidence concerning the value
of its assets
and liabilities.
There was no
error in drawing those conclusions or taking those matters into account in
determining whether Sparks had established
that an order for security would
stultify proceedings.
[35] The sixth
and final assertion of error made by Sparks in relation to the exercise of the
discretion is that the primary judge
gave undue weight to the absence of
evidence from those who stand behind Sparks as to their financial circumstances.
Reference to
the reasons for decision reveals that the primary judge relevantly
observed that Sparks had failed to fully and promptly provide
information
regarding its financial circumstances, and then observed that there was no
evidence of the willingness of those standing
behind the company, who would
benefit from the litigation, to provide
This consideration was
not decisive in the exercise of the discretion. Rather, it was directed to the
sufficiency of Sparks’s
assets and whether any impecuniosity on its part
was due to the actions of AAC, and that was one matter, amongst others, leading
to the conclusion that an order for security should be made in the exercise of
the discretion. The reasons do not support the suggestion
that undue weight was
given to this factor. Just as it was open to the court to draw inferences from
the insufficiency evidence concerning
Sparks’s financial position in
determining whether the threshold had been met, that consideration was also
relevant to the
exercise of the discretion.
[36] The final
challenge to the primary judge’s determination is that the amount awarded
for security was for the full amount
of the estimated recoverable party/party
costs without the usual deductions for contingencies and other factors. The
principles to
be applied in assessing the quantum of any order for security for
costs have already been described above in dealing with the challenge
primary judge’s determination at the threshold stage. Any analysis of this
contention must start with the fact that
the claim for security was in the sum
of $201,243.50 and the ultimate allowance was for a sum of $90,000. The reasons
of the primary
judge fully expose the process involved in reaching that reduced
figure. The primary judge conducted a section-by-section analysis
skeleton estimate of costs which had been submitted by the solicitors for AAC
and made reductions where the estimate was “ambitious”,
“excessive”, “speculative” or “inflated” to
reflect what the estimate would be on a conservative
party/party basis. That
figure was then discounted by a further $10,000 for costs which might be
incurred in the prosecution of AAC’s
counterclaim.
[37] This was
not, as Sparks submitted, a process akin to taxation, but rather a broadbrush
and transparent analysis directed to determining
an adequate amount for security
having regard to the nature of the claim, which was “neither illusory nor
oppressive”.
In reaching that figure, the primary judge noted that
“I am not obliged to fix an amount reflective of the full estimated costs
and that I can have regard to contingencies”.
However, no further discount was
allowed for the prospect of settlement given the history of the matter and the
unsuccessful mediation
process which had already taken place. Any appropriate
allowance for contingencies and vicissitudes must be made having regard to
history and circumstances of the matter, rather than by the application of some
fixed or customary percentage. The approach to
the assessment of quantum adopted
by the primary judge cannot be said to be erroneous in any relevant sense, or to
be unjust or unreasonable.
It is of some significance in that respect that the
figure reached by that process is not dissimilar from the estimate provided by
Sparks in relation to its future legal costs.
Disposition
application for leave to appeal is granted and the appeal is dismissed. We will
hear the parties in relation to costs and
the appropriate form of security if
_______________________
Sparks NT Pty Ltd v Angkerle
Aboriginal Corporation
[2025] NTSC 24.
Mannix Electrical Pty Ltd v
Belport Pty Ltd
[2019] SASC 159
(2019) 134 SASR 438
Cornelius v
Global Medical Solutions Australia Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWCA 65
(2014) 98 ACSR 301.
Sparks NT Pty Ltd v Angkerle
Aboriginal Corporation
[2025] NTSC 24
See affidavit of Alison Phillis,
16 December 2024, Annexure G.
Sparks NT Pty Ltd v Angkerle
Aboriginal Corporation
[2025] NTSC 24
DGR Global Ltd v
[2025] QCA 122
Rimhart Nominees Pty Ltd v
Glenent Pty Ltd
[2009] SASC 267
See, for example,
Drumdurno Pty
Ltd v Braham
[1982] FCA 161
(1982) 42 ALR 563
at 570-571.
Sparks NT Pty
Ltd v Angkerle Aboriginal Corporation
[2025] NTSC 24
relation to whether the plaintiff's impecuniosity could be attributed to the
actions of the defendant.
Anchung Pty Ltd v Northern
Territory of Australia
[2015] NTSC 76
Attorney-General (Botswana)
v Aussie Diamond Products Pty Ltd
[2009] WASC 299
Arnold v Queensland
[1987] FCA 148
(1987) 73 ALR 607
Bailey v Beagle Management
[2001] FCA 60
(2001) 182 ALR 264
Beluga Developments Pty Ltd v
Sobel Investments Pty Ltd
[2010] VSC 303
Buckley v Bennell Design
& Constructions Pty Ltd
(1974) 1 ACLR 303
Hydrocool Pty Ltd v Hepburn
[2010] FCA 285
Octocane Pty Ltd v SRJ
Property Development Pty Ltd
[1999] SASC 231
See, for example,
CGU Insurance Ltd
[2008] NSWCA 148
(2008) 67 ACSR 105
Sparks NT Pty Ltd v Angkerle
Aboriginal Corporation
[2025] NTSC 24
Sparks NT Pty Ltd v Angkerle
Aboriginal Corporation
[2025] NTSC 24
Sparks NT Pty Ltd v Angkerle
Aboriginal Corporation
[2025] NTSC 24
Sparks NT Pty Ltd v Angkerle
Aboriginal Corporation
[2025] NTSC 24
See, for example,
Pty Ltd v Haddad
[2007] NSWCA 291
(2007) 65 ACSR 276
Sparks NT Pty Ltd v Angkerle
Aboriginal Corporation
[2025] NTSC 24
Sparks NT Pty Ltd v Angkerle
Aboriginal Corporation
[2025] NTSC 24
Sparks NT Pty Ltd v Angkerle
Aboriginal Corporation
[2025] NTSC 24
Sparks NT Pty Ltd v Angkerle
Aboriginal Corporation
[2025] NTSC 24
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (215 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter