URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTSCFC/2021/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:23:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Queen v Rolfe (No 5) [2021] NTSCFC 6 (13 August 2021)
The Queen v Rolfe (No 5)
[2021] NTSCFC 6
PARTIES: THE QUEEN
ROLFE, Zachary
TITLE OF COURT: FULL COURT OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
the Supreme Court
FILE NO.: FSC 3 of 2021 (21942050)
DELIVERED: 13 August 2021
HEARING DATE: 28 July 2021
JUDGMENT OF: Southwood, Kelly and Blokland JJ, Mildren and Hiley AJJ
CATCHWORDS:
CRIME – Murder – Relationship between defences under ss 48BD and
208E of the
Criminal Code
and s 148B of the
Police Administration
– Good faith – Self-defence – Reasonable conduct
STATUTORY INTERPRETATION – Subsequent legislation – Multiple
statutory defences – Two discrete statutes –
No implied repeal
– No inconsistency – Legislative intention
Criminal Code 1983
(NT) s 28, s 43AA, s 43BD, s 156, s 160, s 161A,
Correctional Services (Related and
Consequential Amendments)
Food Act 2004
Fisheries Act 1988
Fisheries Amendment Legislation 2016
Gaming and Betting Act 1912
Gaming Control Act 1993
Interpretation Act 1978
Landlord and Tenant (Amendment) Act 1948
Liquor Act 2019
Meat Industries Act 1996
National Security Act 1939-40
Police Act 1990
Police Act 1988
(SA) s 45, s 65
Police Administration Act 1978
Police Administration Amendment Act 2016
Police Administration Amendment (Powers and Liability) Act 2005
Private Security Act 1995
Road Traffic Act 1961
Sentencing Act 1995
Statute Law Revision Act 2005
Supreme Court Act 1979
Terrorism (Emergency Powers) Act 2003
Territory Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act 1976
Tobacco Control Act 2002
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
Associated Minerals v Wyong Shire Council
[1974] 2 NSWLR 681
(1974) ALR 353
Associated Minerals Consolidated Ltd v Wyong Shire
[1975] AC 538
Blackpool Corporation v Starr Estate Co.
[1922] 1 AC 27
Butler v Attorney General (Vic)
[1961] HCA 32
(1961) 106 CLR 268
Commissioner of Police (New South Wales) v Eaton
[2013] HCA 2
“CMS” (A Child) v Giacomini
[2003] WASCA 42
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v JM
[2013] HCA 30; (2013) 250 CLR
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Comber
[1986] FCA 92
(1986) 10 FCR 88
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings Ltd
[2012] HCA 55
250 CLR 503
Fonteio v Morando Bros Pty Ltd
[1971] VicRp 81
[1971] VR 658
[1908] HCA 55
(1908) 7 CLR 1
Hamilton v Halesworth
[1937] HCA 69
(1937) 58 CLR 369
Hayward-Jackson v Walshaw
[2012] WASC 107
223 A Crim R 489
[1984] TASRp 3
(1984) 12 A Crim R 45
Lacey v Attorney General (Qld)
[2011] HCA 10
242 CLR 573
Little v The Commonwealth
[1947] HCA 24
(1947) 75 CLR 94
[2019] SASC 178
Masson v Parsons
[2019] HCA 21
(2019) 266 CLR 554
Maybury v Ploughman
[1913] HCA 43
(1913) 16 CLR 468
McLean v Kowald
Mercantile Mutual Life Insurance Co Ltd v Australian Securities
[1993] FCA 77
(1993) 40 FCR 409
Mangurra v Rigby
[2021] NTSC 6;
North Australian Aboriginal Justice Agency Ltd v Northern Territory
[2015] HCA 41
(2015) 256 CLR 569
Proudman v Dayman
[1941] HCA 28
(1941) 67 CLR 536
[1993] FCA 538
(1993) 46 FCR 336
Rice v Connolly
[1966] 2 QB 414
Whittington (No 2)
[2007] NTCCA 2
(2007) 19 NTLR 83
Saraswati v R
[1991] HCA 21
(1991) 172 CLR 1
Sarris & Guise v Penfolds Wines Pty Ltd
[1962] NSWR 801
The Vera Cruz
(1884) 10 App Cas 59
Spargo v Repatriation Commissioner
[2001] FCA 1763
(2001) 116 FCR 304
Telstra Corp Ltd v Australasian Performing Right
Association Ltd
[1997] HCA 41
(1998) 191 CLR 140
Theobald v Crichmore
1 B & Ald 227
[106 ER 83]
The Ombudsman v Laughton
[2005] NSWCA 339
(2005) 64 NSWLR
Thiess v Collector of Customs
[2014] HCA 12
(2014) 250 CLR 664
Thomson v C
[1989] NTSC 23
(1989) 95 FLR 116
Webster v Lampard
[1993] HCA 57
(1993) 177 CLR 598
Wellington Capital Ltd v Australian Securities and Investments Commission
(2014) 254 CLR 288
, referred to
Debates 2 December 2004, Hansard
Macquarie Dictionary
ed, 2009) ‘function’
Northern Territory,
September 2014
Pearce and Geddes
Statutory Interpretation in Australia (7
REPRESENTATION:
Crown: P Strickland QC with him S Callan QC
Defendant: D Edwardson QC with him A Allen QC
Solicitors:
Crown: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Defendant: Tindall Gask Bentley
Judgment category classification: A
Number of pages: 97
IN THE FULL COURT OF THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
The Queen v Rolfe (No 5)
[2021] NTSCFC 6
No. FSC 3 of 2021 (21942050)
ZACHARY ROLFE
CORAM: SOUTHWOOD, KELLY and BLOKLAND JJ, MILDREN and HILEY AJJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 13 August 2021)
SOUTHWOOD J AND MILDREN AJ
Introduction
defendant is a member of the Northern Territory Police Force. He is charged with
murder contrary to s 156 of the
Criminal Code Act 1983
Criminal Code
”) on an indictment dated 25 July 2021. In the
alternative, he is charged with manslaughter contrary to s 160 of the
Criminal Code
; and in the further alternative, with engaging in a violent
act which caused the death of the deceased, contrary to s 161A(1) of
Criminal Code
. He has pleaded not guilty to all counts.
defendant’s trial before a jury is to commence on 18 August 2021. The
trial Judge, Mildren AJ, has heard a number of
voir dires to make necessary
rulings before the trial commences. In the course of that process, on
22 July 2021, his Honour referred
the following three questions to the Full
Court under
Supreme Court Act 1979
Police Administration Act 1978
(NT) apply to acts
or omissions done or made, or purported to have been done or made, by a police
if the police officer is acting in the capacity of a public
official under an authorising law?
Having regard to
Police Administration Act 1978
based upon the assumed facts attached (*) hereto, is a police officer who acts
or purportedly acts in the exercise of a power
or performance of a function
under the Act, acting in the capacity of a public official under an authorising
Based upon the assumed facts, at the time the accused fired the second and
third shots resulting in the deceased’s death, was
he acting in the
exercise, or purported exercise, of a power, or the performance, or purported
performance, of a function under the
Police Administration Act 1978
of that Act arises for the jury’s consideration?
[3] On 26 July
2021, Mildren AJ referred the following
question to the Full
The accused, Zachary Rolfe, is charged with murder, contrary to s 156 of
Criminal Code Act 1983
(NT). In the alternative, the accused is
charged with reckless or negligent conduct causing death, contrary to s 160
Criminal Code
. In the further alternative, he is charged with
engaging in a violent act which caused the death of the deceased contrary to
Criminal Code
. In the circumstances, is a defence
Police Administration Act 1978
potentially open in
the light of s 208E of the
Criminal Code
, and in the circumstances where
the accused has raised the defence raised by s 43BD of the
[4] The referred
questions are primarily concerned with the following issues.
the protective provisions of
Police Administration Act 1978
Police Administration Act
”) available to the defendant
as a defence if the defendant was acting in defence of a fellow police officer
at the time he
fired the second and third shots.
Police Administration Act
impose functions on individual members of
the police force; and,
, does s 208E of the
operate as a proviso and limit the operation of s 148B.
[5] Attached to
the questions referred to the Full Court on 22 July 2021 was a document
headed “Assumed Facts” which has
the following annexures. Annexure
A, a Warrant for Breach of Order Suspending Sentence issued for the apprehension
of the deceased
for breach of a suspended sentence prior to his death. Annexure
B, a map of Yuendumu Community. Annexures C and D, electronic copies
audio-visual recordings of the shooting and arrest of the deceased prior to his
death made by the body worn cameras of the
defendant and police officers Eberl
and Hawkings, and transcripts thereof. Annexure E, a photograph of the scissors
used by the deceased
to stab the defendant before the defendant shot him.
[6] The contents
of the assumed facts and annexures do not constitute concluded facts. Nor do
they constitute admissions made by the
parties or agreed facts. However, the
documents do contain some facts not in dispute, some facts the Crown will seek
to prove at
trial, and some facts the defence will press. The Court received the
documents to provide a context for the resolution of the referred
They were received on a similar basis to that approved by the High Court in
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v
The issues of law raised by
the referred questions are concerned with how the law applies to the facts of
this particular case. While
the referred questions are contingent on facts yet
to be established, the materials provided to the Court demonstrate that the
questions are not hypothetical nor academic questions.
The assumed facts
[7] The assumed
facts can be summarised as follows.
defendant has the rank of Constable. In 2016 he was posted to Alice Springs. In
November 2017 he became a member of the Alice
Springs Immediate Response Team
which provides additional general duty support and can immediately respond to
“high risk”
[9] On 26 June
2019, Judge Birch convicted the
of aggravated assault, assault
police and other offences. Judge Birch sentenced him to 16 months
imprisonment, suspended after eight
months and backdated to 22 February
2019. Judge Birch imposed 10 conditions on the suspended part of the
deceased’s sentence
including: (a) wearing an approved electronic
monitoring device; and (b) completing the residential rehabilitation program
by the Central Australian Aboriginal Alcohol Program Unit
(“CAAAPU”) in Alice Springs.
October 2019, the deceased was released from the Alice Springs Correctional
Centre, fitted with an electronic monitoring
device and entered CAAAPU. In the
early hours of 29 October 2019, he removed his electronic monitoring device and
left CAAAPU. These
acts constituted a breach of conditions of his suspended
November 2019, a warrant issued for the arrest of the deceased for breach of
conditions of his suspended sentence. The warrant
issued under
Sentencing Act 1995
November 2019, Senior Constable First Class Christopher Hand and Senior
Constable Lanyon Smith attended House 577 at Yuendumu
to arrest the deceased for
breach of his suspended sentence. The deceased armed himself with a small axe,
threatened the police officers
with the axe and fled. A body worn camera
captured the incident. If proven, the incident amounts to the criminal offence
[13] At 3 pm on
7 November 2019, Sergeant Evan Kelly briefed his patrol group including the
defendant about the deceased and told
them he was an arrest target. On the same
day, the defendant viewed the body worn video of the axe incident several
November 2019, following a request by Sergeant Julie Frost, the Officer in
Charge of the Yuendumu police station, the defendant,
Senior Constable Anthony
Hawkings, Constable Adam Eberl, and Constable James Kirstenfeldt travelled to
Yuendumu. On the same day
Senior Constable Adam Donaldson, a member of the
police dog operation unit, also travelled to Yuendumu.
[15] At 7:06 pm
on 9 November 2019 the four police officers from Alice Springs and Senior
Constable Donaldson left the Yuendumu police
station and attended at House 577.
Persons at that house told them that the deceased left a few minutes earlier and
went towards
[16] Annexures C
and D to the assumed facts contain electronic copies of the film taken by the
police body worn cameras of their attendance
at Houses 577 and 511.
[17] When the
police officers arrived at House 511 the defendant and Constable Adam Eberl
entered the house and arrested the defendant.
The two other officers remained
outside. During the course of the arrest, the deceased stabbed the defendant
with a pair of scissors
and the defendant shot him three times with his police
issue handgun. If proven, the stabbing of the defendant would constitute a
serious criminal offence.
[18] The details
of the shooting incident are as follows. At 7:21:50 pm, the defendant said to
the deceased, “Just put your
hands behind your back”. The deceased
produced a pair of scissors and stabbed the defendant in his left shoulder
defendant fired the first shot. At 7:22:01, the defendant fired the
first shot from close range into the middle-right region of the
back. The shot was not fatal.
[19] For the
purposes of this reference, the Crown accepts that the defendant fired the first
shot in the course of arresting the
[20] At 7:22:04
the accused fired a second shot. He fired the shot into the deceased’s
left torso. At 7:22:05 the accused fired
a third shot. He fired the third shot
into the deceased’s left torso. 2.6 seconds passed between the first shot
and the second
shot. 0.53 seconds passed between the second shot and the third
shot. The second and third shots were fired at a distance of no more
from the deceased. Either the second or the third shot was fatal.
7:23:10 pm, the police had successfully applied handcuffs to the deceased who
was still alive. He was under control and
he was becoming compliant. The police
transported him to Yuendumu police station and administered first aid. He died
at 9:28 pm.
A preliminary issue
[22] At the
beginning of the hearing before this Court, the defence submitted that, with the
exception of question 1 (which the defence
accepted was a pure question of law),
the Full Court should not answer the other three referred questions. This was
because each
of those questions necessarily involved a secondary factual dispute
that could not be resolved at this stage of proceeding. The last
three questions
were questions of mixed fact and law. In particular, counsel for the defence
submitted that the defendant’s
state of mind was an issue for each of the
three defences that were potentially available to him, respectively under
s 148B (good
faith) of the
Police Administration Act
(self-defence) and s 208E (reasonable conduct) of the
[23] The defence
submitted that the issue of the defendant’s state of mind could only be
resolved once the Supreme Court received
all of the evidence. It will be
necessary to have regard to all of the Crown’s evidence, the relevant
circumstances and, if
the defendant gives evidence, his evidence too. Questions
2, 3 and 4 remained hypothetical. The trial judge could only instruct the
at trial about the law which applied to the facts of the case. The defence said
it was not possible to do that now because the
Crown’s case was
incomplete, and it had not been determined whether the defendant would, or would
not, give evidence.
[24] The defence
raised these concerns because of the Crown’s major contention in its
written submissions was a contention of
fact. The Crown submitted that the
defence under
Police Administration Act
available to the defendant. Without conceding the validity of the defence, the
Crown contended that the defendant’s
only possible defence was
self-defence under s 43BD of the
Criminal Code
. This was because of
the explanation the defendant gave Constable Eberl for shooting the deceased
immediately after he fired the
second and third shots. The Crown says that the
audio/visual recordings made by the police body-worn cameras, record the
as stating that he fired the second and third shots in defence of
Constable Eberl. He was no longer in the process of arresting the
deceased. He
was not exercising a power or function under the
Police Administration
. The Crown took these points in its written submissions in answer to
both referred questions 3 and 4. However, the defence says that
factual dispute about what the police body-warn cameras recorded and the
defendant’s state of mind when he fired
the second and third shots.
[25] The defence
objections to the Court dealing with referred questions 2, 3 and 4 were resolved
on the following basis.
1. The parties agreed that the answer to
both referred questions 1 and 2 is “No”.
2. Both referred questions 1 and 2 are questions of law. Question 2 was
simply the mirror image of question 1.
3. Referred question 3 did raise issues of mixed fact and law but its
ultimate determination depended upon how the Court ultimately
analysed the question. Some aspects of question 3 were quintessentially matters
for the jury. However, the scope and operation
Administration Act
, the relationship between
and s 25 of the
Act, and the scope and content of police powers and functions “under this
Act” (see the text of
Police Administration
) raised important questions of law. It was necessary to resolve those
matters prior to trial for the trial Judge to instruct the
jury about the
defence provided by
Police Administration Act
were not hypothetical matters.
4. Question 4 is a question of law. The Crown’s factual contentions did
not alter the nature of the question. Both parties agreed
that the provisions of
, s 43BD and s 208E are not inconsistent. Subject to the
jury’s findings of fact at trial, all three defences were potentially
available to the defendant. Section 208E and s 43BD of the
did not operate as provisos to
Administration Act
Police Administration
20 April 2005, there was no specific provision for protection of members of the
police force against civil and criminal
liability in the
Administration Act
. Protection for members from civil and criminal liability
depended on members acting within the scope of their powers, certain provisions
Criminal Code
, and the common law. The only relevant provisions in
Police Administration Act
Section 161
provided protection for members from liability for executing
warrants that contained irregularities and defects.
Section 162
specified a
time limit for the commencement of actions against members. Section 163
provided for the vicarious liability of the Crown
for the acts and omissions of
members. Subsection 163(1) stated:
Subject to subsection (3), the
Crown is liable in respect of a tort committed by a member in the
performance
of his duties as a member
in the like manner as a master is liable in
respect of a tort committed by his servant in
the course of the
of that servant and, shall in respect of such tort, be treated
for all purposes as a joint tortfeasor with the member.
[27] Things
changed upon the enactment of
Police Administration Act
and the original
inserted in the Act by
Police Administration Amendment
(Powers and Liability) Act 2005
(NT) which commenced on 20 April 2005.
When first enacted,
was only concerned with protection of members from
civil liability, the vicarious liability of the Territory and the procedure for
making claims for police torts. Importantly, Division 3 of
that claims are to be commenced against the Territory not members of the police
provisions in the
Police Administration Act
dealing with vicarious
liability are important. There was an established doctrine at common law which
was specifically applied to
constables of police making arrests, namely: the
doctrine that any public officer whom the law charges with a discretion and
responsibility
in the execution of an independent legal duty is alone
responsible for tortious acts which he or she may commit in the course of
her office and for such acts the government or body which he or she serves or
which appointed him or her incurs no vicarious
[29] During
the second reading speech
Bill that became the
Police Administration Amendment (Powers and Liability)
, the Minister for Police, Fire and Emergency Services
The bill seeks to amend the
Police Administration Act
in a number of ways. Primarily, this bill will put into place a new regime
dealing with
claims of alleged tortious acts
by members of the police
[...] this bill does more than introduce a new vicarious liability scheme; it
also makes several other substantial reforms.
In relation to the amendments to section 163 of the Act, it is intended to
repeal and replace the scheme for claims against police.
The proposed scheme is
substantially the same as the
Police Legislation Amendments (Civil Liability)
(NSW), which commenced on 1 January 2004.
As I noted in my response to the house on 5 October 2004, this is a complex
area of law. It is made more difficult by the fact that
members of the police
force are not ‘employees’. Vicarious liability is a common law
doctrine relating to the issue of
an employer’s liability for the actions
of their employee. Generally speaking, the Crown cannot be vicariously liable
an independent statutory officeholder such as a member of
. It is for this reason that section 163(1) of the Act makes the
Crown liable for members’ torts in the like manner as a master
for the torts committed by a servant in the course of employment.
Another problem is the interaction of sections 162 and 163 of the Act.
Section 162 provides a limitation period of two months in which
a plaintiff
has to commence an action against a member for anything ‘done pursuant to
this Act... and not otherwise’.
Unfortunately, the court is not in the
position to be able to make a determination about the limitation, or the
vicarious liability
of the Crown, until all evidence has been presented to it.
This places the member in the position of being weighed down with an action
may have little prospect of success. This is an unfair burden on the member. The
courts have interpreted section 162 as meaning
the two-month limitation period
only applies where the member acted in good faith in the course of the
member’s duties. Where
the member’s actions were serious or wilful,
the two-month limitation period does not apply. If the member’s conduct
not in this category, then not only will the limitation not apply, the Crown
will not be liable.
[...] As it currently stands, a [person] seeking to sue a member of the
police force for an alleged tort may sue the member personally.
There is no
requirement for him to join the Crown to the proceedings. Subsection 163(3)
enshrines the public policy that the Crown
is not liable to pay damages in the
nature of punitive damages, as the court will only award those damages to punish
or deter the
defendant for their conduct. The experience in the Territory is
that, in most cases where the court finds for the plaintiff, the
court has not
awarded punitive damages. In those circumstances, the Crown meets the payment of
the damages, even though the Crown
may not have been party to the claim.
However, there have been two cases where punitive damages were awarded against
The threat of an action and the stress of ongoing court proceedings places an
un-deserved heavy toll on members whose job of policing
has its own inherent
difficulties. We intend on rectifying this by ensuring a plaintiff cannot
directly sue a police officer for
a police tort claim. A police tort claim means
a claim for damages, including punitive damages for a tort allegedly committed
a member or a former member in
the performance or purported performance of
. This does not, of course, prevent claims against police officers
alleging that the negligence occurred other than in the course
Under the proposed scheme, a person can only initiate a claim in the name of
the Territory and the Territory must, as a result, make
an election whether or
not it would be vicariously liable in any award of damages. If the Territory
denies it would be liable, then
the court must make any orders it considers
appropriate to enable the plaintiff to amend the existing originating process in
the member. The plaintiff only has two months from the date of the order
to amend the originating process, otherwise the plaintiff
will be barred from
In relation to a claim for punitive damages, the plaintiff is unable to seek
this remedy without the leave of the court. If the court
grants leave, the
plaintiff may join the member.
The proposed section 148G provides that the vicarious liability provisions do
not affect a person’s rights they would otherwise
have but for these
provisions.
These amendments will apply to a tort committed or allegedly committed prior
to the commencement of the new scheme, but only where
any legal proceedings have
not commenced at the time of the commencement of the legislation.
The new scheme is intended to regulate the manner in which a person can
sue a member of the police force
. By virtue of their powers, members of the
police force may be required to perform functions and exercise powers under
other Acts,
often in the capacity of a public official. There are a large number
of Acts that give police additional powers or functions. Some
of those Acts also
contain protection from liability provisions that apply both to employees of the
relevant agency and police alike.
Unfortunately, not all the protection from
liability provisions are identical, so each provision needs to be addressed
based on the
protection it provides.
Ancillary amendments have been made to ensure the new regime
unintentionally affect existing rights, liabilities or procedures
Police Administration Act
are respectively in
Divisions 1 and 2 of Part VIIA of the Act. The heading of Part VIIA is
“Protection from liability of members,
Territory’s vicarious
liability and legal proceedings for damages for certain torts by members”.
Division 1 is headed
“Preliminary”. Division 2 is headed
“Protection from liability and vicarious liability of the
Territory”.
[31] Section
148A states:
Part applies to duties of member as a public
(1) For this Part
, an act done or omission made, or purported to have
been done or made, by a member in the capacity of a public official under an
or regulations (the “authorising law”) is taken to have been done or
omitted to have been done by the member
in the performance or purported
performance
of duties as a member
(2) For subsection (1), a public official is a person appointed or authorised
under the authorising law to perform
inspection, investigation or other
enforcement functions
under that law for the Territory, an Agency or another
Territory authority.
(3) This Part
applies despite
a provision of the authorising law
providing for
the protection from
civil liability
of a member
(regardless of whether it also provides for protection from criminal liability)
for an act done or omitted to be done
in the exercise or purported exercise
of a power, or the performance or purported performance of a function, under
[32] Acknowledging
that when Part VIIA was first enacted headings to sections were not part of an
Act, the heading to s 148A misleadingly
appears to raise a constructional
choice. On one interpretation, the heading evinces an intention to limit the
application of Part
VIIA to circumstances where a police officer is acting in
the capacity of a public official under another Act or regulation only.
another interpretation, the heading evinces an intention to expand the
application of Part VIIA to include circumstances where
a police officer is
acting in the capacity as a public official. Under the latter interpretation,
Part VIIA applies both to members
of the police force performing their duties as
members of the police force, and to members acting in the capacity of a public
But no such choice arises from the text of s 148A(1). The correct
interpretation of the subsection is the latter interpretation of
the heading.
This is so for the following reasons. The heading to Division 1 of Part VIIA is
“Preliminary” not “Application
of this Part”. The text
of s 148A(1) commences with the words “For this Part”, not
“This Part applies”.
The words “For this Part” are
expansive words not limiting words. Subsection 148A(1) is simply a deeming
provision. It
deems acts done or omitted by a police officer in the capacity of
a public official to be taken to have been done by a member of
the police force
in the performance of his or her duties as a member of the police force.
[33] The words
“performance of duties as a member” in s 148A(1) and elsewhere
in Part VIIA of the
Police Administration Act
have been carried forward
from repealed s 163(1). They are reflective of the tortious and vicarious
liability matters dealt with
They are equivalent words to the
words “in the course of employment” which are commonly used in
matters involving the
vicarious liability of employers for employees. The
Legislature used the words “performance of duties as a member”
members of the police force are independent statutory office holders.
They are not employees. However, the Territory is vicariously
liable for police
torts committed by members of the police force
in the performance of their
duties as members
important effect, of the deeming provision of
definition of “police tort claim” in
, and the provisions of
, is to make the Territory vicariously liable for a police tort
committed by a member in his or her capacity as a public official
authorising law. Those provisions also require a claimant to sue the Territory
and not the police officer. The statements
made in the second reading speech
above support this
interpretation.
[35] Originally,
the deeming effect of s 148A(1) of the Act had two purposes.
to protect members from civil liability, not only for acts done or omitted in
the performance or purported performance by a member
of duties as a
of the police force, but also acts done or omitted by members as
public officials under an authorising law.
, to make the Territory
vicariously liable and provide a single procedural regime for claimants to make
claims for damages against
the Territory for police torts committed by a member
of the police force. The procedural regime applies to both torts committed by
members in the performance of duties as a member of the police force, and to
torts committed by members in the capacity of a public
Police Administration Act
limits the functions of public
officials to inspection, investigation or other enforcement functions. It is not
necessarily every
function of a police officer under an authorising law which is
deemed to be taken to have been done by the member in the performance
purported performance of duties as a member. For example, if a member was given
a license issuing function that function would
not fall within the deeming
provisions of
provides that
applies despite a provision of the authorising
law providing for
the protection from
civil liability
of a member
for an act done or omitted in the exercise or purported exercise
of a power,
or the performance or purported performance of a function, under the law
The purpose of
is to make it clear that, within the ambit of its
provisions for protection from civil liability,
of the Act, in
particular the vicarious liability and procedural provisions, is to apply
despite any protective provisions for civil
liability in authorising statutes.
The words “regardless of whether it also provides protection from criminal
in parentheses in s 148A(3) have no operational effect.
They do not mean that s 148A has any application to protection from
liability. The words simply make it clear that the provisions of Part
VIIA apply to protection from civil liability regardless of
whether the
authorising law provides for protection from criminal liability also.
[38] Originally,
s 148B stated:
Protection of members from civil
(1) This section applies to a person who is or has been a member.
(2) The person is
not civilly liable
for an act done or omitted to be
done by the person in good faith
in the performance
or purported
performance of
duties as a member
protection provided by s 148B of the Act when first enacted only applied to past
or present members of the police force.
The section protected members who were
acting in good faith from civil liability only. The subject matter of
s 148B was acts done
or omitted, or purported to be done or omitted, by a
member in the performance of
duties as a member
and that phrase appeared
in both s 148A(1) and s 148B(2) of the Act. As originally enacted, the
protection provided by s 148B extended
to protection for acts done or omitted by
a member acting in the capacity of a public official.
Statute Law Revision Act 2005
(NT) amended
Police Administration Act
to correct the spelling of the word
“performance”.
Police Administration Amendment Act 2016
s 148B and the whole of the original Division 2 of Part VIIA of the
Police Administration Act
and inserted a new Division 2 which is comprised
The newly inserted provisions commenced on
28 September 2018. The repeal and replacement of Division 2 of
coincided with the enactment of Division 7AA of Part VII of the
Administration Act
. Division 7AA established disease-testing regimes and
enacted provisions for the taking and testing of blood samples by persons who
were not members of the police force. Some of those provisions give functions
and powers under the
Police Administration Act
to persons who are not
members of the police force. For example, s 147R(3) of the Act requires a
medical practitioner, nurse or qualified
person to take a blood sample from a
person in accordance with a disease test authorisation.
[42] In addition
to Division 7AA of Part VII of the
Police Administration Act
, there are
also other provisions in the Act that give powers and functions to persons who
are not police officers.
Police Administration Act
Protection from liability
(1) A person is not civilly or criminally liable for an act done or omitted
to be done by the person in good faith in the exercise
of a power or performance
of a function under this Act.
(2) Subsection (1) does not affect any liability the Territory would, apart
from that subsection, have for the act or omission.
(3) In this section:
, of a power, includes purported exercise of a power.
performance
, of a function, includes purported performance of a
currently enacted, s 148B of the Act provides protection to a person from
civil and criminal liability
for an act done or omitted to be done by the
person in good faith
in the exercise of a power or the performance of a
Administration Act
. The section differs from the repealed section in a
number of important respects.
, protection, under the section, is
for both civil and criminal liability. The protection is no longer limited to
civil liability.
, the protection is for acts done, or omitted, in
the exercise of a power or the performance of a function. It is not for acts
or omitted in the performance of duties as a member.
relevant powers and functions are powers and functions
Administration Act
. There is no reference in the text of
public officials, authorising laws or “the performance of duties as a
member” which appear in
[45] Consequently,
there is a question as to whether
now has any application to
Section 148A
remains unamended. When enacted,
in a part of the Act that only provided protection for members from civil
liability. As s 148A has not been amended and the
words “performance
or purported performance of duties” remain in the section, and as those
words no longer appear in
s 148B, there is nothing to suggest that the
application of s 148A extends to the protection of members from
. This interpretation is reinforced by the following
considerations:
(a) s 148B was repealed and re-enacted, not simply amended;
(b) for good reason, the Legislature makes a distinction between the
“performance of duties as a member” and the “exercise
power or the performance of a function” by a member;
(c) s 148B(1) states that it applies to acts done or omitted by a person
“under this Act”, that is, the
Police Administration Act
still has work to do, it applies to the provisions for vicarious
liability and procedures for making a claim for police torts.
[46] Further,
the authorising laws themselves commonly provide protection from civil and
criminal liability for acts done or omitted
by public officials under those Acts
in similar terms to
Police Administration Act
Consequently, further protection under the
Police Administration Act
would seem to be unnecessary, and there is no reason to differentiate between
the protection provided for the acts done or omitted
by police officers as
public officials, on the one hand, and other persons as public officials on the
other hand.
[47] Following
are two examples of the protective provisions of authorising statutes.
Meat Industries Act 1996
(NT) provides that every member of
the Police Force is an inspector for the purposes of this Act.
Meat Industries Act
Where an inspector does an
act or makes an omission in good faith:
(a) in the exercise or purported exercise of a power; or
(b) in the performance or purported performance of a
under this Act
, no action, claim or demand,
either civil
or criminal
, in respect of that act or omission lies, or
shall be commenced or allowed, against the Territory, the Chief Inspector or an
Tobacco Control Act 2002
(NT) states that a member of the
Police Force is an authorised officer.
Tobacco Control Act
(1) This section applies to a person who is or has been:
(c) an authorised officer
(2) No civil or criminal proceedings
lie against a person to whom this section applies in relation to an act done or
omission made
in good faith in the exercise or purported exercise of a power or
the purported exercise of a power or the performance or purported
performance of
under this Act
or the Regulations.
(3) Subsection (2) does not affect any liability that the Territory would,
but for that section, have for an act or omission.
(4) This section has effect subject to Part VIIA of the
Administration Act 1978
to the extent it relates to civil liability
of an authorised officer who is or has been a member of the Police Force.
[52] In both of
the above examples, the Legislature makes it plain that it intends to confine
the protection from liability provided
by each Act to acts done or omitted
under the relevant Act
. It has done so by the use of the words
“under this Act”. Likewise, we infer that by the use of the same
words in the
Police Administration Act
, the Legislature intends to limit
the application of
to acts done or omitted by members under the
provisions of the
Police Administration Act
or under those provisions in
the sense that the immediate source of conferral is delegated
legislation.
The Legislature does
not intend the ambit of the protection provided by
to extend to acts done
or omitted by police officers as public officials.
[53] In the
circumstances, the protection provided by
Administration Act
no longer applies to members acting in the capacity of
public officials under authorising laws or regulations. We agree with the
Crown’s submissions that the repeal and re-enactment of
narrowed and expanded the section’s operation. Its current application is
limited to acts done or omitted by a person in good
faith in the exercise of a
power or the performance of a function under the
Police Administration
, not under an authorising law. Its application now extends to both civil
and criminal liability, and to other persons who too perform
functions and
exercise powers under the
Police Administration Act
[54] Section
148A of the Act still has work to do under Division 3 of Part VIIA of the
Police Administration Act
. By virtue of the deeming effect of
, the Territory is vicariously liable for torts committed by
police officers in the performance of their duties as members and as
officials. Further, the procedures for police tort claims in Division 3 apply
likewise. This is confirmed by provisions such
and (4) of the
Tobacco Control Act
Questions 1 and 2
[55] We accept
the Crown’s submissions about the interpretation of s 148A and
Police Administration Act
and the answers to referred
questions 1 and 2. In the context of what we have stated at
above, we have largely adopted the
Crown’s submissions in what we state below about questions 1 and 2.
Police Administration Act
creates a fictional state of
affairs, namely: that when a member of the police force is acting as a
“public official”
under an “authorising law” he or she
“is taken to be” acting
in the performance of their duties
as a member
Section 148A
does not limit
Administration Act
to instances of members acting as “public
officials” under an “authorising law”. Rather, its purpose is
extend the application of Division 3 of Part VIIA of the Act so the
Territory is also vicariously liable for police torts committed
acting as public officials, and claims for those torts too are against the
Territory, not the member of the police force.
This is evident from the text of
s 148A, the relationship between s 148A and the provisions in Division
3 of Part VIIA and the legislative
context and history of s 148A.
[57] Section
148A does not apply to
Police Administration Act
Police Administration Act
applies (but is not
limited) to members of the police force to protect them from civil and criminal
liability for an act done or
omitted in good faith in the exercise of a power or
performance of a function under the
Police Administration Act
[58] The central
focus of statutory construction is on the text of a provision in context. In
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory
Hayne, Heydon,
Crennan and Kiefel JJ stated:
This Court has stated on many
occasions that the task of statutory construction must begin with a
consideration of the text itself.
[...] The language [...] in the text of
legislation is the surest guide to legislative intention.
[59] Subject to
limited exceptions, the meaning of a statutory provision must be reasonably open
on the natural and ordinary meaning
of the words read in the context in which
By itself, the meaning of the words used in the text does not determine the
meaning of a legislative provision. It is necessary to
consider the context of
the text. In
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings
after citing the
above passage from
, the High Court stated:
statutory text must be considered in its context. That context includes
legislative history and extrinsic materials. Understanding
context has utility
if, and in so far as, it assists in fixing the meaning of the statutory text.
Legislative history and extrinsic
materials cannot displace the meaning of the
statutory text. Nor is their examination an end in itself.
considering the context of a legislative provision, statute and common law
require consideration of the purpose of the provision.
As the High Court stated
Thiess v Collector of
“[o]bjective discernment of statutory purpose is integral to
contextual construction”.
Section 62A
Interpretation Act 1978
Interpretation
In interpreting a provision of an Act, a
construction that promotes the purpose or object underlying the Act (whether the
or object is expressly stated in the Act or not) is to be preferred to a
construction that does not promote the purpose or object.
purpose is to be objectively identified, and “may appear from an express
statement in the relevant statute, by inference
from its terms and by
appropriate reference to extrinsic
materials”.
[63] However,
extrinsic materials can only be used to confirm that:
“the meaning of
the provision is the ordinary meaning conveyed by the text of the provision
taking into account its context
in the Act and the purpose or object underlying
and to determine
the meaning of a provision where the provision is
“ambiguous or
or the ordinary meaning produces a result that is
“manifestly absurd”
“unreasonable”
However, extrinsic materials cannot be used to displace the ordinary meaning of
a provision, which appears from its
Police Administration Act
establishes the Police Force of the Northern
Territory (see
, a scheme for determining the conditions of service of
members of the Police Force (see
, a disciplinary regime (see
and an appellate system in relation to promotions and disciplinary matters
The Act also regulates the use of dangerous drugs for use in
training (see Part VIA), prescribes the powers of police (see Part VII),
establishes a regime for legal proceedings for damages for certain torts
committed by members, provides some protection for members
from civil and
criminal liability (see Part VIIA), and prescribes offences in relation to the
Police Force (see Part VIII).
key phrase in s 148A(1) is:
“is taken to have been”
understand that phrase, it is helpful to consider the context and history of
Police Administration Act
[66] When the
Police Administration Amendment (Powers and Liability) Act
commenced in
2005, there were a number of Territory Acts that authorised members of the
police force to execute powers and perform
functions under those
Those Acts included
provisions protecting members from civil and criminal liability for acts done
under those laws. For example,
see the provisions of, the
Tobacco Control Act
[67] The second
reading speech to the Bill introducing the
Police Administration Amendment
(Powers and Liability) Act
above) makes it clear that the Legislature sought to establish a regime
addressing legal proceedings for alleged police torts by
members of the police
force that operated in harmony with existing protections for members acting as
“public officials”
under “authorising laws”.
provisions of the
Police Administration Amendment (Powers and Liability)
confirm that
is to operate alongside provisions
protecting “public officials” under “authorising laws”.
In particular,
Police Administration Amendment (Powers and Liability)
amended other Acts to make it clear that those Acts had effect
Police Administration Act
For example,
Tobacco Control Act
. Other Acts also had provisions similar to
Tobacco Control Act
inserted, which authorised
members of the police force to execute powers and perform functions under those
light of the legislative background, it is clear that the phrase “
taken to have been”
in s 148A(1) operates as a deeming provision. It
creates a deemed state of affairs upon which a court is to proceed when applying
certain provisions of
, namely that a member acted as a member in
the performance of duties as a member under the
Police Administration
, even though he or she was, in fact, acting as a “public
official” under an “authorising law”.
interpretation of
Police Administration Act
important implications.
does not confine the application of
Administration Act
to acts done or omitted by members in the capacity of a
public official under an authorising law. Rather,
extends the
application of
Police Administration Act
so that it not
only applies to acts done or omitted by members in the performance of duties as
a member under the
Police Administration Act
, but where provided also
applies to acts done or omitted by a member in the capacity of a “public
official” under an
“authorising law”.
[72] Second
does not mean that an act done or omitted by a member in the performance
of duties as a member under the
Police Administration Act
to have been done” by the member as a “public official” under
an “authorising law”.
That is not the deemed state of affairs
Police Administration Act
uses a drafting technique a
preliminary stage for economy of expression. The use of the technique avoids
repetition. In subsequent
sections of
, it is unnecessary for the
Legislature to state that the section applies to both: (i) acts done or omitted
by a member performing
duties as a member of the police force, and (ii) to
acts done or omitted by a member in the capacity of a “public
under “an authorising law”.
understand how
operates as a deeming provision, it is helpful to consider
how it applies to subsequent provisions in
plainly applies to a section in
of the Act if the section
contains the phrase “by a member in the performance or purported
performance of duties as a member”.
Accordingly, it applies to the
sections in Division 3 of Part VIIA of the Act. Section 148A(1) expands the
definition of “police
tort claim” in s 148D to include a tort
committed by a member in the capacity of a “public official” under
an “authorising
law”. This has flow on consequences for the
application of s 148F(1), s 148F(2) and s 148F(3) which use the
term “police
tort claim”. The result is that, subject to the
provisions of s 148F and s 148G, the Territory is vicariously liable
torts committed by members regardless of whether they were acting
Police Administration Act
at the time or as a public official
under an authorising law. Further, in respect of all such torts, subject to
certain qualifications,
the Territory, not the tortious member, is to be the
defendant named in the claim.
apparent from the second reading speech, the Legislature saw the enactment of
Division 3 of Part VIIA of the Act as a fundamentally
important part of the 2005
amendments.
The interpretation of s 148B
[77] Questions
1 and 2 draw particular attention to the meaning of “person” in
Police Administration Act
. There is nothing in the
immediate context of
to suggest that “person” should be
limited to “members” (as that term is defined in the
Administration Act
). If the Legislature wished to confine the application of
to members it would have used the term “members” as it did in
the repealed
[78] Members of
the police force are not the only persons who exercise powers or perform
functions under the Act. The Act confers
powers and functions on various
persons. They include: a person appointed to the Appeal Board (s 94(2)); a
health practitioner attending
to a person held in custody (s 132); a
correctional officer assisting a member in the exercise or performance of the
functions under Division 6A of Part VII (s 138B); a medical
practitioner; and, a nurse or qualified person who conducts blood testing
infectious diseases (see s 147FA and s 147FR).
[79] Section
148B, in its current form, was inserted in the Act by
Administration Amendment Act 2016
. A focus of the amending Act was to
introduce amendments about the power of police, medical practitioners, nurses
and “qualified
persons” (see s 147FA) to take forensic samples,
while protecting those persons from the risks associated with blood or bodily
fluids. There is no mention of s 148B of the Act in the second reading speech
for the Bill that introduced the
Administration Amendment Act 2016
. However, the Explanatory Statement
confirms that a broad reading should be given to the term “person”.
Explanatory Statement states:
New s 148B provides protection
from liability so a person is not civilly or criminally liable for an act done
or omitted [...] in
good faith in the exercise of a power or performance of a
function under the Act. This section reflects changes so as to include
acting under the new provisions of this Bill (i.e. medical practitioners, nurses
and qualified persons).
[81] A narrow
reading of “person” to be only a “member” would exclude
all of the other persons who exercise
powers and perform functions under the Act
from the protection provided by s 148B. The Explanatory Statement does not
support such
an interpretation. The current s 148B is plainly different to the
Police Administration Act
, which only applied
to members of the police force and was limited to civil liability.
[82] Referred
questions 1 and 2 also draw attention to the meaning of “under this
Act” in s 148B(1). The natural and ordinary
meaning of the words
“this Act”, together with immediate context in which they appear,
plainly indicate that “this
Act” is a reference to the
Administration Act
only. Further, there is nothing in the broader
legislative context that suggests otherwise. It can be inferred that the purpose
Police Administration Act
is to protect a person
from civil and criminal liability for an act done or omitted by the person in
good faith in the exercise of
a power or performance of a function under the
Police Administration Act
The relationship between
does not apply to
Police Administration Act
the reasons given at [26] to [82] above and for the following reasons.
the difference in the language used in
clearest indication that
does not apply to
By its terms,
applies to “members” and to provisions containing the
phrase “the performance or purported performance of duties
member”. These words are absent from
Administration Act
. In contrast, s 148B(1) of the Act uses the terms
“person” as opposed to “member” in s 148A(1), and
as opposed to “duties” in s 148A(1).
This contrast is starker when regard is had to s 148D and s 148G(1)(f) of
which use the same phrase and terms as are used in s 148A. It might be
expected that the Legislature would have used the same phrase
or terms in
s 148B as used in s 148D and s 148G(1)(f) if it had intended
s 148A to apply to s 148B in the same way that it applies
to s 148D and
s 148G(1)(f).
[85] Second
the application of s 148A to s 148B would produce results inconsistent
with the text of s 148B. Any attempt to use s 148A(1) to
protection from liability in s 148B(1) to a member when acting as a
“public official” under an “authorising
law” would be
inconsistent with the language of s 148B(1), which refers to
act done or omitted ... in the exercise of a power or performance of a function
under this Act
[86] Further,
construing s 148A(1) as limiting the protection from liability in s 148B(1)
to a member (and only if the member is acting
in the capacity of a “public
official” under an “authorising law”) is inconsistent with the
term “person”.
the application of s 148A to s 148B is inconsistent with the purpose of
s 148B, which is to protect a person from civil and criminal
liability for
an act done or omitted while executing a power or performing a function under
Police Administration Act
applies to a member
if the member is acting in the
capacity of a “public official” under an “authorising
law” is inconsistent
with the broader protection that
intended to provide to the various
who execute powers or perform
functions under the
Police Administration Act
. Such an interpretation is
not supported by the purpose of
identified in the Explanatory
[88] Fourth
is a deeming provision. A deeming provision should be construed to have
legal operation only as far as is necessary to achieve the
purpose of the
provision. In
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v
Fisher J made the
following comments about deeming provisions:
In my opinion deeming
provisions are required by their nature to be construed strictly and only for
the purpose for which they are
resorted to:
Re Levy; Ex parte Walton
[1881] UKLawRpCh 160
(1881) 17 Ch D 746
per James LJ at 756. It is improper in my view to extend by
implication the express application of such a statutory fiction. It is
improper so to do if such an extension is unnecessary, the express provision
being capable by itself of sensible and rational
application. This is precisely
the position in the section in
recently, in
Wellington Capital Ltd v Australian Securities and Investments
observed that the clauses of a company constitution that the Court was asked to
construe used phrases such as “
it were” and
the language of a legal fiction. Ordinarily, a legal fiction is not construed to
have a legal operation beyond that required
to achieve the object of its
incorporation. That general observation applies as much to the construction of a
deed of trust, as it
does to the construction of a statute (citations
[90] The purpose
Police Administration Act
is to ensure that a
reference to an act done or omitted by a member
in the performance of duties
as a member
includes an act done or omitted by the member in the capacity of
a “public official” under “an authorising law”.
is such a clear difference in the language of
application of
is contrary to the purpose of
However, the application of
to Divisions 3 of
achieves the
purpose of the section.
the legislative history of
Administration Act
supports the view that
does not apply to
in its current form. With one minor
the Legislature has
not amended
since 2005 and it still has work to do in the operation
of the regime dealing with claims of alleged tortious acts by members of
police force. While
was repealed and re-enacted in completely
different terms.
Conclusions on
Questions 1 and 2
[92] For the
reasons set out above,
Police Administration Act
not apply to
Section 148B
Police Administration Act
is to be construed according to its terms.
Section 148B
Administration Act
does not apply to acts done by a member
the member is acting as a “public official” under an
“authorising law”.
[93] We would
answer to Question 1: “No”.
[94] However,
the protection provided by
only applies to acts done or omitted by a
person (including a police officer) in good faith in the exercise of a power or
performance
of a function under the
Police Administration Act
protection provided by
extend to acts done or
omitted by police officers acting as public officials under an authorising
Question 2, the effect of
Police Administration Act
that an act done or omitted by a member as a “public official” under
an “authorising law” is taken to
have been done or omitted by the
member in the performance (or purported performance) of duties as a member. The
subsection does
not have the reverse effect, namely that an act done by a member
Police Administration Act
is taken to have been done by the
member in the capacity of a “public official” under an
“authorising law”.
A member who acts under the
Administration Act
is not under
Police Administration
, or otherwise, acting in the capacity of a “public official”
under an “authorising law”.
[96] We would
answer Question 2: “No”.
[97] The Crown
submits that the answer to referred question 3 turns on whether the defendant
fired the second and third shots (one
of which was fatal) in good faith
“in the exercise, or purported exercise, of a power or the performance, or
purported performance,
of a function under the [
Police Administration
]”. We agree with the Crown’s starting proposition.
[98] However,
the Crown also submits that a succession of High Court authorities on similar
provisions establish that
Police Administration Act
would only apply if the defendant genuinely believed that firing the second and
third shots was
done under his power to arrest the deceased
. Further, the
Crown says that on the Assumed Facts, and by the defence invoking self-defence
under s 43BD of the
Criminal Code
, when he fired the second and
third shots, the defendant was not exercising or purporting to exercise any
power or function under
Police Administration Act
. Nor is there any
evidence to suggest that was the defendant’s genuine belief.
Crown’s third proposition raises mixed issues of law and fact that can
only be resolved after all of the evidence is
before the jury. To avoid dealing
with issues of fact, the Court has redrafted referred question 3 as follows:
Redrafted Question 3
Based upon the assumed facts, at the time the accused fired the second and
thirds shots resulting in the deceased’s death, would
it be open to the
jury to find that the accused was acting in the exercise or purported exercise
of a power or performance or purported
performance of a function under the
Police Administration Act
, such that s 148B of the Act arises for
the jury’s consideration?
[100] The Act
contains various provisions that confer powers and functions on various persons.
To answer redrafted question 3 it is
necessary to consider the powers and
functions that members of the police force have “under the Act”.
assessing the powers and functions members of the police force have,
is useful to keep in mind the constitution of the Police Force, and that members
of the police force are statutory office holders.
They are required to make an
oath, before they can exercise or perform any of the powers, functions or duties
conferred or imposed
on a member of the Police Force by a law of the
[102] Division 1
of Part II of the
Police Administration Act
provides for the
establishment of the Police Force of the Northern Territory.
Division I states:
The police force shall consist of a Commissioner
and other members appointed and holding office
under and in accordance
with this Act.
Police Administration Act
A person shall
not exercise or perform any of the powers, functions or duties conferred or
imposed upon a member of the Police Force
by a law of the Territory unless he or
she has taken and subscribed an oath in the form in the Schedule.
[104] The form
of the oath is as follows:
I _______ [
promise/ swear etc as
required by
Oaths, Affidavits and Declarations Act 2010
] that I will well
and truly serve Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth the Second, Her Heirs and
Successors as a member of the Northern Territory
Police Force without fear or
favour, affection or ill-will from this day and until I am legally discharged
from that Force; that
I will see and cause Her Majesty’s peace to be
kept and preserved, that I will prevent, to the best of my powers, all offences
against Her Majesty’s peace and against all laws in force in the Northern
Territory of Australia and that
, while I remain a member of the Northern
Territory Police Force, I will, to the best of my skill and knowledge,
faithfully discharge
all my duties according to law.
[So help me God! or as
appropriate]
[105] A number
of sections of the
Police Administration Act
confer functions on the
police force and on members of the police force. Subsection 5(2) of the Act
The core functions of the Police Force are:
(a) to uphold the law and maintain social order; and
(b) to protect life and property; and
(c) to prevent, detect, investigate and prosecute offences; and
(d) to manage road safety education and enforcement measures; and
(e) to manage the provision of services in emergencies.
Police Administration Act
is headed “Functions of
members” and states:
Subject to this act, a member shall
perform the duties and obligations and have the powers and privileges as are,
by any law in force
in the Territory,
conferred or imposed
[107] In our
opinion, by virtue of the oath members of the police force take, and the fact
that the police force can only act through
its members, members are under an
obligation and have a duty to carry out the core functions stipulated in
s 5 of the Act. In
Lord Parker CJ
It is also in my judgment clear that it is part of the
obligations and duties of a police constable to take all steps which appear
him necessary for keeping the peace, for preventing crime or for protecting
property from criminal injury. There is no exhaustive
definition of the powers
and obligations of the police, but they are at least those, and they would
further include the duty to detect
crime and to bring an offender to
[108] There is
nothing in the
Police Administration Act
to exclude the common law duties
of police officers from applying in this case. Such an interpretation of the Act
is consistent with
s 25 of the Act, which is headed “Functions of
members” and refers to duties, obligations, powers and privileges
or imposed on him “by any law in force in the Territory”,
which includes the common law and statutory law.
[109] Rice v
was followed and applied by Angel J in
a decision of this Court,
where his Honour said, after quoting the passage from
Rice v Connolly
referred to above:
As Cosgrove J said in
Innes v Weate
the duty of a
police officer cannot be stated in other than general terms, as the range of
circumstances in which there is a duty
to act is so wide, so various, and so
difficult to anticipate. I agree.
[110] To the
same effect is the decision of the Full Court of the Federal Court in
where the Court followed
and applied
Rice v Connolly
Thomson v C
as expressing the
duties of a police officer at common law. The Court concluded, after examining a
number of other English and Canadian
authorities that:
The effect of
all those cases is that a police officer acts in the execution of his duty from
the moment he embarks upon a lawful
task connected with his functions as a
police officer, and continues to act in the execution of that duty for as long
as he is engaged
in pursuing the task and until it is completed, provided that
he does not in the course of the task do anything outside the ambit
of his duty
so as to cease acting therein.
argument of the defence was that
Police Administration
confers functions on individual members of the police force. There is no
definition of “functions” in the Act. The Macquarie
defines “function” as “the kind of action or activity proper
to a person, thing, or
institution”.
opinion, the functions of a member of the police force include their duties. The
argument of the Crown was that s 5 confers
functions on the Police Force as
an institution, and was irrelevant. Although the Police Force may be an
institution or a body, it
is not a corporation; it is comprised of the
Commissioner and other members holding office under and in accordance with the
and it acts through its
members. We consider that s 5, when considered in the light of s 25 of
the Act, and the oath of office taken
by a member, makes it part of a police
officer’s functions and duties, amongst other things, to protect life and
prevent offences.
The same approach was taken by Murray J and Burchett AUJ in
“CMS” (A Child) v
where their
Honours said:
It is a central function of the office of a police
constable to preserve the peace and public order. That is so at common law and,
for example, by
. It is central to the oath
of engagement taken by a police officer...
[112] Indeed, s
28(e) of the
Criminal Code
In the circumstances
following, the application of force that will or is likely to kill or cause
serious harm is justified provided
it is not unnecessary force
(e) ... in the case of a police officer, or a person acting by his authority,
when attempting to prevent a person committing or continuing
the commission of
an offence of such a nature as to cause the person using the force reasonable
apprehension that death or serious
harm to another will
Although that provision does not apply to provide a
defence to Schedule 1
it is still relevant
to offences that are not Schedule 1 offences, and is illustrative of the
[113] Part VII
Police Administration Act
is headed “Police powers”.
There is specific provision in the Divisions of
for the following
police powers: use of dogs and horses; use of electronic drug detection systems;
arrest; apprehension without arrest; taking
person into custody for infringement notice offences; notice to appear before
Court; furnishing of name and address; bringing detained persons
before court and obtaining evidence after taking into custody; recording
confessions and admissions; and forensic examinations. The powers are
particular relevance to referred question 3, are the powers of arrest contained
Police Administration Act
Section 123
A member of the Police Force may, without
warrant, arrest and take into custody any person where he believes on reasonable
that the person has committed, is committing or is about to commit an
(1) A member of the Police Force may, without warrant, arrest and take into
custody any person who the member has reasonable cause
to believe is a person
for whose apprehension or committal a warrant has been issued by any Supreme
Court Judge, Local Court Judge
or justice of the peace.
(2) Where a member arrested person under subsection (1), the member shall, as
soon as reasonably practicable thereafter, produce
or cause to be produced to
the person the warrant authorising his apprehension or committal, where the
person has been apprehended
in pursuance of a warrant authorising his
apprehension, and the person shall be charged with the offence specified in the
[116] The Crown
says that the relevant statutory provision was the power to arrest the deceased,
and, on the Agreed Facts, the defendant
was not purporting to exercise that
power at the time he fired the second and third shots. His purpose and intent
was to defend Constable
[117] Before
further considering the Crown’s submissions, we note the following assumed
facts. They do not appear to be controversial.
The defendant, Senior Constable
Anthony Hawkings, Constable Adam Eberl, and Constable James Kirstenfeldt went to
Yuendumu to arrest
the deceased. A warrant for his apprehension for breach of a
suspended sentence was outstanding and on 6 November 2019, the deceased
assaulted two police officers who were attempting to arrest him by threatening
them with a small axe. After the police officers arrived
at House 511 at
Yuendumu, the defendant and Constable Eberl went into the house to arrest the
deceased. They spoke to him and he
gave them a false name. The police identified
the deceased by reference to a digital picture of him on a mobile telephone and
proceeded to arrest the deceased. The deceased resisted arrest. He stabbed
the defendant and attempted to stab Constable Eberl and
the defendant shot him
three times. There was 3.13 seconds between the first shot and the third shot.
The deceased did not die immediately.
He continued to resist and threaten the
police. The police eventually handcuffed the deceased and placed him inside the
cage at the
rear of the police van. The police body-worn cameras recorded most
of these actions. The deceased died approximately two hours after
[118] The Crown
submits that there must be evidence capable of showing there was a reasonable
possibility that when the defendant
fired the second and third shots he
genuinely believed he did so in the exercise, or purported exercise, of
power of arrest under
Police Administration Act
Otherwise, the Crown says the defendant cannot rely on s 148B of the Act as
a defence. The Crown accepts that when the defendant
entered House 511 to
arrest the deceased, he genuinely believed he was exercising the power of arrest
Police Administration Act
, and also there is a temporal
connection between the defendant entering the house to arrest the deceased and
the discharge of the
second and third shots. However, the Crown contends that
circumstances materially changed between the firing of the first and second
shots. The firing of the last two shots was unnecessary or unreasonable. The
defendant fired the second and third shots, not to effect
an arrest of the
deceased, but on the defence case, to prevent death or serious harm to Constable
Eberl. The Crown says that the
record of the defendant’s statements to
Constable Eberl before they handcuffed the deceased support this contention.
[119] In our
opinion, these are matters for the jury. The facts illustrate that incident
occurred very quickly. The defendant fired
the second shot only 2.6 seconds
after the first shot, and the third shot only 0.53 seconds after the second
shot. The Crown’s
submissions overlook the fact that at the relevant time
the defendant may have been exercising his power of arrest and simultaneously
performing his functions of preventing an offence and protecting the life of
Constable Eberl. The police officers completed the arrest
of the deceased. They
placed him in the police van and took him to the police station. The defendant
may give evidence at the trial
and third shots. It may be that when he fired the second and third shots the
was intending to both arrest the deceased and defend Constable Eberl.
It would be open to the defendant, if he gives evidence, to
state as much. There
is nothing in the
Police Administration Act
to prevent a police officer
from exercising multiple powers and performing multiple functions during the
course of a single incident.
[120] In any
event, it is our opinion, that if the second and third shots can be isolated,
and the defendant fired those shots to
defend Constable Eberl, those acts fall
within the protection of s 148B of the Act so long as he genuinely believed it
was necessary
to fire the second and third shots to do so. The defendant was
under a duty to prevent an attack on Constable Eberl and save his
[121] The Crown
referred the Court to a number of
authorities
that, it was put,
showed, provisions such as
Police Administration Act
expressly confined by the provisions which creates or defines the section to
acts having the designated connexion with the specified
powers and functions
under the Act. In this case, the defendant must have genuinely and honestly
acted in pursuance or purported
pursuance of a power of arrest under the Act. As
the defendant was not attempting to arrest the deceased when he fired the second
and third shots, the protection provided by s 148B was not available to
Webster v Lampard
plurality of the Court stated at 605:
Each of the statutory defences
upon which Sergeant Lampard relies is expressly confined, by the provisions
which creates or defines
it, to acts having a designated connexion with the
actual or intended course of official duty. Thus, the defence under s 47A of the
Limitation Act is only available in the present case if the acts alleged against
Sergeant Lampard were, in the words of the section,
“done in pursuance or
execution or intended execution of any Act, or of any public duty or
authority”. Similarly, the
defence under s 138 of the Police Act is only
applicable if the alleged acts were in the words of par, H, “done ... in
the provisions of [the Police] Act into effect again[st] ... parties
offending or suspected of offending against the same.
[123] We accept
that those principles apply to
Police Administration
. However, the defendant’s powers of arrest are not his only power
and function under the Act. For the reasons given, it is
our opinion that, on
the Assumed Facts, it is open to the jury to find that the accused was acting in
the exercise or purported exercise
of a power or performance or purported
performance of a function under the
Police Administration Act
s 148B of the Act arises for the jury’s consideration. It is also
important to note, that the plurality in
Webster v Lampard
should now be accepted as settled “that there must be some factual basis
for the belief, and while the actual facts known
to the defendant may often be
relevant to the question of the existence of a real belief, it is not necessary
that the belief should
be based on reasonable grounds”.
[124] In support
of its case that the defendant was not acting pursuant to his powers of arrest
the Crown also placed significant
reliance on Dixon J’s reasons for
decision in
Little v The
Commonwealth
concerned a claim for damages by Mr Little against the Commonwealth for false
imprisonment. An important issue was whether
the police officers who arrested
the plaintiff were entitled to the protection of s 13(3) of the
Security Act 1939-40
(Cth). That section stated:
No action shall
lie against the Commonwealth, any Commonwealth officer, any constable or any
other person acting
in pursuance of this section
in respect of any
arrest or detention in pursuance of this section
Governor-General is satisfied that any arrest was made without any reasonable
cause, he may award such compensation in
respect of what he considers
reasonable.
[125] During the
course of his reasons for decision in
Little v The Commonwealth
made the following statements of
enactments have always been construed as giving protection, not where the
provisions of the statute have been followed, then
protection would be
unnecessary, but where an illegality has been committed by a person honestly
acting in the supposed course of
the duties authorities arising from the
enactment. Lord Kenyon CJ said:
It has been frequently observed by the Courts that the notice, which is
directed to be given to justices and other officers before
action is brought
against them, is of no use to them when they have acted within the strict line
of the duty, and is only required
for the purpose of protecting them in those
cases where they intended to act within it, but by mistake exceeded it.
Theobold v Crichmore
There can be no rule more firmly established, than that if parties
and not absurdly believe they were acting in pursuance of Statutes, and
according to law, they are entitled to the special protection
Legislature intended for them, although they have done an illegal act.
The truth is that a man acts in pursuance of a statutory provision when he is
honestly engaged in a course of action that falls within
the general purpose of
the provision. The explanation of his failure to keep within his authority or
comply with the conditions governing
its exercise may lie in mistake of fact,
default in care or judgment, or ignorance or mistake of law. But these are
reasons which
explain why he needs the protection of the provision and may at
the same time justify the conclusion that he acted bona fide in the
adopted and that it amounted to an attempt to do what is in fact within the
purpose of the substantive enactment.
For the reasons I have indicated, I think that the words “any arrest or
detention in pursuance of this section” occurring
in s 13(3) of the
National Security Act
cover an arrest or
by a constable who with some facts to go upon honestly thinks that
what he has found or suspects is an offence against the Act committed
to be committed by the person whom he arrests or detains notwithstanding that
the arrest and detention are not actually
justified and that his error or
mistake is in whole or in part one of law. This being the operation of sub-s (3)
of s 13, the circumstances
of the arrest of the plaintiff on 8
and his detention until 19
June 1942 appear to me to make it
inevitable that I should hold that the inspector and, in giving effect to his
orders, Detective
Raetz, acted in pursuance of s 13 and that, accordingly, it
was an arrest and detention in pursuance of that section and so not
actionable.
[126] In our
opinion, these principles apply to this case and, on the “Assumed
Facts”, it is open to the jury to find
that the defendant honestly engaged
in a course of action that falls within the defendant’s powers, functions
and duties under
Police Administration Act
. As we have stated, the
defendant’s powers of arrest were not his only powers and functions under
[127] We would
answer redrafted Question 3 (see
above): “Yes”.
[128] At the
outset, it is necessary to refer briefly to the
Criminal Code Act 1983
Criminal Code
”) to make sense of the issues that arise
in this question. The original
Criminal Code
, which came into force on
1 January 1984, was based on the Queensland (“Griffith”) Code.
Criminal Code
was amended by the
Criminal Code Amendment (Criminal
Responsibility Reform) Act 2005
, which came into force on 20 December 2006.
This established a different regime for dealing with criminal responsibility for
1 offences and declared offences, largely based on the
Criminal Code
(Cth). Thus, in its present form, the
Criminal Code
provisions that apply only to Schedule 1 and declared offences as contained in
Part IIAA, while the original provisions, including
the provisions of
Part I and Part II, still operate for all other offences. Importantly,
subsections 43AA(2) and (3) exclude certain
(but not all) of the provisions of
Part I and Part II from applying to Part IIAA offences. This mixture of the two
codes is at times
[129] In these
circumstances, the question raised is whether s 148B applies to this case
in light of s 208E of the
Criminal Code
; in other words, is
s 208E a special provision that covers the field and is intended to operate
as a proviso to all later provisions
of the law that provide authorisation,
justification or excuse for similar conduct.
Criminal Reform Amendment Act (No. 2) 2006
inserted s 208E in the
Criminal Code
. That Act came into force on 19 September 2006. The
offences of murder (s 156), reckless or negligent conduct causing death
and engaging in a violent act causing death (s 161A(1)) are
all in Part VI of the
Criminal Code
, and are all Schedule 1 offences.
Section 208E is also in Part VI. As originally introduced, s 208E
Law enforcement officers
(a) person is not criminally responsible for an offence against this Part
the person is, at the time of the offence, a public officer
acting in the course of his or her duty as a police officer, prison officer
other law enforcement officer; and
(b) the conduct of the person is reasonable in the circumstances for performing
[131] Section
208E was amended by
Correctional Services (Related and
Consequential Amendments) Act
, which came into force on
9 September 2014,
Law enforcement officers
A person is not criminally responsible for an offence against this Part
(a) the person is, at the time of the offence, a public officer acting in the
course of his or her duty as a police officer, correctional
services officer or
other law enforcement officer; and
(b) the conduct of the person is reasonable in the circumstances of performing
[132] Section
43BE of the
Criminal Code
A person is not criminally responsible for an offence if the conduct
constituting the offence is justified or excused by or under
[133] Neither
Criminal Code
Interpretation Act
the word “law”, although
of the latter Act does define
“law of the Territory”. We consider that the word “law”
would at least include
another Northern Territory Act, so that
Police Administration Act
is such a law.
[134] Subject to
the Crown’s view of the defendant’s state of mind when he fired the
second and third shots, both the
Crown and the defence, accept that
Police Administration Act
establishes a discrete defence that is
available to the defendant. The Crown also agrees that s 208E of the
Criminal Code
does not operate as a proviso to
Police Administration Act
. Subject to the evidence at trial, the Crown
accepts that the defendant can rely on defence of another under s 43BD of
Criminal Code
, as well as the defences provided by s 208E of the
Criminal Code
Police Administration Act
the charges brought against him. Both parties submitted that there was no
inconsistency between s 208E of the
Criminal Code
Police Administration Act
differences between s 208E of the
Criminal Code
Police Administration Act
(1) Section 208E of the
Criminal Code
applies where the police officer is
acting in the course of his duty. Whereas, s 148B is available if the police
officer has done
(or purported to do) or omitted to do an act in the exercise of
a power or performance of a function under the
Police Administration Act
There may not be any practical difference in many cases, except that
specifically covers a failure to act.
(2) Section 208E applies only to offences that fall within
Criminal Code
(3) In order to succeed under s 208E, the police officer must act reasonably in
the performance of his duty. That calls for an objective
evaluation of his
conduct. A defence under s 148B requires that he or she must have been acting in
good faith, or, in other words,
[136] There is a
line of authority that discusses the circumstances where there are two
provisions, either in the same Act, or in
different Acts, which cover either
wholly or partially the same ground. The answer as to which of two or more
provisions is to apply
is encapsulated in the maxim
generalia specialibus non
This principle of construction applies especially if the more
general provision comes into force after an earlier but limited provision.
Sarris & Guise v Penfolds Wines Pty
Penfolds, the landlord
of certain premises, served a notice to quit under s 19 of the old
Gaming and Betting Act 1912
(NSW) on Sarris and Guise as tenants, on the
ground that Penfolds had reasonable grounds to suspect that the tenants were
property in contravention of that Act, which then empowered the
company to serve the notice to quit. Sarris and Guise relied upon
Landlord and Tenant (Amendment) Act 1948
(NSW), which placed restrictions
on the giving of a notice, and provided (by
that “a notice
to quit given in contravention of this section shall not operate to terminate
the tenancy...”. The defendants
argued that the later
Landlord and
Amendment) Act
impliedly repealed s 19 of the former
The Full Court held that there was no implied repeal unless there
was such repugnancy that the two Acts could not be reconciled,
and found that
there was no repugnancy between the two provisions, which could readily stand
and operate together. In holding that
the notice to quit was validly given,
Sugerman J (with whom Collins and Jacobs JJ concurred) referred to the speech of
the Earl of
Selborne, LC in
Seward v The Vera
there are general words in a later Act capable of reasonable and sensible
application without extending them to subjects
specially dealt with by earlier
legislation you are not to hold that earlier and special legislation indirectly
repealed, altered
or derogated from merely by force of such general words,
without any indication of an intention to do so.
His Honour also referred to the speech by Viscount Haldane in
Corporation v Starr Estate
...[W]herever Parliament in an earlier statute has directed its attention to
an individual case and has made provision for it unambiguously,
there arises a
presumption that if in a subsequent statute the Legislature lays down a general
principle, that general principle
is not to be taken as meant to rip up what the
Legislature had before provided for individually, unless an intention to do so
specifically declared.
McLean v Kowald
Court of the Supreme Court of South Australia considered the position of a
defendant who had pleaded guilty to driving under
the influence of intoxicating
liquor contrary to s 47 of the old
Road Traffic Act 1961
was the defendant’s second offence. The Act provided that in such a case,
a penalty of imprisonment for not less
than one month nor more than six months,
and a licence disqualification of not less than six months, was required. The
sentenced the defendant to imprisonment for ten weeks with hard
labour and disqualified him from driving for three years. The defendant
his sentence. He argued that his sentence of imprisonment could have been
suspended under the
Offenders Probation Act Amendment Act 1969
which came into force after
Road Traffic Act 1961
After referring to the maxim
generalia specialibus non derogant
CJ said: “There are many cases in which the width of the language of a
later general statute has been held not to affect
a prior special enactment in
the absence of express language or necessary implication”. His Honour,
after referring to a number
of cases (including
Seward v The Vera Cruz
Blackpool v Starr Estate Co.
4(2a) of the Offenders
Probation Act
lays down a general rule about the
mitigating power of a court of summary jurisdiction. Parliament had previously
provided in s
47(4) for the special case of sentences on person convicted for
the second time of the offence of driving under the influence. There
in the general language of sub-s (2a) to express an intention to rip up what had
been provided by s 47(4). Words directing
that its provisions should apply
notwithstanding any other enactment are conspicuously lacking. Nor, in my view,
can such an intention
be found by implication. It is, in my view, nothing to
the point to say that sub-s (2a) can be read as making the power to suspend
sentence an exception to the prohibition against reduction or mitigation
contained in s 47(4). Of course it can be so read. The
question is, ought it
to be so read? Or is not the proper inference that in the absence of any express
words it was not intended
to draw a distinction between the powers of mitigation
after conviction conferred by the original provisions of the Offenders Probation
Act and those conferred by the amending provisions. Nothing in s 2a indicates
that is was intended to be an exception from the other
Acts mentioned in s
In the result, he found that the
Offenders Probation Act
apply. Bright and Jacobs JJ agreed.
Commissioner of Police (New South Wales) v
the High Court
considered whether the Commissioner of Police’s power to dismiss a
Probationary Constable without giving reasons
by virtue of
Police Act 1990
(NSW) was subject to a merits review under
Industrial Relations Act
. The Court held that the general
provisions of the
Industrial Relations Act
did not apply in the face of
the special, and inconsistent, terms of
Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ
after referring to Lord
Wilberforce’s speech in
Associated Minerals Consolidated Ltd v Wyong
Wilberforce went on to observe that discussion of these matters commonly
involves consideration of the rule of construction [expressed
in the maxim
generalia specialibus non
] which presumes that a later,
general enactment is not intended to interfere with an earlier, special
provision unless it manifests
that intention very clearly. Even so, the question
as to the operation of statutes remains a matter to be gleaned by reference to
legislative intention. That intention is to be extracted “from all
available sources”.
[139] Counsel
for the Crown submitted that as a matter of statutory construction there is no
impediment to a defendant relying upon
both s 208E of the
Police Administration Act
circumstances engage the requirements of both provisions. There is nothing in
the terms of s 208E to suggest that it is the
only defence open to a police
officer charged with an offence against
Criminal Code
is there anything in the legislative history to suggest that s 208E is the only
defence available for offences against Part
VI. Further, there is nothing in the
terms of s 148B of the
Police Administration Ac
t or elsewhere in the
Police Administration Act
to indicate that
is not available
to an offence under
is unavailable if a defence
under s 208E of the
Criminal Code
is available. Counsel for the
defence made similar submissions. He referred to the approach taken by Stanley J
Lumsden v Police
where his Honour held that the police officer in that case was entitled to rely
on a defence under s 45(4a) of the
Police Act 1988
section provided the defence of honest and reasonable mistake of fact as the
defendant believed them to be, notwithstanding
that the officer failed on the
Proudman v Dayman
defence, because the prosecution had disproved the reasonableness of the
defendant’s mistake; reasonableness in that situation
meaning objectively
reasonable.
[140] We agree
with the contentions of counsel. There is nothing to suggest that s 148B
repealed s 208E or that s 208E operates as
a proviso to s 148B.
There is nothing unusual about different defences being available to a defendant
facing a criminal trial. Section
43BE of the
Criminal Code
specifically
recognises such a possibility. The text of s 148B is not in terms that
would make s 208E redundant. For the reasons
discussed above, the two
provisions may well be different in their application to the facts of a
particular case.
[141] We would
answer Question 4: “Yes”.
KELLY and BLOKLAND JJ and
accused, Zachary Rolfe, is charged with murder, contrary to s 156 of the
Criminal Code Act 1983
Criminal Code
alternative the accused is charged with reckless or negligent conduct causing
death, contrary to s 160 of the
Criminal Code
; and in the further
alternative, with engaging in a violent act which caused the death of the
deceased, contrary to s 161A(1) of
Criminal Code
. All of these
sections occur in Part VI of the
Criminal Code
: Offences against the
person and related matters.
November 2019, the accused and a number of other police officers were deployed
to Yuendumu from Alice Springs following
a request by the OIC of the Yuendumu
police station to assist in the arrest of the deceased Kumanjayi Wilson. (There
had been trouble
at Yuendumu. Clinic staff had left the community as a result
of a number of break ins and on 6 November the deceased had threatened
police officers with an axe as they tried to arrest him.) On 9 November
2019, the accused and Constable Eberl entered House 511
for the purpose of
arresting the deceased. However, he resisted and stabbed the accused in the
left shoulder with a pair of scissors.
The accused then fired three shots into
the body of the deceased as a result of which the deceased died several hours
accused has been charged with murder on the basis of the firing of
the second and third shots.
[144] An issue
has arisen as to whether the immunity from criminal liability under
Police Administration Act 1978
(NT) (“PAA”) conferred
on a person exercising a power or performing a function under the PAA (or
purporting to exercise
or perform such a function or power) in good faith, has
application in the circumstances of this case. Accordingly, the trial judge
referred the following questions of law for the consideration of the Full Court
pursuant to
Supreme Court Act 1979
Supreme Court Act
Police Administration Act 1978
(NT) apply to acts or
omissions done or made, or purported to have been done or made only if the
police officer is acting in the
capacity of a public official under an
authorising law?
Question 2:
Having regard to
Police Administration Act
(NT), and based upon the assumed facts, is a police officer who acts or
purportedly acts in the exercise of a power of performance
of a function under
the Act, acting in the capacity of a public official under an authorising
Question 3:
Based upon the assumed facts, at the time the accused fired the second and
third shots resulting in the deceased’s death, was
he acting in the
exercise or purported exercise of a power or performance or purported
performance of a function under the
Police Administration Act
(NT), such that s 148B of the Act arises for the jury’s consideration?
Question 4:
The accused, Zachary Rolfe, is charged with murder, contrary to s 156 of the
Criminal Code Act 1983
(NT). In the alternative the accused is charged
with reckless or negligent conduct causing death, contrary to s 160 of the
Criminal Code
. In the further alternative, the accused is charged with
engaging in a violent act which caused the death of the deceased, contrary
161A(1) of the
Criminal Code
. In these circumstances, is a defence under
Police Administration Act 1978
(NT) potentially open in the
light of s 208E of the
Criminal Code
consequence of the course taken by argument on the hearing of the reference, the
Court determined to amend the form of
Question 3 to the
Amended Question 3:
Based upon the assumed facts, at the time the accused fired the second and
third shots resulting in the deceased’s death, would
it be open to the
jury to find that the accused was acting in the exercise or purported exercise
of a power or performance or purported
performance of a function under the
Police Administration Act
, such that s 148B of the Act arises for
the jury’s consideration?
preliminary issue arose on the hearing of the reference, Defence counsel
contending that the questions ought not be answered.
We have had the benefit of
reading the reasons of Southwood J and Mildren AJ at [22] to [25] in relation to
that preliminary issue.
We agree with the conclusions stated in [25] of their
Honours’ reasons.
Questions 1 and 2:
parties are agreed that PAA s 148B applies according to its terms and that its
scope is not limited by s 148A. We agree.
heading to s 148A says, “Part applies to duties of member as public
official” which might, at first glance appear
to be an indication that the
sections which follow, including s 148B, were only intended to apply when a
member of the police force
is performing duties as a public official. However,
such a construction cannot stand in light of the plain words in
The original sections 148A and 148B
[149] Sections
148A and 148B of the PAA were initially introduced by the
Administration Amendment (Powers and Liability) Act 2005
(NT) (No 11 of
of that Act introduced a new Part VIIA into the Act. As
enacted these sections were as follows:
PART VIIA –
PROTECTION FROM LIABILITY OF MEMBERS, TERRITORY'S VICARIOUS LIABILITY AND LEGAL
PROCEEDINGS FOR DAMAGES FOR CERTAIN
TORTS BY MEMBERS
DIVISION 1 – PRELIMINARY
148A. PART APPLIES TO DUTIES OF MEMBER AS PUBLIC OFFICIAL
(1) For this Part, an act done or omission made, or purported to have been
done or made, by a member in the capacity of a public official
under an Act or
regulations (the “authorising law”) is taken to have been done or
omitted to be done by the member in
the performance or purported performance of
duties as a member.
(2) For subsection (1), a public official is a person appointed or authorised
under the authorising law to perform inspection, investigation
enforcement functions under that law for the Territory, an Agency or another
Territory authority.
Examples of a public official for subsection (2) –
1. A Fisheries Officer within the meaning of the
Fisheries Act
2. An inspector within the meaning of the
Meat Industries Act
3. An authorised officer within the meaning of the
Tobacco Control
(3) This Part applies despite a provision of the authorising law providing
for the protection from civil liability of a member (regardless
of whether it
also provides for protection from criminal liability) for an act done or omitted
to be done in the exercise or purported
exercise of a power, or the performance
or purported performance of a function, under the law.
DIVISION 2 – PROTECTION OF MEMBERS FROM CIVIL LIABILITY AND
TERRITORY’S VICARIOUS LIABILITY
148B. PROTECTION OF MEMBERS FROM CIVIL LIABILITY
(1) This section applies to a person who is or has been a member.
(2) The person is not civilly liable for an act done or omitted to be done by
the person in good faith in the performance or purported
performace (sic) of
duties as a member.
purpose of these amendments was “to repeal and replace the scheme for
claims against police”.
The second reading speech contained the following explanation seemingly about s
The new scheme is intended to regulate the manner in which a
person can sue a member of the police force. By virtue of their powers,
of the police force may be required to perform functions or exercise powers
under other acts, often in the capacity of a
public official. There are a large
number of Acts that give police additional powers or functions. Some of those
Acts also contain
protection from liability provisions that apply both to
employees of the relevant agency and police alike. Unfortunately not all
protection from liability provisions are identical, so each provision needs to
be addressed based on the protection it provides.
[151] The second
reading speech does not go on to spell out what the amendments propose doing
the remedy was s 148A and
s 148B. Section 148B provided an immunity from civil liability for an act
done or omitted to be done by
the person in good faith in the performance or
purported performance of duties as a member (i.e. a member of the Police Force);
s 148A extended the immunity from civil liability conferred by
s 148B to acts done by members of the Police Force in their capacity
public officials under other legislation – regardless of the form of the
protective provisions in the other acts (the non-uniformity
of those protective
provisions being the mischief referred to in the second reading
The new section 148B
[152] Section
148B was amended again by the
Police Administration Act
Amendment Act
30, 2016, s 7 which replaced the old s 148B with the following (ie the present
provision).
DIVISION 2 PROTECTION FROM LIABILITY AND VICARIOUS
LIABILITY OF THE TERRITORY
148B PROTECTION FROM LIABILITY
(1) A person is not civilly or criminally liable for an act done or omitted
to be done by the person in good faith in the exercise
of a power or performance
of a function under this Act.
Subsection (1) does not affect any liability the Territory would, apart from
that subsection, have for the act or omission.
In this section:
“exercise”, of a power, includes the purported exercise of the
“performance”, of a function, includes the purported performance
of the function.
literal reading, s 148B gives complete immunity from civil or criminal liability
for acts or omissions done by a person
in good faith in the exercise of a power
or performance of a function under the PAA (or purported exercise or performance
[154] The Crown
made a further submission, not strictly relevant to either questions 1 or 2, to
the effect that since the 2016 amendment
to s 148B, s 148A no longer
applies to extend the protection conferred by s 148B to acts of members of
the Police Force performing
functions under other Acts.
[155] The Crown
points out that PAA s 25 (headed Functions of Members)
Subject to this Act, a member shall perform the duties and
obligations and have the powers and privileges as are, by any law in force
the Territory, conferred or imposed on him.
[156] The Crown
also says that the majority of those duties, obligations, powers and privileges
are in Part VII of the PAA which is
titled “Police Powers”. The
Crown submitted that “it is clear from s 25 that a member will only have a
duty, obligation,
power or privilege if it is conferred or imposed on them by a
Strickland SC for the Crown contended that the protection of the new s 148B
extends only to situations in which the person
is exercising a power or
performing a function under the PAA, whether it be under Part VII or another
Part of the Act. The contention
is that s 148A no longer extends the protection
afforded by s 148B to circumstances in which a police officer is performing a
Strickland pointed to the change in wording from the old s 148B (as enacted
in 2005) and the new s 148B which replaced it
in 2016. He submitted that
the new s 148B broadened the protection it offers in some respects, namely
that it applies to “persons”,
not just “members”, and it
now extends to criminal as well as civil liability. However, he submitted that
the protection
extended by the new s 148B is narrower in another respect in
that the old s 148B applied where the person was performing
duties as a member of the Police Force; whereas the protection afforded by the
new s 148B extends only to acts or omissions done
in the exercise of a
power or the performance of a function under the PAA. No similar amendment was
made to s 148A, as a result
of which the Crown submitted that s 148A
no longer applies to extend the protection afforded by s 148B to situations
in which a member
of the Police Force is performing enforcement duties under
other Acts.
[159] In answer
to questions from the bench, Mr Strickland said that s 148A still had work
to do under such a construction, for example
by extending the restrictions in
s 148F upon police torts claims to situations in which police perform
duties under other acts, such
Fisheries Act
[160] It is not
necessary to determine this issue in order to answer the Questions referred to
the Full Court by the trial judge.
Further, it is apparent that the answer can
have no bearing on the outcome of this trial as there is no suggestion that in
the acts said to constitute the offence of murder (i.e. firing the second
and third shots), the accused was acting in the capacity
of a public official
performing duties under an Act other than the PAA. It is therefore a
hypothetical question and we decline to
deal with it.
[161] Southwood
J and Mildren JA have expressed the view, that s 148A has no application to
s 148B and that the protection given to
the police (and others) under
s 148B is confined to acts done and omitted while police officers (and
others) are acting under the
PAA: it does not extend to acts done or omitted by
police officers as public officials under authorising laws. Southwood J
and Mildren
AJ have also expressed the view that s 148A applies to
civil liability only, which would also mean that the protection from criminal
liability afforded to members of the Police Force by s 148B would not
extend to situations in which members of the Police Force are
enforcement duties under other Acts. This is the position adopted by the
[162] While
there are respectable arguments to support those views, we do not necessarily
agree with those conclusions and do not
consider that the present case is a
suitable vehicle to determine those questions.
[163] There are
also respectable arguments for the contrary view - that s 148A still has
the effect of extending the operation of
the protective provision in s 148B
(criminal as well as civil) to the activities of members referred to in
s 148A. First, the second
reading speech on the introduction of
s 148A in 2005 implies that the purpose of s 148A was to apply s 148B
to situations in which
members of the Police Force are performing functions
under other Acts in order to ensure uniformity of the protective provision
to members. It is arguable that this purpose has not been affected by
the amendment to s 148B.
[164] Second,
PAA s 25 set out above, obliges a member of the Police Force to perform the
duties and obligations imposed on the member
by any law in force in the
Territory. That suggests that, in performing duties under another Act, the
member is also performing
a duty, or function, imposed on the member by PAA s
25. Section 25 also provides that a member shall have the powers and privileges
conferred on the member by any law in force in the Territory so that, by the
same reasoning, it may be said that a member of the
Police Force exercising a
power under another Act is also exercising a power conferred on the member by
[165] Third, it
is not clear that a purpose of the 2016 amendment to s 148B was to narrow
the protection offered by the section in
the way suggested by the Crown. The
evident purpose of the change in wording from “performing duties as a
“exercising a power or performing a function under”
the PAA, like the change from “member” to “person”
the protection in s 148B to other people performing a
range of functions under the PAA. It is not obvious that it was intended to
the protection conferred on members of the Police Force by that
[166] Fourth,
s 148A begins with the words, “For this part”: that is, it is
expressed to apply to the whole of Part VIIA
of the Act, which includes
[167] Although
there is a somewhat confusing difference in terminology (s 148A refers to
the performance of duties as a member, and
s 148B refers to a person
performing a function or exercising a power under the PAA), it is at least
arguable that the purpose and
effect of s 148A remains as it was when
enacted, to extend the protection afforded by s 148B to situations where a
member of the
Police Force is performing an “inspection, investigation or
other enforcement function” as authorised under another law
Answers to Questions 1 and 2:
answers to questions 1 and 2 are as follows.
Police Administration Act 1978
(NT) apply to acts
or omissions done or made, or purported to have been done or made only if the
police officer is acting in the
capacity of a public official under an
authorising law?
Section 148B
applies according to its terms, that is to say, to a person
performing a function or exercising a power under the PAA (or purporting
Question 2:
Having regard to
Police Administration Act 1978
based upon the assumed facts, is a police officer who acts or purportedly acts
in the exercise of a power of performance of
a function under the Act, acting in
the capacity of a public official under an authorising law?
It is not necessary to answer Question 2 in light of the answer to Question
1. However, if it was necessary to answer that question
we would answer it
[169] The Crown
argues that, on the assumed facts, the defence under s 148B is not
available because, at the time of firing the second
and third shots which form
the basis of the charge of murder, the accused was not performing a function or
exercising a power under
the PAA but was (on the defence case) acting in defence
of another person.
[170] The major
focus of the Crown case was on the exercise of the power to enter a house for
the purpose of arresting a person pursuant
to an arrest warrant, and the
exercise of the power to effect the arrest. Details of the parties’
contentions in relation
to the exercise, or purported exercise of the power of
arrest will be considered below. First, consideration must be given to the
effect of PAA s 5.
[171] Defence
counsel submits that in the circumstances, on the assumed facts, the accused was
performing a number of functions simultaneously;
attempting to arrest the
deceased [PAA s 24]; protecting the life of Constable Eberl [PAA s 5(2)(b)]
and attempting to prevent a
crime, namely the stabbing of Constable Eberl by the
deceased [PAA s 5(2)(c)].
[172] The Crown
submits that the accused’s use of a firearm was not an act done in the
exercise of the “power” to
protect life, under PAA s 5(2).
[173] The first
thing to say about that submission is that it misstates the defence contention.
The Crown, throughout its submissions
focuses on “the exercise of
powers” or “duties, obligations, power and privileges” (See
for example Crown
Submissions [89]). Section 148B gives an immunity from civil
or criminal liability for an act done (or omitted) in good faith in
the exercise
of a power or the performance of a function under the PAA. The heavy emphasis
by the Crown on the exercise of powers
and performance of duties ignores (or at
least fails to give adequate weight to) the words in s 148B “or the
performance of
a function under this Act”.
[174] Section
5(2) sets out the “core functions” (not powers) of the Police Force.
They are set out below. The first
contention by the Crown is that s 5(2)
sets out the core functions of the Police Force not the powers or functions of
Strickland for the Crown submitted that for the defence in s 148B to apply,
the power or function in question must be sourced
in a particular provision
relating to powers or functions conferred on individual members of the Police
Force (or subgroups such
as Ethical and Professional Standards Command referred
to in PAA s 34G) under the PAA and not to some other general power
on police by another Act or the common law or by a general provision
of the PAA such as s 5.
[176] We do not
accept that distinction. PAA s 6 sets out the composition of the Police
Force. It provides:
The Police Force shall consist of a
Commissioner and other members appointed and holding office under and in
accordance with this
“Member” is defined in PAA s 4 as a member of the Police Force.
It follows that the functions of the Police Force are
functions of its
“core functions” of the Police Force, and hence the members of the
Police Force, under PAA s 5(2) are:
(a) to uphold the law and maintain social order; and
(b) to protect life and property; and
(c) to prevent, detect, investigate and prosecute offences; and
(d) to manage road safety education and enforcement measures; and
(e) to manage the provision of services in
emergencies.
The Crown accepts that all of these
functions must be performed by individuals, as a “corporate entity”
cannot perform
physical actions, but maintains the distinction between the
general functions of the Police Force and particular functions conferred
members of the Police Force (and others) under the PAA.
[178] While some
of the core functions in s 5(2) are apt to be performed at an organisational
level, for example (a), (d) and (e),
some of those functions can
performed by individual members of the Police Force. This includes what are
arguably two of the most important of the core functions
set out in s 5(2);
the function of protecting life and property [s 5(2)(b)] and the function
of preventing, detecting, investigating
and prosecuting offences
[s 5(2)(c)].
[179] In oral
argument, Mr Strickland for the Crown conceded that preventing crime was an
important function of individual members
of the Police Force, but contended that
the source of that power was not PAA s 5 which merely serves to confer that
function on the
Police Force as a “corporate entity”. When pressed,
Mr Strickland was unable to nominate an alternative source of the
conferral of
that function on individual members but did not concede that the source was the
[180] In our
view, the protection afforded by s 148B does extend to the performance of
the functions in PAA s 5. We are fortified
in this conclusion by the South
Australian case of
Stanley J considered the effect of s 65 of the South Australian
which is in very similar terms to s
Stanley J held that the
protection offered by s 65 extended to acts done in the performance of the
functions set out in a very similar
provision to PAA s 5 which recited the
“purpose” of SA Police. That purpose included the provision of
services to “uphold
the law”, “preserve the peace” and
“prevent crime”. In considering these provisions Stanley J
confers on a member of SA Police an immunity from civil and criminal liability
for acts or omissions performed in the exercise
or discharge, or the purported
exercise or discharge, of a power, function or duty conferred or imposed on a
police officer by or
under, inter alia, the
. Section 65 is a
beneficial provision. I see no justification for reading down its terms. When
identifying a function or duty
conferred or imposed on a police officer under
the Police Act, s 5 provides an obvious touchstone for identifying those
and duties.
[181] In our
view, the same can be said of PAA s 5. It can hardly be doubted, for example,
that s 148B was intended to apply to provide
immunity from criminal
liability for an act done by a member of the Police Force in good faith in the
performance of the function
of investigating an offence, or trying to prevent a
[182] In the
same way, the function of protecting life is one which is most apt to be (and
will almost always be) performed by an
individual member of the Police Force
– often in an emergency situation when a police officer sees a life or
lives in danger.
How can it be doubted that s 148B was intended to apply
to a member of the Police Force engaged in performing such an important
[183] Further
support that s 5 confers on members of the Police Force the functions set
out in that section comes from the fact that
members of the Police Force are
required to take an oath. Section 26(1) provides:
(1) A person shall not exercise or perform any of the powers, functions or
duties conferred or imposed upon a member of the Police
Force by a law of the
Territory unless he or she has taken and subscribed an oath in the form in the
[184] The form
of oath set out in the Schedule is as follows:
FORM OF OATH TO BE TAKEN BY MEMBERS
I, ___________
[promise/ swear etc. as required by
Oaths, Affidavits and
Declarations Act 2010
that I will well and truly serve Her Majesty, Queen
Elizabeth the Second, Her Heirs and Successors as a member of the Northern
Police Force without fear or favour, affection or ill-will from this
day and until I am legally discharged from that Force; that
I will see and cause
Her Majesty’s peace to be kept and preserved,
that I will prevent, to
the best of my powers, all offences against Her Majesty’s peace and
against all laws in force in the
Northern Territory of Australia
while I remain a member of the Northern Territory Police Force, I will, to the
best of my skill and knowledge, faithfully
discharge all my duties according to
[So help me God! or as appropriate]
(emphasis by underlining
[185] The Crown
does not accept that the combination of
, the requirement for a member
to take the oath, and the content of the oath mean that the function of
preventing offences was one
that was conferred on members of the Police Force by
the PAA. We disagree, but it doesn’t really matter one way or the other:
s 148B does not refer to performance of a function conferred on an
individual person under the Act, it simply refers to “performance
function under this Act”. A member of the Police Force doing an act to
protect life or prevent a crime is performing
a function under the PAA whether
the functions in s 5 are conferred on the Police Force as a
“corporate entity” or on
individual members or (which we hold to be
the correct view) on both.
[186] The Crown
objected that one cannot pick and choose the functions in s 5 to which
s 148B has potential application: it must apply
to all or to none. So much
may be granted. The Crown then placed reliance on the remarks of Dixon J in
Little v The
Commonwealth.
Speaking of protective provisions like s 148B, Dixon J quoted from
can be no rule more firmly established, than that of parties bona fide and not
absurdly believe that they are acting in pursuance
of Statutes and according to
law, they are entitled to the special protection which the Legislature intended
for them, although they
have done an illegal act.
[187] His Honour
It has, however, been found not easy to define the exact
conditions which must be fulfilled to qualify for protection. Bona fides
been regarded as indispensable. But the difficulty has been to give such
provisions an operation which, on the one hand, will
not be so narrow that it
goes little, if at all, beyond what is authorized by the substantive parts of
the enactment, and, on the
other, will not be wide enough to cover wrongful acts
so outside the scope of the authority given by the statute that it can hardly
supposed that it was intended to protect those responsible. In
Williams J. said:—“It would be wild work if a party
might give himself protection by merely saying that he believed himself
in pursuance of a statute; for no one can say what may possibly come into an
individual's mind on such a subject. Still, protecting
clauses, like that before
us, would be useless if it were necessary that the person claiming their benefit
should have acted quite
rightly. The case to which they refer must lie between a
mere foolish imagination and a perfect observance of the statute.”
Strickland for the Crown contended that if s 148B were held to apply to
performance of the functions set out in s 5, this
would be to give
s 148B such a broad scope of operation that it would extend to situations
to which it can hardly be supposed it
was intended to apply. He gave, as an
example, a hypothetical case of a police officer going to absurd lengths to
social order” and committing an offence in the
[189] While
there is some force in that argument, in our view, the plain words of
s 148B compel the conclusion that the protection
from criminal and civil
liability conferred by that section does extend to acts done (or omitted) in the
performance of the functions
in PAA s 5.
[190] Extreme
hypotheticals like the one offered by Mr Strickland, although they can be useful
aids to analysis, are not always good
guides. Although it must be so that if
s 148B extends to acts done in the performance of some of the functions in
s 5, it must apply
to all of them, some of the functions are such that the
performance of them are unlikely to involve a real risk of unlawful conduct
example road safety education). The requirement that the person be acting in
good faith further restricts the potential for
s 148B to extend to absurd
or extreme cases.
Strickland for the Crown conceded, fairly, that if s 148B applied to acts
done in the performance of functions under s 5,
then the Crown’s
position that Question 3 should be answered no was untenable. Nevertheless, it
is necessary to consider the
arguments of both parties in relation to the
contention by the Defence that the defence under s 148B would be available
to the accused
because, at the time he did the acts said to constitute the
offence (ie firing the second and third shots), he was exercising the
arrest pursuant to a warrant under s 124 of the Act.
assumed facts include body worn camera footage from the accused, Constable Eberl
and Constable Hawkings – along with
transcripts from the audio from that
footage. The assumed facts include the following:
19. At 7:21:50pm,
the accused stated to the deceased, “Just put your hands behind your
back.” The deceased then retrieved
a secreted pair of scissors and stabbed
the accused in the left shoulder before the first shot was fired.
20. At 7:22:01pm, the accused fired one shot into the middle right region of
the deceased’s back. This shot was fired at close
21. Dr Marianne Tiemensma, a specialist forensic pathologist, undertook a
post mortem examination of the deceased. She concluded
that this shot was not
22. The accused fired a shot at 7:22:04pm into the deceased’s left side
torso (2.6 seconds after the first shot).
23. At 7:22:05pm, the accused fired another shot into Walker’s left
torso (0.53 seconds after the second shot).
24. Balistic evidence indicates the second and third shots were fired at a
distance of no more than five centimetres from the deceased.
25. Dr Marianne Tiemensma’s conclusion from the post mortem examination
is that the fatal shot was either the second or third
26. At 7:23:10 pm, handcuffs had been successfully applied to the
[193] The body
worn footage shows a confused, not clearly visible, struggle during and after
the above, and the transcript of the
accused’s body worn footage contains
the following dialogue after the shots were fired and before the handcuffs were
successfully
ROLFE: You good?
EBERL: Yeah mate. Oi, don’t fuck around! I’ll fucking smash you
ROLFE: Give me your arm. Give me your arm.
EBERL: Did you? Fuck!
ROLFE: That’s me. It’s all good. He was stabbing me. He was
stabbing me.
EBERL: Okay brus.
ROLFE: It’s all good. He’s got scissors in his hand. He was
stabbing me. He was stabbing you.
EBERL: Alright brus.
ROLFE: He’s got scissors right here! He’s got scissors right
here! Let go of the scissors! Let go of the scissors!
EBERL: Drop the scissors.
EBERL: Let go of the scissors!
WALKER: I’m gonna kill you mob (inaudible) ahhhh!
EBERL: I’ve got it off now mate.
EBERL: Just make sure the cuffs are on properly.
WALKER: Leanne, Leanne.
ROLFE: Fuck, I’m (inaudible).
EBERL: You alright bro?
ROLFE: His shirt, his shirt ...
EBERL: Have you locked ‘em?
ROLFE: No, cause his shirt –
EBERL: That’s okay, take your time.
ROLFE: Alright, we need to get your cuff there.
[194] The body
worn footage shows that after the shots were fired, the deceased continued to
struggle; the accused and Constable Eberl
continued to try to subdue him and put
handcuffs on him; the deceased had scissors in his hand; and the accused and
Constable Eberl
kept trying to get the scissors away from him.
[195] The Crown
concedes “that s 148B would apply if the accused genuinely believed
that the ‘acts’ (firing the
second and third shots) were done
‘under’ his power to arrest the
However, the
Crown characterises the defence case as being that the accused had a lawful
justification for the acts of firing the
second and third shots pursuant to
s 43BD of the
Criminal Code
– namely that he believed the acts
were necessary to defend Constable Eberl from the risk of death or serious harm.
to say, the shots were not fired in order to effect the arrest of the
deceased: they were fired (on the accused’s case) to
defend Constable
[196] The Crown
accepts for the purposes of this hearing that there is a temporal connection
between the accused entering House 511
to arrest the deceased and the discharge
of the second and third shots, but contends that by the time the accused
discharged the
second and third shots, the circumstances had materially changed.
On the accused’s version of events, he fired those shots
because he had a
genuine belief that Constable Eberl was at risk of serious harm or death, and
not to effect the arrest of the deceased.
The Crown says that there is a
fundamental distinction between the accused purporting to exercise a power to
arrest the deceased,
and shooting the deceased with intent to kill him or cause
him serious harm in order to defend Constable Eberl. Because of this,
contends that, on the assumed facts, there is no material on which a jury could
conclude that the second and third shots
were fired in order to arrest the
defence contends that the Crown’s submission rests on a flawed assumption
that a person can have only one purpose
or intention at a time, and that an
intention to defend Constable Eberl could not co-exist with a continuing
intention to arrest
the deceased. Mr Edwardson for the Defence submitted that
the proposition that a belief that Constable Eberl was at risk of serious
or death somehow takes away the continuation of the power of arrest cannot
withstand sensible legal analysis.
[198] Defence
counsel submitted that there was one continuous transaction from the moment the
accused asked the deceased to put his
hands behind his back, to the
deceased’s response of deploying the scissors and stabbing the accused
then turning his attention
to Constable Eberl, right through to the deceased
being secured in handcuffs. Mr Edwardson for the Defence submitted that it was
evident from the video footage that the deceased was continuing to resist
throughout the whole process and continued to have possession
of the scissors
during that process until they were taken from him.
[199] Defence
counsel submitted that everything that was done during that process, including
the firing of the shots in question,
was part and parcel of the process of
arresting the deceased and done pursuant to the power to arrest in PAA
[200] Defence
counsel pointed out that the Defence position at trial might well be that the
accused was doing both things at once
– trying to arrest the deceased and
acting to protect Constable Eberl, both of which are inextricably linked because
conduct of the deceased which ultimately forced the hand of the accused.
He said that the accused might say, for example, “I
was trying to arrest
him. He was violently resisting. He had already stabbed me. He had turned his
attention to my partner and
was seeking to deploy the same potentially lethal
weapon on him, and in those circumstances, I was trying to achieve two purposes,
one the arrest and restraint of Mr Walker, and two to ensure that my
partner was not stabbed by him like me.”
[201] We agree
that the (assumed) fact that at the time he fired the second and third shots,
the accused was trying to defend Constable
Eberl, does not mean that, ipso
facto, he was not also exercising, or purporting to exercise his power to arrest
the deceased. On
the assumed facts, it would be open to the jury to find that
at the time he fired the second and third shots, the accused was acting
dual purpose of attempting to arrest the deceased who was violently resisting
and trying to defend Constable Eberl.
[202] The Crown
submits that there is a logical inconsistency between an intention to kill
someone and an intention to arrest them
in order to charge them with an offence
and/ or bring them before a court; but there is no logical inconsistency between
an intention
to cause someone serious harm and an intention to arrest them for
those purposes.
[203] Ultimately,
the question of what the accused’s intention was (or his intentions were)
will be a matter for the jury.
The question of whether the accused was
performing a function under the PAA (the function of preventing the commission
of an offence,
and/or of protecting life and/or some other function) or
exercising a power under that Act (either the power of arrest or some other
power) will likewise be a matter for the jury after they have heard all of the
Answer to Question 3:
[204] The answer
to Question 3 is as follows:
(a) The protection from criminal and civil liability conferred by s 148B of
the PAA extends to acts done (or omitted) in the performance
or purported
performance of functions in s 5 of that Act.
(b) On the assumed facts it would be open to the jury to find that at the time
he did the acts which are the subject of the charge
(ie firing the second and
third shots) the accused was performing or purporting to perform the function of
preventing the commission
of an offence by the deceased (ie the stabbing of
Constable Eberl) and/ or the function of protecting life (that of Constable
and/ or that he was exercising or purporting to exercise a power under
the PAA (the power to arrest the deceased under PAA s 124).
(c) The question whether the accused was in fact acting in the exercise or
purported exercise of a power, or the performance or purported
performance of a
function under the PAA is a question of fact for the jury to determine after
they have heard all of the evidence.
(d) The separate question of whether, at the time he performed the relevant
acts, the accused was acting in good faith is likewise
a question of fact for
the jury to determine after they have heard all of the evidence.
(e) Once all of the evidence is in, it will be a matter for the trial judge to
direct the jury on the matters they need to be satisfied
of to determine
whether, as a matter of fact, it is reasonably possible that:
(i) the accused was performing or purporting to perform and/ or exercising or
purporting to exercise a power under the PAA; and
(ii) the accused was doing so in good
Question 4:
[205] Defence
counsel contended that the answer to Question 4 should be yes. The Crown
contended that the answer should be no, but
only because they contended that the
answer to Question 3 should be no. Both counsel were agreed that there was no
inconsistency
between s 208E of the
Criminal Code
and PAA s148B. We
[206] During the
hearing of this reference, there was some discussion about the possibility of
incompatibility between s 208E of the
Criminal Code
and PAA s 148B.
[207] Section
208E provides:
208E LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
A person is not criminally responsible for an offence against this Part
(a) the person is, at the time of the offence, a public officer acting in the
course of his or her duty as a police officer, correctional
services officer or
other law enforcement officer; and
(b) the conduct of the person is reasonable in the circumstances for performing
Explanatory Statement on the Bill introducing s 208E of the
Criminal Code
As Part II of the
Criminal Code
will not apply to
scheduled offences, this provision is necessary to provide a defence for police
and prison officers in circumstances
involving a scheduled offence.
Currently, section 28 of the
Criminal Code
would apply.
[209] There are
several principles of statutory construction dealing with possible inconsistency
between legislative provisions which
may possibly be applicable.
[210] Where a
later legislative provision is inconsistent with an earlier one, then it may be
inferred that the later statute was
intended to repeal the earlier, or where
there is partial inconsistency, that the later statute was intended to prevail
to the extent
of any inconsistency in their application to particular cases.
This is summed up in the maxim
leges posteriores priores contrarias
: later Acts repeal earlier inconsistent Acts. In
Griffith CJ
referring to a particular provision in Victorian legislation, and said:
The effect of that provision is this: so far as possible the Acts
are to be read together and as forming one document, and so far
as there is
anything in a later Act inconsistent with the provisions of the earlier Acts the
later Act must be read as a proviso
or exception to the former, if possible, but
if the provisions are quite inconsistent the later must necessarily operate as a
of the earlier.
His Honour went on to say:
That proposition is only an instance of a more general rule, that is, that
where the provisions of a particular Act of Parliament
dealing with a particular
subject matter are wholly inconsistent with the provisions of an earlier Act
dealing with the same subject
matter, then the earlier Act is repealed by
implication. It is immaterial whether both Acts are penal Acts or both refer to
rights. The former must be taken to be repealed by implication. Another
branch of the same proposition is this, that
if the provisions are not wholly
inconsistent, but may become inconsistent in their application to particular
cases, then to that
extent the provisions of the former Act are accepted or
their operation is excluded with respect to cases falling within the provisions
of the later Act.
[211] However,
this principle of statutory interpretation will only be applicable where the two
statutory provisions under consideration
are genuinely inconsistent. In
Goodwin v Phillips
, Barton J said:
Before coming to the
conclusion that there is a repeal by implication "The Court must," to use the
in his work on the Interpretation of
Craies on Statute Law
, 4th ed., p. 303) "be satisfied that the
two enactments are so inconsistent or repugnant that they cannot stand together,
they can from the language of the later imply the repeal of an express
prior enactment, i.e., the repeal must, if not express, flow
from necessary
implication." If, therefore, there is fairly open on the words of the later Act,
a construction by adopting which
the earlier Act may be saved from repeal, that
construction is to be adopted
Saraswati v R
expressed the same cautious note:
It is a basic rule of construction
that, in the absence of express words, an earlier statutory provision is not
repealed, altered
or derogated from by a later provision unless an intention to
that effect is necessarily to be implied. There must be very strong
support that implication, for there is a general presumption that the
legislature intended that both provisions should
operate and that, to the extent
that they would otherwise overlap, one should be read as subject to the other.
Butler v. Attorney-General (Vict.)
[1961] HCA 32
(1961) 106 CLR 268
per Fullagar J. at p 276, and per Windeyer J. at p 290. More particularly, an
intention to affect the earlier provision will not
be implied if the later is of
general application (as is the provision by which indecent dealing is
constituted an offence under
the Act) and the earlier deals with some matter
affecting the individual (as does the limitation provision in s.78). Nor will an
intention to affect the earlier provision be implied if the later is otherwise
capable of sensible operation. The position was stated
by Lord Selborne in
Seward v. The "Vera Cruz"
(1884) 10 App Cas 59
, at p 68, as follows:
"where there are general words in a later Act capable of
reasonable and sensible application without extending them
to subjects specially dealt with by earlier legislation,
you are not to hold that earlier and special legislation
indirectly repealed, altered, or derogated from merely by
force of such general words, without any indication of a
particular intention to do so".
[213] Another
way of expressing the same caution is to say that there is a strong presumption
that the legislature does not intend
to contradict itself, but intends both
legislative provisions to operate within their own
[214] Inconsistency
between statutory provisions is dealt with differently where the earlier
provision is a special provision and
the later provision is a general one.
Those circumstances may call for the application of the maxim
specialibus non derogant
: a general provision does not impliedly repeal a
specific provision. The principle was explained by Barton ACJ in
in the following
The judgment under appeal turns on the application of the
principle involved in the maxim
generalia specialibus non derogant
cases in which the legislature, after having dealt specially with a particular
matter, has afterward passed an enactment in general
terms wide enough to
repeal, or supersede, or qualify the original provision ..... I wish to quote a
passage from the judgment of
Wood V-C in
Fitzgerald v Champneys
[1861] EngR 821
at 54 quoted by Sterling J in
Re Smith’s Estate; Clements v
[1887] UKLawRpCh 96
(1887) 35 ChD 589
at 595. ‘The reason in all these cases is
clear. In passing the special Act, the legislature had their attention directed
to the special case which the Act was meant to meet, and considered and provided
for all the circumstances of that special case;
and having done so, they are not
to be considered by a general enactment passed subsequently, and making no
mention of any such intention,
to have intended to derogate from that which by
their own special Act, they had thus carefully supervised and regulated.
[215] With this
maxim, too, before the principle can be called into operation it must be shown
that there is an irreconcilable conflict
between the relevant provisions. It
must be shown that the two provisions cannot stand
[216] In our
view, there is no call for the application of either principle of construction
because s 208E of the
Criminal Code
and PAA s 148B are not
inconsistent: there is no irreconcilable conflict between the two provisions.
(Nor is either provision inconsistent
with s 43BD.)
[217] Both s
148B and s 208E provide partial immunity from criminal liability or
responsibility to police officers in the areas specified
in each section. Their
areas of operation are not the same, but they overlap. Section 148B applies to
all criminal and civil liability
and s 208E applies only to offences under Part
Criminal Code
; s 148B applies a person performing a function or
exercising a power under the PAA and s 208E applies to police officers,
correctional
services officers and other law enforcement officers acting in the
course of their duty.
[218] The area
of overlap – ie the sphere in which both sections can potentially operate
– consists of acts done in the
exercise of a power or performance of a
function under the PAA
of acts done in the performance of a person’s duty as a police officer,
corrections officer or other law enforcement
officer) which are offences under
Part VI of the
Criminal Code
(a subset of all civil and criminal
liability).
[219] The two
sections apply different standards for the operation of the immunities they
confer. The protection against civil or
criminal liability conferred by s 148B
applies where a person does or omits to do a relevant act (ie one within the
scope of the
in good faith
. For the immunity from criminal
responsibility in s 208E to apply, the relevant conduct of the person (ie that
falling within the
scope of the section) must be “reasonable in the
circumstances for performing that duty”.
[220] Although
the two sections apply different standards for the immunity they confer, that
does not mean that they are inconsistent
within the sphere in which they both
potentially operate. Distilling the different standards down to their
essentials, s 208E provides
that a person to whom the section applies will not
be criminally responsible if their conduct is reasonable for performing the
duty; s 148B provides that a person to whom the section applies will not
be criminally liable if they are acting in good faith –
that is to say,
[221] The two
expressions
“is not criminally responsible if the conduct is
reasonable”
“not criminally liable if they are acting in
good faith”
are not logically or necessarily inconsistent.
[222] Starting
with the proposition in s 208E,
“a person will not be criminally
responsible if the conduct is reasonable”:
this proposition tells you
nothing about when a person
be criminally responsible, and it tells
you nothing about any other circumstances in which the person
criminally responsible. In particular, you cannot infer from the proposition
“a person will not be criminally responsible if the conduct is
reasonable”
that the converse is true – namely that
be criminally responsible if the conduct is
reasonable.”
[223] Because
you cannot infer from the proposition
“a person will not be criminally
responsible if the conduct is reasonable”
that a person
criminally responsible if their conduct is
reasonable, the statement
“a person will not be criminally responsible if the conduct is
reasonable”
is not logically or necessarily inconsistent with the
“a person will not be criminally liable if they are acting in
good faith”.
There is no
irreconcilable conflict between the
two provisions. They are not so inconsistent that they cannot stand
[224] It would
be different if s 208E said that the people to whom the section applied
“will not be criminally responsible
if the conduct is
reasonable”
be a logical fallacy to infer from
that proposition that the converse is true:
“if the conduct is
t reasonable the person
be criminally
responsible”.
A section so worded would be relevantly inconsistent
with the proposition
“a person will not be criminally liable if acting
in good faith”.
(The word “only” would exclude the
application of any other protective provision which applied an alternative test.
person acting in good faith would
not be criminally liable if they
acting reasonably. Section 208E would override s 148B to the
extent of the inconsistency in application in any given case.)
[225] That is
not the case with s 208E and s 148B as they are worded. It doesn’t matter
that in practical terms s 208E will
probably not be applied in circumstances
where s 148B also applies (or for that matter where the self-defence provision
also applies). Section 208E still has work to do, for corrections
officers and other law enforcement officers and even for police
officers in the
(theoretically possible if practically very narrow) area where they are acting
in the course of their duty but not
exercising a power or performing a function
under the PAA.
[226] If s 208E
and s 148B were necessarily inconsistent, application of either maxim would not
necessarily lead to the result that
s 208E applies to the extent of any
inconsistency between the two sections.
[227] Section
208E was introduced in 2006; s 148B in its current form in 2016. If the two
were necessarily inconsistent, then application
of the maxim
posteriores priores contrarias abrogant
would lead to the result that s 148B
would prevail to the extent of any inconsistency unless it could be said that s
208E is a specialist
provision and s 148B a later, more general provision such
that the maxim
generalia specialibus non derogant
would apply.
[228] It is far
from clear that s 208E is a specialised provision and s 148B a later, more
general provision. Sections 208E and 148B
each have a respectable claim to be
the “special” provision. Section 148B of the PAA gives a wide
exemption from criminal
or civil liability but
when the person has
done or omitted to do an act (in good faith) in the performance of a function or
exercise of a power (or purported
exercise of a power or performance of a
function) or under that Act.
To that extent, it is a specialised
provision dealing only with those people tasked with performing functions and
exercising powers
under the PAA and doing so or purporting to do so.
[229] Section
208E of the
Criminal Code
is a more general provision than PAA
s 148B in several respects.
(a) It applies to a potentially wider class of people - not only to police
officers, but also to correctional services officers and
other law enforcement
(b) Those entitled to the protection of that section need only be acting
(reasonably) in the course of their duty as police officers,
correctional
services officers or other law enforcement officers, which, even in the case of
a police officer, is potentially wider
than exercising a power or performing a
function under the PAA, even if one includes the extended definition in s 148A.
[230] However, s
208E is a more specialised provision than s 148B in one important respect: it
only applies in relation to offences
against Part VI of the Code:
“Offences against the person and other related matters”, including
murder. The protection
under s 148B applies to
civil or criminal
[231] It seems
to us that on a reasonable reading of both sections, both can be said to be, in
some sense, specialist provisions:
s 208E of the Code might be said to be a
“special” provision applying to offences under Part VI of the
Criminal Code
and PAA s 148B to be a “special” provision
applying to people tasked with performing functions and exercising powers
the PAA when they are doing so or purporting to do so.
[232] In our
view, however, the answer is that, since the two sections are not logically, or
necessarily inconsistent, the legislative
intention was for both protective
provisions to apply. Nor is there a necessary inconsistency between either s
208E or s148B and
the self-defence provisions applicable to Schedule 1 offences
in s 43BD of the Code. The three defences (in ss 208E, 148B and 43BD)
all available and all operate according to their own terms and an accused can
take advantage of any or all of them. We agree
with Southwood J and Mildren AJ
that there is nothing in the terms of s 208E to suggest that it is the only
defence open to a police
officer charged with an offence against Part VI of the
Code and that there is nothing in the PAA (in s 148B or elsewhere) to
that s 148B is not available to an offence under Part VI of the
Criminal Code
Answer to Question 4:
[233] The answer
to Question 4 is yes.
Question 1:
Police Administration Act 1978
(NT) apply to acts
or omissions done or made, or purported to have been done or made only if the
police officer is acting in the
capacity of a public official under an
authorising law?
Section 148B
applies according to its terms, that is to say, to a person
performing a function or exercising a power under the PAA (or purporting
Question 2:
Having regard to
Police Administration Act
(NT), and based upon the assumed facts, is a police officer who acts or
purportedly acts in the exercise of a power of performance
of a function under
the Act, acting in the capacity of a public official under an authorising
It is not necessary to answer Question 2 in light of the answer to Question
1. However, if it was necessary to answer that question
we would answer it
Question 3:
Based upon the assumed facts, at the time the accused fired the second and
third shots resulting in the deceased’s death, would
it be open to the
jury to find that the accused was acting in the exercise or purported exercise
of a power or performance or purported
performance of a function under the
Police Administration Act
, such that s 148B of the Act arises for
the jury’s consideration?
(a) The protection from criminal and civil liability conferred by s 148B of
the PAA extends to acts done (or omitted) in the performance
or purported
performance of functions in s 5 of that Act.
(b) On the assumed facts it would be open to the jury to find that at the time
he did the acts which are the subject of the charge
(ie firing the second and
third shots) the accused was performing or purporting to perform the function of
preventing the commission
of an offence by the deceased (ie the stabbing of
Constable Eberl) and/ or the function of protecting life (that of Constable
and/ or that he was exercising or purporting to exercise a power under
the PAA (the power to arrest the deceased under PAA s 124).
(c) The question whether the accused was in fact acting in the exercise or
purported exercise of a power, or the performance or purported
performance of a
function under the PAA is a question of fact for the jury to determine after
they have heard all of the evidence.
(d) The separate question of whether, at the time he performed the relevant
acts, the accused was acting in good faith is likewise
a question of fact for
the jury to determine after they have heard all of the evidence.
(e) Once all of the evidence is in, it will be a matter for the trial judge to
direct the jury on the matters they need to be satisfied
of to determine
whether, as a matter of fact, it is reasonably possible that:
(i) the accused was performing or purporting to perform a function and/ or
exercising or purporting to exercise a power under the
(ii) the accused was doing so in good
Question 4:
The accused, Zachary Rolfe, is charged with murder, contrary to s 156 of the
Criminal Code Act 1983
(NT). In the alternative the accused is charged
with reckless or negligent conduct causing death, contrary to s 160 of the
Criminal Code
. In the further alternative, the accused is charged with
engaging in a violent act which caused the death of the deceased, contrary
s 161A(1) of the
Criminal Code
. In these circumstances, is a defence
Police Administration Act 1978
(NT) potentially
open in the light of s 208E of the
Criminal Code
---------------------------------
[2013] HCA 30; (2013) 250 CLR 135
at [14] – [34].
Little v The Commonwealth
[1947] HCA 24
(1947) 75 CLR 94
Debates 2 December 2004, Hansard
Or purported exercise of power or
purported performance of a function.
Mercantile Mutual Life
Insurance Co Ltd v Australian Securities Commission
[1993] FCA 77
(1993) 40 FCR 409
Gummow J at 442;
Lumsden v Police
[2019] SASC 178
per Stanley J at
[2009] HCA 41
(2009) 239 CLR 27
North Australian Aboriginal
Justice Agency Ltd v Northern Territory
[2015] HCA 41
(2015) 256 CLR 569
(French CJ, Kiefel and Bell JJ) and
Masson v Parsons
[2019] HCA 21
(2019) 266 CLR 554
(Kiefel CJ, Bell, Gageler, Keane, Nettle and Gordon JJ).
[2012] HCA 55
(2012) 250 CLR 503
[2014] HCA 12
(2014) 250 CLR 664
Lacey v Attorney General
[2011] HCA 10
(2011) 242 CLR 573
(French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan,
Kiefel and Bell JJ).
Interpretation Act
Interpretation Act
Federal Commissioner of
Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings Ltd
[2012] HCA 55
(2012) 250 CLR 503
(the Court).
Meat Industries Act
Tobacco Control Act 2002
Food Act 2004
Private Security Act 1995
Territory Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act 1976
(NT) (see cl.24). See
also various provisions of the
Gaming Control Act 1993
(NT) which confer
functions on “a member of the Police Force” (see, for example,
; various provisions of the
Liquor Act 2019
which impose functions on a “police officer” (see, for example,
); and various provisions of the
(Emergency Powers) Act 2003
(NT) which impose functions on a “police
officer” (see, for example,
Police Administration
Amendment (Powers and Liability) Act 2005
Police Administration
Amendment (Powers and Liability) Act 2016
inserted s 33(12) into the
Fisheries Act
(see cl 20), s 130(4) into the
(see cl.21),
Gaming Control Act
(see cl 22),
(see cl.23),
Private Security Act
cl 24), s 110(2) into the
Territory Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act
(see cl 24) and
Terrorism (Emergency Powers) Act
Some of these provisions have since been amended.
For example,
Fisheries Act
was replaced by
Fisheries Act
see cl 20 of the
Fisheries Amendment Legislation
(NT). Nonetheless
is in almost identical terms to
before its repeal.
[1986] FCA 92
(1986) 10 FCR 88 (Full
This passage has been approved
in a number of subsequent cases. See, for example,
Telstra Corp Ltd v
Australasian Performing Right Association Ltd
[1997] HCA 41
(1998) 191 CLR 140
(McHugh J) and
Spargo v Repatriation Commissioner
[2001] FCA 1763
(2001) 116 FCR 304
[14] (the Court).
(2014) 254 CLR 288
A typographical error appeared
Police Administration Act
as amended by the
Administration (Powers and Liabilities) Amendment Act 2005
. The error was
corrected by s 35 and Part 1 of Schedule 4 to the
Statute Law Revision
[1966] 2 QB 414
[1989] NTSC 23
(1989) 95 FLR 116
[1984] TASRp 3
(1984) 12 A Crim R 45
[1993] FCA 538
(1993) 46 FCR 336
, at 339-341.
Hayward-Jackson v Walshaw
[2012] WASC 107
223 A Crim R 489
495 per Heenan J;
Mangurra v Rigby
[2021] NTSC 6 at [34] per Kelly J.
Macquarie Dictionary
ed, 2009) ‘function’ (def 1).
Police Administration
[2003] WASCA 42
Section 7(1)
provided at that
time: The Commissioner of Police may appoint so many non-commissioned officers
and constables of different grades
as he shall deem necessary for the
preservation of peace and order throughout the said State, subject, however, to
the approval of
the Governor: and such non-commissioned officers and constables
shall have all such powers and privileges, and be liable to all such
obligations as any constable duly appointed now or hereafter may have, or be
liable to, either by the common law, or by
virtue of any statute law now or
hereafter to be in force in the said State.
Criminal Code
Webster v Lampard
[1993] HCA 57
177 CLR 598
Lumsden v Police
[2019] SASC 178
Little v The
Commonwealth
[1947] HCA 24
(1947) 75 CLR 94
Hamilton v Halesworth
[1937] HCA 69
(1937) 58 CLR
Fox v Coates
[2010] NTSC 46
R v Whittington
[2007] NTCCA 2
(2007) 19 NTLR
[1993] HCA 57
(1993) 177 CLR 598.
Webster v Lampard
[1993] HCA 57
177 CLR 598
at 607-608.
[1947] HCA 24
(1947) 75 CLR 94.
Ibid at 108-109; 112; 113.
Criminal Code
208E, as at 20 December 2006.
Northern Territory,
, No S 80, 9 September 2014.
[1962] NSWR 801.
(1884) 10 App Cas 59
[1922] 1 AC 27
(1974) 9 SASR 384.
[2013] HCA 2
(2013) 252 CLR
Ibid at [46].
[1975] AC 538
at 553-554.
[2019] SASC 178
[1941] HCA 28
(1941) 67 CLR 536.
Section 148B was amended by the
Statute Law Revision Act
No 44 of 2005
and Schedule 4
to correct a spelling error “performace” to
“performance”.
Second reading speech.
Actually it doesn’t set
of the Police Force either.
[2019] SASC 178
Stanley J considered the effect of s 65 of the South Australian
Section 65 of the
is somewhat wider than s 148B in that it extends to acts or omissions
under “this Act or any other Act or law”.
[1947] HCA 24
[1947] 75 CLR 94
(1818) 1 B & Ald 227
Crown’s written
submissions at [72].
[1908] HCA 55
(1908) 7 CLR 1
[1991] HCA 21
(1991) 172 CLR 1
Butler v Attorney General
[1961] HCA 32
(1961) 106 CLR 268
at 276 per Fullagar J.at [7]; Fullagar J also
said, st [6]: “I would say that it is a very rare thing for one
affirmative terms to be found to be impliedly repealed by another
which is also in affirmative terms.”
[1913] HCA 43
(1913) 16 CLR 468
Pearce and Geddes
Interpretation in Australia (7
p 271 at [7.20];
Fonteio v Morando Bros Pty Ltd
[1971] VicRp 81
[1971] VR 658
Associated Minerals v
Wyong Shire Council
[1974] 2 NSWLR 681
(1974) ALR 353
The Ombudsman v
[2005] NSWCA 339
(2005) 64 NSWLR 114.
or the purported exercise of a
power or performance of a function.
R v Whittington (No
[2007] NTCCA 2
(2007) 19 NTLR 83
, the Court of Criminal Appeal considered the meaning of
the term “in pursuance of” in PAA s 162 a protective provision
provides a two month time limit for all actions and prosecutions against any
person for anything done “in pursuance of”
the PAA. The Court said,
at pp 86 – 87 para [15]: “A succession of High Court authorities
plainly establishes that
provisions such as s 162(1) apply if the unlawful act
is committed by a person who genuinely believes that the act was done in the
proper execution of that person’s duties:
Hamilton v Halesworth
[1937] HCA 69
(1937) 58 CLR 369
at 374 and 380;
Little v Commonwealth
[1947] HCA 24
(1947) 75 CLR 94
Webster v Lampard
[1993] HCA 57
(1993) 177 CLR 598
at 605 and 619.
This is commonly known in logic
as “the converse fallacy”. It is behind such gems of logical
reasoning as the following
by conspiracy theorists.
Premise 1: If there were a conspiracy, the government would deny it.
Premise 2: The government is denying it.
Conclusion: Therefore there is a conspiracy!
This may be so even if the
protection afforded by s 148B extends to the areas referred to in s 148A.
Section 148A applies where
an act is done by a member in the capacity of a
public official under “
an Act or regulations
authorising law’)” [s148A(1)] where the person is authorised to
perform inspection, investigation or other
enforcement functions” under
the authorising law, which may leave open common law duties and/ or
non-enforcement type functions.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (841 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter