URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTLC/2022/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:21:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Inquest into the death of Kumanjayi Walker (Ruling No 3) [2022] NTLC 19 (14 October 2022)
into the death of Kumanjayi Walker (Ruling No 3)
[2022] NTLC 019
TITLE OF COURT: Coroners Court
FILE NO(s): A51 of 2019
DELIVERED ON: 14 October 2022
DELIVERED AT: Alice Springs
HEARING DATE(s): 29 September 2022
FINDING OF: Judge Elisabeth Armitage
CATCHWORDS:
Coronial proceedings; inquests; death in custody; inquest
following acquittal; objections to evidence; authority to receive evidence
Coroner’s Act 1993
Coroner’s Act 1993
(NT), ss 4A, 4B, 26, 34, 35 and 39
Doomadgee v Clements
(2006) 2 Qd R 352
R v Doogan; Ex parte Lucas-Smith
[2005] ACTSC 5
(2004) 157 ACTR 1
Inquest into the death of Kumanjayi Walker (Ruling No 2)
[2022] NTLC
Domaszewicz v State Coroner
[2004] VSC 528
(2004) 11 VR 237
Thales Australia Limited v Coroner’s Cour
[2011] VSC 133
Priest v West
[2012] VSCA 327
(2012) 40 VR 521
Harmsworth v State Coroner
[1989] VicRp 87
[1989] VR 989.
Conway v Jerram
[2010] NSWSC 371
(2010) 78 NSWLR 689
Doomadgee v Clements
(2006) 2 Qd R 352
Re Pochi and Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1979] AATA 64
(1976) 36 FLR
Sullivan v Civil Aviation Safety Authority
[2014] FCAFC 93
Nominal Defendant v Manning
[2000] NSWCA 80
(2000) 50 NSWLR 139
Bajramovic v Calubaquib
[2015] NSWCA 139
(2015) 71 MVR 15
Liu v Age Company Limited
[2016] NSWCA 115
(2016) 92 NSWLR 679
Tracy v Repatriation Commission
(2000) 101 FCR 279
Knight v FP Special Assets Ltd
(1992) 174 CLR 178
PMT Partners Pty Ltd (in liq) v Australian National Parks & Wildlife
[1995] HCA 36
(1995) 184 CLR 301
Victims Compensation Fund Corporation v Brown
(2003) 201 ALR 260
Brisbane City Council v Attorney-General
[1908] HCA 8
(1908) 5 CLR 695
REPRESENTATION:
Counsel Assisting: Dr P Dwyer with Mr P Coleridge
For Zachary Rolfe: Mr D Edwardson KC and Mr F Merenda
For the Brown Family: Mr G Mullins with Ms P Morreau For the Walker, Lane and
Robertson families: Mr A Boe with Mr D Fuller and Ms G Boe For the Northern
Territory Police Force: Dr I Freckelton AO KC with Ms
A Burnnard For the
Department of Health: Mr T Hutton
For NAAJA: Mr P Boulten SC with Ms B Wild and Mr J Murphy
For the Parumpurru Committee: Mr J McMahon SC For the Northern Territory
Association: Ms S Ozolins
For James Kirstenfeldt: Mr C Gnech
For Lee Bauwens: Ms KM McNally with Mr JM Suttner
For Paul Kirkby: Mr SA Robson SC For Anthony Hawkings and Adam Eberl: Mr I Read
Judgment category classification: A
Judgement ID number:
[2022] NTLC 019
Number of paragraphs: 88
Number of pages: 32
IN THE CORONERS COURT
AT ALICE SPRINGS IN THE NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
No. A51 of 2019
Introduction
In the matter of an inquest into the death of Kumanjayi
9 November 2019 police members from the Alice Springs Immediate Response Team
) travelled to Yuendumu. The IRT members encountered Kumanjayi Walker
in House 511 Yuendumu. During an incident inside the house,
one of the IRT
members, Constable Zachary Rolfe, shot Kumanjayi Walker three times. Kumanjayi
Walker was taken to the local police
station where he passed away. This inquest
will inquire into the circumstances of Kumanjayi Walker’s death.
date, thirteen interested parties have sought and been granted leave to appear
or be represented at the inquest under s 40(3) of
Coroner’s Act
). Those parties are the Brown family, the Walker, Lane
and Robertson families (
WLR families
), Constable Zachary Rolfe, the
Northern Territory Police Force (
Police Force
), the Department of Health,
the Parumpurru Committee of Yuendumu (
), the North Australian
Aboriginal Justice Agency (
), the Northern Territory Police
Association (
Association
), Constable James Kirstenfeldt, Sgt Paul Kirkby,
Sgt Lee Bauwens, Constable First Class Anthony Hawkings and Constable First
Anthony Eberl.
Rolfe objects to ‘eight discrete categories [of] evidence’. With one
the evidence that falls within those eight categories is
summarised in a 'Schedule of Objections’ filed by Constable Rolfe and
annexed to this ruling as Annexure A. This ruling deals with each of those
objections, save for an objection to a report filed
by NAAJA on 12 September
2022 titled ‘“In Normal Circumstances” – Understanding
the structural nature of
racial violence in the Northern Territory”’
NAAJA Report
It is necessary to deal with
H, which Constable Rolfe describes as ‘exploration of whether the
evidence in the criminal trial of Constable Rolfe
“contaminated”’.
has been the subject of separate legal submissions and will be the subject of a
separate ruling.
Rolfe’s objections at this time because it is anticipated that the inquest
will shortly hear from a large number of witnesses
who are capable of giving
evidence about the subject matters of the evidence to which Constable Rolfe
objections were opposed by Counsel Assisting, the Police Force, the Brown
family, the WLR families, NAAJA and the Committee. They
were supported, at
least in part, by and Sgts Kirkby and Bauwens.
the reasons that follow, I will receive the evidence under s 39 of the Act. The
evidence is appropriately directed to my ultimate
function of determining what,
if any, finding, comment, or recommendation I should or must make under ss 26,
of the Act. To adopt Constable Rolfe’s test, there
is, or may at the conclusion of the evidence be, a ‘rational
connection’
between the evidence and the subject matters of those
provisions.
turning to the substantive issues, I make two preliminary
observations.
Lateness of Constable Rolfe’s objections
Constable Rolfe is entitled to raise objections and have those objections
determined on their merits, it is appropriate that
I again briefly comment on
the regrettable timing of this application in light of the express statutory
function of the Territory
Coroner to ‘ensure that the coronial system in
the Territory is administered and operates
efficiently’.
Rolfe submits that ‘[t]o the extent that this inquest is to continue
whilst these objections are being considered,
the exploration of [issues
associated with the evidence the subject of the objections] is objected to and
should stop’:
Constable Rolfe (Submissions dated 27 September 2022),
Northern Territory Police Association made written and oral submissions in
support of Constable Rolfe’s original objection
to the evidence of the
text-messages. Although no further submissions was made in support of the
renewed objections, I have considered
those earlier submissions for the purpose
of this ruling where appropriate.
accept that, unlike s 26, provisions such as s 34(2) and 35(2) may not authorise
a Coroner to ‘inquire for the sole or dominant
reason of making comment or
recommendation’: see,
Thales Australia Ltd v Coroner’s Court
[2011] VSC 133
Coroner’s Act,
ss 4A and 4B.
procedural history of Constable Rolfe’s objections was provided by Counsel
Assisting on 9
and 29 September 2022,
and in the written
submissions of NAAJA dated 27 September 2022 at [3]-[13].
that the lateness of Constable Rolfe’s objections has disrupted the
efficient progress of this lengthy and complex
inquest. On 9 September 2020, by
way of explanation, Mr Edwardson KC submitted that in her formal opening of the
inquest Counsel
Assisting ‘had for the first time, identified how she
propose[d] to use and lead the evidence at this inquest’.
was submitted that only ‘with the benefit of the opening’ could
Constable Rolfe make his objections. I am perplexed
by this submission because
in addition to similar objections having been raised on 25 May 2022 and
withdrawn on 26 May 2022, written
submissions in support of the revived
objections were filed on 30 August 2022, four business days before Counsel
Assisting opened
on 5 September 2022.
Rolfe submits that there is a tension between the criticism of his objections as
being ‘grossly late’, and the
description in
Ruling No 2
objections of this kind as ‘premature’.
However, as
Counsel Assisting submitted, when authorities such as
Thales Australia Ltd v Coroner’s Court
describe objections of the present kind as ‘premature’ what they
convey is that ‘a liberal approach to the receipt
of evidence is often
necessary during an inquest, because it will often not be possible to determine
what, if any, comment or recommendation
might be permissible as a result of
evidence that has yet to be called.’
That is ‘a very
different thing’ to expecting ‘that if Constable Rolfe’s
legal team knew that he wished to
make objections of this kind in May of this
of Proceedings,
Inquest into the death of Kumanjayi Walker
(Coroner’s Court of the Northern Territory, Alice Springs, 9 September
2022), 297-300.
of Proceedings,
Inquest into the death of Kumanjayi Walker
(Coroner’s Court of the Northern Territory, Alice Springs, 29
September 2022), 1182-1184.
paragraph [4] is read subject to the qualification that an earlier objection had
been made, and withdrawn, in May.
Transcript of
Proceedings (9 November 2022), 304.
Constable Rolfe (Submissions dated 27 September 2022), [1].
[2005] ACTSC 5
(2004) 157 ACTR 1.
[2011] VSC 133.
of Proceedings (29 September 2022), 1182. See, relevantly,
, [68] (Beach J);
[2005] ACTSC 5
(2004) 157 ACTR 1
then those objections should have been presented at that stage, rather than
waiting [until four] days prior to the commencement of
Ruling No 2
second preliminary observation concerns the relationship between these
objections and earlier objections by Constable Rolfe that
I considered and
dismissed in
Ruling No 2
Procedural background to
Ruling No 2
30 August 2022 Constable Rolfe filed written submissions in support of
objections to 13 issues identified on what was then Counsel
Assisting’s
‘issues list’. On 2 September 2022 Constable Rolfe filed written
submissions objecting to the receipt
of two discrete items of evidence: namely,
evidence of phone messages downloaded from Constable Rolfe’s mobile
telephone and
any evidence given by the witness Claudia Campagnaro.
reasons explained in
Ruling No 2
, I ultimately accepted a submission that
it was inappropriate that I rule in an abstract way on the entirety of what was
then Counsel
Assisting’s issues list. I did, however, consider and reject
Constable Rolfe’s objections to the two discrete items of
Constable Rolfe now submits that, following
Ruling No 2
‘admissibility of the messages, by reference to the scope of this inquest,
remains a live issue for determination.’
The ‘abuse of process’ issue
9 September 2022 Mr Edwardson KC submitted that the phone download was
‘challenged on a number of fronts’, one of which
was that they were
‘too remote to engage the jurisdiction or function of this court’.
Mr Edwardson noted that his oral
submissions were to be considered alongside
Constable Rolfe’s written submissions of 30 August 2022 and 2 September
2022, which
included detailed submissions on the jurisdiction of a
Transcript of Proceedings (29 September 2022), 1182-1183.
Constable Rolfe (Submissions dated 27 November 2022), [4].
the commencement of her submissions on 12 September 2022, Counsel Assisting
stated that while it would be inappropriate for me
to ‘try to determine
all the questions of what evidence can and can't be received as a block and at
the beginning of the inquest’,
‘[t]o the extent that Mr
Edwardson KC has raised objections to particular evidence, your Honour can and
should rule on those
objections’.
Counsel Assisting
And just to make it clear before anybody has an
opportunity
to address your Honour. I anticipate that with the
witnesses this week,
including Sergeant Jolley, the text messages that
are referred to in MFI
C, will become relevant.
That is, I wish to ask questions of Sergeant Jolley
that relate to some of the messages. And to that end, because I anticipate
tender, if there is any objection then, I – or presuming that there
will be, given what’s followed from Constable Rolfe’s
would ask that your Honour – that your Honour’s ruling assist us, or
guide us in that respect.
So if anybody else want – wants to say anything about their text
messages and their admissibility, in my respectful submission, they
should do so this afternoon so the Coroner is assisted
response to this statement was to emphasise that I wanted to be in a position to
proceed with the inquest without,
...having to break for further submissions on [the] text messages, and whether I
can receive them or not.
So I think they fall – fall squarely
under objection from Constable Rolfe, and that should be properly
addressed now by all parties.
then heard submissions regarding the ‘relevance’ or
‘remoteness’ of the text-messages to the subject matter
Constable Rolfe’s representatives, who had already
made lengthy written and oral submissions on the issue, indicated that there
‘nothing in reply.’
Transcript of Proceedings (12 September 2022), 328.
Transcript of Proceedings (12 September 2022), 329.
Transcript of Proceedings (12 September 2022), 351.
Transcript of Proceedings (12 September 2022), 351.
eg, Transcript of Proceedings (12 September 2022), 352-355 (Mr Murphy for
NAAJA), 357 (Mr McMahon AC SC for the
Committee).
Transcript of Proceedings (12 September
2022), 362.
Assisting submitted that insofar as Constable Rolfe’s most recent
objections contained a renewed challenge to the ‘admissibility
messages, by reference to the scope of this inquest’, they were an
‘attemp[t] to re-litigate on the same facts
and circumstances the question
of whether the text messages can and should be received, which would
likely constitute
an abuse of the court’s processes.’
Similarly, NAAJA submitted that it was ‘not appropriate for the
Coroner to be asked to rule again on the objection without Constable
identifying a relevant change in circumstances (and none has been
identified).’
While NAAJA suggested that to do so
amount to an abuse of process’,
principal submission was that ‘the Coroner’s statutory function of
ensuring the efficient operation of the coronial
system is a sufficient basis to
refuse to entertain such an objection.’
this, Constable Rolfe contends that his renewed objection to the
‘admissibility’ of the text messages was not
improper because he had
understood that no ‘questions of admissibility by reference to the scope
of this inquest’ were
to be argued.
Constable Rolfe submits
that as a result of this understanding he was denied the opportunity to make
submissions in
on the issue of the ‘admissibility’ of
the text messages.
light of the lengthy submissions on 9 and 12 September 2022, I find this
explanation unconvincing. I do not accept that Constable
Rolfe’s legal
representatives were denied an opportunity to make submissions in reply and in
Ruling No 2
, Constable Rolfe’s submissions regarding the
‘remoteness’, ‘relevance’ or ‘admissibility’
of the text messages were considered and rejected.
Transcript of Proceedings (29 September 2022), 1187.
NAAJA (Submissions dated 28 September 2022), [17].
(Submissions dated 28 September 2022), [17] citing
Nominal Defendant v
[2000] NSWCA 80
(2000) 50 NSWLR 139
, [6]–[7], [10] (Mason P), [72] (Heydon
Bajramovic v Calubaquib
[2015] NSWCA 139
(2015) 71 MVR 15
, [40]–[41] (Emmett
JA, Adamson J in agreement);
Liu v Age Company Limited
[2016] NSWCA 115
(2016) 92 NSWLR
, [199] (McColl JA, Beazley P and Ward JA in
agreement).
NAAJA (Submissions dated 28 September
2022), [17].
Constable Rolfe (Submissions of 28 September 2022), [4].
Constable Rolfe (Submissions of 28 September 2022), [6].
Ruling No 2
[2022] NTLC 016
[18], [34]-[38].
Rolfe’s renewed objection to the ‘admissibility of the messages by
reference to the scope of this inquest’,
might constitute an abuse of
process. Alternatively, it might be that it should not be entertained because to
do so would ‘undermine
the efficient operation of the Coronial
system.’ These issues are, however, unnecessary to decide because, for the
given at [49]-[71], I have dismissed the objections on their
Receiving evidence under the
Coroner’s Act 1993
39 of the Act provides that a ‘coroner holding an inquest is not bound by
the rules of evidence and may be informed,
and conduct the inquest, in a manner
the coroner reasonably thinks fit.’
power must be exercised in light of the Coroner’s ultimate powers and
duties to make findings, comments or recommendations
at the conclusion of the
inquest under ss 26, 34 and 35 of the Act. The only purpose for receiving
evidence in this inquest is to
enable me to make such findings, comments or
recommendations.
addition to obliging a Coroner to find, ‘if possible ... the cause of
death’, ss 26, 34 and 35 of the Act collectively
(a) An obligation to find, ‘if possible ... any relevant circumstances
concerning the death’: s 34(1)(a)(iv);
(b) A power to comment on matters ‘including public health or safety or
the administration of justice, connected with the death
investigated’: s 34(2);
(c) An obligation to ‘investigate and report on the care, supervision and
treatment of the person while being held in custody
or caused or contributed to
by injuries sustained while being held in custody’: s 26(1)(a); and,
(d) A power to ‘investigate and report on a matter connected with public
health or safety or the administration of justice
that is relevant to the
death’: s 26(1)(b).
powers and duties were inserted into the Coroner’s Act in 1993 in order
‘to implement various recommendations of
the Royal Commission into
the avoidance of doubt, I note that, unlike s 26, ss 34(2) and 35(2) of the
Act do not to authorise a Coroner to ‘inquire
for the sole or dominant
reason of making comment or recommendation’: see,
Deaths in Custody’.
As Counsel Assisting submitted, that
report had ‘recommended that ... Coronial legislation be strengthened to
increase the
breadth and depth of Coronial investigations in the case of deaths
in custody and in particular the death of an Aboriginal person
not unlimited, it is apparent from the text of ss 26, 34 and 35 that the subject
matters of the coronial inquiry are ‘broad
... with indefinite
boundaries.’
That is consistent with the legislative history
of the Act. It is also consistent with the principles governing the construction
of ‘remedial’ provisions,
and provisions conferring
powers or jurisdiction on courts,
which ordinarily require that
such provisions be read as broadly as a fair reading of their text, in context,
will allow. Each of
these principles has been held to apply to coronial
legislation.
Accordingly,
I accept Counsel Assisting’s submission that ‘any attempt [by
Constable Rolfe] to artificially narrow the
language which is actually used in
Coroners Act
of the Northern Territory should be
In particular, I do not accept that the word
‘relevant’ in s 26 of the Act can be read as if it said,
‘closely connected
Beyond that, I do not perceive
there to be any significant dispute between the parties about the ambit of ss
26, 34 and 35 of the
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 3 March 1993,
7897- 7899 (Mr Stone, Attorney-General).
Transcript of
Proceedings (29 September 2022), 1186.
Doomadgee v Clements
(2006) 2 Qd R 352
Tracy v Repatriation Commission
(2000) 101 FCR 279
v FP Special Assets Ltd
(1992) 174 CLR 178, 205 (Gaudron J). See also,
PMT Partners Pty Ltd (in liq) v Australian National Parks & Wildlife
[1995] HCA 36
(1995) 184 CLR 301
, 313 (Brennan CJ, Gaudron and McHugh J),
[2010] NSWSC 371
(2010) 78 NSWLR 689
[39] (Barr AJ);
Doomadgee v
(2006) 2 Qd R 352
, [31] (Muir
Transcript of Proceedings (29 September 2022),
Constable Rolfe (Submissions dated 30 August 2022), [24]-[26], Constable Rolfe
(Submissions dated 27 September 2022), [6]. I acknowledge
that there is a
potential superfluity to the words ‘relevant’ and ‘connected
with’ in the expression ‘relevant
circumstances connected with the
death’. One explanation is that the words do not convey two different
concepts and that the
expression is a ‘composite phrase’ or
Victims Compensation Fund Corporation v Brown
(2003) 201 ALR
, [32] (Heydon J). This would reflect the principle that it will not always
be possible to give a full and accurate meaning to every
word in a statute:
Brisbane City Council v Attorney-General (Qld)
[1908] HCA 8
(1908) 5 CLR 695
(O’Connor J). An alternative, but in my view less likely,
authorities emphasise the flexible and inclusive approach a Coroner should take
to the receipt of evidence under a provision such
as s 39 of the Act. In
Priest v West
for example, the Court of Appeal of Victoria
noted that it was ‘precisely because’ provisions such as s 34 of the
a Coroner to ‘do everything
to determine
the cause and circumstances of the death that Parliament has removed all
inhibitions on the collection and consideration
of material which may assist in
that task.’
Hence, ‘[f]ar from justifying a narrow view
of the scope of an investigation’ provisions such as s 39 of the Act
the coroner to take an expansive or inclusive approach, in our
part, this flexible, and inclusive, approach to the receipt of evidence reflects
the ‘broad ... scope and indefinite boundaries’
of the subject
matters of provisions such as ss 26, 34 and 35 of the Act.
Doomadgee v Clements
that breadth and those
indefinite boundaries, ‘generally make it inappropriate to interfere with
the gathering of evidence by
a coroner’ or ‘to seek from a coroner a
ruling that one piece of evidence or another is inadmissible or irrelevant as
the coroner were conducting a civil or criminal trial.’
equally, this flexibility and inclusivity reflects the fact that, unlike
ordinary court proceedings between parties,
an inquest is an
investigative
In that sense, the purpose of an
inquest is to identify the issues that arise out of the circumstances of a
reportable death. And,
particularly in an inquest as lengthy and complex as
this, those issues may not fully emerge until the evidence gathering process
complete. That is why, as the Court of Appeal of the ACT confirmed in
‘a liberal approach to the potential relevance of evidence may
construction is that the word ‘relevant’ limits the
(but not degree) of relation between the circumstance and the death: ie, to
circumstances ‘underlying’, or in the broadest
‘contributing to’, the death. Ultimately, it is unnecessary to
[2012] VSCA 327
(2012) 40 VR 521.
[2012] VSCA 327
(2012) 40 VR 521
, [6] (Maxwell P, Harper J).
[2012] VSCA 327
(2012) 40 VR 521
, [6] (Maxwell P, Harper J).
Doomadgee v Clements
(2006) 2 Qd R 352
, [32], [36].
(2006) 2 Qd R 352.
Doomadgee v Clements
(2006) 2 Qd R 352
which the major issues between the parties are, or should ordinarily be, defined
in advance by a charge or cause of action and
civil or criminal
Domaszewicz v State Coroner
[2004] VSC 528
be appropriate’.
And that is why, as Beach J noted in
, objections such as these are often criticised as being
‘hypothetical’, ‘speculative’ or
‘premature’,
or as tending inappropriately to ‘fragment’
the evidence gathering process.
As Beach J noted, sometimes the
‘question of what comment or recommendation might be permissible as a
result of evidence that
has yet to be called is not capable of
determination’.
so, I would be hesitant to accept the submissions of NAAJA and the WLR families
that a Coroner’s power to receive evidence
is not, at least indirectly,
‘limited by reference to concepts of relevance’.
difficult to think of a case in which concepts of relevance, or potential
relevance, would not at least inform the question
of whether a Coroner thinks
fit to receive an item of evidence under s 39 of the Act. Even administrative
decision makers, who ‘are
equally free to disregard formal rules of
evidence in receiving material on which facts are to be found’
are not absolved of the ‘obligation to make findings of fact based
upon material which is logically probative’.
Hence, if a
Coroner concluded that a piece of evidence could not, at the conclusion of the
inquest, possibly be relevant to any of
the subject matters of ss 26, 34 and 35
it is unlikely that she could reasonably think fit to receive it. But, as
demonstrate, that does not equate to a positive
obligation to conclusively determine all questions of relevance before the
gathering process is complete.
will turn to the objections.
[2005] ACTSC 5
(2004) 157 ACTR 1
, [34] (The Court).
[2011] VSC 133
[2011] VSC 133
, [68]. I accept that there will be cases where, irrespective
of how the evidence might emerge, it would be inconceivable that particular
evidence could bear upon the subject matters of ss 26, 34 and 35 of the Act:
see, albeit in a different statutory context,
Harmsworth v State Coroner
[1989] VicRp 87
[1989] VR 989.
NAAJA (Submissions dated 28
September 2022),
Pochi and Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1979] AATA 64
(1976) 36 FLR 482
(Brennan J).
Sullivan v Civil Aviation Safety
[2014] FCAFC 93
, [97] (Flick and Perry JJ).
The objections
categories of evidence to which Constable Rolfe objects, as described by him,
a) evidence concerning the honesty of Constable Rolfe’s application to
join NT Police;
b) evidence concerning the nature and adequacy of NT Police recruitment
concerning the alleged discrimination by NT Police against indigenous persons or
community police;
d) evidence concerning Constable Rolfe’s use of force history;
e) evidence concerning Constable Rolfe’s disciplinary
background/history;
f) evidence concerning the possibility of prior recreational drug use by
Constable Rolfe;
g) evidence concerning the procedures of NT Police in relation to drug and
alcohol testing;
h) exploration of whether the evidence in the criminal trial of Constable Rolfe
was ‘contaminated’.
will deal with the evidence that falls into these categories in turn. Where they
concern broadly overlapping evidence and have related
subject matters, I will
attempt to deal with categories together. For the avoidance of doubt, the
category descriptions are Constable
Rolfe’s, not mine.
Category A: evidence concerning the honesty of Constable
Rolfe’s application to join the NT Police
Category B: evidence concerning the nature and
adequacy of NT Police recruitment policies
Rolfe applied to join the Police Force on 2 February 2016. Following a
recruitment process, he received an offer of employment
as a Constable on 22
April 2016 and commenced training on 30 May 2016. He commenced duties as a
general duties police officer at
Alice Springs Police Station on 14 December
2016. A little under three years later, on 9 November 2019, he shot and killed
least three areas of potential relevance emerge from the evidence covered by
Categories A and B. First, the impugned evidence suggests
that Constable Rolfe
did not provide accurate information to the Police Force during his recruitment
process. For example:
(e) In his written application, Constable Rolfe was asked ‘Have you ever
been the subject of any complaints, internal investigations
or ever had any
disciplinary action imposed on you?’, Constable Rolfe marked his
application form ‘No’. The impugned
evidence suggests, however, that
while a soldier in the Australian Defence Force in 2012, Constable Rolfe had
been the subject of
an internal military investigation as a result of which he
had pleaded guilty, at a military trial, to a charge of theft.
(f) During his interview on 16 March 2016, the impugned evidence suggests that
Constable Rolfe was asked by the three-member panel,
‘Did you have [any]
disciplinary problems when you served in the military?’ The impugned
evidence suggests that Constable
Rolfe again failed to declare his ADF
disciplinary matters.
(g) In his written application, Constable Rolfe initially marked both the
‘Yes’ and “No” boxes when answering
the question
‘Have you previously applied to join any other police service?’. He
then crossed out the ‘Yes’
box. Constable Rolfe had, however,
applied to join the Victoria Police Service on 30 December 2015 and, on 1
February 2016 had applied
to join the Queensland Police Force (ie, the day
before his application to join the Police Force).
(h) In his written application to the Police Force, Constable Rolfe did not
disclose a fine he had received in Queensland for ‘Public
violent behaviour’. On the other hand,
Constable Rolfe disclosed this matter during his oral interview.
(i) Finally, by way of context, in his application to join the Queensland Police
Force, Constable Rolfe also did not disclose the
fine he had received in that
State for ‘Public nuisance – violent behaviour’.
On 7 March 2016, Queensland Police informed
Investigation Report of Commander David Proctor APM, ‘Death in Custody of
Charles Arnold Walker at Yuendumu on 9 November
2019’ (31 August 2021),
Constable Rolfe that the failure to disclose this matter was an integrity breach
and that he was excluded from reapplying for the
Queensland Police Service for
the impugned evidence suggests that on 28 February 2016, as a part of the
recruitment process, Constable Rolfe undertook psychological
testing with the
Australian Institute of Forensic Psychologists. Although he was otherwise found
to be an ‘excellent’
candidate, the resulting report found
After making a mistake, Zachary is less likely than many others to accept
responsibility. He may brush off the significance of the
error, seek to minimise
his own role, or to blame others.
The ‘Aggression’ score is above average. Whether Zachary will act
with firm assertiveness or frank aggression cannot
be determined from this scale
that friction between Constable Rolfe and his father, Richard Rolfe, was a
pattern that:
...has frequently found to be associated with later resentment of authority
figures in highly structured organisations in which
employees are expected to
comply with strict procedures. In the present case, other data confirm this
could be a problem.
as Mr Boe for the WLR families noted, the impugned evidence ‘reveals that
attempts to access a recruit’s ADF information
was abandoned by police in
the recruitment process because there were delays and obstacles in obtaining
information about Constable
Rolfe’s particular ADF history.’
As I have noted, that ADF history would have disclosed Constable
Rolfe’s conviction for an offence of dishonesty.
Transcript of Proceedings (29 September 2022), 1200.
Rolfe submits that there is ‘no logical connection’ between this
material and my assessment of the issues that
arise out of the death of
Kumanjayi Walker.
I disagree.
obviously, the impugned evidence may prove relevant to my assessment of the
credibility and reliability of Constable Rolfe’s
evidence. It is neither
necessary nor appropriate for me to determine the ‘value’ of the
impugned evidence for that purpose
at this stage, noting, in particular, that I
have yet to hear from Constable Rolfe. It suffices that the evidence is, like
the impugned text messages and the evidence of Claudia
Campagnaro,
prima facie evidence of dishonesty or unreliability by
Constable Rolfe. This is in circumstances where I may well be called upon
resolve inconsistencies between the evidence of Constable Rolfe and other
to whether the ‘nature and adequacy of NT Police Force recruitment
policies’ might justify or require a finding, comment
or recommendation,
as Beach J noted in
, it is not possible at this stage to say
whether this issue ‘might or might not be “connected with the death
deceased]”’.
Much will depend on the evidence,
including, in particular, my findings on the evidence about the nature of
Constable Rolfe’s
conduct, and any inappropriate conduct or misconduct, on
9 November 2022.
is, however, certainly evidence from Deputy Commissioner Smalpage that different
recruitment policies, which would have disclosed
Constable Rolfe’s ADF
file and military conviction for a dishonesty offence, ‘
adversely influenced the decision to offer him employment.’
Equally, the combination of
Constable Rolfe (Submissions dated 27 September 2022),
Ruling No 2
[2022] NTLC 016
, [42]-[56].
the relevance of this evidence does not depend on the existence of such
inconsistencies.
[2011] VSC 133
Affidavit of Deputy Commissioner of Police Murray Smalpage
dated 12 July 2022, [203].
the expert reports of Sgt Andrew Barram,
Professor Andrew McFarlane
and Dr Ned Dobos
may suggest that more robust
recruitment processes would have disclosed ‘disentitling ... pathology or
attitudes suggestive
of [Constable Rolfe’s] unsuitability’
for employment as a police officer that contributed to Kumanjayi
Walker’s death. At this stage that is not a matter that is
possible to
apart from the issue of the adequacy of the relevant Northern Territory Police
recruitment
processes, the impugned evidence may raise questions about
the adequacy of the ongoing supervision and assessment Constable Rolfe
after he commenced as police officer; in particular, his supervision and
assessment in or around 9 November 2019, including
the assessment that he was
suitable for deployment to Yuendumu with the IRT on that day. As Deputy
Commissioner Smalpage notes in
the impugned portion of his affidavit,
assessment processes must be rigorous, they need to
be supplemented by
assessments’.
because ‘[i]n spite of all the checks and balances that are conducted
during the recruitment process, it is possible
that unsuitable applicants may
still be offered employment if they deliberately obscure disentitling conduct
or pathology or attitudes
suggestive of their
unsuitability.’
it would be wrong to characterise them as even provisional
‘diagnoses’, Constable Rolfe had been identified at recruitment
someone who might be ‘less likely than many others to accept
responsibility’, as having an above average ‘Aggression
score’, and as exhibiting patterns of behaviour associated with
opines that Constable Rolfe ‘has demonstrated a tendency to rush into
situations with a disregard for his and others' safety,
and a disregard for NT
Police training, practice and procedure’: Affidavit of Sgt Andrew Barram
dated 26 March 2022, [19].
opines that Constable Rolfe may have suffered from PTSD or an exaggerated
survival instinct: Statutory Declaration of Professor
Alexander McFarlane dated
15 July 2020.
opines that Constable Rolfe’s ‘ability to use [violence] without
emotional or moral distress’ was consistent
with ‘what one would
expect from a morally injured individual’ who had undergone military
conditioning: Statutory Declaration
of Dr Ned Dobos dated 31 August 2022,
Affidavit of Deputy Commissioner of Police
Murray Smalpage dated 12 July 2022, [213].
Affidavit of Deputy Commissioner of Police Murray Smalpage
dated 12 July 2022, [213].
Affidavit of Deputy Commissioner of Police Murray Smalpage
dated 12 July 2022, [213].
‘resentment of authority figures in highly structured organisations in
which employees are expected to comply with strict
procedures’.
addition, Constable Rolfe was known to have served with the ADF and, as Mr Boe
submitted, there is now expert ‘evidence that
training and service in the
ADF may have a significant impact on a soldier; both PTSD, according to
Professor McFarlane and ‘moral
injury’ according to Dr [Ned]
Indeed, in the United States, the Justice Department
and the International Association of Chiefs of Police developed guidelines in
2009 for police departments recruiting military veterans. These guidelines note
that military conditioning may,
cause returning officers to mistakenly blur the lines between military combat
situations and civilian crime situations, resulting
in inappropriate decisions
and actions – particularly in the use of less lethal or lethal
might ultimately be argued that what the Police Force learned about Constable
Rolfe during his recruitment called for a greater
degree of ongoing supervision
and/or assessment to ensure Constable Rolfe’s suitability as a police
officer and, in particular,
his suitability for deployment with a tactical team
such as the IRT. Indeed, it might ultimately be argued that had a greater degree
of supervision or assessment been provided, Constable Rolfe would not have been
deemed suitable for deployment with the IRT on 9
November 2019. That is to bear
in mind the evidence of Constable Rolfe’s use of force complaint history
at that time (as to
which, see [72]-[77], below), his text exchanges, which
include exchanges with supervisors, and the evidence that he was diagnosed
a depressive illness in October 2019 of which his supervisors appear not to have
been aware.
Accordingly,
I will receive the evidence under s 39 of the Act at this stage.
Transcript of Proceedings (27 September 2022), 1200.
See, Statutory Declaration of Dr Ned Dobos dated 31 August
2022, [25].
Category C: evidence concerning the alleged discrimination by
NT Police against indigenous persons or community police
to one side the NAAJA Report and the issue of systemic racism, Category C
comprises two principal sub-categories of evidence.
The first is evidence of and
evince racist attitudes
towards aboriginal people.
The second is
evidence of and about Constable Rolfe’s participation in text-message
exchanges that may evince derogatory attitudes
towards community police.
Essentially for the reasons I gave in
Ruling No 2
at [34]-[41], I
dismiss the objection.
his renewed attempt to object to this evidence, Constable Rolfe submits that any
evidence of racism by him cannot be ‘relevant
because the body-worn video shows that Constables Rolfe and Eberl engaged with
Kumanjayi Walker in a ‘calm and
respectful manner’ and that it was
Kumanjayi Walker who then ‘set upon the two officers’, including by
There may be debate about that. But more
importantly, as Counsel Assisting noted, the focus on the body-worn footage
a range of decisions made by Constable Rolfe and others prior to
the entry into House 511 which led to the confrontation with Kumanjayi,
may or may not have been affected by conscious or unconscious racial
These decisions may have increased the likelihood of
Kumanjayi Walker’s death.
Rolfe then submits that any expressions of misogyny, or derogatory and
dismissive attitudes towards community police, cannot
be relevant because there
is no inconsistency between what the IRT did on 9 November 2019 and the orders
given to them at the Yuendumu
Police Station by Sgt Julie Frost, who is both a
woman and a ‘bush cop’.
Specifically, Constable Rolfe
submitted that Sgt Frost had accepted that, ‘contrary to the written plan
that had been prepared
See, Constable Rolfe (Submissions dated 27 September 2022),
Ibid, [13].
Transcript of Proceedings (29 September 2022), 1191.
Constable Rolfe (Submissions dated 27 September 2022),
deployment of the IRT’ – which involved a 5am arrest –
‘she nonetheless deployed them at 7pm ... and told
the officers that they
were to intelligence gather.’
Assisting submitted that it was ‘plainly incorrect’ to say that
there was no inconsistency between Sgt Frost’s
orders and the conduct of
She submitted that it was,
clear from the evidence, written and oral of Sergeant Frost that it was her
belief when the IRT members left the Yuendumu Station
5 am arrest plan was still in effect. She gave evidence that it was Constable
Kirstenfeldt who suggested that the IRT should go out
and ‘gather
intelligence’. She rejected the notion that their almost immediate
to mere intelligence gathering. And
she and other officers have noted that in fact those sorts of actions would
jeopardise the plan
of a 5 am arrest which was meant to minimise the use of
is unnecessary and inappropriate for me to resolve this dispute at this time,
noting that I have not yet heard from a number of
the direct witnesses to the
conversation between Sgt Frost and the IRT. It is sufficient that Counsel
Assisting’s interpretation
of the evidence is, on the basis of what I have
heard so far, arguable. That being so, I agree with Counsel Assisting
....on the issue of whether there was a deliberate disobedience of [Sgt
Frost’s] written arrest plan ... expressions of contempt
towards females
and more importantly expressions of contempt about bush cops may well be highly
although Constable Rolfe’s objects to the text messages insofar as they
are prima facie evidence of racism or derogatory
attitudes towards community
police, a number of the text-messages provide prima facie evidence of an
association
between those sentiments and inappropriate attitudes towards
the use of force. One example of this is a text exchange between Constable
and another police officer on 9 April 2019 from 8:45:24PM:
Constable Rolfe (Submissions dated 27 September 2022),
Transcript of Proceedings (29 September 2022), 1191.
Transcript of Proceedings (29 September 2022), 1191.
Transcript of Proceedings (29 September 2022), 1189-1190.
Officer to Rolfe:
Rolfe to Officer Officer to Rolfe:
Officer to Rolfe: Rolfe to Officer:
Officer to Rolfe: Rolfe to Officer:
I ' m so sick of aboriginals tonight fuckkkkkkk
They being losers ?
Just had a chick lying the whole time 'I don't know him' then her kid has the
same last name ' oh no rela tion ' and then fucking
look her up and they' re
husband and wife. So we laid into her and she stuck to it
..... and I may have been super hangry......
Oi if you're hungry you're definitely allowed to towel locals up
If your last name rhymes with Rolfe you' re allowed to towel up locals
I do have a license to towel loca ls. I like it
that is sufficient to dismiss Constable Rolfe ' s renewed objection to
text-messages , there were additional objections pressed by
and Sgts Bauwens and Kirkby .
60. Sgt Bauwens made two submissions in support of his objection to the text
messages. First, he 'adopts and associates himself with
' the submiss ions made
by Constable Rolfe regarding the legali ty and receipt of the phone download
that I considered and dismissed
Ruling No 2.
It is not necessary to
say anything further about them. Second, he contends that if the purpose of
admitting the text messages is
'to establish the existence of a form of sys
temat ic racism in the NTPF or in the IRT' then
is required'. He
suggests that I should seek an apparently random 'sample of cell phones and
records to make the evidence more representat
ive of the NTPF. '
61 . In my view, the principal relevance of Sgt Bauwens ' text messages is not
that they are prima facie evidence of 'systemic
racism' within the Police
The principal relevance of Sgt Bauwens ' text -message is
that they are prima facie
Although they may be.
evidence that Sgt Bauwens held
racist attitudes and that he
expressed these views to his subordinates in the IRT when discussing the work of
example, on 9 July 2019 from 7:04:52PM Sgt Bauwens and Constable Rolfe had
this text exchange about what appears to have been
an arrest of an aboriginal
person in a remote community:
Bauwens to Rolfe: Cool as long as we got him, had a run hey Rolfe to
Bauwens: Yeah the bush cops would never have been
able to get him. Impossible for them
Rolfe to Bauwens: So it was good we went, the bush cops
fucked up as usual but that just mean we had a run instead of getting him
cordoned properly so it’s all good.
Rolfe to Bauwens: He was fair rapid
Bauwens to Rolfe: Good job, I’ll let [Superintendent Jody]
Nobbs know the details
I want to do a lot more of this stuff That’s a couple we have got for
Rolfe to Bauwens: Yeah I’m hell keen, it seems he’s getting on
Bauwens to Rolfe:
aren’t used to people
going after them
Rolfe to Bauwens: Yeah bushcops blow my mind, I’ll tell you
my view, there is a potential nexus between Sgt Bauwens’ conduct and the
circumstances of Kumanjayi Walker’s death.
Sgt Bauwens was the Officer in
Charge of the IRT. It might be thought that he was, or ought to have been,
responsible for establishing
discipline and a working ‘culture’
within the IRT. Superintendent Nobbs, who authorised the deployment of the IRT
9 November 2019, gave evidence that he perceived in Sgt Bauwens’ and
others’ text-messages a ‘theme of contempt
for the community and
contempt for colleagues and
Emphasis added.
clearly ill-discipline’
He agreed that this
ill-discipline was relevant when ‘trying to understand why [the] operation
plan [for the arrest of Kumanjayi
Walker] was not executed in the way [he and
Sgt Frost] had wanted it to be.’
That was because,
if the starting point is a nil discipline workforce and a broad contempt for the
colleagues in which they're going to actively operate
within the community in
which they're operating ... there is no foundation to the plan in the first
instance. So anything that will
flow from that is destined to
those reasons, it is unnecessary for me to consider Sgt Bauwens’
suggestion that I should obtain an apparently random ‘sample
phones and records to make the evidence more representative of the NTPF’
in order better to conduct an abstract examination
of systemic racism within the
Police Force. I doubt very much that this would be lawful.
Sgt Kirky made, in effect, two broad submissions in support of his objection to
the text messages. First, Sgt Kirkby submitted
that an abstract
‘investigation into whether discrimination, systemic racism and cultural
bias exists within the ... Police
Force’ would ‘presen[t] more as a
wide inquiry into the Police Force, than an inquest into a particular
I agree. But that is not what I am doing. What I am
considering is whether any discriminatory attitudes, systemic racism and/or
bias as is evidenced by these text-messages may have been involved in,
or made more likely, Kumanjayi Walker’s death. That
is a distinction
recognised by Nathan J in
Harmsworth v State Coroner
Sgt Kirkby submitted that his ‘attitude, whether deemed to be good, bad,
indifferent or ill-informed, is not a matter
directly or indirectly connected
with the death of Mr Walker.’ While I accept that he was not a member of
the IRT, for the
reasons I gave in respect of Sgt Bauwens’ objections,
there may well be a nexus between Sgt Kirkby’s conduct and the
circumstances of Kumanjayi Walker’s death.
of Proceedings,
Inquest into the death of Kumanjayi Walker
(Coroner’s Court of the Northern Territory, Alice Springs, 27
September 2022), 1121.
Transcript of Proceedings (27
September 2022), 1121.
Transcript of Proceedings (27 September 2022), 1121.
Sgt Kirkby (Submissions dated 7 October 2022), [11].
particular in the course of his Honour’s discussion of the relevance of
‘theories of maximum security imprisonment’:
[1989] VicRp 87
[1989] VR 989
Sgt Paul Kirkby was a senior police office in the Alice Springs Police Station
and directly supervised Constable Rolfe. Of Constable
Rolfe’s 46 use of
force incidents 11 occurred while Sgt Kirkby was his shift supervisor. It is
not inconceivable that to
the extent that Sgt Kirkby expressed or tolerated
inappropriate behaviours or attitudes, this may have contributed to the
development
of such behaviours or attitudes by Constable Rolfe.
example, some of the text-messages may suggest that Sgt Kirkby expressed or
tolerated racism, homophobia, misogyny or contempt
for senior police officers
and community police in his communications with Constable Rolfe. On 22 June 2019
from 8:13:34PM Sgt Kirkby
and Constable Rolfe had the following exchange about
what appears to have been a policing interaction between Constable Rolfe and
unidentified woman:
Kirkby to Rolfe: Who was the silly bitch?
Rolfe to Kirkby: Fuck knows some white bitch who thinks
she aboriginal
Kirkby to Rolfe: Lying in the dirt pissed!
Doing a fucking good impression
on 22 September 2019 from 4:24:55PM Sgt Kirkby and Constable Rolfe had the
following exchange about what appears to have
been an unsuccessful application
by Constable Rolfe to join the Territory Response Group:
Rolfe to Kirkby: Nah application was fine, except that dashy
wrote a stupid comment and vicary didn’t fill out her bit at all.
But they reckon that the other applicants have “longer and more diverse
careers” then me.
And recommend I go out bush for 12 months haha
Fucking joke
Kirkby to Rolfe: That’s their standard line now.
Everyone knows people go out bush cause they’re fucking lazy. Maybe
they’re looking for now. The order of preference now is blacks, chicks,
gays and lazy fucks – then Zac
text-messages may provide prima facie evidence that Sgt Kirkby (whose
responsibility it was to review Constable Rolfe’s
Use of Force incidents)
tolerated or encouraged dishonesty by Constable Rolfe in the context of his work
as a police officer. For
example, on 3 September 2019 from 12:04:47PM Sgt Kirkby
and Constable Rolfe had the following exchange:
Kirkby to Rolfe: Sorry about the stress caused by losing my
shit the other night. Stress you didn’t need. You sorted it well.
I’d just had enough. He was the second person to press
my button that
Rolfe to Kirkby: Bro there was literally no stress about it.
I’m all for that shit, I’ve done the same thing to you more than
once before.
I’m always ready to make my camera face
the other way and be a
dramatic cunt for the
Kirkby to Rolfe: And the Oscar goes to ... Rolfe to Kirkby: Haha
those reasons, I do not accept Sgt Kirkby’s submission that his conduct
could not be indirectly relevant to ‘the circumstances
Walker’s death or the interests of the persons represented at the bar
table as they relate to that matter.’
Accordingly,
I will receive the evidence under s 39 of the Act at this stage.
Category D: evidence concerning Constable Rolfe’s use of
force history Category E: evidence concerning Constable Rolfe’s
disciplinary
background/history
relatively significant body of evidence on the coronial brief concerns Constable
Rolfe’s use of force and disciplinary history.
On the basis of much of
this material,
Sgt Kirkby (Submissions dated 7 October 2022), [11].
one witness, Sgt Andrew Barram, identified five incidents in which Constable
Rolfe used excessive force or ‘engaged in conduct
that unnecessarily led
to situations where force was then required.’
Barram’s opinion, Constable Rolfe ‘has demonstrated a tendency to
rush into situations with a disregard for his
and others' safety, and a
disregard for NT Police training, practice and procedure.’
Rolfe submits that ‘there is no question as to who fired the fatal shots
that killed Kumanjayi Walker or the circumstances
in which those shots were
fired’. It is submitted that this ‘inform[s] the necessity of
investigating the circumstances
of Constable Rolfe’s use of force
In addition, Constable Rolfe submits that
differences between the prior use of force history and the circumstances of 9
November 2019
eliminate the relevance of this evidence as ‘tendency’
Finally, Constable Rolfe submits that in order to
determine whether the prior history discloses a relevant tendency the court
‘be required to conduct several discrete trials’
involving the calling of ‘each of the persons who were allegedly the
subject of that use of force’.
oral argument, Counsel Assisting’s response to these submissions was as
In my respectful submission, Constable Rolfe’s use of force and
disciplinary history may well be rationally connected with
your Honour’s
... functions under ss 26, 34 and 35. The [objection] fails for essentially
three reasons.
First, the fact that there is no question as to who fired the fatal shots does
not mean that evidence as to prior inappropriate excessive
use of force is not
probative as tendency evidence. It is.
For example, it may be probative of Constable Rolfe’s state of mind at
the time of the shooting and it may be probative of
his state of mind in the
lead up to the shooting and whether or not there were less forceful options, or
options that would have
minimised the risk of use of force and been safer for
Constable Rolfe and for Kumanjayi.
Affidavit of Sgt Andrew Barram dated 26 March 2022,
Affidavit of Sgt Andrew Barram dated 26 March 2022,
Constable Rolfe (Submissions dated 27 September 2022),
Constable Rolfe (Submissions dated 27 September 2022),
Constable Rolfe (Submissions dated 27 September 2022),
Constable Rolfe (Submissions dated 27 September 2022), [19],
For example, Sergeant Barram’s expert opinion ... in his report that is
tendered in these proceedings ... – and Sergeant
Barram of course will be
available for cross-examination – is that Constable Rolfe had a tendency
to rush into situations in
such a way as to increase the likelihood of the use
of force scenario.
And that issue is, in my respectful submission, squarely an issue within your
Honour’s remit and should be an issue of concern.
It’s not an issue
I’m inviting your Honour to predetermine now of course. This is just in
relation to the admissibility
of this evidence. Because your Honour is open
minded about these issues and your Honour will give full and fair consideration
Constable Rolfe’s evidence when he comes to give that evidence and the
evidence of other members of the IRT.
[Second, t]here is no real risk of a trial within a trial as suggested by those
appearing for Constable Rolfe. In many cases there
is body worn video footage or
even transcript of a local court hearing that then becomes relevant in
proceedings. If there are particular
witnesses who Constable Rolfe wishes to say
should be added to the witness list ... so that he can fairly represent the
in previous situations where he is said to have used excess force,
then those assisting Constable Rolfe should notify counsel assisting.
have not, at this stage, had any suggestion that any further witnesses should be
added to the witness list in that regard.
Thirdly, and perhaps most importantly, as I’ve stressed previously, your
Honour, one of the significant focusses ... is ...
the supervision of what is
said may be excessive use of force; the supervision by NT Police of Constable
Rolfe in certain circumstances,
but equally, and possibly more importantly going
forward, of other officers in those circumstances. So that any issues in
to potential excessive use of force can be addressed, not necessarily
through discipline, although that might be appropriate, but
at least through
instruction.
accept those submissions. In doing so, I note, and adopt, the observations of Dr
Freckelton AO SC regarding the need for ‘a
rigorous approach’ to the
use of any of this evidence for a ‘tendency’ or
‘propensity’ purpose. Although
permissible in coronial
proceedings,
‘a fair and rigorous analysis is required to
analyse whether proven instances of that prior conduct are available, shown on
proper evidence, and then whether those prior incidents can fairly be
interpreted as manifesting [a relevant] tendency or
propensity’.
Transcript of Proceedings (29 September 2022), 1192-1193.
Priest v West
[2012] VSCA 327
(2012) 40 VR 521
Doomadgee v
(2006) 2 Qd R 352.
Transcript of Proceedings (29 September 2022), 1205.
said this, I agree with the submission of Mr McMahon AC SC that the relevance of
the evidence of Constable Rolfe’s prior
uses of force may not ultimately
depend on whether I characterise them as ‘excessive’, or whether
they give rise to evidence
of a relevant tendency.
submitted that in the lead up to 9 November 2019 Constable Rolfe had accrued a
‘troubling list of use of force complaints’.
addition, he had recently been publicly described by a sitting Northern
Territory judge as having giving evidence justifying an
application of force
that was a ‘pure fabrication’,
and was an active
suspect in an associated investigation for perjury by the Police Force’s
Crime Command.
Accordingly, irrespective of whether he is
ultimately ‘exonerated or not exonerated’, Mr McMahon submitted that
of the long list of use of force complaints’
that may bear upon the adequacy of the Police Force’s supervision and
of Constable Rolfe in the lead up to 9 November 2019, and, in
particular, the assessment that he was suitable for deployment with
Accordingly,
I will receive the evidence under s 39 of the Act at this stage.
Category F: evidence concerning the possibility of prior
recreational drug use by Constable Rolfe
Category G: evidence concerning the procedures of
NT Police in relation to drug and alcohol testing
relevant prima evidence of recreational drug use by Constable Rolfe is contained
in the text-messages on the phone download. Other
evidence within this category
includes passages of the affidavit of Deputy Commission Murray Smalpage and the
statutory declaration
of Professor Alexander McFarlane AO, psychiatrist.
Constable Rolfe submits that because there is no evidence that Constable Rolfe
was affected by recreational drugs or alcohol at the time he shot
Transcript of Proceedings (29 September 2022), 1198.
of Proceedings (29 September 2022), 1198. Whether that characterisation is
justified is a matter for another day.
of Proceedings,
Police v Malcolm Ryder
(Local Court of the Northern
Territory, Alice Springs, 9 September 2022, Judge Borchers), 9.
Northern Territory Police Force, Memorandum to Superintendent Special References
Unit by Detective Sgt Sonia Kennon, dated 17
October 2022.
and killed Kumanjayi Walker, there is no logical connection between the evidence
and the subject matters of ss 26, 34 or 35 of the
agree that there is no evidence that suggests that Constable Rolfe was affected
by recreational drugs or alcohol at the time he
shot and killed Kumanjayi
Walker. But nor is there any objective evidence that he was not affected by
recreational drugs or alcohol.
That is because Constable Rolfe was not tested
for those substances after the shooting.
Deputy Commissioner Smalpage notes in his first affidavit, ‘in Australia,
all other jurisdictions can require police officers
to submit to drug and
alcohol testing following the discharge of a firearm.’
public policy served by such testing is obvious. In my view, whether and if so
in what way the Police Force of the Northern Territory
ought to have been
empowered, or obliged, to test Constable Rolfe for illicit drugs following the
shooting of Kumanjayi Walker is
a matter relevant to the administration of
justice connected with the death under ss 26(1)(b), 34(2) and 35(2) of the Act.
as Deputy Commissioner Smalpage himself notes, the Police Force is
pursuing the implementation of suitable drug and alcohol
testing powers. Amendments to the
Police Administration Regulations
being progressed to implement drug and alcohol testing. The anticipated
commencement date of the drug and alcohol testing regime
is December 2022. A
General Order: Drug and Alcohol Testing of Police Officers
developed and will be promulgated once the
Police Administration Regulations
– Drugs and Alcohol Testing
come into force.
apart from the issue of
drug use, at the time of Kumanjayi
Walker’s death there is evidence that Constable Rolfe had recently been
prescribed a medication
that may also have impacted upon his decision-making,
Escitalopram. Accordingly, the direct outcome of routine drug testing may have
been that the Police Force identified that Constable Rolfe was taking a drug
that, in Professor McFarlane’s view, is ‘likely
to have impacted on
his capacity for behavioural inhibition to threat.’
indirect outcome may have been that the Police Force
Affidavit of Deputy Commissioner of Police Murray Smalpage
dated 12 July 2022, [338].
Affidavit of Deputy Commissioner of Police Murray Smalpage
dated 12 July 2022, [338].
Statutory Declaration of Professor Alexander McFarlane dated
15 July 2020, 4.
identified that Constable Rolfe was suffering from a psychiatric condition that
is ‘associated with significant difficulties
with information processing
and threat perception’ and is ‘likely to have impacted upon
Constable Rolfe's capacity to
respond in an appropriate and measured way at the
time of the attempted arrest of Mr Walker on 9 November 2019.’
Accordingly, the evidence may prove relevant to my assessment of
‘the cause of death’, or constitute a ‘relevant
circumstance
connected with the death’, pursuant to s 34 of the Act.
Accordingly,
I will receive the evidence under s 39 of the Act at this stage.
Category H: exploration of whether the evidence in the
criminal trial of Constable Rolfe was ‘contaminated’
this category of objection appears not to be covered by the Schedule of
Objections, it is convenient to quote directly from
Constable Rolfe’s
written submissions:
As this inquest has developed, Counsel Assisting has sought opinions from
witnesses in relation to the appropriateness of a barbecue
held at Rolfe’s
Commissioner Wurst was questioned
gathering, which was in contravention of general orders relating to the
separation of police
officers following a fatal incident, considered [sic] that
there was a real potential for evidence, including that of Rolfe at trial,
have been contaminated by such a gathering. Constable Rolfe objects to that line
of questioning.
as it contains a description of the evidence, that passage is accurate. It
appears that on 10 November 2019 Constable Rolfe
attended a social gathering
with a relatively large number of police officers, including witnesses to the
events of 9 November 2019.
to the relevance of the evidence, Constable Rolfe’s written submissions
appear to concede that this social gathering
contravened the General Order
Statutory Declaration of Professor Alexander McFarlane dated
15 July 2020, 4-5.
Constable Rolfe (Submissions dated 27 September 2022),
Deaths in Custody,
which mandates that ‘[a]ll members,
whether directly or indirectly involved in the incident, are to be segregated
from all other
witnesses, including other police immediately after the
and that ‘communication between such
witnesses is [must be] prevented’.
Certainly, that was the
opinion of Assistant Commissioner Travis Wurst.
His concerns
applied ‘particularly to Constable Rolfe, who ... hadn’t provided a
statement at that point in time’.
Assistant Commissioner
Wurst’s evidence was that this gathering ‘had the potential to
contaminate the version of events
that Constable Rolfe eventually
Constable Rolfe’s objection focusses on the social gathering on 10
November 2019, other material raises similar concerns.
For example, also on 10
November 2019 a member of Constable Rolfe’s patrol group and the
texted Constable Rolfe with what on one view is a suggestion
as to how he should justify his decision to shoot Kumanjayi Walker. Including
all factual and spelling errors, the relevant part of the text message
The member has to answer his critics with IAMO +P.
I= Intent... the shit cunt was telling them he was going to stab the
A= ABILITY. He had the ability to do so because he both said it and
was a young fit male who (looking at Rolfe) would have had size disparity.
M= Means. He had an edged weapon and told the police he (more tham like said)
was going kill them.
O= OPPORTUNITY.
Northern Territory Police Force, ‘General Order: Deaths
in Custody, and Investigation of Serious and/or Fatal Incidents Resulting
Police Contact with the Public (OP-C1)’ (Dated 10 November 2011 and
updated on 8 September 2016).
Northern Territory Police Force, ‘General Order: Deaths
in Custody, and Investigation of Serious and/or Fatal Incidents Resulting
Police Contact with the Public (OP-C1)’ (Dated 10 November 2011 and
updated on 8 September 2016), [26.1]
Northern Territory Police Force, ‘General Order: Deaths
in Custody, and Investigation of Serious and/or Fatal Incidents Resulting
Police Contact with the Public (OP-C1)’ (Dated 10 November 2011 and
updated on 8 September 2016), [15].
Transcript of Proceedings (26 September 2022), 998.
Transcript of Proceedings (26 September 2022), 998.
Transcript of Proceedings (26 September 2022), 998.
Although not a member deployed on 9 November 2019.
The members let him get close enough to be afforded the opportunity to stab one
of them and coupled with all of the above. IAMO
+P = PRECLUSION
"I was precluded from all other options available to me, (being distance, time,
cover, taser, baton, spray, etc) so I had no other
option but to protect myself
and those with me by shooting the offender to gain immediate subject control and
incapacitation...
That what I did (taught by some very experienced old members in 1994)
Never forget it. IAMO +P.
When asked about these messages, Assistant Commissioner Wurst agreed that it
was ‘extremely concerning that another officer
is texting Constable Rolfe
with what appears to be suggestions as to how evidence should be given about
what occurred in [House
Counsel Assisting submitted, the purpose of this evidence is not to assist me to
determine whether the evidence in the
criminal trial
of Constable Rolfe
was contaminated – its purpose is to assist me to assess ‘the
credibility and reliability of the
evidence which is now available to [me] in
Coronial proceedings
In addition, it may be
necessary to make a finding, comment or recommendation about the consistency of
the post-incident police conduct
with the General Order on Deaths in Custody,
which could constitute a ‘matter [concerning] the administration of
connected with the death’.
Ultimately, Counsel
Assisting urged me to,
consider the evidence that is now available to [me] in these Coronial
proceedings and to make a determination whether or not, contrary
to the General
Order that requires officers to be separated before a version is given, and
contrary to the direction in that General
Order that every effort be made to
preserve independent accounts, whether or not in fact accounts have been
Transcript of Proceedings (26 September 2022), 1062.
Transcript of Proceedings (29 September 2022), 1194.
See, ss 26(1)(b), 34(2) and 35(2).
Transcript of Proceedings (29 September 2022), 1194.
agree that this inquiry is appropriately directed to my ultimate functions
under ss 26, 34 and 35 of the Act. Accordingly, I will
receive the evidence at
this stage under s 39 of the Act.
for the NAAJA Report which has not yet been considered, under s 39 of the Act I
will at this stage receive the evidence in the
Schedule of Objections.
Dated this 14
day of October 2022.
_________________________
ELISABETH ARMITAGE TERRITORY CORONER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.04 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter