URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCA/2025/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:16:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Young v Chief Executive Officer (Housing) [2025] NTCA 5 (9 May 2025)
Young v Chief Executive Officer (Housing)
[2025] NTCA 5
PARTIES: YOUNG, Matthew Wayne in his capacity as Administrator of the Estate
of Kwementyaye Young (deceased)
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER (HOUSING)
TITLE OF COURT: NORTHERN TERRITORY COURT OF APPEAL
FILE NO: AP 8 of 2020 (21911211)
DELIVERED: 9 May 2025
HEARING DATE: 15 August 2024
JUDGMENT OF: Grant CJ, Huntingford J & Riley AJ
CATCHWORDS:
LEASES AND TENANCIES – Residential tenancies — Assessment of
compensation
Whether Supreme Court erred in calculation of compensation under
s 122(1) of the
Residential Tenancies Act
for breach of obligation
to ensure premises reasonably secure – Whether amount of compensation
awarded manifestly inadequate
– Compensation assessed on flawed legal
basis – Order for compensation set aside – Matter remitted to the
for determination.
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
Young v Chief Executive Officer (Housing)
[2023] HCA 31
(2023) 278 CLR 208
Baltic Shipping Co v Dillon
[1993] HCA 4
(1993) 176 CLR 344
Bond v Weeks
[1999] 1 Qd R 134
Development Consent
Authority v Phelps
[2010] NTCA 3
(2010) 27 NTLR 174
Henville v Walker
[2001] HCA 52
Herbert v An Assessor (Victims of Crime Assistance Act) &
[2022] NTSC 76
Miller v Jennings
[1954] HCA 65
(1954) 92 CLR 190
Scenic Tours Pty Ltd
[2020] HCA 17
(2020) 268 CLR 326
Osland v Secretary, Department
[2010] HCA 24
(2010) 241 CLR 320
O'Toole v Charles David Pty Ltd
171 CLR 232,
Progressive Mailing House Pty Ltd v Tabali Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 14
Tiver Constructions Pty Ltd v Clair
[1992] NTSC 86
(1992) 110 FLR 239
Union Steamship Co of Australia Pty Ltd v King
[1988] HCA 55
(1988) 166 CLR 1
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: M Albert
Respondent: N Christrup SC (Solicitor-General for the Northern Territory)
with H Baddeley
Solicitors:
Appellant: Daniel Kelly
Respondent: Mills Oakley
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 32
IN THE COURT OF APPEAL
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Young v Chief Executive Officer (Housing)
[2025] NTCA
No AP 8 of 2020 (21911211)
MATTHEW WAYNE YOUNG IN HIS CAPACITY AS ADMINISTRATOR OF THE ESTATE OF
KWEMENTYAYE YOUNG (DECEASED)
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER (HOUSING)
CORAM: GRANT CJ, HUNTINGFORD J & RILEY AJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 9 May 2025)
[1] This is an
appeal from a decision of the Supreme Court delivered on 8 September
, allowing in part an appeal
from a determination by the Northern Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal
) delivered on 27 February 2019 concerning the
entitlement to compensation pursuant to
Residential
Tenancies Act 1999
(NT) for breaches of various obligations alleged to have
been committed in the course of two residential
[2] This aspect
of the appeal concerns the assertions that the Supreme Court erred in its
approach to the calculation of compensation
Residential Tenancies Act
and, or in the alternative, that the amount of
compensation awarded was manifestly inadequate. These proceedings have a long
convoluted procedural history. A proper understanding of the issues raised
by this appeal requires the traversal of that
Proceedings before the Tribunal
material times, Kwementyaye Young (
the appellant
) was the tenant of
residential premises in Santa Teresa, an Aboriginal community located 80
kilometres south-east of Alice Springs.
The Chief Executive Officer (Housing)
) is a corporation sole established by
(NT) and was the landlord within the meaning of the
Residential
Tenancies Act
February 2016, the appellant and another tenant filed Initiating Applications in
the Tribunal seeking orders under
Residential Tenancies
requiring the CEO to effect emergency repairs to the premises.
Subsequently, the relief sought was amended to include a claim for
compensation
Residential Tenancies Act
for a breach of the
landlord’s obligation to repair the premises under
Residential Tenancies Act
; or, in the alternative, for a breach of the
landlord’s obligation to ensure that the premises were
‘habitable’
Residential Tenancies Act
or, in respect of some items, for a breach of the landlord’s obligation to
ensure the premises were reasonably secure under
Residential
Tenancies Act
[5] The CEO
counterclaimed against the appellant for compensation under
Residential Tenancies Act
for unpaid rent under a written tenancy
agreement made on 14 December 2011; and for compensation under that same
provision for loss
suffered as a result of the appellant’s failure to
properly maintain the premises in breach of the terms of the written tenancy
agreement and the term incorporated by
Residential Tenancies
. The CEO withdrew the claim against the appellant for unpaid rent during
the course of the hearing of the matter before the Tribunal.
[6] So far as is
relevant for present purposes, the Tribunal found:
(a) in order to establish a breach of the CEO’s obligation to ensure that
the premises were ‘habitable’ under
Residential Tenancies Act
, the state of the premises must have been such
that there was ‘a threat to the tenant’s safety, going to both
and health issues’;
(b) the obligation was on the tenant to establish that the state of the premises
was such that a threat to the tenant’s safety
would naturally occur from
the ordinary use of the
(c) a bent perimeter fence surrounding the appellant’s premises did not
constitute a breach of the duties incorporated by
Residential Tenancies
(d) there was no evidence that a leak under the kitchen sink at the
appellant’s premises was in breach of the CEO’s obligation
that the premises were ‘habitable’ under
Residential Tenancies Act
, and the leak was repaired in compliance with
the obligation under
Residential Tenancies
(e) there was no evidence that a leaking shower head or drain at the
appellant’s premises was in breach of the CEO’s
obligation to ensure
that the premises were ‘habitable’ under
Residential Tenancies Act
, or in breach of the obligation to repair under
Residential Tenancies
(f) the failure to equip the appellant’s premises with an air conditioner
was, in the months of January, November and December
each year, in breach of the
CEO’s obligation to ensure that the premises were ‘habitable’
Residential Tenancies
during the period from 13 November 2011 up until 31 January 2016 when an
air conditioner was installed;
(g) the manner in which the air conditioner was subsequently installed at the
appellant’s premises was not in breach of the
CEO’s obligation to
ensure that the premises were ‘habitable’ under
Residential Tenancies Act
or the obligation to repair under
Residential Tenancies
(h) as a result of the CEO’s breach of
Residential
Tenancies Act
in failing to install an air conditioner during the relevant
period, the appellant was entitled to compensation for loss and damage
amount of $4735.80 (being a refund of the rent paid for the relevant months
during the period between 13 November 2011 and
5 October 2016), and $4000
for the distress arising from the physical inconvenience caused by the
(i) the CEO’s failure to replace a missing back door on the
appellant’s premises for over six weeks was in breach of
the duty to
repair under
Residential Tenancies Act
absence of a back door did not constitute a breach of the CEO’s obligation
to ensure that the premises were ‘habitable’
Residential Tenancies Act
or to take reasonable steps to ensure the
premises were reasonably secure under
Residential
Tenancies Act
(j) there was no evidence that any problem with the toilet at the
appellant’s premises was in breach of the CEO’s obligation
that the premises were ‘habitable’ under
Residential Tenancies Act
, but the CEO failed to act with reasonable
diligence to have the toilet repaired during the period from 22 January to
8 April 2016
in breach of the obligation under
Residential Tenancies
(k) the CEO failed to act with reasonable diligence to have the stove at the
appellant’s premises repaired during the period
from November 2015 to
mid-April 2016, in breach of the obligation under
Residential Tenancies
(l) as a result of the CEO’s breaches of
Residential Tenancies Act
in failing to replace the missing back door and
to repair the stove in a timely fashion, the appellant was entitled to
damages’ in the amounts of $100 and $200 respectively in
the absence of evidence as to specific loss and
Proceedings before the Supreme Court
appellant brought an appeal to the Supreme Court asserting that the Tribunal
made various errors of law in its determination.
So far as is relevant for
present purposes, the Supreme Court found:
(a) the Tribunal erred in construing the term ‘habitable’ in
Residential Tenancies Act
as limited to matters
bearing on a tenant’s health and safety, and the appellant’s claim
Residential Tenancies Act
in respect of the
defects was remitted to the Tribunal for determination on the basis that the
assessment of habitability includes
‘an overall assessment of the
humaneness, suitability and reasonable comfort of the premises ... judged
against contemporary
standards’;
(b) the Tribunal erred in finding that the CEO’s failure to furnish the
appellant’s premises with a back door did not
constitute a breach of the
CEO’s obligation to take reasonable steps to ensure the premises were
reasonably secure under
Residential Tenancies Act
(c) the appellant was therefore entitled to compensation under
Residential Tenancies Act
in the amount of $10,200 ($150 per month for 68
months) for distress and disappointment caused by the failure to provide secure
[8] The relevant
effect of the Supreme Court’s determination in relation to habitability
was broadly as follows. The appellant
claimed her house was not
‘habitable’ within the meaning of
Residential
Tenancies Act
because of any, or a combination, of a number of defects. They
were: (a) the showerhead and drain leaking for 2117 days; (b) the
toilet having
a poor flush mechanism which did not clear waste for 534 days; (c) a leak under
the kitchen sink for 477 days; (d)
the absence of a back door for 2090
days; (e) the perimeter fence being bent to the ground for 2328 days; (f) the
lights and fans
being removed and the circuit breaker turned off for 58 days;
(g) wires being left exposed and dangling from the ceiling the 58 days;
being left without an air conditioner for 2121
[9] The Tribunal
had determined that the only defect in breach of the CEO’s obligation to
ensure that the premises were ‘habitable’
Residential Tenancies Act
was the absence of an air conditioner for a
period of 540 days.
Having found
that the Tribunal had erred in relation to the meaning of the term
‘habitable’ in
Residential Tenancies Act
the Supreme Court allowed the appeal in that respect and remitted the matter
the claim under
Residential Tenancies Act
]’. What that means is that it remains
for the Tribunal to determine whether each of the defects asserted by the
appellant was
of a character which rendered the premises not
‘habitable’ in the relevant sense and, if so, to determine the
of compensation payable in respect of that breach. That includes the
determination made in relation to the absence of air conditioning,
to the extent
that it was based on the erroneous premise that the assessment of habitability
was limited to matters bearing on a
tenant’s health and safety.
Tribunal had awarded the appellant compensation for the absence of the back door
only for breach of the landlord’s
obligation to repair under
Residential Tenancies Act
, and then only in the nominal amount of
$100 to reflect the six-week period which ran from when the CEO received notice
of the defect
to when it was rectified. The Tribunal had rejected the
appellant’s alternative claim that the absence of a back door for 2090
days constituted a breach of the term incorporated by
Residential Tenancies Act
that ‘the landlord will take reasonable
steps to provide and maintain the locks and other security devices that are
to ensure the premises and ancillary property are reasonably
secure’. During the course of the appeal before the Supreme Court,
conceded that in doing so the Tribunal was in error. In terms which are
extracted and discussed further below in the context
of the proceedings before
the Court of Appeal, the Supreme Court awarded the appellant compensation for
her ‘reduced enjoyment
of the premises and subsequent distress and
disappointment due to the failure to provide a premises which was
proceedings before the Court of Appeal
[11] The CEO
brought an appeal from the decision of the Supreme Court to the Court of Appeal
on various grounds which included, so
far as is relevant for present
(a) that the Supreme Court erred in construing
Residential Tenancies Act
by holding that the term
‘habitable’ requires an overall assessment of humaneness,
suitability and reasonable comfort
of the premises judged against contemporary
standards; and
(b) that the Supreme Court erred in finding that the tenancy agreement between
the CEO and the appellant was an agreement whose object
was to provide
enjoyment, relaxation or freedom from molestation and was therefore governed by
the second limb of the principle in
concerning damages
for distress and disappointment for breach of contract.
reviewing the jurisprudential history of the concept of habitability in tenancy
law, the Court of Appeal concluded that
the Tribunal had fallen into error in
its approach to the construction of the term ‘habitable’ by limiting
the relevant
consideration to matters bearing on a tenant’s health and
safety, and that the Supreme Court was correct in ordering that the
should be remitted to the Tribunal for reconsideration of the claims for
compensation made on that ground.
[13] However,
the Court of Appeal also found that the statement by the Supreme Court of the
test to be applied in determining
habitability
should not be
adopted in its entirety in that reconsideration. In particular, the Court of
Appeal stated that a finding that premises
are not fit for habitation should not
be made lightly, and the criteria of ‘humaneness’ and
‘suitability’
suggested by the Supreme Court did not assist in that
determination. Rather, the relevant test of habitability involves considerations
of comfort, health and safety to be judged against a standard of reasonableness
having regard to the age, character and locality
of the residential premises and
the effect of the defect on the state or condition of the premises as a
The Court of Appeal
dismissed that ground of appeal subject to those
observations.
[14] In the
other presently relevant ground of appeal, the CEO asserted that the Supreme
Court erred in law in finding that the tenancy
agreement between the CEO and the
appellant was an agreement whose object was to provide enjoyment, relaxation or
freedom from molestation,
and in the consequential finding that an award of
compensation for the breach of a term incorporated by the
Residential
Tenancies Act
was therefore governed by ‘the second limb of the
principle in
Baltic Shipping
’ concerning damages for distress and
disappointment for breach of contract. The Supreme Court’s reasoning and
conclusions
in that respect were as follows (citations
Both parties recognise the principles from
Shipping Co v Dillon
apply to residential tenancies. The respondent
recognised distress and disappointment arising from physical inconvenience is
but the circumstances here should not be aligned with cases where the
contract breached is one whose object is to providing enjoyment
and relaxation.
Any award made in favour of Ms Young under
of the RTA may compensate
for the physical inconvenience caused by the breach of contract or statutory
provisions such as
of the RTA. While I agree with the respondent
that the circumstances here are far removed from those in
, distress and disappointment arising from physical inconvenience
may form part of an award of compensation. Since the hearing of
the appeal,
counsel have drawn attention to and made further submissions on the recent High
Court decision of
Moore v Scenic Tours Pty Ltd
which confirmed various
elements of
Baltic Shipping
. Counsel for the appellants pointed out that
Moore v Scenic Tours
, the Court made reference to compensation arising
in respect of “vexation and frustration”, “humiliation,
indignity...grief,
anxiety and distress, not involving a recognised
psychological condition” and ‘depression of spirit’. The Court
also endorsed the following passage by Brennan J in
Baltic Shipping
“[I]f peaceful and comfortable accommodation is promised ... and the
accommodation tendered does not answer the description,
there is a breach which
directly causes the loss of the promised peacefulness and comfort and damages
are recoverable accordingly.”
The tenancy agreement here is very different to a contract offering holiday
makers enjoyment and relaxation. The statutory guarantee
underpinning the
tenancy agreement is fundamental and promised secure premises. The principles
and observations drawn from both
Baltic Shipping
Moore v Scenic
Tours Pty Ltd
must be heavily calibrated appropriately to the circumstances
of Ms Young’s reduced enjoyment of the premises and subsequent
and disappointment due to the failure to provide a premises which was secure.
Although I am prepared to accept the application
of those principles, heavily
calibrated to include frustration and distress, compensation here cannot be
based on a proportion of
the damages in
Moore v Scenic Tours Pty Ltd
was suggested by the appellants.
I would assess compensation under
of the RTA in the sum of $10,200.
This is based on $150 per month for 68
[15] The parties
were in disagreement as to whether, by those reasons, the Supreme Court did in
fact make an award of compensation
in the application of ‘the second limb
of the principle in
Baltic Shipping
’. Counsel for the appellant
contended that in saying ‘[a]ny award made in favour of [the appellant]
of the RTA may compensate for the physical inconvenience caused
by the breach of contract or statutory provisions such as
RTA’, the Supreme Court determined to limit the award of compensation to
distress and disappointment contingent on physical
inconvenience. The Court of
Appeal found that the more likely import of those reasons, as near as could be
determined, was that the
Supreme Court had awarded compensation for
‘reduced enjoyment of the premises and subsequent distress and
disappointment due to the failure to provide a premises which
was secure’,
albeit on a ‘heavily calibrated’ basis. That was best construed as a
reference to the second limb
of damages in
Baltic Shipping
, rather than
an award of damages for distress and disappointment arising exclusively from
inconvenience.
[16] The Court
of Appeal then went on to consider whether the power to award compensation under
Residential Tenancies Act
was subject to the same
strictures which govern the award of damages under the law of contract, and
whether the power to award compensation
under that provision for the breach of a
term of a tenancy agreement incorporated by the statute extended to compensation
for distress
and disappointment for a failure to provide quiet enjoyment and/or
secure premises. After reviewing a range of decisions dealing
with that general
issue, the Court of Appeal determined that the Supreme Court had fallen into
error in finding that compensation
could be awarded consistently with the second
limb of the principle in
Baltic Shipping
concerning damages for distress
and disappointment for breach of contract. This ground of appeal was allowed on
Proceedings
before the High Court
appellant then brought an appeal to the High Court from the Court of
Appeal’s determination. The issue for determination
on that appeal was
described in joint reasons by three members of the five-member bench to be
‘whether [the Tribunal] is empowered
Residential Tenancies Act
] to order that a landlord compensate a tenant
for distress or disappointment suffered by the tenant as a normal healthy
to a failure on the part of the landlord to comply with a statutorily
imposed term of a residential tenancy agreement that the landlord
reasonable steps to provide and maintain security devices necessary to ensure
that residential premises are reasonably
While that formulation of the dispositive question was directed specifically to
the Supreme Court’s finding in relation to
the absence of the back door in
breach of the term incorporated by
Residential Tenancies
, it has a more general application to the award of compensation under
Residential Tenancies Act
for the breach of a term
of a tenancy agreement.
answering that question, the three-member joint reasons state that the Court of
Appeal was correct to find that the language
Residential Tenancies Act
requires an applicant to establish a causal
connection between breach and compensable loss and damage, which might require a
consideration
of issues falling under the general rubric of remoteness; and that
Residential Tenancies Act
provided for the application of the general
law of contract by making certain obligations terms of a tenancy agreement and
enforceable contractual obligations.
[19] However,
the joint reasons found that the Court of Appeal had erred in finding that the
measure of compensation capable of being
ordered under
Residential Tenancies Act
for breach of a term of the tenancy agreement
was confined by reference to the measure of damages available in a common law
for breach of contract. Rather,
Residential
Tenancies Act
provides for the award of compensation as an alternative to
common law damages. The task of the Tribunal in determining statutory
compensation ‘is to arrive at a measure of compensation which conforms to
the purposes of the Act and to the justice and equity
of the case, having regard
to the nature and purpose of the particular obligation with which there has been
failure to comply’.
joint reasons concluded:
The evident purpose of the obligation
specified by
of the Act to be a term of a tenancy agreement, with which
the CEO as landlord failed to comply, is ensuring that premises occupied
tenant for the purpose of residency are reasonably secure. For a tenant to be
secure in the occupation of premises is for the
tenant to reside there free from
threat of harm or unwanted access. The feeling of insecurity which Ms Young
experienced because
of the landlord's failure to provide the residential
premises with a back door was the obverse of the security which it was the
of that obligation to secure. The connection between the landlord's
breach and the distress and disappointment suffered by Ms Young
satisfied the causal connection required by the word "because" in
[20] On that
formulation, the question whether a particular form or type of statutory
compensation is available in relation to a breach
is essentially one of
statutory construction, and in this case is not answered by whether damages for
distress and disappointment
would have been available in an action for breach of
contract at common law.
[21] The other
two members of the High Court took a different approach to the issue, which was
also described and delivered in joint
reasons. That approach proceeded from the
premise that in the creation of terms the
Residential Tenancies Act
presupposed the operation of general contract law rules, and even if it did not,
in determining the payment of compensation, including
limits to the
recoverability of compensation, the Tribunal would be informed by ‘the
common law rules that have been developed
incrementally over
centuries’.
reasons then stated, by way of summary of the analysis which
... the common law rules concerning limitation of recovery
of compensation or damages for breach of contract preclude recovery of
for disappointment and distress where that disappointment and distress is not
consequential upon physical injury or physical
inconvenience. That is, damages
for disappointment and distress are not available at common law unless an object
of the contract,
or the specific term that is breached, was concerned with the
promisee's state of mind. The relevant contract term breached in this
its focus upon the safety and security of the premises, had an object which
included providing the tenant with security
and peace of
[22] In reaching
that ultimate conclusion, the two-member joint reasons drew a distinction
between the assessment of compensation
s 122(1)(a)
Residential Tenancies Act
for a failure to comply with a term of the
tenancy agreement; the assessment of compensation under
s 122(1)(a)
failure to comply with an obligation in the nature of a statutory civil duty or
statutory offence; and the assessment of compensation
s 122(1)(b)
recovery of an overpayment. The legislation manifests an intention that those
different types of claims be treated differently.
The first type of claim
requires no analogy with the general law because it is a breach of contract
attracting the operation of the
common law rules. The second type of claim
involves a remedy for breach of a statutory obligation, the formulation of which
not necessarily be assisted by an attempt to draw an analogy with any
particular form of claim under the general law. The third type
of claim involves
the remedy of restitution in a liquidated sum of a quite different nature from
the remedy of damages.
[23] Although
both sets of joint reasons determined that the appeal should be allowed, and
there is no ‘majority’ or ‘dissent’
in the result, the
respective reasons for that outcome are markedly different. As the CEO submits,
ratio decidendi
is the legal rule expressed or necessarily implied by
reasons for judgment to which a majority of the participating judges assent
necessary step in reaching that
conclusion.
In accordance with
that formulation, the
of the decision is as expressed in the
three-member joint reasons to the effect that the availability of compensation
Residential Tenancies Act
is not confined by the
common law principles of remoteness addressed in
Baltic Shipping
common law principles generally. It is a matter of statutory interpretation
having regard to the nature and purpose of the obligation
with which there has
been a failure to comply, and the operation of the considerations and exclusions
stipulated in
Residential Tenancies Act
three-member reasons concluded that as a matter of statutory construction the
evident purpose of the obligation to ensure
the premises are reasonably secure
is to enable the tenant to reside there free from the threat of harm or unwanted
access. In the
particular circumstances of this case, any resultant distress or
disappointment arising from feelings of insecurity which the appellant
as a result of that failure would be compensable, subject to the operation of
the relevant statutory considerations and
exclusions. As with the dispositive
question, the analysis underlying that
has the potential
application beyond the obligation in
Residential Tenancies
to all terms and obligations incorporated into a tenancy
The remaining issues
appellant’s appeal against the decision of the Supreme Court has
effectively been held in abeyance pending the determination
of the CEO’s
appeal on the grounds that the Supreme Court had erred in the construction of
the term ‘habitable’
and in finding that the character of the
relevant tenancy agreement attracted the second limb of the principle in
Baltic Shipping
concerning damages for distress and disappointment for
breach of contract. The first issue has now been resolved by the decision of
Court of Appeal and the second issue has now been resolved by the decision of
the High Court.
[26] As part of
the High Court’s determination, Order 4 made by the Court of Appeal was
set aside. That order (or declaration)
was that the Supreme Court erred in
finding that the tenancy agreement was one for which damages could be recovered
for disappointment
and distress independently of any physical inconvenience. The
effect of the High Court’s order in that respect was to recognise,
accordance with the
of the decision, that the recoverability of
compensation for disappointment and distress following a breach of
Residential Tenancies Act
is not governed by common law principles
of contract, and in particular by the
Baltic Shipping
formulation.
addition, orders were made by consent at the commencement of the hearing in the
High Court to set aside Order 5 made by the
Court of Appeal, which had
mistakenly set aside Order 5 made by the Supreme Court assessing compensation
for the claim under
Residential Tenancies Act
sum of $10,200. The purpose and effect of the High Court’s order in that
respect was to leave extant the appellant’s
pending appeal in the Court of
Appeal concerning the quantification of damages for that breach, and to stay the
operation of the
relevant Supreme Court order pending determination of the
[28] Order 5
made by the Supreme Court remains in place in the following
The decision of the Tribunal to dismiss [the
appellant’s] claim under
Residential Tenancies Act
is set aside. The [CEO] is to pay compensation under
Residential Tenancies Act
to [the appellant] in the sum of $10,200.
appellant’s appeal is expressed to be brought from Order 5 and paragraphs
[90], [91] and [93] of the reasons of the
Supreme Court which have been
extracted above. The grounds of appeal are:
learned primary judge erred by characterising the tenancy agreement between the
parties not as one ‘whose object is to provide
enjoyment and
relaxation’, and consequently only compensated the Appellant for
‘physical inconvenience’ arising
as a result of the protracted
tenancy agreement breach by the landlord.
learned primary judge erred by ‘heavily calibrat[ing] the principles and
observations drawn from both
Baltic Shipping [Co v Dillon
[1993] HCA 4
176 CLR 344]
Moore v Scenic Tours Pty Ltd
[2020] HCA 17
calculating compensation under
Residential Tenancies Act
learned primary judge erred by calculating compensation under
Residential Tenancies Act 1999
(NT) other than on the basis that was fair
and reasonable for ‘a fundamental failing by the landlord to provide
secure premises of a ground level house [of] an elderly woman who was
left vulnerable to proven animal intruders and potentially
intruders’ for 68 months. That is, the award of $4.93 per day of that
breach was manifestly inadequate.
appellant does not press ground 1 on the basis that, as has already been
described above, the Court of Appeal found that
the Supreme Court had in fact
awarded compensation for distress and disappointment other than exclusively on
the basis of physical
inconvenience.
No challenge was
brought against that finding in the appeal to the High Court and it remains
undisturbed.
[31] The parties
are at odds in relation to the viability of ground 2. The appellant says that it
remains for determination, and that
it should be allowed and the decision set
aside on the basis that the principles from
Baltic Shipping
should not be
in any way modified in the assessment of compensation under
Residential Tenancies Act
Conversely, the CEO says that on the basis of
the High Court’s determination on appeal, the common law principles
Baltic Shipping
do not apply to either the availability or
the assessment of compensation under
Residential Tenancies
, whether modified and ‘calibrated’ or not. Accordingly, the
ground of appeal now proceeds from a flawed premise and should
appellant resists that submission on the basis that the common law principle
should be taken to have application because
the members of the High Court were
unanimous as to the result; the three-member joint reasons did not expressly
disavow the reasoning
in the two-member joint reasons; and two justices may
constitute a Full Court of the High
. That argument must be
rejected. The relevant claim was exclusively for statutory compensation under
Residential Tenancies Act
. It was not, and is not, an
action for damages at common law for breach of contract, and nor would the
Tribunal have jurisdiction
to entertain such a claim. For the reasons already
described, the
of the High Court’s decision is that the
availability of compensation under
Residential Tenancies
is a matter of statutory interpretation having regard to the nature and
purpose of the obligation with which there has been a failure
to comply, and
does not import the common law principles of remoteness addressed in
[33] Although
one consequence of that conclusion was that the second ground of appeal before
the High Court concerning the content
and application of those common law
principles did not require consideration and
determination
, it is plain from
the three-member joint reasons that common law principles of recovery do not
govern the award of statutory
compensation
. That is because
the premise underlying the three-member determination is that the availability
of compensation under
Residential Tenancies Act
breach of a term of a tenancy agreement is not confined by reference to the type
or measure of damages that could be ordered
by a court in a common law action
for breach of contract
to the express requirement in
that the applicant for compensation
must mitigate his or her loss or damage in the same way as if the applicant were
a plaintiff
in a common law action for damages for breach of
premise is not displaced by the fact that the principles of common law may
provide ‘useful guidance’ and ‘valuable
insight’ for the
assessment of statutory compensation by analogy with causes of action available
at general law.
submits, the principles from
Baltic Shipping
concern the availability of
damages for distress and disappointment in a common law claim for damages for
breach of contract, and
the Supreme Court was applying those principles to the
determination of whether statutory compensation was available.
[35] For that
reason, ground 2 should be dismissed. However, the dismissal of this ground is
irrelevant in a practical sense because
the appellant’s contentions and
related interests under ground 2 are largely subsumed by the contention in
ground 3 that the
award did not compensate ‘a fundamental failing by the
landlord to provide reasonably secure premises of a ground level house
elderly woman who was left vulnerable to proven animal intruders and potentially
human intruders’
therefore manifestly inadequate. The assessment of compensation made by the
Supreme Court must necessarily be set aside,
but not on the ground of manifest
inadequacy. In an appeal against a discretionary determination of this type,
where the appellate
court finds that some specific error has been made in the
exercise of the discretion, which would include a finding that the court
acted on a wrong principle of
, the decision must be set
[36] In the
application of the
of the High Court’s determination on
appeal, the manifest error on the part of the Supreme Court was to proceed on
that the availability of compensation was to be determined in
accordance with the common law principles of recoverability expressed
Baltic Shipping
. That obviates any determination of whether the
assessment of compensation was so unreasonable or plainly unjust it may be
that the exercise of the discretion miscarried in the absence of
discernible error. That is because the Supreme Court’s assessment
compensation was based at the threshold on the application of common law
principles now held to be inapplicable.
[37] That leaves
the question whether this Court of Appeal should undertake the task of assessing
compensation for the breach and
substituting its own determination for that made
by the Supreme Court, or whether the matter should be remitted for determination
to either the Supreme Court or the Tribunal. The appellant says that task should
be undertaken by the Court of Appeal. The principal
bases on which that
submission is put are that the assessment of compensation by this Court would
forestall further delay in the
matter and authoritatively determine both the
principles to be applied having regard to the High Court’s decision and
of compensation properly awarded for these types of breach.
appellant's further submission that a statement made in the two-member joint
reasons in the High Court compels the Court
of Appeal to conduct the assessment
of compensation should be rejected. What the joint reasons say in that respect
is that 'orders
compensation, and any substitute amount,
should be made in the pending appeal to the Court of Appeal' (emphasis by
underlining added).
statement was made in response to the appellant's application for orders that
the High Court should quash the decision of the
Tribunal, quash the orders for
compensation made by the Tribunal and remit the matter back to the Tribunal for
determination according
to law. That statement was only to say that the Court of
Appeal should determine and make the necessary orders concerning matters
compensation, including the forum in which compensation is properly
[39] The CEO
submits that the assessment of compensation should be remitted to the Tribunal
because it is an evaluative matter for
which further findings of fact may have
to be made. In addition, the appellant’s claims in relation to
habitability under
Residential Tenancies Act
already been remitted to the Tribunal and remain to be determined. That
determination will include an assessment of compensation
for any of the defects
which are found to breach the landlord’s obligation to ensure that the
premises are ‘habitable’.
We accept that the assessment of
compensation for the breach of the obligation under
Residential Tenancies Act
is properly remitted to the Tribunal for
determination for the following reasons.
[40] First, in
determining an appeal confined to a question of law, as this appeal
, an appellate court may
substitute its own decision: (a) where only one conclusion is open on the
correct application of that law
to the facts found by the tribunal at first
instance; or (b) where any factual matter in dispute can be conveniently
determined upon
uncontested evidence or primary facts already found by the
tribunal at first instance.
this matter the findings of fact made by the Tribunal concerning the missing
back door were directed to the assessment of compensation
for the breach of the
obligation to repair under
Residential Tenancies Act
which is concerned with the period between the notification of the defect and
its rectification. The appellant has also indicated
an intention to adduce
further evidence. Even were that not so, the issues which remain outstanding are
not conveniently determined
by the Court of Appeal, at least in the first
[41] Second,
where the outstanding issues involve an evaluative judgement the matter should
ordinarily be remitted to the tribunal
The assessment of
compensation for a breach of the obligation imposed under
Residential Tenancies Act
is an evaluative matter which requires the
Tribunal to arrive at a measure of compensation having regard to the nature and
of the particular obligation in question. That exercise is discretionary
and conceivably admits of more than one conclusion. The
decision of the High
Court on appeal is in no way determinative of the amount of compensation
properly awarded, and that matter is
best left in the first instance to the body
selected by the legislature to determine applications for compensation under
Residential Tenancies Act
[42] Third, so
far as considerations of delay, inconvenience and coherence are concerned, there
remain a number of claims which have
already been remitted to the Tribunal and
require determination by way of further hearing in any event. It is necessary
for the Tribunal,
in the application of the ‘habitability’
formulation from the earlier decision of the Court of Appeal, to determine the
appellant’s claims for compensation under
Residential
Tenancies Act
in relation to (a) the showerhead and drain; (b) the toilet
flush mechanism; (c) the leak under the kitchen sink; (d) the back door;
(e) the perimeter fence; (f) the lights and fans; and (g) the exposed
wires. Depending on how the matter is run, the proceedings
already on remittal
might also require a revisitation of the Tribunal’s initial assessment
that the failure to install an air
conditioner constituted a breach of the
CEO’s obligation to ensure that the premises were ‘habitable’
Residential Tenancies Act
only during the
months of January, November and December, rather than throughout the period from
13 November 2011 up until 31 January
determination of compensation which might be made as part of that hearing on
remittal will necessarily involve the process
of statutory construction
described in the three-member reasons of the High Court on appeal, including
whether the appellant is entitled
to compensation for distress and/or
disappointment for any breach of the habitability obligation in
Residential Tenancies Act
[44] It must
also be recognised that the appellant’s claim in relation to the absence
of the back door was brought on the bases
that it constituted a breach of the
obligations under
Residential Tenancies
. The claim under
remains to be determined by operation of
the existing order for remittal made by the Supreme Court. The claim under
remains to be determined in accordance with the decision of the
High Court on appeal. The Tribunal has already awarded the appellant
compensation for the claim under
for the period which ran from
notice of the defect to when it was rectified.
[45] The award
of compensation under
remains on foot and might require
reconciliation with the determinations which are ultimately made in relation to
the claims under
(1). In addition, there is the potential
for overlap between any awards of compensation which might be made under
(1), and between any awards of compensation which might be
made for the different defects said to breach the obligation to ensure
premises were ‘habitable’. Any adjustments to achieve that
reconciliation and accommodate those overlaps are clearly
best made by the one
decision-maker in the first instance.
[46] These are
all matters best determined in a single process of assessment conducted by the
Tribunal. For that reason, Order 5 made
by the Supreme Court ordering the CEO to
pay compensation to the appellant for the breach of the obligation under
Residential Tenancies Act
in the sum of $10,200 should
be set aside, and the matter remitted to the Tribunal for
determination.
Disposition
[47] The orders
part of Order 5 made by the Supreme Court on 8 September 2020 that ‘[t]he
respondent is to pay compensation under
Residential
Tenancies Act
to Ms Young in the sum of $10,200. Payment is to be made
within 28 days from today’ is set aside.
assessment of compensation for the breach of the obligation under
Residential Tenancies Act
is remitted to the Tribunal for
determination.
[48] We will
hear the parties in relation to costs if need be.
___________________________
Young & Conway v Chief
Executive Officer, Housing
[2020] NTSC 59.
Various Applicants from Santa
Teresa v Chief Executive Officer (Housing)
[2019] NTCAT 7.
Various Applicants from Santa
Teresa v Chief Executive Officer (Housing)
[2019] NTCAT 7
, [115]-[120],
De Soleil v Palhide Pty Ltd
[2010] NSWCTTT 464.
Various Applicants from Santa
Teresa v Chief Executive Officer (Housing)
[2019] NTCAT 7
, [167]-[172].
Various Applicants from Santa
Teresa v Chief Executive Officer (Housing)
[2019] NTCAT 7
, [186]-[188].
Various Applicants from Santa
Teresa v Chief Executive Officer (Housing)
[2019] NTCAT 7
, [189]-[191].
Various Applicants from Santa
Teresa v Chief Executive Officer (Housing)
[2019] NTCAT 7
, [173]-[182].
Various Applicants from Santa
Teresa v Chief Executive Officer (Housing)
[2019] NTCAT 7
, [183]-[185].
Various Applicants from Santa
Teresa v Chief Executive Officer (Housing)
[2019] NTCAT 7
Various Applicants from
Santa Teresa v Chief Executive Officer (Housing)
[2019] NTCAT 7
[160]-[166].
Various Applicants from
Santa Teresa v Chief Executive Officer (Housing)
[2019] NTCAT 7
[192]-[196].
Various Applicants from
Santa Teresa v Chief Executive Officer (Housing)
[2019] NTCAT 7
[240]-[243].
Various Applicants from
Santa Teresa v Chief Executive Officer (Housing)
[2019] NTCAT 7
[287]-[289]. It is unclear from the Tribunal's reasons why an award of nominal
damages was not also made in respect of the faulty
Young & Conway v Chief
Executive Officer, Housing
[2020] NTSC 59
, [68]-[81].
Young & Conway v Chief
Executive Officer, Housing
[2020] NTSC 59
, [82]-[93]. The award of damages
was said by the Judge at intermediate level to have been made in accordance with
'[t]he principles
and observations drawn from both
Baltic Shipping [Co v
[1993] HCA 4
(1993) 176 CLR 344]
Moore v Scenic Tours Pty
[[2020] HCA 17;
[2020] HCA 17
(2020) 268 CLR 326]
... heavily calibrated appropriately
to the circumstances of Young's reduced enjoyment of the premises'.
Young & Conway v Chief
Executive Officer, Housing
[2020] NTSC 59
As described above, the
Tribunal awarded the appellant compensation for loss and damage in the amount of
$4735.80 (being a refund
of the pro rata rent paid for the months of January,
November and December each year in the period from 13 November 2011 to
2016), and $4000 for the distress arising from the physical
inconvenience caused by the breach: see
Various Applicants from Santa
Teresa v Chief Executive Officer (Housing)
[2019] NTCAT 7
Young & Conway v Chief
Executive Officer, Housing
[2020] NTSC 59
Baltic Shipping Co v Dillon
[1993] HCA 4
(1993) 176 CLR 344.
Appearing at
& Conway v Chief Executive Officer, Housing
[2020] NTSC 59
See, for example,
[1999] 1 Qd R 134
Chief Executive Officer
v Young & Anor
[2022] NTCA 1
, [30]-[51].
Young & Conway v Chief
Executive Officer, Housing
[2020] NTSC 59
, [90]-[91], [93].
Chief Executive Officer
v Young & Anor
[2022] NTCA 1
, [52]-[53].
Chief Executive Officer
v Young & Anor
[2022] NTCA 1
, [54]-[69].
Young v Chief Executive
Officer (Housing)
[2023] HCA 31
(2023) 278 CLR 208
Young v Chief Executive
Officer (Housing)
[2023] HCA 31
(2023) 278 CLR 208
, [20]-[25].
Young v Chief Executive
Officer (Housing)
[2023] HCA 31
(2023) 278 CLR 208
Young v Chief Executive
Officer (Housing)
[2023] HCA 31
(2023) 278 CLR 208
Young v Chief Executive
Officer (Housing)
[2023] HCA 31
(2023) 278 CLR 208
Young v Chief Executive
Officer (Housing)
[2023] HCA 31
(2023) 278 CLR 208
, [54]-[57].
O'Toole v Charles
David Pty Ltd
(1990) 171 CLR 232, 267.
Chief Executive Officer
v Young & Anor
[2022] NTCA 1
Judiciary Act
Young v Chief Executive
Officer (Housing)
[2023] HCA 31
(2023) 278 CLR 208
, [11], [30].
The reference to the
application of common law principles at [27] of the Reasons is to the common law
principles of contractual interpretation
to determine the nature and purpose of
a particular obligation
Young v Chief Executive
Officer (Housing)
[2023] HCA 31
(2023) 278 CLR 208
Young v Chief Executive
Officer (Housing)
[2023] HCA 31
(2023) 278 CLR 208
See, for example,
[2001] HCA 52
(2001) 206 CLR 459
, 470. See also
Progressive Mailing House Pty
Ltd v Tabali Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 14
(1985) 157 CLR 17
, 29, 40-41, 53 in relation to the
application of the principles of contract law to contractual leases, although
that decision does
not have anything to say about the assessment of statutory
compensation. In its relevant aspect,
Union Steamship Co of Australia Pty Ltd
[1988] HCA 55
(1988) 166 CLR 1
, 15-16 was concerned with a provision in which the
word 'compensation' embraced both common law damages and statutory compensation.
That is clearly not the case here.
This is the manner in which the
breach was characterised by the Supreme Court in
Young & Conway v Chief
Executive Officer, Housing
[2020] NTSC 59
Miller v Jennings
[1954] HCA 65
(1954) 92 CLR 190
That is so unless the appellate
court determines to conduct the assessment itself, where the statutory regime
permits that process,
and in the exercise of that discretion determines that no
different result should ensue.
Young v Chief Executive
Officer (Housing)
[2023] HCA 31
(2023) 278 CLR 208
Northern Territory Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2014
Tiver Constructions
Pty Ltd v Clair
[1992] NTSC 86
(1992) 110 FLR 239
Development Consent Authority v
[2010] NTCA 3
(2010) 27 NTLR 174
Herbert v An Assessor
(Victims of Crime Assistance Act) & Anor
[2022] NTSC 76
, [55]-[57];
Osland v Secretary, Department of Justice
[2010] HCA 24
(2010) 241 CLR 320
[19]-[20]. Cf
Booth v Assessor under s 24 of the Victims of Crime Assistance
[2019] NTSC 89
Herbert v An Assessor
(Victims of Crime Assistance Act) & Anor
[2022] NTSC 76
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (309 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter