URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCA/2025/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:17:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rolfe v The Territory Coroner & Ors (Costs) [2025] NTCA 7 (24 July 2025)
Rolfe v The Territory Coroner & Ors (Costs)
[2025] NTCA
PARTIES: ROLFE, Zachary Brian
THE TERRITORY CORONER
ATTORNEY-GENERAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRRITORY
NORTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINAL JUSTICE AGENCY
NORTHERN TERRITORY POLICE FORCE
WALKER, Alice; LANE, Joseph; ROBERTSON, Rickisha
BAUWENS, Lee
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: AP 1 of 2023 (22300552)
DELIVERED: 24 July 2025
HEARING DATE: Determined on the papers
JUDGMENT OF: Grant CJ, Barr & Brownhill JJ
CATCHWORDS:
COSTS – Party/party – Exceptions to general rule that costs
follow the event – Nature of the proceedings
Whether successful respondents entitled to costs orders against the appellant
– Intervention at first instance on understanding
no costs orders would be
made – No negative implication precluding award of costs in favour of
Attorney-General – Role
of interveners directed to calling attention to
matters of law rather than as parties in ordinary
inter partes
– Proceedings directed to public interest rather than vindication of
private rights of intervening parties –
Question of costs on appeal should
reflect position at first instance – No order as to costs.
Coroners Act 1993
Crown Proceedings Act 1993
Supreme Court Rules
(NT) r 63.28, r 82.26
Allplastics Engineering Pty Ltd v Dornoch Ltd
[2006] NSWCA 33
Derby Wild Inc v Forest Practices Authority
[2023] TASSC 14
Affairs Commission v Bradley; Commonwealth of Australia (Intervenor)
1 NSWLR 391
Council of the City of Liverpool v Weir
(1984) 58 ALJR 213
CSR Ltd v Eddy
[2005] HCA 64
(2005) 226 CLR 1
Denham Constructions Pty Ltd v
Islamic Republic of Pakistan (No 3)
[2016] ACTSC 249
Northern Territory
[2019] HCA 19
(2019) 265 CLR 164
Ohn v Walton
(1995) 36 NSWLR 77
O’Keeffe Nominees Pty Ltd v BP Australia (No 2)
[1995] FCA 109
(1995) 55 FCR 591
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR 72
(No 2) - Costs
[2012] NSWCA 194
Value Inn Pty Ltd v Proprietors of
Unit Plan 2004/048 & Anor
[2020] NTCA 8
, referred to.
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: BJ Doyle KC with L Officer
First Respondent: Submitting appearance
Second Respondent: T Game SC with K Edwards
Third Respondent: E Nekvapil SC with JR Murphy
Fourth Respondent: I Freckelton AO KC with A Burnnard
Fifth Respondent: A Boe with D Fuller and G Boe
Sixth Respondent: No appearance
Solicitors:
Appellant: Tindall Gask Bentley Lawyers
First Respondent: Submitting appearance
Second Respondent: Solicitor for the Northern Territory
Third Respondent: North Australian Aboriginal Justice Agency
Fourth Respondent: Northern Territory Police Fire & Emergency Services
Fifth Respondent: Hearn Legal
Sixth Respondent: No appearance
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 18
IN THE COURT OF APPEAL
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Rolfe v The Territory Coroner & Ors (Costs)
No. AP 1 of 2023 (22300552)
ZACHARY BRIAN ROLFE
TERRITORY CORONER
First Respondent
ATTORNEY-GENERAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
Second Respondent
NORTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINAL JUSTICE AGENCY
Third Respondent
NORTHERN TERRITORY POLICE FORCE
Fourth Respondent
ALICE WALKER; JOSEPH LANE; RICKISHA ROBERTSON
Fifth Respondent
LEE BAUWENS
Sixth Respondent
CORAM: GRANT CJ, BARR & BROWNHILL JJ
DECISION ON COSTS
(Delivered 24 July 2025)
Court delivered its decision on the appeal on 28 June
The questions which arose for
consideration on the appeal were whether there was a common law privilege
against exposure to disciplinary
and other civil penalties which would
ordinarily have application in Northern Territory coronial proceedings; and, if
there were,
Coroners Act 1993
Act’) and the other facilitative powers in that legislation had abrogated
or qualified that privilege such
that the appellant could be compelled to answer
questions in the course of a coronial inquest then underway.
Court concluded that, at the time of the enactment of the Act, penalty privilege
was not imported into the conduct of coronial
proceedings under that
legislation.
Alternatively, if
penalty privilege had application in coronial proceedings unless abrogated, this
Court found that the 2002 amendment
of the Act operated to abrogate
penalty privilege by necessary
intendment.
The result was that the
appellant failed to establish the availability of common law penalty privilege
in coronial proceedings. The
appeal was dismissed.
[3] The second,
third, fourth and fifth respondents all seek costs orders against the appellant.
The appellant opposes the making
of any such orders. Given the contest in
relation to the making of costs orders, it is necessary to set out some of the
history to put the respective submissions into
Proceedings in the coronial inquest
[4] Sergeant
Paul Kirkby was a police officer who had been called as a witness at the
coronial inquest into the death of Kumanjayi
Walker. In October 2022, Sergeant
Kirkby objected to giving evidence on the basis that his answers might expose
him to a disciplinary
penalty under the
Police Administration Act
(NT), asserting common law penalty privilege in support of his
objection. The appellant and the sixth respondent were two police
officers who
were also to be called to give evidence during the coronial inquest. They made
submissions in support of Sergeant Kirkby’s
The Coroner dismissed
the objection on the basis that, to the extent that penalty privilege was a
substantive common law right inherently
capable of application in a coronal
inquest, the privilege had been abrogated and replaced by the scheme set out in
of the Act.
Proceedings in the Supreme Court
[5] Following
the Coroner’s determination, on 25 October 2022 the sixth respondent
commenced proceedings for judicial review
in the Supreme Court seeking
declarations that: (1) penalty privilege had not been abrogated by
the Act; and (2) the Coroner did not have power to compel a person to answer
questions pursuant to
of the Act in breach of penalty
November 2022, the second respondent (‘the Attorney-General’)
intervened in the proceeding as of right pursuant
Crown Proceedings Act 1993
Relevantly,
permits the Attorney-General to intervene on behalf of the Crown in proceedings
, involve the interpretation of a law of the Territory.
The Attorney-General opposed the making of the declarations and sought the
dismissal of the application for declaratory relief, but did not seek any order
as to costs.
November 2022, the appellant applied to be joined as a plaintiff in the Supreme
Court proceeding. The Supreme Court noted
that he also had objected to answering
a question in the coronial inquest on the basis that the answer might expose him
to a disciplinary
penalty and determined that it was appropriate that he be
November 2022, the third respondent (‘NAAJA’) made application to
join the proceedings as an intervener. In
written submissions made in support of
that application, senior counsel for NAAJA identified the interest directly
affected as the
right under s 43(3) of the Act to cross-examine witnesses,
specifically the plaintiff and the proposed second plaintiff (in these
subsequent appeal proceedings, the sixth respondent and the appellant
respectively).
The written
submissions included the following statement in relation to
not seek any order for costs, regardless of the outcome.
November 2022, the fourth respondent (‘Northern Territory Police’)
also made an application to join the proceedings
as an intervener. In the
relevant supporting affidavit, the interest of Northern Territory Police was
said to be that ‘the
outcome could have significant consequences for the
membership and the operation of the police disciplinary
November 2022, Alice Walker, Serita Lane and Rickisha Robertson made application
to intervene in the proceedings on behalf
of three families referred to in the
Coronial inquest and subsequent court proceedings as the ‘WLR
Their stated
interest was ‘in the Territory Coroner hearing evidence from the [sixth
respondent] as well as [the appellant],
including in relation to topics that ...
have prompted him to seek the
declaration’.
[11] The Supreme
Court noted that each of the proposed interveners (that is, the third, fourth
and fifth respondents in the present
proceedings) had been granted leave to
appear at the inquest on the basis of ‘sufficient interest’ under
s 40(2) of the
Act, and held that each thereby had a sufficient interest in
the outcome of the Supreme Court proceeding to justify a grant of leave
[12] As already
noted above, NAAJA stated expressly that it would not seek any order for costs
in the Supreme Court proceeding. In
written submissions filed before an order
for joinder had been made in its favour, the Northern Territory Police
applications for declaratory relief by Sergeant Bauwens and Constable Rolfe,
should he be joined as a plaintiff, should be declined,
and costs should be
awarded against them.
[13] Counsel for
the sixth respondent raised the issue of costs before the presiding Judge at the
commencement of the Supreme Court
proceeding on 23 November 2022, at the point
where the Court was about to make orders in relation to joinder. The relevant
HER HONOUR:
... So we have appearances. Could I just start with the issue of joinder. The
Attorney-General has indicated no objection
to the joinder of the plaintiff, or
any of the other interveners. I haven't heard from the plaintiff, but the
plaintiff has expressed
no opposition, at least in written submissions. And it
does appear to me that both, that Mr Rolfe has established an entitlement
joined as a plaintiff. And that the other interveners – the interveners,
that is – well, the Attorney-General appears
as of right - NAAJA, the
Northern Territory Police, and the families, have likewise established
sufficient entitlement, or interest,
to be joined, as interveners.
So can we take that as read, and I can simply make those orders joining those
– well, joining Mr Rolfe as a plaintiff, and giving
leave to the others to
be – to intervene?
MR BOYLE: The only issue with that, your Honour, and it's Boyle here for Mr
Bauwens ---
HER HONOUR: Yes.
MR BOYLE: --- is that in the submissions filed on behalf of the Northern
Territory Police Force, there is a claim in the final paragraph
submissions, that they ought to be entitled to their costs in the event that the
application is unsuccessful. And we would
say that it should be a condition of
any grant of leave, the rest of the interveners in their – or proposed
interveners, in
their submissions, effectively say they will not seek any costs,
and are effectively undertaking to bear their own costs. If it's
necessary, I
can take your Honour to some authority for the proposition that an intervener,
in effect, ought not to be entitled to
their costs.
Even where their contentions are ultimately accepted.
HER HONOUR: Yes.
MR BOYLE: But that's the only condition I'd put on that.
MR FRECKELTON: Your Honour, that issue has been superseded by
communications laterally [sic]. The application for costs, on behalf
Northern Territory Police Force, should they be successful in the outcome that
they are seeking, has been withdrawn.
HER HONOUR: All right, thank you very much for that.
[14] To this
point, the Attorney-General had intervened as of right but had not included a
costs order as part of the relief sought.
NAAJA and the Northern Territory
Police had stated expressly that they would not be seeking costs. The WLR
families had not foreshadowed
any claim for costs prior to obtaining leave to
intervene, and their counsel did not correct or qualify the statements made by
sixth respondent’s counsel that the applicant interveners were
‘effectively undertaking to bear their own costs’
and that ‘an
intervener ... ought not to be entitled to their costs’. In the absence of
express agreement, the WLR families
would probably have been bound by their
counsel’s conduct. In any event, the WLR families did not seek any costs
order after
Supreme Court had refused the plaintiffs’
application.
Supreme Court did not expressly condition the grant of leave to intervene to
NAAJA, the Northern Territory Police and the
WLR families on their undertaking
not to seek costs but, as the appellant submits, ‘it was in those
circumstances that their
applications to intervene were
appeal to this Court
[16] Having been
accepted as interveners, NAAJA, the Northern Territory Police and the WLR
families became parties to the Supreme
proceeding.
The Attorney-General
intervened as of right and thereby also assumed the status of a party to the
proceeding.
Once the appellant
decided to institute an appeal, he did not have any choice as to the parties to
the appeal. The necessary respondents
were determined by r 82.26 of the
Supreme Court Rules
(NT), the relevant parts of which are
extracted below:
82.26 Parties
(1) Each party to the proceeding in the court or tribunal below and directly
affected by the relief sought in the notice of appeal
or interested in
maintaining the decision being appealed must be made a respondent to the
(2) A person who was not a party to the proceeding in the court or tribunal
below may be joined as a respondent if the person is directly
affected by the
relief sought in an appeal or interested in maintaining the decision being
appealed from.
(3) The Court may order the addition or removal of a person as a party to an
of the interveners joined pursuant to
applied to be removed as a respondent to the appeal. To the contrary, all made
the decision to actively participate by separately
filing written submissions.
All intervener respondents were represented at the hearing of the appeal, and
there was substantial overlap
in the positions adopted by the
respondents.
The appellant was
on notice that three of four respondents would seek costs against him if he were
unsuccessful. With the exception
of NAAJA, the interveners had indicated in
their written submissions that they would be seeking
However, it is unclear as
to when the appellant was first put on notice to this effect. The appeal was
filed on 5 January 2023, the
submissions were not filed and served until
late-March 2023 and the appeal was heard on 11 April 2023.
appellant submits that the issue raised by him in the appeal was one of
importance not only to him but to other witnesses
in the inquest. He submits
that there were finely balanced legal questions which informed the question of
statutory construction;
and further that, in view of uncertainties arising from
High Court decisions and differing approaches taken by intermediate courts
those issues, it was not unreasonable for him to raise his contentions in an
intermediate appellate court.
Those submissions may be accepted, but they are not of themselves determinative
of the issue of costs in this Court.
appellant also submits that it was not necessary for four respondents each to
participate to the extent of filing written
submissions and being represented at
the hearing; and further, that it would be inequitable if he were to suffer four
adverse costs
orders in respect of the appeal. He contends that the costs orders
made by this Court should reflect the position in relation to
costs taken by the
interveners in the Supreme Court proceeding. The appellant’s submissions
in relation to the position of
the Attorney-General raise some additional
issues, which are discussed further below.
interveners subsequently joined as respondents to the appeal acknowledge that
costs are in the discretion of the Court but
contend that the ordinary rule
should apply, with the result that the appellant should be ordered to pay the
costs of each of the
respondents on the basis that they successfully resisted
the appeal.
[21] It may be
accepted at the outset that the purpose of a costs order is to compensate the
person in whose favour it is made, rather
than to punish the person against whom
the order is made.
It may also
be accepted that the general rule is that, if the court makes any order as to
costs, it is to order that the costs follow
the event, unless it appears that
some other order should be made having regard to the
circumstances.
That general rule
is based on the principle that justice is not achieved if the party who is
responsible for others incurring the
costs of litigation does not bear those
costs. In ordinary
inter partes
civil litigation, where the plaintiff is
successful it is the defendant who has been responsible for the costs incurred
has resisted something to which the plaintiff was entitled. Where the
defendant is successful, it is the plaintiff who has been responsible
costs incurred because it has claimed something to which it was not entitled.
[22] In both of
those scenarios, the successful party has been forced to the litigation. In both
of those scenarios, the successful
party has a substantive legal right to
vindicate as opposed to an interest sufficient to confer standing in an
administrative law
sense. That is not so in the present circumstances in
relation to the positions of the parties who had been interveners in the
proceedings
before the Supreme Court. Those circumstances are clearly
distinguishable from cases such as
Northern Territory v
Value Inn Pty
Ltd v Proprietors of Unit Plan 2004/048 &
This is not the kind
of case in which the ordinary principles in relation to costs, and particularly
the principle that the unsuccessful
party should pay the costs of the successful
party, should automatically or necessarily be applied.
relevant circumstances are that: (a) the genesis of the appeal was a coronial
inquest, and the issue concerned the asserted
right of a witness or witnesses in
that hearing; (b) the several respondents had indicated that they would not seek
costs at the
time of seeking leave to intervene in the Supreme Court proceeding
(and did not subsequently seek costs); and (c) the several respondents
seeking costs orders did not contest the joinder by operation of r 82.26 or
apply to be removed as parties to the appeal, and
actively participated in the
appeal. The coronial proceedings were themselves incapable of determining or
affecting substantive rights.
The criminal proceedings in relation to the death
had already been finally determined and the coroner’s function is
limited to finding the identity of the deceased, the time and place
of death, the cause of death and any relevant circumstances concerning
Where the deceased was
held in custody at the time of the death, the coroner may also report on matters
concerned with the administration
of justice that are relevant to the death, and
may make recommendations to the Attorney-General with respect to the prevention
future deaths in similar
circumstances.
That function is
directed to the public interest rather than the vindication of any private
rights of the intervening parties.
[24] The fact
that the proceedings involved a public interest aspect does not, of itself,
warrant departure from the general rule
that costs follow the
However, it is a relevant
consideration that there was a substantial public interest in determining the
availability of an important
common law privilege in coronial proceedings, which
was the issue in question in the judicial review proceedings before the Supreme
Court and in the subsequent appeal before this Court, and that there was
uncertainty arising out of the High Court authorities relevant
to that issue.
Given the character of the coronial proceedings in which that issue arose, and
the nature of the issue, the role of
each of the interveners was more directed
to advising the Court and calling attention to particular matters of law rather
a party in ordinary
inter partes
litigation. That is no doubt why
NAAJA, the Northern Territory Police and the WLR parties intervened in the
proceedings before the
Supreme Court on the understanding – either express
or tacit – that they would not be entitled to their costs of those
proceedings whatever the result might be.
understanding is consistent with the fact that costs orders are rarely made in
favour of interveners. That is particularly
so where the role of the intervener
is more in the nature of
amicus curiae
for the purpose of assisting the
court on points of law which may not otherwise have been brought to its
attention, rather than for
the purpose of protecting some legal right or
substantive interest which is different from those of the parties. An order for
payment of the intervener’s costs will ordinarily only be made in the
exercise of the discretion where the court considers
that justice requires that
result, and particularly where the intervener has in substance acted as the sole
or principal respondent.
There is no reason in principle why the same approach
should not be taken to the costs of the appeal proceedings. Although the
interveners
obtained the status of parties to the Supreme Court proceedings,
with all the benefits and burdens of that status, and were consequently
respondents to the appeal, their roles in the proceedings remained the same.
[26] This was
particularly so in the case of the Attorney-General.
Section 17(1)
Crown Proceedings Act
states expressly that the right of intervention is
‘for the purpose of submitting argument’ on the proper
interpretation
or validity of the relevant legislative provision, or the scope
of the relevant legislative, executive or judicial power, as the
case may be.
There is nothing to suggest that purpose changes at appeal level. The
Attorney-General was representing the Crown interest
in the matter rather than
fulfilling an adversarial role, and it is of some significance for these
purposes that the commencement
of the judicial review proceedings was occasioned
by a lack of clarity in a piece of Northern Territory legislation concerning the
availability of penalty privilege.
[27] Quite apart
from those considerations, the appellant argues that a court is not permitted to
make a costs order in favour of
the Attorney-General in the event of a
‘successful
intervention’.
submission is based upon the terms of
Crown Proceedings
, which provides:
If the Attorney-General intervenes in
proceedings under this section, the court may make an order for costs against
the Crown to reimburse
the parties to the proceedings for costs occasioned by
the intervention, but the court shall not make such an order unless there
special circumstances which in the opinion of the court make it appropriate to
[28] Although
there are no express words in
Crown Proceedings Act
preventing the making of a costs order in favour of the Attorney-General (or
the Crown), the appellant asserts a negative implication
to that effect. That
submission must be rejected.
Section 17(3)
enables the court in which the
intervention takes place, in special circumstances, to make a costs order
against the Crown to reimburse
the parties for the costs occasioned by the
intervention. The subsection modifies the court’s usual discretion as to
by imposing a ‘special circumstances’ condition on any award
of costs against the Crown arising out of an intervention
Attorney-General in the Crown interest. Its purpose is to protect the Crown
against adverse costs orders rather than to protect
the parties in proceedings
in which the Attorney-General intervenes.
[29] The case of
O’Keeffe Nominees Pty Ltd v BP Australia (No 2)
on which the
appellant relies in asserting the negative implication was directed specifically
to intervention by Attorneys-General
in proceedings relating to a matter arising
Constitution
or involving its interpretation. The court in that
case drew a distinction between interventions under
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) on constitutional issues, and cases in which an
Attorney-General intervenes pursuant to a broader statutory right. In the latter
circumstance, the court’s general discretion to award costs is not
displaced. Even leaving aside that distinction, the court
Nominees Pty Ltd
expressly recognised that the approach it had adopted was
inconsistent with the general rule that an intervener is a party to proceedings
with the benefits and burdens of that status. To the extent that the appellant
also relies on the decision of the Supreme Court of
the Australian Capital
Territory in
Denham Constructions Pty Ltd v Islamic Republic of Pakistan (No
, that decision does not adopt the approach taken in
Nominees Pty Ltd
[30] In any
event, the authorities relied on by the appellant are decisions involving
intervention at first instance.
The costs application by the Attorney-General in the appeal is to be determined
in a manner unconstrained by
of the Act. However, it does not
follow that a costs order should be made in favour of the Attorney-General. In
our opinion, and
in reference to the facts in this case, the proper role of the
Attorney-General pursuant to
Crown Proceedings Act
was to assist the Supreme Court and this Court in the proper interpretation
of s 38 of the Act in relation to the availability of
penalty privilege.
That was and remained the ‘question in issue’. Irrespective of the
merits of the Attorney’s
intervention, for the reasons we have already
described that role was properly discharged in the circumstances of this case
expectation that the intervention would result in an order for costs. As
the High Court made clear in
Council of the City of Liverpool v
intervenor, even a Minister responsible for the administration of the
legislation in question in this case, cannot expect
as of course that the
unsuccessful party to the litigation in which he has intruded should bear the
extra burden of his costs, even
if his intervention was well-intentioned and
proved to be of assistance to the court.
[31] Where there
are multiple successful defendants or respondents whose interest is identical
and there is no possible conflict of
interest between them, and who are
separately represented, the court will not normally allow more than one set of
costs (assuming
the matter is one in which costs are properly awarded). There
was no conflict between the interests of the various interveners on
this issue.
All were contending that the appellant should be compelled to answer questions
in the coronial inquest. All took the
position that a coronial inquest is not a
proceeding of a kind to which penalty privilege has application. However, the
Attorney-General,
Northern Territory Police and the WLR families went the
further step of submitting that to the extent penalty privilege would otherwise
apply, it had been abrogated and s 38 of the Act conferred a qualified
privilege consistent with the operation of the privilege against
self-incrimination. NAAJA was the only respondent whose submissions were
ultimately accepted in full by this Court. However, given
our view as to the
relevant costs considerations, the fact that the NAAJA’s arguments found
greater favour than those of the
other respondents does not give rise to a
special entitlement or otherwise elevate its entitlement to a costs order.
[32] For these
reasons, we decline to make the costs orders sought by the respondents and we
make no order as to costs.
________________________
v The Territory Coroner & Ors
[2023] NTCA 8.
v The Territory Coroner & Ors
[2023] NTCA 8
Bauwens and Anor v The
Territory Coroner
[2022] NTSC 92
Inquest into the death of Kumanjayi Walker (Ruling No 5)
The statutory 'scheme' in s 38 of the Act is extracted in
Rolfe v The Territory Coroner & Ors
[2023] NTCA 8
. This Court
ultimately concluded at [73] that s 38 was concerned only with the
privilege against self-incrimination and did not import
a modified form of
penalty privilege into coronial proceedings.
Bauwens and Anor v The
Territory Coroner
[2022] NTSC 92
Bauwens and Anor v The
Territory Coroner
[2022] NTSC 92
Bauwens and Anor v The Territory Coroner
[2022] NTSC 92
also transcript 23 November 2022, p 3.
See Submissions of North
Australian Aboriginal Justice Agency Ltd on Application to Intervene,
21 November 2022, par 2.
See Affidavit of Jessica Readman promised 11 November 2022, filed in the
Supreme Court proceeding, par 6.
It may be noted that, on 23
November 2022, counsel for the WLR families announced his appearance on behalf
of Ms Walker, Ms Robertson
and Joseph Lane (but not Serita Lane). The
change of applicant is not relevant for present purposes given that the
applicants were
each seeking to intervene in a representative capacity on behalf
of one of the three families.
Affidavit of Christian Hearn
promised 18 November 2022, filed in the Supreme Court proceeding, par 13.
Bauwens and Anor v The
Territory Coroner
[2022] NTSC 92
Outline of Submissions by the
Northern Territory Police Force, 21 November 2022, par 37.
Transcript 23 November 2022,
Bauwens and Anor v The
Territory Coroner
[2022] NTSC 92.
In written submissions (at par 16)
dated 19 March 2023 and filed in the appeal hearing, the WLR families
acknowledged that they had
not sought costs of the proceedings in the Supreme
Appellant’s written
submissions on costs, 19 September 2023, par 4(2).
Corporate Affairs Commission
v Bradley; Commonwealth of Australia (Intervenor)
(1974) 1 NSWLR 391
per Hutley JA (Reynolds and Glass JJA agreeing).
See, for example,
Proceedings Act 1993
Rolfe v The Territory Coroner & Ors
[2023] NTCA 8
See the written
submissions of the Attorney-General dated 23 March 2023 at par 108;
submissions of Northern Territory Police dated
22 March 2023 at par 39;
submissions of the WLR families dated 19 March 2023 at par 16. The
submissions of NAAJA dated 22 March 2023
made no reference to seeking
consequential orders as to costs.
See the appellant’s
arguments in relation to the privilege against exposure to penalty at
pars 23-34 of the appellant’s
written submissions in the appeal dated
1 March 2023.
The respondents refer,
Northern Territory v Sangare
[2019] HCA 19
(2019) 265 CLR 164
Northern Territory v Sangare
[2019] HCA 19
(2019) 265 CLR 164
(1995) 36 NSWLR 77
Allplastics Engineering Pty Ltd v
Dornoch Ltd
[2006] NSWCA 33
This general rule has been said
to found a ‘reasonable expectation’ on the part of a successful
party of being awarded
costs against the unsuccessful party:
Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR 72
Territory v Sangare
[2019] HCA 19
(2019) 265 CLR 164
Northern Territory v
[2019] HCA 19
(2019) 265 CLR 164.
Value Inn Pty Ltd v
Proprietors of Unit Plan 2004/048 & Anor
[2020] NTCA 8.
Coroners Act
s 34(1)(a).
Coroners Act
s 34(1)(a).
Oshlack v Richmond River
[1998] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR 72
; Re Kerry (No 2) - Costs
[2012] NSWCA
CSR Ltd v Eddy
[2005] HCA 64
(2005) 226 CLR 1
See Appellant’s written
submission on costs, pars 16-17. For that proposition, the appellant relies
O’Keeffe Nominees Pty Ltd v BP Australia (No 2)
[1995] FCA 109
(1995) 55 FCR
Denham Constructions Pty Ltd v Islamic Republic of Pakistan (No 3)
[2016] ACTSC 249
Blue Derby Wild Inc v Forest Practices
[2023] TASSC 14
In this respect we accept the
analysis of those decisions in the Supplementary Submissions Of The Second
Respondent, pars 12-16.
Council of the City of
Liverpool v Weir
(1984) 58 ALJR 213
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (248 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter