URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCA/2024/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:17:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Darwin International Airport Pty Ltd v DIAH (NT) Pty Ltd [2024] NTCA 4 (3 September 2024)
Darwin International Airport Pty Ltd v DIAH (NT) Pty Ltd
[2024] NTCA 4
PARTIES: DARWIN INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT PTY LTD
DIAH (NT) PTY LTD AS TRUSTEE FOR THE AIRPORT HOTEL TRUST
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: AP 1 of 2024 (22401616)
DELIVERED: 3 September 2024
HEARING DATE: 1 July 2024
JUDGMENT OF: Brownhill, Huntingford and Reeves JJ
CATCHWORDS:
APPEAL – Whether Supreme Court erred in finding there was a denial of
procedural fairness – Where an appeal contains allegations
of denial of
procedural fairness the appeal Court must first address that issue –
Rejection of evidence upon which there was
no cross examination – Local
Court obliged to provide procedural fairness – Procedural fairness not
Defect in the administration of justice which adversely affects
public confidence – Orders need to address the public interest
integrity of the administration of justice – No error by Supreme Court.
APPEAL – Whether Supreme Court erred in finding apprehended bias
– Where an appeal contains allegations of apprehended
bias the appeal
Court must first address that issue – Whether decision is impugned by
apprehended bias – Reasons of Local
Court detailed and cogent –
Local Court’s decision not affected by apprehended bias – Error by
Supreme Court.
APPEAL – Local Court order set aside for denial of procedural fairness
– Retrial by Local Court would be futile as vacant
possession of land
already provided – No remitter to Local Court – Supreme Court erred
in determining other grounds of
appeal and making findings of fact –
Appeal allowed in part – Supreme Court’s orders set aside.
Browne v Dunn
(1893) 6 R 67 (HL),
Charisteas v Charisteas
[2021] HCA 29
(2021) 273 CLR 289
Concrete v Parramatta Design and Developments
[2006] HCA 55
(2006) 229 CLR 577
(2002) 209 CLR 203
Crown Melbourne
v Cosmopolitan Hotels
[2016] HCA 26
(2016) 260 CLR 1
Development Consent Authority v
[2010] NTCA 3
27 NTLR 174
Haritos v Commissioner of Taxation
[2015] FCAFC 92
(2015) 233 FCR
Jorgensen v Fair Work Ombudsman
[2019] FCAFC 113
(2019) 271 FCR 461
Poricanin v
Australian Consolidated Industries Ltd
[1979] 2 NSWLR 419
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural
[2023] HCA 15
(2023) 409 ALR 65
Royal Guardian Mortgage Management Pty Ltd v
[2016] NSWCA 88
Seymour v Australian Broadcasting Commission
(1977) 19 NSWLR 219
Stead v State Government Insurance Commission
(1986) 161 CLR 141,
Sullivan v Trilogy Funds Management
[2017] FCAFC 153
Tiver Constructions v Clair
[1992] NTSC 86
(1992) 110 FLR 239
Windoval Pty
Ltd v Donnelly
[2014] FCAFC 127
(2014) 226 FCR 89
referred to.
Local Court (Civil Procedure) Act 1989
Supreme Court Act 1979
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: W Roper SC with T Silvester
Respondent: A Harris KC with D Lorbeer
Solicitors:
Appellant: Mills Oakley
Respondent: HWL Ebsworth Lawyers
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 22
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Darwin International Airport Pty Ltd v DIAH (NT) Pty
[2024] NTCA 4
No. AP 1 of 2024 (22401616)
DARWIN INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT PTY LTD
DIAH (NT) PTY LTD AS TRUSTEE FOR THE AIRPORT HOTEL TRUST
CORAM: BROWNHILL, HUNTINGFORD and REEVES JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 3 September 2024)
Introduction
International Airport Pty Ltd (‘Airport’) is the head lessor from
the Commonwealth, and operator of, the Darwin
International Airport. In 2015 it
subleased an area of land at that airport to DIAH (NT) Pty Ltd,
(‘Hotel’). Hotel used
that land and a large number of demountable
buildings that it placed on it, to operate a short-term accommodation facility
to, among others, fly in fly out workers.
[2] After the
sublease expired on 30 June 2017, Hotel continued to occupy the land under a
monthly tenancy. That situation continued
until March 2021 when Airport applied
to the Local Court at Darwin under
Business Tenancies (Fair
Dealings) Act 2003
(NT) (‘Act’) for an order that Hotel give it
vacant possession of the land.
[3] In August
2021, following a contested hearing, a Local Court judge ordered that a warrant
of possession be issued in respect of
On 28 August 2021, Hotel
appealed that order to the Northern Territory Supreme Court.
[4] In September
2021, Hotel effectively provided Airport with vacant possession of the
Appeal to the Supreme Court
[5] As they
emerged in the Supreme Court’s
and excluding the ground
related to costs, Hotel’s grounds of appeal were, in summary:
(a) The Local Court did not afford it procedural fairness when rejecting as
unreliable, without notifying it, in circumstances where
there was no cross
examination or other challenge to its reliability, the evidence of its director,
John Robinson, about a conversation
he had with Airport’s CEO, Ian Kew,
where he stated that Airport would give Hotel “plenty of notice to remove
the improvements”
if Airport required vacant possession of the land.
(b) There was a reasonable apprehension that the question concerning the
reliability of Mr Robinson’s evidence would not be
dealt with impartially
by the Local Court.
(c) In the circumstances outlined above, Mr Robinson’s evidence with
respect to the conversation should have been accepted.
(d) Accordingly, its sublease of the land was varied to require Airport to give
either “plenty” or “reasonable
notice” of its
termination and/or a collateral contract was concluded to the same effect.
(e) Alternatively, a promissory estoppel operated to prevent Airport terminating
the tenancy without giving such notice.
It should be noted that this summary differs from the one that appears in the
Supreme Court’s reasons.
Importantly, for the purposes of this appeal the first two grounds described
above do not appear in that summary. As will appear
later in these reasons, this
disparity affects the orders that the Supreme Court ultimately made.
[6] In December
2023, the Supreme Court upheld Hotel’s appeal in respect of the first four
grounds described above but dismissed
However, because Hotel had,
in the meantime, vacated the land,
no order was sought, or made, to set aside the vacant possession order issued by
the Local Court.
Appeal to this Court
[7] Airport has
now appealed that judgment to this Court. While its amended notice of appeal
contains only two numbered grounds of
appeal, on closer examination, it becomes
apparent that it actually identifies four separate alleged errors on the part of
the Supreme
Court. They are that the Court erred in:
(a) holding that there had been a breach of the rule in
and/or a failure to afford
procedural fairness on the part of the Local Court – numbered ground
(b) treating ground 3 before the Court as an allegation of apprehended bias;
then proceeding to deal with that allegation without
first notifying it of that
intention and providing the opportunity to make submissions with respect to it;
and finally, in concluding
that the Local Court had demonstrated apprehended
bias – numbered grounds 1(iii), (iv), (v) and (vi),
(c) failing to remit the matter to the Local Court for a retrial and instead
making findings of fact and disposing of the matter
based thereon –
numbered grounds 1(ii) and (vii), and
(d) finding that the words spoken by Mr Kew resulted in a variation of the
sublease and/or finding that a collateral contract was
formed with respect
thereto – numbered ground 2.
Proper approach to the appeal
Concrete v Parramatta Design and
Developments
Kirby and Crennan
JJ (Gummow J agreeing) gave the following instructions concerning the order and
manner in which this Court should
deal with these issues:
intermediate appellant court dealing with allegations of apprehended bias,
coupled with other discrete grounds of appeal must deal
with the issue of bias
first. It must do this because, logically, it comes first. Actual or apprehended
bias strike at the validity
and acceptability of the trial and its outcome. It
is for that reason that such questions should be dealt with before other,
substantive,
issues are decided. It should put the party making such an
allegation to an election on the basis that if the allegation of apprehended
bias is made out, a retrial will be ordered irrespective of possible findings on
other issues. Even if a judge is found to be correct,
this does not assuage the
impression that there was an apprehension of
[citations omitted]
Their Honours added:
Furthermore, if, as here, an intermediate appellate court finds the
allegation made out, but grants no relief because it otherwise
finds in favour
of the party making the allegation, a defect in the administration of justice
has been found to have occurred which,
in the absence of any successful appeal
on the point, will remain unremedied. Inevitably, this adversely affects public
in the administration of justice.
[9] The Court
recently reiterated this approach in
Charisteas v
emphasising the
words in the quotation above: “strike[s] at the validity and
acceptability of the trial and its
Furthermore in
Jorgensen v Fair Work
Court of the Federal Court extended this ruling to a denial of procedural
fairness more broadly.
rulings therefore require this Court to consider, first, the issues of
apprehended bias and denial of procedural fairness
raised by this appeal.
Furthermore, if either bias or denial of procedural fairness is made out, this
Court is obliged to remedy
the defect in the validity and acceptability of the
trial and its outcome, regardless of any finding that might be made otherwise
favour of the party making allegations of bias or denial of procedural fairness.
In the interests of fostering public confidence
in the administration of
justice, this Court is obliged to find a means to achieve that remedy.
[11] Of course,
the ruling in
applied equally to the appeal before the Supreme
Court. Regrettably, neither party drew the Court’s attention to that
in their written or oral submissions. Unsurprisingly, therefore, the
Court did not require Hotel to make any election with respect
to its other three
grounds of appeal.
[12] Moreover,
while the Supreme Court did deal with Hotel’s denial of procedural
fairness and apprehended bias grounds first
and, as already noted, upheld both
of them, instead of remedying the resultant defect in the Local Court order by
setting it aside
and remitting the matter for a retrial, the Supreme Court was
persuaded by Hotel to proceed to deal with those other three grounds.
process, the Court drew a number of factual and legal conclusions that were
favourable to Hotel. In doing so, the Court was
led into error. We will return
to this matter later in these reasons. First, it is necessary to deal with
Airport’s first two
alleged errors described above. That requires a brief
review of the factual background to them and some brief observations about
nature of this appeal.
Nature of the appeal
[13] Dealing
with the latter first, the appeal to the Supreme Court was brought under
Local Court (Civil Procedure) Act 1989
(NT). As the
primary Judge noted near the outset of the Reasons, that appeal was confined to
“a question of law”.
This appeal is brought under
Supreme Court Act 1979
(NT). This Court has held that, where it is dealing with an appeal under
that section in respect of an appeal that was itself confined
to a question of
law, the appeal to this Court is similarly
[14] Since the
pertinent parts of both these
are expressed in
similar terms to
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth), if a retrial were still a live issue in the present dispute between
the parties, to succeed in this appeal, Airport would need
to establish an error
on a question of law which error involved it suffering a miscarriage of
We will return to this
question later in these reasons when we come to consider what, if any, relief
Airport is entitled to in this
unnecessary, for present purposes, to consider the authorities bearing on what
constitutes a question of law with respect
to these first two alleged errors
above. That is so because there is no dispute that that phrase extends to a
decision impugned by
a denial of procedural fairness, or by apprehended bias on
the part of the
decision-maker.
[16] At the
Local Court trial, in August 2021, Hotel sought to rely on a conversation its
director, John Robinson, said he had with
Ian Kew, Airport’s CEO, in
June 2017 concerning the notice Airport would give to Hotel if it wished to
terminate Hotel’s
tenancy of the land. The evidence of that conversation
appeared in an affidavit that Mr Robinson made for the purposes of that trial.
The pertinent part of his affidavit was as follows:
In about June
2017, I spoke by phone with Ian Kew, who was at the time the Chief Executive
Officer of NT Airports. I cannot recall
whether I called him or whether he
called me, however at the outset of the call one of us said that the purpose of
the call was to
work out the basis of [Hotel’s] ongoing occupation of the
premises (i.e. following on from some of the emails I have referred
In the course of that conversation an exchange took place as follows:
I said words the effect of “we don’t have any forward bookings
and we have significant rental arrears with [Hotel]. I
thought I might be able
to do a deal with JKC but not until later in the year.”
Ian said words to the effect of: “yes, you’ve been a good rent
paying tenant at the Darwin Airport Resort, Darwin Airport
Inn and Darwin
Airport Lodge since 2004. I can agree to invoice only outgoings until you find a
“we don’t not [sic] have any plans for the land and as long as
you cover so there was no cost to us, I’m happy to
agree to 5% of turnover
when you find another client.”
“if anything changes will give you plenty of notice to remove the
improvements”
I said words to the effect of “alright thanks”.(Paragraph
numbering removed)
[17] The Local
Court’s treatment of this evidence was at the centre of the appeal before
the Supreme Court, as was also the
case in this appeal. The relevant
circumstances surrounding its receipt at the Local Court trial are critical. The
Supreme Court
summarised those circumstances as follows:
Robinson’s affidavit was admitted at the hearing. He was not
cross-examined, although he was available to be cross examined,
should [Airport]
have required. His affidavit contained the only evidence of the conversation
which on [Hotel’s] case altered
the notice requirements of the lease. Mr
Kew’s evidence set out in his affidavit, which was before the Local Court
for an interlocutory
proceeding, was merely that he could not recall if the
conversation had taken
[18] Notwithstanding
these circumstances, the Local Court did not accept Mr Robinson’s
evidence as reliable. Accordingly, the
Local Court was not satisfied that
Mr Kew said the words that Mr Robinson claimed he had. In its reasons, the
Local Court set out
in some detail why the Court had concluded that evidence was
unreliable. In brief summary they
(a) the passage of time between the conversation in June 2017 and 14 April
2021 when Mr Robinson made his affidavit;
(b) the lack of any contemporaneous record of the conversation particularly
having regard to the practice of the parties during this
period to send
confirmatory emails of their meetings and discussions;
(c) the absence of any mention of the notice issue in any of the emails that had
passed between the parties at the relevant time;
(d) the fact that Mr Robinson’s evidence was not tested by cross
examination leaving him “with only the brief and unexplored
evidence in
those few lines of that affidavit to determine a question of the greatest
gravity in this proceeding”.
Denial of procedural fairness
conclusions were pivotal to the denial of procedural fairness ground in the
appeal before the Supreme Court and are similarly
so in this appeal. Before the
Supreme Court, Airport contended that, while it did not positively challenge Mr
Robinson’s evidence,
Hotel bore the onus to establish that the
conversation had occurred, and that it had ‘put Hotel to proof’. It
also contended
that Hotel was implicitly on notice of its
‘challenge’ from the manner in which its case had generally been
[20] For its
part, Hotel contended that it had received no clear notice, whether express or
implied, from Airport that it challenged
the reliability of
Mr Robinson’s evidence. As well, it contended that during the course
of the Local Court trial the Local
Court did not express any reservations
concerning the reliability of that evidence.
reviewing the relevant evidence and a number of authorities including
One Flare Pty Ltd v
Kuhl v Zurich
Financial Services
Supreme Court concluded:
In my view there was clear error by the
rejection of the evidence of Mr Robinson on the basis of lack of
reliability due to the passage
of time, without Mr Robinson being given an
opportunity to address the issue through cross examination. It was not clear his
reliability
would be under challenge, by virtue of the passing of
And further:
This was decisive evidence and to reject it required that the witness party
be given an opportunity to deal with the criticism....While
it is the case that
his Honour was not bound to accept the evidence, to exclude it from
consideration required that the witness be
afforded procedural
[22] For the
following reasons, we do not consider the Supreme Court erred in reaching these
conclusions. The consequences that flow
from the failure of a party to cross
examine a witness called by its opponent were illuminated by Mahoney JA in
Seymour v Australian Broadcasting
Where, in a civil case, a witness is not cross-examined, it
may normally be assumed that the evidence of that witness is not in contest.
Therefore...in such a case a party who has not cross-examined the witness will
not normally be entitled to submit in address that
the witness’s evidence
should not be accepted.
But the circumstances of the particular case may negative such an assumption.
Whether it is right to make such an assumption will
depend upon, for example,
whether counsel has at the time, given an adequate reason for not
cross-examining the witness or otherwise
made it clear that it is not a proper
case in which to make that assumption.....It may be that the witnesses evidence
is fanciful
or such as not to warrant cross examination... Or that cross
examination is forgone for other adequate reasons, for example, delicacy...
Similarly, failure to cross examine the witness may not found such an
assumption, or hinder the course of the trial unfairly if it
is clear from the
manner in which generally the case has been conducted that his evidence will be
contested... The nature of the
defendant’s case and the particulars given
and otherwise the conduct of it may make it sufficiently clear that such an
is unwarranted and that there has been no surprise or prejudice
concerning the matter.
[23] None of the
exceptions identified above applied in this matter. Airport’s counsel did
not explain why it did not cross
examine Mr Robinson. Plainly his evidence
was not fanciful and nor did it concern a matter of delicacy. Given that it was
to Hotel’s case, if Airport wished to challenge its reliability,
it was incumbent on it to cross examine Mr Robinson to that
end. Merely
putting Hotel to proof on its case did not suffice. Consistent with its failure
to cross examine, it could not, and did
not, contend in closing addresses that
his evidence should be treated as unreliable. There was nothing else in the
conduct of Airport’s
case that raised a proper challenge to the
reliability of that evidence. To the contrary, the equivocal position expressed
Kew’s affidavit (which was before the Local Court for the
purposes of an interlocutory proceeding only) as to whether the conversation
occurred, indicated the opposite.
[24] We turn,
then, to the obligations of the Local Court to provide procedural fairness to Mr
Robinson and to Hotel in the treatment
of Mr Robinson’s evidence.
Those obligations were described by the Full Court of the Federal Court in
– a case dealing with the conduct of a judge of the
Federal Circuit Court – as follows:
There is no question
that the primary judge was obliged to afford Mr Jorgensen procedural fairness.
Procedural fairness extends to
require a decision‐maker to identify to a
person who may be affected by a decision any adverse conclusion which has been
at which would not obviously be open on the known material, though the
decision‐maker is not obliged to expose his or her mental
processes or
provisional views to comment before making the decision. There will be a denial
of procedural fairness and a substantial
miscarriage of justice where a trial
judge makes findings of impropriety against a witness in circumstances where the
witness was
not given an opportunity to address that issue in
cross‐examination.
obligation of fairness arises more starkly where a court decides to reject
evidence upon which there was no cross examination:
“if a tribunal of fact
rejects that evidence in those circumstances, the result may be a wrong finding
of fact, or, to use
other language, an unreasonable...or even a perverse finding
rejecting Mr Robinson’s evidence as unreliable, without first notifying
him or Hotel that he intended to do so, the
Local Court did not comply with any
of these guidelines and therefore did not afford them procedural fairness. The
Supreme Court
was correct to conclude that was so.
Apprehended
apprehended bias issue arises from another part of the Local Court’s
reasons. It was the following comment: “I
know of my own knowledge after
nearly 40 years in Darwin that John Robinson is widely known as
“Foxy” Robinson, I believe
because his hair was red.”
[28] Before the
Supreme Court, Hotel contended that these comments indicated that the Local
Court had had regard to matters not the
subject of evidence before him which did
not constitute matters he could take into account as judicial notice. It
contended that
when this was coupled with the “minimal
before the Local
Court in respect of Mr Robinson’s credibility, these comments could
“reasonably cause the hypothetical
lay observer to question the decision
making process”.
considering these contentions, the Supreme Court first noted that this was not a
case of actual bias and then set out the
test for apprehended bias by reference
to the “double might” test expounded in
The Court then
observed that that test required a two-step determination: “First, there
must be identification of what might
lead a judge to decide a case other than on
its merits. Second, there must be a logical connection between that matter in
the apprehension
that the judge might not determine the matter on the
[30] Thereafter,
the Supreme Court considered a number of authorities dealing with the
hypothetical observer standard
in the course of which was quoted the following observations of the High Court
QYFM v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural
“fair-minded”, the observer “is neither complacent nor unduly
sensitive or suspicious”. Yet the observer
is cognisant of “human
frailty” and is all too aware of the reality that the judge is human.
The observer understands
that “information [as well as attitudes]
consciously and conscientiously discarded might still sometimes have a
subconscious
effect on even the most professional of decision-making”.
[31] As for the
first step in the requisite two-step determination, the Supreme Court noted
Hotel’s contention that the Local
Court “brought to bear undisclosed
knowledge... to the
proceedings”.
second step, the Supreme Court noted Hotel’s contention that this
knowledge “was possibly brought to bear
on the finding of [Mr
Robinson’s]
unreliability”.
[32] Ultimately,
the Supreme Court concluded that: “the totality of the circumstances here,
including how the observer would
not be insensitive to the impression that the
circumstances might reasonably create in the mind of the appellant lead to the
there existed, at the time of the reasons being published, a
reasonable apprehension that the question of reliability would not be
impartially”.
[33] For present
purposes it does not assist to consider Airport’s assertion that this
issue was not properly raised before
the Supreme
The fact is that the
Supreme Court considered it and drew conclusions in respect of it. The pertinent
question is whether those conclusions
are correct.
[34] The reasons
the Local Court gave for rejecting Mr Robinson’s evidence as unreliable
are set out above.
They are, in
our view, detailed and cogent. In that light, to conclude that the Local Court
might have acted on some other unidentified
and undisclosed reason would, in our
view, attribute to the fair-minded observer an unduly cynical or suspicious
mind. It follows
that we consider the Supreme Court was in error to reach the
conclusion that the Local Court’s decision was affected by apprehended
Consequences of denial of procedural fairness and no
apprehended bias
conclusions mean that Airport’s second alleged error
should be rejected, but
its first alleged error
be accepted. That, in turn, means that, while the defect in the Local Court
order connected with the Supreme Court’s
apprehended bias finding will be
removed, the conclusion concerning the Local Court’s failure to afford
procedural fairness
to Hotel will remain.
questions therefore arise. First, what, if any, order is Airport entitled to in
this appeal? Secondly, having regard to the
should this Court remove that taint on the Local Court trial and outcome?
[37] In oral
submissions at the hearing of this appeal, Hotel’s counsel attempted to
answer the latter question by urging this
Court to adopt the approach taken by
the Court in
. In that matter, having dealt with the denial of
procedural fairness issues first, as required by
, and having
found for Mr Jorgensen, the Court decided to proceed to deal with his other
grounds of appeal because they did not, in
any event, support the course
advanced by him, namely to dismiss the respondent’s primary application
without a retrial.
Their Honours
It is also possible to address the legal issues that are
raised by the remaining grounds of appeal without considering the evidence
any great detail and without expressing views about factual matters which will
need to be considered afresh on remittal to the
Circuit Court. It would, in all
the circumstances, be desirable to address the legal issues so as to provide
guidance for the purposes
[38] We do not
consider this course provides an answer to the latter question. That is so for
two reasons. First, in circumstances
where neither party before the Supreme
Court sought a retrial, on the common basis that a retrial would be futile where
vacant possession
of the land was provided by Hotel back in September 2021, and
where both have confirmed that position before this Court, there is
no occasion
for this Court to provide guidance in respect of the issues that might be
considered in that non-existent trial.
conclusion coincidentally answers the former question posed in paragraph
above and disposes of Airport’s
other two alleg
is so with respect to the former question because Airport’s mixed success
in this appeal together with the common position
of the parties that a retrial
would be futile mean that Airport has not suffered any miscarriage of justice
that calls for
futility applies equally to the other two errors it has alleged in this appeal,
along with Hotel’s related grounds of
appeal before the Supreme Court.
This state of affairs also serves to highlight the error the Supreme Court made
in determining those
three grounds of appeal, relevantly unassisted, by counsel
for either party with respect to the ruling in
brings us to the second reason. It is that
Hotel’s proposed course before this Court, and the one it persuaded the
Supreme Court
to pursue, does not remove the “...defect in the
administration of justice [that] has been found to have occurred [in these
appeal proceedings, thus] adversely affect[ing] public confidence in the
administration of
[41] The most
obvious answer, therefore, to the latter question posed above, is for this Court
to make an order setting aside the
tainted Local Court order in the public
interest. In our view, this should be done despite the fact that the order has
achieved its purpose, namely vacant possession of the land concerned.
While that private controversy between the parties may have
been quelled, the
public interest in the integrity of the administration of justice has not been
[42] In our
view, it would also be prudent to set aside those of the Supreme Court’s
orders that are not consistent with the
respect there is a difficulty. Regrettably, those orders were never formally
extracted by Hotel. The Court was told at the
hearing of this appeal that the
only record of the orders is contained in the Supreme Court’s
where they are expressed
somewhat ambiguously by reference to Hotel’s grounds of appeal. The
ambiguity arises also from the
absence of any express mention of the first two
grounds that the Supreme Court
determined,
the disparity in the
numerical references used in the Supreme Court’s summary of
Airport’s grounds of appeal and, in
that context, what is meant by the
[43] To address
all these complications and to reflect the matters discussed above, we consider
that the following are the appropriate
orders to be made in this
(a) The appellant’s (Airport’s) appeal is allowed in part.
(b) The orders of the Supreme Court made on 29 November 2023 are set aside and
in their place this Court orders that:
(i) The appellant’s (Hotel’s) appeal to the Supreme Court is allowed
with respect to the following ground of appeal:
That the Local Court did not
afford Hotel procedural fairness when rejecting as unreliable, without notifying
it, in circumstances
where there was no cross-examination or other challenge to
its reliability, the evidence of its director, John Robinson, about a
conversation that he had with Airport’s CEO, Ian Kew, where he stated that
Airport would give Hotel ‘plenty of notice
to remove the
improvements’ if it required vacant possession of the land.
(ii) The appellant’s (Hotel’s) appeal to the Supreme Court is
otherwise dismissed.
(iii) The respondent’s (Airport’s) notice of contention in the
Supreme Court is dismissed.
(iv) The order of the Local Court made on 3 August 2021 is set aside.
(v) There is to be no rehearing in the Local Court.
[44] As regards
the question of costs, we will hear from the parties, noting that neither party
has had any significant measure of
success given the conclusions on this appeal
as to the futility of the appeal before the Supreme Court and before this
-------------------
Darwin International Airport v
[2021] NTLC 22.
Diah (NT) Pty Ltd as Trustee
for the Airport Hotel Trust v Darwin International Airport Pty Ltd
(‘the Reasons’).
See the Reasons at [2].
See the Reasons at [43]-[44],
[60], [63], [77] and [79] respectively.
The Reasons at [62].
Browne v Dunn
(1893) 6 R 67
[2006] HCA 55
(2006) 229 CLR 577
At [117], with whom Gummow J
agreed at [3].
[2021] HCA 29
(2021) 273 CLR 289
at [10] per
Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Keane, Gordon and Gleeson JJ. See also
CNY17 v Minister
for Immigration and Border Protection
[2019] HCA 50
(2019) 268 CLR 76
Nettle and Gordon JJ.
[2019] FCAFC 113
(2019) 271 FCR 461
Greenwood, Reeves and Wigney JJ (‘
Royal Guardian Mortgage Management Pty Ltd v Nguyen
ALR 128 at [9] per Basten JA.
See the Reasons at [3]-[8].
Development Consent
Authority v Phelps
[2010] NTCA 3
(2010) 27 NTLR 174
per Martin CJ, Mildren and
Reeves JJ and
Tiver Constructions v Clair
[1992] NTSC 86
(1992) 110 FLR 239
Martin and Mildren JJ.
Section 19(6)
Court (Civil Procedure) Act 1989
(NT) and s 55(1)(f) of the
Supreme Act
(NT), respectively.
Windoval Pty Ltd v
[2014] FCAFC 127
(2014) 314 ALR 622
per Jacobson, White and Gleeson JJ citing
(2002) 209 CLR 203
at [36] per Gaudron ACJ, McHugh, Hayne and
Callinan JJ and
Stead v State Government Insurance Commission
CLR 141 at 145-146 per Mason, Wilson, Brennan, Deane and Dawson JJ at [95]-[96]
and [106] respectively.
As to a denial of procedural
fairness, see, for example,
Haritos v Commissioner of Taxation
[2015] FCAFC 92
noting that special leave to appeal was refused in respect of
that judgment, see
Crown Melbourne v Cosmopolitan Hotels
[2016] HCA 26
(2016) 260 CLR 1
, and as to bias see, for example,
QYFM v Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2023] HCA 15
(2023) 409 ALR 65
per Jagot J (‘
See the Reasons at [25].
Darwin International Airport
[2021] NTLC 22
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298.
(1893) 6 R 67.
[2017] NSWCA 195.
[2011] HCA 11
(2011) 243 CLR 361.
See the Reasons at [43].
See the Reasons at [44].
(1977) 19 NSWLR 219
Sullivan v Trilogy
Funds Management
[2017] FCAFC 153
(2017) 255 FCR 503
See at [199].
Poricanin v Australian
Consolidated Industries Ltd
(1979) 2 NSWLR 419
at 426 per Hope and Glass
JJA. See also
Nominal Defendant v Saleh
[2011] NSWCA 16
(2011) 57 MVR 412
per McColl JA and
One Flare Pty Ltd v Chernih
[2017] NSWCA 195
–[35] and [38] per Meagher JA (Gleeson and Leeming AJJ agreeing).
See the Reasons at [49].
See the Reasons at [49].
See the Reasons at [51], citing
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
See the Reasons at [55],
referring to
Ebner supra
Charisteas v
at [21] and
Johnson v Johnson
[2000] HCA 48
201 CLR 488
See the Reasons at [56].
See the Reasons at [60].
See [6(b)] above.
See at [17].
See [6(b)] above.
See [6(a)] above.
See at [6(c)] and [6(d)]
See at [13] above.
See the Reasons at [86].
See at [4] above.
Compare the Reasons at [86]
with the numbers used in the grounds of appeal set out in the Reasons at
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (245 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter