URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTLC/2022/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:20:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Firth v Tolios [2022] NTLC 25 (7 December 2022)
Firth v Tolios [2022] NTLC 25 (7 December 2022)
Firth v Tolios
[2022] NTLC 025
PARTIES: Justin Firth
Michael Tolios
TITLE OF COURT: LOCAL COURT
FILE NO(s): 22122876, 22122877, and 22120918
DELIVERED ON: 7 December 2022
DELIVERED AT: Darwin
HEARING DATE(s): 23 August and 18 October 2022
DECISION OF: Acting Judge O’Loughlin
CATCHWORDS:
Failure to comply with Health Direction
Public and Environmental Health Act 2011
New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990
Criminal Code Act 1983
Yardley v Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety
[2022] NZHC
Attorney-General S.A. v Corporation of the City of Adelaide
[2013] HCA 3
Kassam v Hazzard
[2021] NSWSC 1320
Cotteril v Romanes
[2021] VSC 498
Harding v Sutton
[2021] VSC 741
REPRESENTATION:
Prosecution: Mr Mohammed
Defendant: Self
Decision category classification: B
Decision ID number: [2022] NTLC 025
Number of paragraphs: 86
IN THE LOCAL COURT
AT DARWIN IN THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY OF
No. 22122876, 22122877, and 22120918
Justin Firth
Michael Tolios
REASONS FOR DECISION
(Delivered 7 December
ACTING JUDGE O’LOUGHLIN
Introduction
Defendant Michael Tolios operated the
Souvlaki Grill and Chill
Nightcliff on Dick Ward Drive. The business was also registered as operated by
co-Defendant
Corporation Capital One (NT) Pty Ltd
where both Mr Tolios
and co-Defendant Ms Violet Krishna were managers.
three Defendants have been charged with breaching
and Environmental Health Act 2011
and these reasons
apply to the three proceedings.
March 2020 the Minister for Health declared a public health emergency under
PEHA in anticipation of the arrival of the Covid-19
This declaration allowed the Chief Health Officer
(“CHO”), pursuant to
(1) of PEHA, to make Directions
thought necessary to alleviate the public health emergency.
of PEHA creates an offence if a person fails to comply with a health
"(1) a person commits an offence if:
(a) the CHO takes an action under
(1) that involves giving a
Direction, whether oral or written and whether specified in
otherwise; and
(b) the person engages in conduct that results in a contravention of the
Fault elements:
The person:
(a) intentionally engages in the conduct; and
(b) is reckless as to whether the conduct would result in a contravention of
the declaration or Direction.
(2) It is a defence to a prosecution for an offence against subsection
(1) if the Defendant establishes a reasonable excuse.
CHO issued a number of Directions in respect of the pandemic
Directions 56 of 2020 requiring certain business to have a Covid safety plan,
put in place Covid signage, and have a customer
check-in register;
Directions 16 of 2021 imposing the “lock down” and requiring masks
to be worn in most situations; and
Directions 35 of 2021 requiring businesses to have QR codes to record the
presence of customers.
Defendants are charged with breaching these Directions in late June and early
July 2021 and thereby committing offences against
The Evidence
prosecution called a number of police witnesses where very little of their
evidence was challenged by the Defendants. The following
is a summary of the
officer Carter gave evidence that she attended the business on 30 June 2021. She
stated that a she saw Mr Tolios and Ms Krishna
sitting in the courtyard of the
business and neither were wearing masks. She asked them to put masks on and they
claiming they, and their staff, had medical exemptions.
Carter asked about the nature of the medical exemptions but they declined
S Hutchinson
2 July 2021 Police officer Hutchinson followed up with a further inspection of
the Defendants’ business where she saw a female
and male employee (not the
Defendants) who weren’t wearing masks. The female employee claimed to have
an exemption but did
not produce it.
saw another male staff member not wearing a mask. He put one on briefly, but
then took it off.
saw a customer but she couldn't recall if they were wearing a mask but assumes
they were because she didn't speak to them.
She did not say how long that
customer stayed in the shop (this is explored below where details on check-in
were only required if
customers remained at the location for more than 15
officer attended the shop on 6 July 2021 and did not see a QR check-in code near
the entry. Christie saw staff who were not wearing
masks. He asked why and the
staff said that they did not have to do as it was contrary to their occupational
health & safety
left but went back later and saw that the staff were still not wearing masks and
there was still no QR code on display. He asked
the female staff member where
the QR was located and she said it was somewhere but did not produce it. He saw
customers coming in
but did not give evidence as to how long they remained. He
told the staff they need to wear masks and he left.
6 July 2021 Sgt Jones attended the shop and spoke to Mr Tolios and Ms
did not see any Covid safety signage and he issued an infringement notice based
on information he had been told by some of the
officers mentioned above.
said he searched the government records for a safety plan and this search
indicated no such plan had been lodged. He said a QR
code is only issued by the
Department of Health when a safety plan had been lodged.
officer contacted the CHO having heard reports from the above police officers
and from the public.
caused the CHO to generate Directions which were specific to the Defendants,
directing the business to "immediately cease operating
and be closed until
compliance officers inspect and review what is required under the relevant CHO
Directions".
email was drafted by the CHO at 8:11 PM on 6 July 2021. Mr Engels went to the
shop at 8:36 PM on the same day and saw three staff
members not wearing masks
and that there was still no QR code near the entrance nor any check-in book. He
gave the Direction to a
staff member called Stephanie who immediately complied
by shutting the shop.
Engels returned the next morning and saw the business had reopened and was
trading. Mr Tolios subsequently claimed that he
did not read or receive the
email until 11 AM that day, but even if this were true, the shop was seen to be
trading well after 11
Engels spoke to Ms Krishna who identified herself as the owner and said the
Directions were unlawful and she would not close the
store. She was arrested. Mr
Tolios was present and I find he and Ms Krishna had notice of the specific CHO
Direction by at least
11 am on 7 July.
McClay is the principal policy officer to the CHO. He searched the database of
safety plans on 2 July 2021 and determined that
no safety plan had been lodged
in respect of the business and that QR codes are only issued after the safety
plan is lodged.
said it was not until 7 July 2021 that the safety plan was lodged by the
Defendants.
inspected the business on 8 July in accordance with the specific CHO Direction
applicable to that business. This was after the
safety plan was lodged and he
took out the QR code and signage and gave them to the
Defendants.
business was then allowed to reopen.
Findings on the above
stated earlier, the Defendants challenged very little or any of the above and I
accept all the above evidence by the police witnesses.
Evidence of Michael Tolios
Tolios was the only Defendant to give evidence and he admitted the safety plan
was not submitted until 7 July 2021.
his evidence Mr Tolios denied having any medical conditions that prevented him
from wearing a mask but he did tender a letter from
a GP stating Ms Krishna
"can't wear mask for health reason" (sic). This letter however is dated 18
August 2021 which is after the
dates of all the alleged offences.
Tolios did not claim that any of the face mask exemptions referred to in
Direction 18 of CHO Directions 16 of 2021 applied
to him. That is, he did not
claim that the business was his residence, that he had a physical or mental
health illness or condition,
a disability etc.
his cross examination of witnesses, Michael Tolios repeatedly put to witnesses
the proposition that CHO Directions 16 of 2021 did
not require an individual to
wear a mask if that individual was more than 1.5 m away from others. He was
repeatedly asked by the
court to identify where this exemption was located in
the Directions.
Tolios eventually tendered a single page from what appeared to be a CHO
Direction which stated:
6. A person must wear a face mask at all times when the person is inside
any premises or vehicle within any of the following places
and cannot maintain a
distance of 1.5 m from other people:...".
which did not commence until 15 July 2022 (about
one year after the alleged
Tolios also tendered other documents which appeared to be extracts from the
Department of Health website from unknown times. These
extracts stated
"facemasks must be worn when you can't distance". No such rule or wording
appears in the CHO Direction 16 of 2021
which are applicable at the time of
these alleged offences. These tendered documents appear to be from subsequent
Directions and
are therefore not relevant.
Tolios in evidence, and in questions to witnesses, also argued that the wearing
of masks was dangerous because the business used
a charcoal rotisserie. This is
not an exemption mentioned in CHO Directions 16 of 2021 and there was no
suggestion that the cooking
with charcoal was an emergency under Direction 18
(g). I do not find cooking with charcoal to be a reasonable excuse to not wear
Tolios also wanted to tender expert evidence which I allowed over objection.
This was in the form of a short extract of what appears
to paper by a
Denis G Rancourt PHD
claiming that masks do
work to prevent
influenza type diseases. The qualifications and area of expertise of this author
were not explained in the document
or by Mr Tolios. This expert was not called,
and Mr Tolios had not given any notice to the prosecution of relying on expert
I received the document into evidence, I reject the proposition that masks do
not reduce the risk of contracting or infecting
others with influenza type
diseases. Instead, I take judicial knowledge of the countless epidemiology
experts who have repeatedly
stated in the media over the last two years that
reduce the risk of the spread of Covid-19.
Defendants’ Other Arguments
Defendants filed useful written closing submissions which raised a number of
first was that PEHA “did not confer the power to make the Directions that
the CHO made”.
power to make Directions is contained in
subsection 52
emergency declaration is in force, the CHO may take the actions (including
giving oral or written Directions) the CHO considers
necessary, appropriate or
desirable to alleviate the public health emergency stated in the
declaration.
Defendants argued that this power is not as broad as it appears and that powers
are in fact confined to those specifically referred
subsection 52
which states:
Directions the CHO may give
Directions requiring any of the
(a) a person to undergo a medical examination of a general nature, or of a
stated kind, immediately or within the period stated;
(b) a stated person to remain in, or move to or from, a stated area or place
immediately or within a stated period;
(c) a stated thing to be seized or destroyed;
(d) a stated person to provide oral or written information relating to the
emergency.”
have added the emphasis which suggests a weakness in the argument.
Subsection 52
(3) lists only 4 specific powers which are stated as
otherwise very broad power granted by the
subsection 52
(1). This subsection is
clearly not attempt to be an exhaustive list of the Directions that may be
given, and is probably included
to make it clear that the Directions may affect
an individual’s right to decline a medical examination, their property
and their liberty.
Furthermore,
states an offence is committed if a person contravenes a Direction
“whether specified in
section 52(3)
or otherwise”.
Defendants also argued that the PEHA did not grant broad powers as it was only
intended to “deal with emergencies that were
smaller and more localised
than a state of emergency”.
is not what is suggested by the provisions relating to a declaration of a public
health emergency, as these use broad language
subsection 49
(b) specifically
states that there can be a declaration in the “whole of the
Territory”.
Defendants referred the Court to
Yardley v Minister for Workplace Relations
[2022] NZHC 291
where Cooke J. dealt with laws or Directions
requiring NZ police to be vaccinated. The case was determined by application of
New Zealand Bill of Rights Act
where Cooke J found that the vaccine
requirement limited the New Zealand citizen’s right to refuse medical
treatment (section
5). This was found not to be a reasonable limit on the
applicants’ rights that can be demonstrably justified in a free and
democratic society (Section 11 of the
New Zealand Bill of Rights Act
similar rights, or bill of rights exist in the NT and
application here.
Defendants also raised the ‘principle of legality’ where
in the absence of clear words or necessary implication the courts will
not interpret legislation as abrogating or contracting fundamental
”, as stated by Heydon J in
Attorney-General S.A. v City of
[2013] HCA 3
(2013) 249 CLR 1
least three recent superior courts
have rejected this argument involving arguably more extreme laws or restrictions
in response to the Covid pandemic which essentially
required citizens to be
vaccinated to keep their employment. Like those decisions I find that freedoms
are indeed abrogated but that
PEHA clearly intends to abrogate these rights
during an emergency. As Beech-Jones CJ said in
Kassam v Hazzard at
“At least so far as the abrogation of particular rights are
concerned, the presumption is of little assistance in construing
a statutory
scheme when abrogation is the “very thing which the legislation sets out
to achieve” (Australian Securities
and Investments Commission v DB
Management Pty Ltd
(2000) 199 CLR 321
[2000] HCA 7
Consideration of the Charges
Krishna, Michael Tolios and Capital One (NT) Pty Ltd were charged with the same
section 56 offence namely that between 29 June
and 8 July 2021 they engaged in
conduct that resulted in the contravention of a Direction made by the CHO under
section 52 (1) where
it is alleged the Defendants failed to have:
Covid safety plan;
signage; and
check-in register.
Failure to have a Covid Safety
requirement for certain businesses to have a Covid safety plan was imposed by
CHO Directions 56 of 2020 which commenced on 30
November 2020 and
The person in authority for the place, business, activity, service or
premises must prepare a COVID-19 safety plan, in a form approved
Direction applied to a business that sells food so it applied to the
Defendants’ business.
evidence clearly showed that Mr Tolios and Ms Krishna managed and were in a
position of authority at the business. The subsequent
safety plan prepared by
the Defendants recorded the business details as being operated by the Capital
One (NT) Pty Ltd. Mr Tolios
was a director of that corporate
accept the evidence of Stuart McClay that a Covid safety plan was not lodged
until 7 July 2021 and the evidence suggests that it
was not prepared until about
therefore find that all three Defendants failed to have a Covid safety plan
approved until 7 July 2021, and charge 1 is made out
in respect of this
particular.
accept the evidence of the police that there was no Covid signage which was
required by Directions 29 and 30 of CHO Directions 56
of 2020. These provisions
required “conspicuous” signage reminding customers to keep 1.5m
apart, practice hand hygiene,
and of other behaviours that would reduce the risk
of the spread of Covid-19. No such signage was on display and I am satisfied
reasonable doubt that this particular of breach is made
record of a customer check-in is only required by CHO Directions 56 of 2020 if
the person is staying for more than 15 minutes (Direction
18). Given the
Defendants sold takeaway food, I have a reasonable doubt customers were there
for longer than 15 minutes. This particular
is therefore not
Finding on Count 1
find the actions of failing to have a Covid safety plan and Covid signage were
intentional and the Defendants were reckless as to
whether these actions would
breach the CHO Direction. The Defendants have not suggested that there was a
reasonable excuse for not
having signage and a safety plan. I'm satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that between 29 June on 8 July 2021 all three Defendants
guilty of breaching a Direction of the CHO 56 of 2021 by failing to have a Covid
safety plan and failing to have appropriate
Remaining Charges
remaining charges 2 to 5 were laid against Mr Tolios and Capital One (NT) Pty
Ltd (not Ms Krishna).
charge alleges Mr Tolios and the corporation failed to wear a mask thereby
contravening a Direction made by the CHO and committing
an offence contrary to
section 56.
Direction 16 of 2021 took effect on 28 June 2021 which put in place a "lockdown"
over Darwin and other areas. Directions 17 and
18 imposed the following mask
requirement:
“17 Subject to Direction 18, a person must wear a face mask at all
times while in the lockdown area.
18. A person is not required to wear a mask if the person:
is at the premises where the person resides; or
is in a private vehicle; or
is a child under the age of 12 years; or
has a physical or mental health illness or condition, or disability, which
makes wearing a face mask unsuitable; or
is communicating with another person who is hearing impaired and
visibility of the mouth is essential; or
is asked to remove the face mask to ascertain their identity; or
must remove the face mask in an emergency.”
is difficult to imagine a corporation being required to wear a
but section 43 BL of the
Criminal Code
can attribute physical acts of people to
corporations:
"if a physical element of an offence is committed by an employee, agent or
officer of a body corporate acting within the actual or
apparent scope of his or
her employment, or within his or her actual or apparent authority, the physical
element must also be attributed
to the body corporate".
if an employee fails to wear mask that failure can be attributed to the
corporate Defendant.
accept the evidence of police officer Carter who attended on 30 June 2021 and
spoke with Mr Tolios and Ms Krishna and neither were
wearing masks.
Defendants argued that they and their employees were essential workers and
argued that CHO Directions 16 of 2021 did not require
essential workers to wear
face masks.
is true that CHO Directions 16 of 2021 refers to “essential workers”
and I accept that the Defendants and their employees
met that definition.
However this class of people were only exempted from the Directions regarding
movement during the lock down,
and not excused from the Directions as to mask
medical certificate was tendered in respect of Ms Krishna, stating that she had
a medical condition preventing her from wearing
a mask but this was dated 18
August 2021 which was more than a month after the date of the alleged offence.
Nevertheless it is possible
that the unnamed medical condition could have
existed at 30 June 2021 and I can't be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Ms
was required to wear mask
am satisfied that the business was not the residence of Mr Tolios and Ms
Krishna, that Mr Tolios did not have a physical or mental
health condition
preventing him from wearing a mask, and that none of the other exemptions
applied. The actions of Mr Tolios and
therefore the corporate entity were
intentional and they were reckless as to whether their conduct might breach the
Directions.
therefore find that Mr Tolios breached Direction 17 of CHO Directions 16 of 2021
and thereby committed an offence under section
56 of the act. As Mr Tolios was
an agent and director of the corporation I find the corporation also committed
the offence.
count alleges that on 2 July 2021 both Mr Tolios and the corporate entity failed
to comply with a CHO Direction by failing to
a) a relevant Covid business QR code was displayed; and/or
b) there was a sign-in capability; and/or
c) that their staff wore facemasks.
examination of the 2021 CHO Directions shows that the requirement to display a
QR code was not imposed until 12 July 2021 (CHO
Directions 35 of 2021). This was
10 days after the alleged offence so this particular of the complaint is
discussed above, the requirement to have a sign-in capability only applied if
customers were staying for more than 15 minutes (Direction
18 of CHO Directions
56 of 2020). As this business was a souvlaki takeaway I have a reasonable doubt
customers were there for longer
15 minutes and this particular is
respect of the allegation of staff failing to wear face masks, I accept the
evidence of police officer Hutchinson that two staff
were not wearing masks on 2
July 2021. There was no suggestion that the staff satisfied any ground for not
wearing a mask (e.g. medical
condition, communicating with a hearing-impaired
person etc.). I find that cooking with charcoal is not within any of the stated
exceptions and is not a reasonable excuse.
is no evidence that Mr Tolios was not wearing a mask on 2 July 2021 however I
find that the staff were his representatives acting
within their apparent
authority. Section 116 (2) of PEHA states that "conduct engaged by a
representative of a person within the
scope of the representatives actual or
apparent authority is taken to have been also engaged in by the person". Mr
Tolios is therefore
taken to have engaged in the conduct of not wearing a mask
at the business on this day.
also find that the staff are employees of the corporate entity which conducted
the business.
therefore find Mr Tolios and Capital One (NT) Pty Ltd guilty of count three. The
actions were intentional and the Defendants were
reckless as whether these
actions might constitute a breach of the Directions.
count alleges that on 3 July 2021 Mr Tolios and the corporate entity failed to
ensure the Covid safety plan was in force and
thereby committed a section 56
find that the business was required to have a safety plan in place pursuant to
CHO 56 of 2020 which came into force in November
2020. Direction 6 therein
required that "the person in authority for the place, business, activity... must
prepare a Covid safety
plan". I find that both Mr Tolios and the corporate
entity were persons in authority.
accept the evidence of Stuart McClay that this safety plan was not lodged until
7 July 2021.
actions were intentional and the Defendants were reckless as to breaching the
Directions and I therefore find that on 3 July 2021
both the corporate entity
and Mr Tolios were in breach and committed a section 56
final count alleges that on 7 July 2021 Mr Tolios and the corporate entity
failed to comply with a Direction to close its business.
was a Direction made and/or recorded by email on 6 July 2021, after the CHO
became aware of the other breaches of Directions
Direction was specific to the business in question and was drafted in the form
of an email which stated:
"I... Chief Health Officer... consider it necessary, appropriate or
... [to make]
the following Directions, effective
immediately:
The Souvlaki Grill and Chill-26/159 Dick Ward Drive, Coconut Grove, NT
0810 to immediately cease operations and be closed until compliance
inspect and review what is required under the relevant CHO
Directions.”
52 of PEHA allows the CHO to issue Directions orally or in writing with no
provisions requiring a particular form of signing
or execution. If a Direction
can be made orally I have no trouble in concluding that it can also be made by
above specific Direction described the Defendants' business in a way which is
consistent with other tendered documentation.
accept the evidence of the police that the notice was given to a staff member at
approximately 8:40 PM on 6 July 2021 and that staff
member promptly closed the
business that day. I also accept the evidence that the business was trading the
next morning and I find
it unlikely that Mr Tolios and Ms Krishna were not aware
of the Direction until 11 AM in the morning of 7 July. Nevertheless it is
that Mr Tolios knew of the Direction at least by 11 AM that morning and yet he
refused to comply and allowed the shop to continue
to operate.
Tolios was reckless as to breaching the Directions. I therefore find that Mr
Tolios and the corporate entity is guilty of this
Firth v Tolios –
The Defendant Michael Tolios is guilty of counts one to
Firth v Capital One (NT) – 22122877
Defendant Capital One (NT) Pty Ltd is guilty of counts one to five.
Firth v Krishna – 22120918
The Defendant is
guilty of count one.
Kassam v Hazzard
, Cotteril v Romanes
[2021] VSC 498
and Harding v Sutton
Despite the law sometimes
referring to the metaphor of the “corporate
Ms Krishna was not
charged in respect of this offence though.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (344 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter