URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTADComm/1998/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:16:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Fornaro, Rosemary v Ron Strachan [1998] NTADComm 3 (20 July 1998)
OFFICE OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION COMMISSIONER
COMPLAINANT:
MRS ROSEMARY FORNARO
RESPONDENT:
MR RON STRACHAN
MS DAWN LAWRIE
HEARING COMMISSIONER
COUNSEL ASSISTING:
PATRICK McINTYRE
GROUNDS OF COMPLAINT:
DISCRIMINATION ON THE GROUNDS OF SEX (
AND SEXUAL HARASSMENT (
) OF THE NT
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION ACT
DATE OF DECISION:
20 July 1998
Introduction
April 1997 a delegate of the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner accepted a
complaint from Mrs Rosemary Fornaro against Mr Ron
Strachan, the operator of a
business known as National Flags. The complaint alleged discrimination in the
area of work on the grounds
of sex and sexual harassment contrary to
Anti-Discrimination Act
Following investigation and an unsuccessful attempt to
conciliate the matter, the complaint was referred to the NT Anti-Discrimination
Commissioner for Hearing pursuant to
of the Act on 28 January
A copy of the referral report was sent to the parties and the
matter was heard in Darwin 20/21 April
Mrs Fornaro has lived in the Northern
Territory for approximately 5.5 years, having come here with her (then) husband
who is a serving
member of the Armed forces.
Mrs Fornaro and her husband
were divorced four years ago, and when he was posted interstate Mrs Fornaro
remained in Darwin, living
on her own and by her own resources.
Fornaro is a dressmaker and designer, and pursued that employment from home
during her husbands postings around Australia.
Since arriving in the NT
Mrs Fornaro has also worked as a home carer for a quadriplegic and a house carer
for Red Cross.
Early 1995 Mrs Fornaro attended a Skillshare course in
commercial lettering and arts, during which the tutor encouraged students to
accept some outside work. Mrs Fornaro fabricated some banners and flags, and
was then approached by Mr Strachan to perform similar
work on a contract basis
Although Mrs Fornaro was keen to develop her artwork, the work
performed for Mr Strachan was essentially sewing of flags and banners,
Mrs Fornaro sewed the flags at her home, and charged a fixed
fee. Mr Strachan would deliver and pick up work from Mrs Fornaro, and
arrangement was in place for eighteen months, during which time Mrs Fornaro
sewed some hundreds of flags involving artwork from
international insignia,
company logos, joke flags, company flags and personalised designs.
Fornaro had been the victim of sexual physical and mental abuse in her childhood
and had endured two abusive and violent marriages.
Mrs Fornaro had confided in
Mr Strachan, advising him of some this history of abuse and making it clear
their relationship was a
business relationship only.
Mrs Fornaro became
increasingly concerned at Mr Strachan's behaviour which included remarks made in
her presence which she alleged
were of a sexual nature and the presence of
others, and became stressed. She terminated her "piece work" with Mr Strachan,
a complaint with the Office of the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner
alleging discrimination in the area of work on the grounds of
sex, and sexual
harassment.
Mr Strachan advised he was aware of Mrs Fornaro's traumatic
past, and that at no time was there any deliberate attempt to cause Mrs
The Legislation
Anti-Discrimination
came into operation 1 August 1993, and makes discrimination based
on sex in the area of work unlawful, unless a specific exemption
"Discrimination" is defined in the following terms:
SECTION 20 - DISCRIMINATION
(1) For the purpose of this Act, discrimination includes -
(a) any distinction, restriction, exclusion or preference made on the basis of
an attribute that has the effect of nullifying or
impairing equality of
opportunity;
(b) harassment on the basis of an attribute,
in area of activity referred in Part
(2) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), discrimination takes
place if a person treats or proposes to treat another
person who has or had, or
is believed to have or had -
(a) an attribute;
(b) a characteristic imputed to appertain to an attribute; or
(c) a characteristic imputed to appertain generally to persons with an
less favourably than a person who has not, or is believed not to have such an
(3) For discrimination to take place,
it is not necessary that -
(a) the attribute is the sole or dominant ground for the less favourable
treatment; or
(b) the person who discriminates regards the treatment as less
favourable.
(4) The motive of a person alleged to have discriminated against another is,
for the purposes of this Act, irrelevant."
"Sexual harassment" is
prohibited conduct and is outlined in the Act as follows:
SECTION 22 - PROHIBITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT
(1) A person shall not, in an area of activity referred to in Part 4,
sexually harass another person.
(2) Sexual harassment takes place is a person -
(a) subjects another person to an unwelcome act of physical intimacy;
(b) makes an unwelcome demand or request (whether directly of by implication)
for sexual favours from the other person:
(c) makes an unwelcome remark with sexual connotations; or
(d) engages in any other unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature, and
(e) that person does so -
(i) with the intention of offending, humiliating or intimidating the other;
(ii) in circumstances where a reasonable person would have anticipated the
possibility that the other person would be offended, humiliated
or intimidated
by the conduct; or
(f) that other person is, or reasonably believes that he or she is likely to
be, subjected to some detriment if he or she objects
to the act, demand,
request, remark or conduct.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2)(e)(ii), circumstances that are
relevant in determining whether a reasonable person would have
anticipated that
possibility that the other person would be offended, humiliated or intimidated
by the conduct include -
(a) the sex, age or race of the other person;
(b) any impairment that the other person has;
(c) the relationship between the other and the person engaging in the
conduct; and
(d) any other circumstances of the other person."
The Evidence
Mrs Fornaro gave evidence relating to her
employment status with Mr Strachan.
It is undisputed that Mrs Fornaro worked
for Mr Strachan on a part-time basis, the majority of the work being the
preparation and
the sewing of flags. This work commenced around May
Mr Strachan would either visit Mrs Fornaro at her home or telephone
her to ask if she could do certain work, which she carried out
at her home in
Jingili (a Suburb of Darwin). Mrs Fornaro would then invoice Mr Strachan for
the completed work.
Mrs Fornaro was initially receiving an unemployment
benefit, which in December 1996 was changed to a Disability pension. Mrs
was required to advise the Department of Social Security on a monthly
basis of the extra income earned, and her pension was adjusted
accordingly.
Mrs Fornaro described her initial relationship with Mr
Strachan as "friendly, in as much as we were extremely pleasant with each other
- we'd pass the time of day.......basically it was a business relationship, a
small business relationship"
In December 1996 Mrs Fornaro advised Mr
Strachan that due to arthritis in her spine she did not wish to continue sewing
but was happy
to continue doing artwork. Mrs Fornaro stated that she had to
explain this several times over a three month period as Mr Strachan
continued to
bring her sewing work. Mrs Fornaro described the relationship between them at
that time as "friendly".
Mrs Fornaro then gave evidence as to the events
of 20 January 1997.
On that day she had not been expecting Mr Strachan,
and was talking to a Mr Bill Rolfe, vice president of "Toastmasters" who had
to her house to give her a revised schedule of meetings. Mrs Fornaro
described the sequence of events as follows:
"We were standing in the carport, just chatting, just - he was - I think he
was sitting on his motor bike or leaning up against it,
it was just prior to him
leaving and Mr Strachan drove up and into the other carport. Mr Strachan got
out of the van - ah - came
over, I introduced them. There was some small talk
and I think he returned to the van and picked up a large box which contained
flags. He then put it on the ground again and completely out of the blue, he
made a remark that I found excessively offensive and
hurtful......"
"And I suppose you know where her bed is' and this was to Mr Rolfe."
Counsel assisting asked if Mrs Fornaro was shocked by that comment, to
which she replied " I was horrified, quite honestly. These
were relatively -
relative strangers to me, both of them. I had hoped to - to become a permanent
member of Toastmasters. I am not,
never have been and never will be promiscuous
object strongly to an employer - um - just sort of throwing it up in
the air in front of strangers. It was inappropriate to the situation
frankly, I don't know - I don't understand where it came from or why it
Mrs Fornaro found that comment embarrassing -
"To the extent that I felt that I could no longer go back to Toastmasters and
so I'd lost out on a very positive move on my behalf
- on my part to get myself
back into a community environment and to a community group. I thoroughly
enjoyed it. I loved going there.
The people there were terrific. They knew
nothing - none of them knew about my background. The basis of Toastmasters is
confidence, I was gaining skills that I hadn't had before and
I'm afraid that
remark to the vice president, in particular, it shook me to such an extent that
I've never been able to back again
and face them. It was devastating thing to
Mrs Fornaro outlined her reasons for wishing to join "Toastmasters"
- the last five years of her marriage had been extremely abusive
- Mrs Fornaro
had low self esteem and confidence and experienced extreme anxiety and
depression. She sought professional help from
the Tamarind Centre, as a result
of which she decided to try something on her own, and her choice was public
speaking. With encouragement
from her counsellor, Vicki Telfor, Mrs Fornaro
attended Toastmasters, and had hoped to become a member.
Mrs Fornaro
described the full effect Mr Strachan's remark had on her -
"I went into immediate shock. Because of the - there was just no reason for
a remark like this and I did go into shock. Later -
later on, it developed into
a huge emotional uprising. I recognised a great deal of these emotions as being
ones that I had felt
before when abused by both my step-father and my husband,
my husband in particular, in this case, because he often used to throw
at me that implied that I was of loose morals, his actual word was a 'slut' and
it - yeah, he had limited vocabulary but
he certainly knew that word and
whatever circumstances he felt justified, he just continuously called me a slut.
There was no basis
for it. The shear fact that Mr Strachan felt that he was
able to do this, to make a remark like that, brought back abuse from my
step-father who used a great many controlling mechanisms on me as a child, one
of which was to denigrate me in front of people, make
me feel as if I'm
worthless and make me feel as though I had to depend on him for my existence.
He used a great many controlling
mechanism and being allowed to remake - to make
inappropriate remarks of those sort of things is a controlling mechanism and I
up with a migraine. I didn't sleep for several weeks and the migraine was
so bad I had to go to Royal Darwin to get an injection
Mrs Fornaro then outlined earlier incidents which had distressed
and embarrassed her
At a time when she was very emotionally disturbed
mind giving her a hug.
Mrs Fornaro agreed to this, and as Mrs Fornaro
described the incident "as I said, it was just a hug of compassion, if you like.
was just a contact with another human being. Mr Strachan stated pelvic
thrusting, I broke immediately and told him it was not necessary
to do that and
he immediately whipped around and said, 'Don't you dare criticise my
Mrs Fornaro referred to conversations and random remarks which she
described as 'tiresome'. On one occasion Mr Strachan came into
Mrs Fornaro's
house when there was an exercise program on TV, and Mrs Fornaro alleged Mr
Strachan said "Can't you imagine those tits
and twats bouncing up and down?" a
remark Mrs Fornaro found offensive.
Early in 1996, after inspecting some
industrial sewing machines at the Tiwi annexe of the Northern Territory
University Mr Strachan
and Mrs Fornaro went to a fast food outlet for coffee.
Mrs Fornaro believed the outlet to be Hungry Jacks. Mrs Fornaro was explaining
her objections to sewing with an industrial machine to Mr Strachan when Mr
Strachan allegedly broke off the conversation and started
talking to a person
she described as a cleaner. Mrs Fornaro stated -
"The conversation covered women in fairly derogatory terms, sexual exploits
of them between, you know, that they'd experienced. It
- they sort of came to a
conclusion when they were talking about women who did not perform for the - did
not perform as expected
by men and I sort of ended the conversation by saying
that, 'There are some women nowadays who choose not to have sex at particular
times' and that I was one of them."
Mrs Fornaro stated that she found
such remarks in a public place extremely embarrassing and felt degraded by them.
In her evidence
Mrs Fornaro went on to say -
"I felt that - um - somebody needed to stop this conversation - um - get
through to Mr Strachan that I was just not interested in
any way, shape or form,
any sexual advance, any sexual behaviour or anything to so with sex and it was
my choice to do it."
Mrs Fornaro then gave evidence as to why these
remarks affected her so badly, outlining a history of sexual abuse and her
sensitivity to such remarks which she found unnecessary and hurtful.
Mrs Fornaro said -
"I thought that we had a business relationship. I had never made any
encouragement whatsoever towards anything like a sexual relationship.
Strachan was told right from the start it would be a relation - a business
relationship only. It - um - my sensitivity is mine.
It is acute under
circumstances like this and I thought I'd given out enough information for Mr
Strachan as - or any reasonable
person to know without really thinking that nay
remark like this is going to hurt me, it's going to upset me, it's - I just
it totally inappropriate."
Mrs Fornaro referred to another incident
which occurred on Anzac Day 1996. Mrs Fornaro accepted Mr Strachan's offer of a
the Dawn Service and Mr Strachan had a male friend with him. After the
service Mr Strachan asked if Mrs Fornaro would like to have
a drink but she said
she wanted to go home. The two
men then discussed their plans for the day,
which Mrs Fornaro alleged included references to a woman and "what he hoped she
do with him" towards the end of a day.
Mrs Fornaro said she told Mr
Strachan the remarks were totally inappropriate for ANZAC day, and asked to be
taken home.
On a couple of occasions Mr Strachan took Mrs Fornaro out to
dinner, which she understood to be a reward for her good work - on the
one restaurant Mrs Fornaro told Mr Strachan about the abuse she had suffered
from her step-father and her husband which had
caused her to seek psychiatric
assistance - Mrs Fornaro hoped that when Mr Strachan understood what she had
gone through, Mr Strachan
would understand that she would find any sexual
advances from him horrifying.
These conversations took place before the
incident of 20 January 1997.
Mrs Fornaro also outlined the difficulties
she experienced with Mr Strachan arriving at her house at unscheduled times to
either drop
off or collect work. Although Mrs Fornaro had asked Mr Strachan to
phone first he would arrive unexpectedly. Twice she was in the
shower, which
caused her distress.
Mrs Fornaro referred to Mr Strachan placing his arm
around her shoulders if he met someone else while they were going for a cup of
coffee - Mrs Fornaro would remove his arm as she found it offensive and
indicative of "ownership".
Mrs Fornaro stated she found Mr Strachan's
behaviour extremely difficult to deal with - she felt he was not capable of
himself in a business like manner.
Three witnesses gave
evidence at the Hearing, Vicki Telfor, Jeff Dewar, and Bill Rolfe.
Telfor is a registered general and psychiatric nurse, working at the Tamarind
Centre, (Darwin community mental health service).
Ms Telfor was one of
Mrs Fornaro's case managers, and encouraged and supported Mrs Fornaro in her
decision to become involved with
Toastmasters.
Ms Telfor referred to Mrs
Fornaro's distress following the incident of 20 January 1997, and stated Mrs
Fornaro's sought counselling
in relation to other earlier incidents with her
employer (Mr Strachan) which Mrs Fornaro found difficult to deal
The evidence of Vicki Telfor (Territory Health Services) was not
disputed and is accepted.
Jeff Dewar has been employed at the fast food
outlet known as Hungry Jacks for some eight years, attending to stores,
maintenance
and cleaning. Mr Dewar has known Mr Strachan for nine years and for
a time assisted him in his business at the markets.
Mr Dewar's evidence
was that the conversation with Mr Strachan which took
place at Hungry Jacks
was of brief duration, approximately two minutes, and was confined to normal
Bill Rolfe is the president of Toastmasters and has been
involved with the organisation for over three years. In 1997 he was
Vice-President
(education).
A letter Mr Rolfe had written to the
Anti-Discrimination's Conciliator during the investigation of the complaint was
tendered as evidence,
and is reproduced in full here:
"2/6114 Richards Court
Malak NT 0812
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner
LMB 22, GPO Darwin NT 0801.
Trudi Jobberns
As I have said to Ms Fornaro, If she can name three people that have had a
similar incident as she has from Mr R. Strachan, in other
words, been
discriminated against, then I have no problems in saying what happen that day.
Ms Fornaro has not been able to present
these people for me to talk to, which
she said she could, so I only have her word.
The reason I'm hesitant to say anything is that day in question, the way I
took it was that it was just a joke. So what she has probably
told you was
correct but unless someone can show me or tell me that he discriminates al the
time, as Ms Fornaro has told me, I will
have to decline. This may seem unfair to
Ms Fornaro but unless there is more evidence I cannot help her or unless you can
me he has had complaints against him before.
Bill Rolfe.
In his evidence, Mr Rolfe remembered attending Mrs
Fornaro's residence to deliver documents relating to the Toastmasters and at
stated he vaguely remembered a remark "Bill's shoes under the bed" which
he agreed probably referred to him.
Mr Rolfe later changed his testimony
to hearing something to the effect of "Bill" and "shoes".
persistent questioning Mr Rolfe was unable to clarify why he would write a
letter in the terms outlined above and specifically
why he would need any advice
or assistance as to whether Mr Strachan had been the subject of other
complaints before saying what happened on the day in question.
the course of the Hearing, a rough plan or diagram of Mrs Fornaro's home was
tendered in evidence, which showed the relative
position of the
In giving his evidence Mr Strachan stated he was astounded with
"this" and that it had been twisted and warped. By ""this" I understood
Strachan to be referring to the proceedings and the evidence presented to the
Mr Strachan stated that when he met Mrs Fornaro at Skillshare
he believed her bag had been stolen, was sorry for her and offered her
Mr Strachan denied having entered the house while Mrs Fornaro was
in the shower, and declined to comment on the conversation which
was alleged to
have taken place at Hungry Jacks.
Mr Strachan agreed that he had, on
occasions, given Mrs Fornaro a hug, but refuted any suggestion of a pelvic
thrust during the hug.
In relation to the incident of 20 January 1997 Mr
Strachan stated he was aware there was to be a party at her landlord Mr Fry's
that night and that his inference was -
"Why don't you have a sleep while you're here. No doubt you'll have a sleep
while you're here".
Mr Strachan said that until he received a letter from
Ms Jobberns, the conciliator, he was unaware that Mrs Fornaro objected to his
Mr Strachan agreed that Mrs Fornaro discussed her emotional
circumstances, and stated he was shocked and mortified at hearing of what
happened to her. He was not aware of any distress he may have caused Mrs
Fornaro, other than that associated with the pressure
Strachan recalled having placed his arm around Mrs Fornaro's shoulders, but did
not recall any occasions when Mrs Fornaro removed
Mr Strachan
described himself as a "touchy feely kind of person" and classified his
relationship with Mrs Fornaro as "excellent".
In agreeing that he
regarded himself as a "jocular, flamboyant, touching person" with no hesitation
approaching anybody with a hand
around the shoulder, Mr Strachan described this
behaviour as "giving encouragement and confidence".
Mr Strachan produced
a teddy bear, described as a "door-knob" bear which Mrs Fornaro had given him at
Christmas. Mrs Fornaro described
the gift as a
Submissions
In her final submission, Mrs Fornaro
spoke in some detail of the alleged events of 20 January 1997 when, in her
opinion Mr Strachan
made a derogatory remark implying she was of a promiscuous
nature, to Mr Rolfe. Mrs Fornaro stated she
did not sleep at night because
her thoughts were crowded with memories of this incident and past abuses by her
step-father and ex
Mrs Fornaro referred to her efforts to
overcome the effects of this past abuse, and the way in which the various
incidents referred
to in her earlier evidence had effected her, expressing
"disgust' at Mr Strachan's conduct. She described how as a result of Mr
Strachan's behaviour her ability to interact with men had altered -
"Anxiety and depression have been problems that have developed in early
childhood and developed because of the conflict I felt because
of my inner
feelings and my reactions to what my step-father said and did, and the fact that
my mother showed reluctance to comfort
me. I've never lost that sensitivity.
However, I have learnt to keep it reasonable context in everyday life. The big
I've noticed is that because of the way Mr Strachan behaved with me
as a relative stranger, I now see all men with suspicion, anxiety
whereas before I met him I gave each one a chance to be different.......I'm not
comfortable with this reaction and I seem
unable to overcome it.
Fornaro outlined her loss of income as a result of no longer working for Mr
Strachan and the deterioration in her health.
Mrs Fornaro asked for an
apology and a reference from Mr Strachan, and appropriate
compensation.
In a brief final submission, Mr Strachan said -
"I dispute the comments and body movements that has been alleged against me.
The stories appear to have been twisted to suit Mrs
Mr Strachan
stated that although Mrs Fornaro had indicated her skills lay in working with
canvas, he always used plastic, and that
the coffee at Hungry Jacks was in the
outside area.
In response to Mrs Fornaro's submission, Mr Strachan stated
"I'm sorry for the three divorces Mrs Fornaro suffered. One is one too many.
However, I wonder if she has filed sexual abuse charges
against her ex husbands
an yet I'm being attacked here on an alleged case of words, no violence - or
words and no violence - of words
and - and no violence. I'm loath to give an
apology, written or otherwise, and I cannot substantiate a work reference other
hemming, overlocking or heading, of which she's been extremely capable of
doing. Mrs Fornaro, being self-employed, with the parameters
of the pension,
must push her own barrow like any self-employed person because without pain
there's no gain."
Mr Strachan then said he would prefer that the orders
sought by Mrs Fornaro "not proceed".
Mr Strachan made no further
submission.
Mr McIntyre's submission first referred to the relevant
provisions of the NT
Anti-Discrimination Act 1992
, addressing the
relationship between the parties in the area of work, and then outlined relevant
case law relating to harassment
and discrimination, and the award of
compensation.
Mrs Fornaro's complaint is of
discrimination on the grounds of sex and sexual harassment in the area of work
pursuant to
Sections 19(1)(b)
of the Northern Territory
Anti-Discrimination Act
The respondent is Mr Ron Strachan who is the
operator of a business known as Territory Flags.
It is undisputed that in
May 1995 Mrs Fornaro commenced working for Mr Strachan on a part time basis,
sewing flags and preparing some
associated art work.
Mrs Fornaro worked
from home, and Mr Strachan would deliver materials and pick up completed work,
being invoiced by Mrs Fornaro for
the work performed.
"work" as defined
Anti-Discrimination Act
(a) in a relationship of employment (including full-time, part-time, casual,
permanent and temporary employment);
(b) under a contract for services;
(c) remunerated in whole or in part on a commission basis;
and I find that the relevant relationship in the area of work
has been established.
Some of the evidence placed before me referred to
events which allegedly occurred in the first half of 1996, and I have taken that
evidence into account in arriving at my finding in this matter.
Fornaro's evidence was clear and unambiguous. She outlined in some detail the
events which caused her considerable humiliation
and distress, resulting in her
seeking medical treatment.
While Mr Strachan refuted the claim of pelvic
thrusting when giving Mrs Fornaro a "friendly hug", and I make no finding on
that allegation,
his evidence relating to other alleged incidents was less
convincing.
With regard to the alleged remark made by Mr Strachan on 20
January 1997 in the presence of Mr Bill Rolfe "I suppose you know where
is". I have carefully considered the evidence of Mrs Fornaro, Mr Strachan and
Mr Rolfe, and prefer the evidence of Mrs Fornaro,
which was in part corroborated
by Mr Rolfe.
There was undisputed evidence that Mr Strachan would from
time to time place his arm around Mrs Fornaro's shoulders, indeed Mr Strachan
described himself as an "extroverted touchy - feely person".
that Mrs Fornaro found this distasteful, and removed his arm from her
While Mr Strachan stated that he did not make remarks about
women's breasts, crotches, "boobs" and his sexual prowess, as outlined
original complaint, Mr Strachan did not dispute Mrs Fornaro's evidence as to the
events alleged to have occurred on Anzac
On the evidence before
me, I accept that during the course of her employment, remarks of a sexual
nature were made which Mrs Fornaro
found unwelcome, totally inappropriate and
which caused her embarrassment.
I find that Mrs Fornaro suffered severe
distress as a result of Mr Strachan's behaviour, her distress being exacerbated
her history of sexual and physical abuse.
Further on her
undisputed evidence I find that Mrs Fornaro feared that if she objected to Mr
Strachan's sexual remarks her work for
him, her income would be in jeopardy. I
take this into account under
Section 22(3)
Having regard to the
particular circumstances of Mrs Fornaro, I find that, pursuant to
S.22(1)(e)(ii)
a reasonable person would have
anticipated the possibility that the other person (Mrs Fornaro) would be
offended, humiliated or intimidated
by this conduct. For these reasons I find
the requirements of
Anti-Discrimination Act 1992
been met and consequently that Mrs Fornaro was subjected to sexual harassment by
Mr Strachan in the area of her work, and that
this harassment constituted
discrimination on the grounds of her sex.
SECTION 88 - ORDERS AFTER HEARING
(1) If, after the hearing of a complaint, the Commissioner finds the
prohibited conduct alleged in the complaint is substantiated,
the Commissioner
may make one or more of the following orders:
(a) an order requiring the respondent not to repeat or continue the
prohibited conduct;
(b) an order requiring the respondent to pay to the complainant or another
person within a specified period, an amount, being an amount
not more than that
prescribed, that the
Commissioner considers appropriate as compensation for loss or damage caused
by the prohibited conduct;
(c) an order requiring the respondent to do specified things to redress loss
or damage suffered by the complainant or any other person
because of the
prohibited conduct;
(d) an order declaring void all or part of an agreement made in connection
with the prohibited conduct, either from the time the agreement
was made or
subsequently.
(2) In this section, the specified things a respondent may be required to do,
include, but are not limited to the following:
(a) employing, reinstating or re-employing a person;
(b) promoting a person;
(c) moving a person to a specified position within a specified time.
(3) In this section, "damage", in relation to a person, includes the offence,
embarrassment, humiliation, and intimidation suffered
by the person.
(4) If, after the hearing of a complaint, the Commissioner finds the
prohibited conduct alleged in the complaint is not substantiated
Commissioner shall make an order dismissing the complaint."
Statement of Claim Mrs Fornaro sought
• an order requiring the Respondent Mr Strachan not to repeat or
continue the prohibited conduct;
• financial compensation for loss of income, (a minimum of
• a sincere letter of apology and an unbiased reference based on Mrs
Fornaro's work performance over all;
• for damage to her general well being including hurt, humiliation,
stress, intimidation, depression, loss of trust dealing
with men, and loss of
faith in herself, an amount of $3000 minimum.
Based on the demeanour of
the parties and the evidence before me, I conclude that Mrs Fornaro holds a
genuine belief that Mr Strachan
will continue to engage in unwelcome conduct
towards her.
I note that her income has dropped and that it is unlikely
that she would be re-engaged by the respondent Mr Strachan on similar financial
terms. I also note that she had herself requested less sewing work from the
respondent, which would have most likely produced a
lower income.
not consider an order to produce a sincere letter of apology to be appropriate -
sincerity cannot be ordered. That being said,
I believe it would be entirely
appropriate for Mr Strachan to offer a written apology to Mrs Fornaro for the
distress caused by his
I am in no doubt that Mrs Fornaro
suffered damage as a result of the prohibited conduct, and pursuant to
Anti-Discrimination Act 1992
I make the following
• THAT THE RESPONDENT, RON STRACHAN, REFRAIN FROM ENGAGING IN
PROHIBITED CONDUCT TOWARDS THE COMPLAINANT ROSEMARY FORNARO.
• THAT WITHIN FOURTEEN (14) DAYS, THE RESPONDENT RON STRACHAN PROVIDE
THE COMPLAINANT ROSEMARY FORNARO WITH A WRITTEN REFERENCE
ATTESTING TO HER
OVERALL WORK PERFORMANCE.
• THAT WITHIN TWENTY-EIGHT (28) DAYS THE RESPONDENT RON STRACHAN PAY
THE COMPLAINANT ROSEMARY FORNARO THE SUM OF $4500,
being $1000 loss of income, actual and potential.
$3500 hurt, humiliation and
DAWN LAWRIE
Commissioner
20 July 1998
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (50.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter