URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCCA/2024/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:18:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The King v Porch [2024] NTCCA 2 (25 January 2024)
The King v Porch
[2024] NTCCA 2
PARTIES: THE KING
PORCH, Jared Kane
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: CA 5 of 2023 (22134972)
DELIVERED: 25 January 2024
HEARING DATE: 3 July 2023
JUDGMENT OF: Blokland and Barr JJ and Huntingford AJ
CATCHWORDS:
SENTENCING – Crown Appeal – inadequacy of sentences – child
exploitation offences – whether individual sentences
manifestly inadequate
– whether total sentence manifestly inadequate – appeal
Cases referred to:
Everett v The Queen
[1994] HCA 49
Griffiths v The Queen
Hili v The Queen
[2010] HCA 45
House v The King
Lacey v Attorney-General (Qld)
[2011] HCA 10
Markarian v The
(2005) 228 CLR 257;
Mill v The Queen
[1988] HCA 70
Minehan v R
[2010] NSWCCA 140
(2010) 201 A Crim R 243
Pearce v The Queen
Postiglione v The Queen
[1997] HCA 26
(1997) 189 CLR 295
R v Osenkowski
(1982) 30 SASR 212
[2006] NTCCA 10
(2006) 161 A Crim R
Ryan v The Queen
[2001] HCA 21
(2001) 206 CLR 267
The Queen v Hancock
[2011] NTCCA 14
The Queen v Kilic
[2016] HCA 48
(2016) 259 CLR 256
The Queen v
[2017] NTCCA 7
Walker v The Queen
[2008] NTCCA 7.
Statutes referred to:
Crimes Act 1914
Criminal Code
(Cth) 1983 (NT) s 474.25A
Sentencing Act (NT)
1995 (NT) ss 5(2)(e); 6
Thomas, Principles of Sentencing, 2
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: K Breckweg
Respondent: J Tippett KC
Solicitors:
Appellant: Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
Respondent: Greg Betts Legal
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 22
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
The King v Porch
[2024] NTCCA 2
CA 5 of 2023 (22134972)
JARED KANE PORCH
CORAM: BLOKLAND & BARR JJ & HUNTINGFORD AJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 25 January 2024)
[1] This is a
Crown appeal against a total effective head sentence of four years and nine
months with a non-parole period of 18 months
imposed for offending involving the
sexual exploitation of children committed by the respondent in the period from
31 July 2020 to
14 November 2021.
[2] The admitted
offending was the subject of 12 separate charges and six distinct types of
criminal conduct. On 22 occasions between
31 July 2020 and 14 October 2021, the
respondent sent child abuse material to 20 different individuals using
Facebook Messenger,
generally using fictitious
Over a 12-month period, he
asked multiple persons if they could find young children to engage in sexual
activity with him, and provided
details of the sexual activity in which he
wished to engage and the age and type of child he
On 24 occasions
between 1 March 2021 and 1 November 2021, he asked 20 different
participants to send him child abuse videos, very
often in exchange for
[3] On 27 May
2021 and again on 7 July 2021, the respondent communicated with a male
university student in Fiji and asked him to find
a 14 year old boy to have sex
on video calls to the accused.
[4] After his
arrest, the respondent was found in possession of 6 items of child abuse
material, some of which he had transmitted
to or received from online
correspondents.
offending charged as count 7 was the most serious of the offences committed by
the respondent. The sentence imposed was three
years and nine months. On appeal,
the appellant contended (as the first ground) that that sentence was manifestly
inadequate for
a number of reasons
particularised.
Given the structure
of the overall sentence and the significance of the sentence for count 7 to the
appeal, it is appropriate to
consider the nature of that offence and the
relevant facts.
[6] The offence
charged as count 7 was as follows:
Between 29 August 2021 and 5
October 2021, at Alice Springs in the Northern Territory of Australia or
elsewhere, engaged in conduct
in relation to a child, who was under 16 years of
age, causing the child to engage in sexual activity using a carriage service
another person, namely DH, being someone who was at least 18 years of age.
Contrary to section 474.25A(2) of the
Criminal Code
[7] Although the
offence carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment of 20 years, counsel for
the appellant concedes that the sentencing
judge was misinformed by the
prosecutor below that the maximum penalty for the offence was 15 years’
imprisonment. The appellant
submits that, for the purposes of this appeal, this
Court should proceed on the basis that the offence did carry a maximum penalty
of 15 years imprisonment, “so that the error does not act in any way to
the detriment of the respondent”. However, we
note that a particular of
the first ground of appeal is that “the sentence does not adequately
reflect the serious nature and
circumstances of the offending, including the
maximum penalty prescribed for the offence”.
[8] Section
Crimes Act 1914
requires that a sentencing court impose a sentence
of imprisonment of at least 5 years upon conviction for an offence against
474.25A(2).
is subject to
, which permits a reduction of the minimum penalty
from that specified in
by up to 25%, taking into account a plea of
not provide for any minimum period of custody before release. There is no
mandatory minimum non-parole period calculated as
a percentage of the head
[9] The section
heading for s 474.25A
Criminal Code
is ‘Using a carriage service
for sexual activity with person under 16 years of age’. The sub-heading
for s 474.25A(2)
is ‘Causing child to engage in sexual activity with
another person’. The elements of the s 474.25A(2) offence are specified
defendant engages in conduct in relation to another person (the child); and
conduct causes the child to engage in sexual activity with another person (the
participant) using a carriage service; and
child is under 16 years of age when the sexual activity is engaged in; and
participant is at least 18 years of age when the sexual activity is engaged in.
[10] The term
‘engage in sexual activity’ is given an extended meaning in the
Dictionary to the C
riminal Code,
as follows:
sexual activity
: without limiting when a person engages in sexual activity,
a person is taken to
engage in sexual activity
if the person is in the
presence of another person (including by a means of communication that allows
the person to see or hear the
other person) while the other person engages in
sexual activity.
therefore not necessary that the child victim of an offence contrary to
474.25A(2) engage in sexual activity in the sense
of being a participant or a
knowing participant in sexual activity. Element b. is satisfied where a child
victim is in the presence
of a person (‘the participant’) who
engages in sexual activity, even if the child is asleep or otherwise unaware of
the other person is doing.
[12] Count 7
charged offending conduct on three separate occasions as one offence. The agreed
facts are summarized in [13] –
[18] below.
August 2021, the respondent asked DH to engage in a video call with him, while
the six year old son of DH was in the room
and awake. It is unclear exactly what
DH did, but whatever it was, the respondent asked him to “keep
going”, before then
saying “... roll him over so he is facing u too
chore while ur doing it’.
then sent a category 3 child abuse material video to the respondent. The
respondent encouraged him to keep going:
Keep going chore like that
for 5 minutes...and cum chore.
[14] DH then
sent further videos, including one where he placed a child’s arm on top of
his erect penis. The respondent encouraged
further sexual activity, specifically
that DH get the child’s “hand on there like this and cum for
me”. The respondent
asked for further videos but DH was reluctant, saying:
“It’s my son chore ahah”. He apparently overcame his
after the respondent offered him three hundred dollars for a further
five minutes with the encouragement, “... just u two and
300 chore for 5
mins and just use his hand over ur chest and dick like in that other
[15] DH sent a
further category 3 child abuse material video of himself masturbating, then
pulling the child’s arm so that it
rested on his chest. He then
ejaculated. There followed a discussion about payment: the accused paid $250 and
DH apparently objected
on the basis that he thought he was to receive
August 2021, the respondent asked DH for a further video with the instruction,
“Well u take videos and have him asleep
there next to u and use his
hand”. The respondent also asked for a video of DH and his son in the
shower with the request that
September 2021, the respondent and DH spoke again. In the course of that
conversation, the respondent asked DH to take
his son for a shower, in return
for which the respondent would pay $300. During a video call shortly afterwards,
DH filmed his six
year old son naked in the shower, with his penis and anus
exposed and visible. After the child then walked away, DH got into the
shower and masturbated. The content of that call was categorised as category 1
on the ANVIL scale.
October 2021, the respondent engaged in a further video call with DH during
which DH filmed his six year old son in the
shower. The events which then took
place were identical with the events which took place on 17 September 2021.
The content of that
call also was categorised as category 1 on the ANVIL
[19] There is no
doubt that the respondent’s conduct charged as count 7 was appalling.
There was a clear need for the sentence
to reflect the objectives of punishment,
denunciation and general deterrence. However, there are two important matters to
account in relation to the objective seriousness of the
respondent’s conduct. The first and probably the more important is
the child did not engage in sexual activity, except in the sense contemplated by
the extended definition, as explained in [11]
above. It appears that he was
used as a ‘prop’ in the making of the respondent’s
masturbation videos, and was manipulated
for that purpose. The second matter is
that it is unclear from the Crown facts whether the child was awake or remained
the activities described in [13] – [16].
[20] Before the
sentencing judge, the prosecution submitted that that the offending generally
was sexually motivated, manipulative
and was almost exclusively aimed at
corrupting adults into procuring children to participate in the creation of
sexually explicit
material to send to the accused. In the case of count 7, the
prosecution submitted that the accused had persuaded DH to film his
old child on a number of different occasions, even after DH indicated he was
reluctant to use his son in the videos. The
prosecution further submitted that
the offending was particularly grave because the accused was a serving police
officer involved
in the corruption and exploitation of Aboriginal people amongst
whom he lived and worked.
prosecution nonetheless contended that offending was in the mid-range of
objective seriousness.
circumstances, the sentencing judge was “bound to consider where the facts
of the particular offence and offender
lie on the ‘spectrum’ that
extends from the least serious instances of the offence to the worst category,
properly so
prosecutor made a number of concessions in the course of sentencing proceedings.
prosecutor conceded that there was no evidence to indicate that the respondent
planned to meet up with any children, although
the prosecutor submitted that the
accused appeared to have met up with some of the adults with whom he
communicated.
prosecutor acknowledged, in relation to Count 12, that the number of child abuse
material images was comparatively
prosecutor further acknowledged that the pleas of guilty were entered at the
first reasonable opportunity.
Reference was made not only to the utilitarian value of the early pleas of
guilty but also to their relevance on a subjective basis
in considering remorse
and contrition. That submission may appropriately be linked with the letter
written by the respondent in which
he expressed his shame and remorse for his
Courts, and
particularly appellate courts, are naturally cautious in relation to the weight
to be given to such letters, but the
sentencing judge accepted that the
respondent was “genuinely remorseful”. Much of the evidence
suggested that he was
a broken man.
[26] It was
accepted by the prosecutor that a former police officer identified as a sex
offender would be more likely to serve his
sentence in protective custody and in
that sense any period of incarceration would be more burdensome compared to the
sex offender
who was not a former police
In our opinion, the
prosecutor’s attempt to limit the class of comparator to “a sex
offender who was not a former police
officer” was unsatisfactory because,
logically, the respondent was likely to be the victim of assault and other
mistreatment
by fellow prisoners on account of both being a police officer and a
sex offender.
[27] Another
matter relevant to the sentencing of the respondent was evidence of good
character or ‘past good deeds’.
We refer to matters of a more
substantial nature than the mere absence of criminal history. Prior to serving
as a police officer
in the Northern Territory, the respondent had been a
firefighter with the National Parks and Wildlife Service. For several years
had been a volunteer firefighter with the South Australian Country Fire Service,
and also a volunteer ambulance officer with the
South Australian Ambulance
As a serving police
officer in the Northern Territory he had been commended by the coroner for the
standard of care provided to a
deeply disturbed woman bent on self-harm by
dousing herself in petrol and attempting to set herself alight. The
coroner’s finding
was as follows:
... The Police were
particularly caring and supportive of N [the deceased]. We heard at the inquest
from Sergeant Jarred Porch and
saw footage from his body worn camera. It showed
the care of N to be of a very high standard and I commend Sergeant Porch on his
compassionate and caring approach.
[28] There are a
number of authorities to the effect that less weight is given to previous good
character for this type of
However, as
Mildren J observed in
The Queen v Hancock
As a generality,
that may be so, but it is only a generality. In
Walker v The
this Court said that
a person of otherwise good character is entitled to have it taken into account,
Ryan v The Queen
Sentencing Act
(NT) s 5(2)(e) and s 6. The weight to be
given to prior good character will vary according to the circumstances of the
case including
the objective seriousness of the offending. It may also be an
important factor in considering the extent to which special deterrence
relevant factor, and the prospects of rehabilitation of the offender, which in
turn may become relevant to the fixing of a non-parole
period or a suspended or
partially suspended sentence; or in minor cases, some lesser disposition.
Obviously, consistently with what
was said in
relevance of previous convictions for the same kind of offending, a person of
bad character or who has prior convictions
of that kind will expect to receive a
higher sentence, not to punish him again for his past offending, but because it
is relevant
to show his moral culpability for his present offending, the extent
to which he remains a danger to the public, and it has obvious
relevance to his
prospects of rehabilitation.
prosecutor also drew attention to the Court’s obligation to have regard to
the objective of rehabilitation when sentencing
an offender for a Commonwealth
child sex offence.
The need for
clinical intervention to address the respondent’s deviant arousal was
referred to in the report of Dr Sullivan,
consultant forensic
psychiatrist.
Dr Sullivan
considered that the respondent was “a deeply conflicted man who is
prosocial in orientation and whose world view
is challenged by his sexual
orientation, which is associated with marked guilt and confusion”. Dr
Sullivan expressed the opinion
that the respondent should undergo
“offence-specific intervention, focused upon developing positive and
pro-social sexual identity
and the capacity to develop and sustain healthy
reciprocal relationships”. Dr Sullivan expressed the further opinion
given the limited range of treatment options in the Northern Territory,
the respondent would not only have better family support
in South Australia, but
“potentially a greater range of treatment options without the risk that he
[would] be in groups with
those he had interactions as a police officer”;
and that “individual treatment was likely to result in better treatment
gains than group treatment”.
sentencing judge considered the offence charged as count 7 to be the most
serious of the 12 offences committed by the respondent.
Her Honour made the
following statements in the course of her sentencing remarks:
7, using a carriage service for sexual activity with a person under 16, and
causing a child to engage in sexual activity with
another person, is the most
serious of all.
In the case of count 7, you successfully persuaded DH to film his own six
year old child on a number of different occasions, even
after DH indicated that
he did not really want to use his own child for those videos. You persuaded him
with money and offers of
Now, at all times during this offending, you were a serving Territory police
officer and I agree that that increased your moral culpability
offending. You knew it was very wrong.
The offending involved the corruption and exploitation of Aboriginal people
amongst whom you lived and worked, and you must, at all
times, have been
cognizant of the Commonwealth Intervention and the concern, the general concern
expressed in the community about
sexual exploitation of Aboriginal children; in
particular, relating to the availability of online pornography.
I agree with the Crown submission that this is in the mid-range of objective
seriousness.
mentioned, the offence carried a maximum penalty of imprisonment of 20 years and
a mandatory minimum sentence of imprisonment
of five years. Her Honour made an
assessment that there were no exceptional circumstances which would have
warranted a sentence of
less than the mandatory minimum but also determined that
the offence did not warrant more than the mandatory
Her Honour took as a
starting point a sentence of five years, which was discounted by 25 per cent for
the guilty plea. Her Honour
considered that the guilty plea was evidence of a
willingness to facilitate the course of justice and also indicative of genuine
Her Honour convicted
the respondent and sentenced him to a term of imprisonment of three years and
nine months. The sentence was
backdated by some days and deemed to have
commenced on 20 March 2023.
[32] In relation
to the remaining 11 counts, her Honour said:
I need to take into
account the objective seriousness of the offending, by reference to the number
of images, the period of time over
which the offending persists, the number of
people that you engaged in activities of this nature, the ages of the children,
and matters
of that nature.
I agree with the Crown submission that the offending was persistent and
significant, and of a significant duration, going from May
2020 to November
2021, and that it only ceased on police intervening. It was sexually motivated,
manipulative, and was almost exclusively
aimed at corrupting adults into
procuring children to participate in the creation of sexually explicit material
to be sent to you.
[33] Her Honour
imposed other sentences as follows:
Count 1: imprisonment for 9
months, of which 3 months to be served cumulatively on the sentence imposed for
Counts 2, 4, 8, 9, 10 and 11: imprisonment on each for 9 months, all to be
served concurrently, and 3 months to be served cumulatively
on the sentence
imposed for count 1;
Counts 5 and 6: imprisonment on each for 9 months, to be served concurrently,
and 3 months to be served cumulatively on the sentences
imposed for counts 2, 4,
8, 9, 10 and 11;
Count 12: imprisonment for 9 months, of which 3 months to be served
cumulatively on the sentences imposed for counts 5 and 6;
Count 3: imprisonment for 9 months, to be served wholly concurrently with the
sentence imposed for count 1.
[34] The total
effective sentence was therefore four years and nine months, with a non-parole
period of 18 months.
appellant contends not only that the sentence on count 7 was manifestly
inadequate (Ground 1) but that “the individual
sentences, the total
effective sentence and the non-parole period imposed are manifestly
inadequate” (Ground 2) deriving from
the manifestly inadequate individual
sentence imposed on count 7, and for a number of additional reasons
particularised. We say more
considering the first ground, it is important to bear in mind the principles in
relation to manifest inadequacy in the context
of Crown appeals against
sentence, re-stated by this Court in
The Queen v
appeals against sentence should be a rarity brought only to establish some
matter of principle, and to afford an opportunity
to the Court of Criminal
Appeal to perform its proper function in this respect; namely, to lay down
principles for the guidance of
courts sentencing
The reference to a
“matter of principle” must be understood as encompassing what is
necessary to avoid the kind of manifest
inadequacy or inconsistency in
sentencing standards which constitutes an error in point of
[12] As to what will constitute an error in point of principle, in
this Court stated:
R v Barbara
(NSW Court of Criminal Appeal, unreported judgment
number 60638 delivered 24 February 1997), Hunt CJ at CL, with whom the other
of the Court agreed, pointed out that the passage from the judgment in
cited by Thomas J was not limited to laying down some new point
of principle. His Honour said:
“It is usually overlooked by respondents that the High Court has at the
same time also clearly indicated that sentences which
are so inadequate as to
indicate error or departure from principle, and sentences which depart from
accepted sentencing standards,
constitute error in point of principle which the
Crown is entitled to have this Court correct.”
[13] These remarks do not operate to displace the principle expressed by
R v Osenkowski,
It is important that prosecution appeals should not be allowed to
circumscribe unduly the sentencing discretion of judges. There must
always be a
place for the exercise of mercy where the judge’s sympathies are
reasonably excited by the circumstances of the
case. There must always be a
place for leniency which has been traditionally extended even to offenders with
bad records when the
judge forms the view, almost intuitively in the case of
experienced judges, that leniency at that particular stage of an
life might lead to reform. The proper role for prosecution
appeals, in my view, is to enable the courts to establish and maintain
standards of punishment for crime, to enable idiosyncratic views of individual
judges as to particular crimes or types of
crime to be corrected, and
occasionally to correct a sentence which is so disproportionate to the
seriousness of the crime as to
shock the public conscience.
[14] The principles enunciated in
House v The
remain applicable to
the determination of manifest
inadequacy.
In the oft-quoted
passage from that decision, the High Court
The manner in which an appeal against an exercise of discretion should be
determined is governed by established principles. It is
not enough that the
judges composing the appellate court consider that, if they had been in the
position of the primary judge, they
would have taken a different course. It
must appear that some error has been made in exercising the discretion. If the
upon a wrong principle, if he allows extraneous or irrelevant matters
to guide or affect him, if he mistakes the facts, if he does
not take into
account some material consideration, then his determination should be reviewed
and the appellate court may exercise
its own discretion in substitution for his,
if it has the materials for doing so. It may not appear how the primary judge
has reached
the result embodied in his order, but, if upon the facts it is
unreasonable or plainly unjust, the appellate court may infer that
in some way
there has been a failure properly to exercise the discretion which the law
reposes in the court of first instance. In
such a case, although the nature of
the error may not be discoverable, the exercise of the discretion is reviewed on
the ground that
a substantial wrong has in fact occurred. Unlike courts of
criminal appeal, this court has not been given a special or particular
review sentences imposed upon convicted persons. Its authority to do so belongs
to it only in virtue of its general appellate
power. But even with respect to
the particular jurisdiction conferred on courts of criminal appeal, limitations
upon the manner
in which it will be exercised have been formulated.
Lord Alverstone LCJ said that it must appear that the judge imposing the
had proceeded upon wrong principles or given undue weight to some of
the facts (
). Lord Reading LCJ said the court will not
interfere because its members would have given a less sentence, but only if the
appealed from is manifestly wrong (
). Lord Hewart LCJ has said
that the court only interferes on matters of principle and on the ground of
substantial miscarriage of
Hili v The Queen
, the plurality reasons contain the following
observations concerning the assessment of manifest inadequacy, in the absence of
assertion of specific error, on the basis that the sentence subject to
appeal was unreasonable or plainly
[A]ppellate intervention on the ground that the sentence is manifestly
excessive or manifestly inadequate “is not justified
simply because the
result arrived at is markedly different from other sentences that have been
imposed in other cases”. Rather
as the plurality went on to say (72) in
, “[i]ntervention is warranted only where the difference is
such that, in all the circumstances, the appellate court concludes
have been some misapplication of principle, even though where and how is not
apparent from the statement of the reasons.
[...] But what reveals manifest excess, or inadequacy, of sentence is
consideration of all the matters that are relevant to fixing
the sentence. The
references made by the Court of Criminal Appeal to the circumstances of the
offending and the personal circumstances
of each offender were, therefore,
important elements in the reasons of the Court of Criminal Appeal.
[37] In the
present appeal, it is important to bear in mind also the observations made by
the plurality in
Markarian v The Queen
, extracted
legislative provisions apart, neither principle, nor any of the grounds of
appellate review, dictates the particular path
that a sentencer, passing
sentence in a case where the penalty is not fixed by statute, must follow in
reasoning to the conclusion
that the sentence to be imposed should be fixed as
it is. The judgment is a discretionary judgment and, as the bases for appellate
review reveal, what is required is that the sentencer must take into account all
relevant considerations (and only relevant considerations)
informing the
conclusion reached. As has now been pointed out more than once, there is no
single correct sentence. And Judges at
first instance are to be allowed as much
flexibility in sentencing as is consonant with consistency of approach and as
accords with
the statutory regime that applies. [Citations omitted]
[38] Having
regard to the relevant principles, we are not persuaded that the sentence
imposed on count 7 was manifestly inadequate.
In relation to the particulars of
Ground 1 relied on, the appellant has not established that the sentence imposed
does not adequately
reflect the serious nature and circumstances of the
offending; the appellant has not established that the sentence does not
reflect the principles of general deterrence, specific deterrence,
punishment and denunciation; and the appellant has not established
sentence demonstrates that too much weight was placed on subjective factors. In
brief, the appellant has not established
that the sentence was unreasonable or
plainly unjust.
mentioned in [35] above, the appellant contends under Ground 2 that “the
individual sentences, the total effective sentence
and the non-parole period
imposed are manifestly inadequate”, deriving from the asserted manifestly
inadequate sentence imposed
on count 7 and for a number of additional reasons
particularised. The additional reasons are the asserted failure to adequately
the serious nature and circumstances of the overall offending, including
the maximum penalty prescribed for the offences; the asserted
adequately reflect the principles of general deterrence, specific deterrence,
punishment and denunciation; the asserted
failure to give due regard to
“the principle of totality in sentencing in accordance with
”; insufficient cumulation which failed to reflect the
“distinct instances of serious offending on the different aspects
criminality”, and disproportionate weight placed on subjective factors.
[40] Leaving
aside the criticism of the sentence on count 7, the appellant’s arguments
on the hearing of the appeal merged in
the proposition that, with the orders for
concurrency and cumulation made by her Honour for all the remaining offences,
the respondent
was only required to serve a further 12 months in prison,
that is, an additional 12 months to the three years and nine months
imposed on count 7.
relevance of the High Court’s decision in
Pearce v The Queen
appellant’s case on ground 2 is unclear. The decision related to the
possibility of an abuse of process where an offender
was charged and sentenced
for two crimes with overlapping elements. In that context, the plurality posed
the rhetorical question,
“Does that matter if, as was the case here, an
order was made that the sentences be served concurrently?” Part of the
answer to that question was then given in the passage extracted below:
A judge sentencing an offender for more than one offence must fix
an appropriate sentence for each offence and then consider questions
cumulation or concurrence, as well, of course, as questions of totality.
[42] In its
earlier decision in
the High Court had
discussed the totality principle and the related principles of concurrency and
cumulation. The Court described
the totality principle as “a recognized
principle of sentencing formulated to assist a court when sentencing an offender
a number of offences”.
The Court referred with approval to Thomas,
Principles of Sentencing
quoted the passage extracted
effect of the totality principle is to require a sentencer who has passed a
series of sentences, each properly calculated
in relation to the offence for
which it is imposed and each properly made consecutive in accordance with the
principles governing
consecutive sentences, to review the aggregate sentence and
consider whether the aggregate is ‘just and appropriate’.
principle has been stated many times in various forms: ‘when a number of
offences are being dealt with and specific punishments
in respect of them are
being totted up to make a total, it is always necessary for the court to take a
last look at the total just
to see whether it looks wrong [’]; ‘when
... cases of multiplicity of offences come before the court, the court must
content itself by doing the arithmetic and passing the sentence which the
arithmetic produces. It must look at the totality
of the criminal behaviour and
ask itself what is the appropriate sentence for all the
offences’.”
After then referring to Ruby,
ed. (1987),
pp 38 - 41, the Court observed:
Where the principle falls to be applied in relation to sentences of
imprisonment imposed by a single sentencing court, an appropriate
result may be
achieved either by making sentences wholly or partially concurrent or by
lowering the individual sentences below what
would otherwise be appropriate in
order to reflect the fact that a number of sentences are being imposed. Where
practicable, the
former is to be preferred.
Postiglione v The Queen
Kirby J cited with approval the passage from Thomas,
Principles of
, extracted in [42] above, and observed as
... The sentencing judge must first reach a conclusion as
to what seems to be the appropriate sentence having regard to the maximum
by Parliament for the worst case and the norm that is appropriate to the
objective criminality of the case. The judge must
then adjust that sentence,
where appropriate, for the factors personal or special to the offender,
discounted by any relevant considerations
(for example co-operation with
authorities or absence of remissions). But it still remains for the judge to
look back at the product
of these calculations and discounts. It is then that
the sentencing judge must consider whether the resulting sentence needs further
adjustment. It may do so because it is out of step with the parity principle
requiring that normally like cases should be treated
alike. Or it may offend
the totality principle because, looking at the prisoner’s criminality as a
whole, the outcome is,
in its totality, not “just and appropriate”.
The last-mentioned conclusion will the more readily be reached where the
comes to the conclusion that the outcome would be “crushing” and, as
such, would not hold out a proper measure
of hope for, and encouragement to,
rehabilitation and reform. Obviously, the adjustments for the parity and
totality principles,
whether performed by a sentencing judge or an appellate
court, involve subtle considerations which defy precision either of description
or implementation. It has been recognised by this Court that the adjustments for
totality will sometimes result in a lower sentence
which might even fail to
reflect adequately the seriousness of the crime in respect of which it is
imposed. Whilst this is unfortunate,
it is to be preferred to imposing a
sentence which is excessive in its totality or unfair when tested by parity in
the punishment
of comparable offenders
[44] Having
regard to the principles referred to in [41] – [43], we do not consider
that there was error in the approach of
the sentencing judge. Her Honour gave
effect to the principle of totality in the way preferred by the High Court in
Mill v The Queen
, namely by making the sentences wholly or partially
concurrent, rather than lowering the individual sentences below what would
have been appropriate. We reject the appellant’s contention that
the individual sentences were manifestly inadequate.
[45] As to the
appellant’s contention that the degree of cumulation was insufficient, we
do not agree the adjustments made by
her Honour resulted in a sentence which did
not adequately reflect the seriousness of each and every offence. We are mindful
exception to the general principles on concurrency and cumulation
contained in
-(7) of the
(Cth) which apply to
Commonwealth child sex offences committed on or after 23 June 2020. Subject to
the exception in
, it is presumed there will be full cumulation in
the service of the sentences. The requirement of full cumulation does not apply
if the Court is satisfied that imposing the sentence in a different manner would
still result in sentences that are of a severity
appropriate in all the
circumstances. There was a significant degree of both overlapping conduct and
overlapping elements as between
offences. In those circumstances full
accumulation would result in a substantial degree of double punishment. We are
satisfied the
sentencing Judge dealt with cumulation and concurrency
appropriately.
[46] Finally, we
find no error in the length of the non-parole period fixed by her Honour.
[47] We would
dismiss the appeal.
[48] If we are
wrong in our conclusion that the sentences are not manifestly inadequate, we
would in any event decline to intervene
in the exercise of the residual
discretion. The prosecution below characterised the offending as in the
“mid-range” of
offences of this kind. It was acknowledged that the
number of images in relation to count 12 was comparatively small. The prosecutor
also accepted that imprisonment would be more burdensome on the respondent
compared with other prisoners sentenced for like offending
and that the
respondent was more likely to serve the term in protective custody. The
sentencing Judge’s approach was influenced
by those factors. As mentioned
previously, her Honour was also erroneously told the maximum penalty for count 7
was imprisonment
15 years. Given those factors, we would dismiss the appeal in
the exercise of the discretion even if the grounds had been made out.
appeal is dismissed.
---------------
Count 1, contrary to s 474.22(1)
Criminal Code
Counts 2, 4, 8, 9, 10 and 11,
contrary to s 474.27AA(1)
Criminal Code
Count 3, contrary to s 474.22(1)
Criminal Code
Counts 5 and 6, contrary to s
474.27AA(2)
Criminal Code
Count 12, contrary to s 474.22A
Criminal Code
Amended Notice of Appeal, AB
Item 14 in the Table to
See s 16AAC(2)(a) & (3)(a).
AB 54, par 33.
AB 54, par 36.
AB 54, par 37.
AB 7, par 4(d).
The Queen v Kilic
[2016] HCA 48
259 CLR 256
Crown written submissions, par
12(c), AB 10.
Crown written submissions, par
Crown written submissions, par
Crown written submissions, par
4(f), AB 7.
The position of the Crown was
explained in the following submission at AB 45: “You don't load up the
fact when considering
hardship ... because of the type of offences he has
committed, because that ... is taken into account by the legislature in setting
the maximum penalty. So the weight that your Honour is going to give to the fact
that he’s a police officer and any additional
hardship that accrues, it is
really a question of weight ...”.
Testimonial Glenda Cass, 15
February 2023, AB 82.
See for example,
[2003] 2 App. R. (S.) 15 at 74,
Minehan v R
[2010] NSWCCA 140
(2010) 201 A Crim
The Queen v Hancock
[2011] NTCCA 14
, per Mildren J at [37], Riley CJ and Southwood J agreeing at
[1] and [50] respectively.
[2008] NTCCA 7
[2001] HCA 21
(2001) 206 CLR 267.
Crown written submissions, par
8(b), AB 8, in reference to s 16A(2AAA)
Crimes Act 1914
AB 111-112.
The Queen v Roe
40 NTLR 187
Griffiths v The
[1977] HCA 44
; 137 CLR 293 at 310.
Everett v The Queen
[1994] HCA 49
181 CLR 295
[2006] NTCCA 10
(2006) 161 A
R v Osenkowski
at 212-213.
[1936] HCA 40
55 CLR 499.
Lacey v Attorney-General
[2011] HCA 10
242 CLR 573.
House v The King
at 503-504.
Hili v The Queen
242 CLR 520
Markarian v The Queen
(2005) 228 CLR 257 at [27], per Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne and Callinan
Mill v The Queen
[1988] HCA 70
(1988) 166 CLR 59.
Ibid, p 62-63.
Principles of
ed (1979), pp 56 - 57
Postiglione v The Queen
[1997] HCA 26
(1997) 189 CLR 295
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (260 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter