URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTADComm/2004/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:16:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Blackham Davison, Chris & Davison, Toni v Kenneth Joils [2004] NTADComm 1 (13 April 2004)
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION COMMISSION
LOCATION: DARWIN
TRIBUNAL: TONY FITZGERALD
HEARING COMMISSIONER
DATE OF HEARING: 13 APRIL 2004
HEARING NO: 1 of 2004
BETWEEN: CHRIS BLACKHAM-DAVISON
First Complainant
TONI DAVISON
Second Complainant
KENNETH JOILS
DATE OF DECISION: Oral Decision given on 13 April 2004.
Written Decision given on 16 April 2004.
Legislation: Anti-Discrimination Act 1992 (NT), ss 4(1), 19(1)(j)
and (r), 20, 21, 28, 88 and 90.
REASONS FOR
The Complainants allege that
they were subject to unlawful discrimination by the Respondent at Darwin Airport
at about 1.00am on 6
October 2003 in breach of the provisions of the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1992 (NT) (“the
Chris Blackham-Davison
(“Complainant 1”) has permanent severe-to- profound hearing loss.
He requires the assistance of
a “hearing” dog (included in the
definition of “guide dog” under section 4 of the Act). It was not
by the Respondent that Complainant 1 has an impairment and/or required
the assistance of a hearing dog for the purposes of the Act.
Kelpie/Staffordshire Terrier cross named “Ivy”, was present at the
The allegations arise out of
the refusal by the Respondent, a taxi driver, to allow Complainant 1 to travel
in his taxi because Complainant
1 was accompanied by Ivy. Complainant 1 alleges
discrimination on the ground of his impairment and on the ground that he was
accompanied
by a guide dog. Toni Davison (“Complainant 2”) alleges
discrimination on the basis that her “association”
(for the purposes
of section 19 of the Act) with Complainant 1 at the time of “the
incident” at the airport meant that
she too was unable to travel in the
One attempt at conciliation
was made but was unsuccessful.
On 18 November 2003 the
Respondent was issued with an Infringement Notice by the Inspector of Commercial
Passenger Vehicles (“the
Inspector”) for alleged infringement of the
Commercial Passenger (Miscellaneous) Regulations
, in that on 6 October 2003 he
was a taxi driver who “refused a hiring involving a hearing dog”.
During the course of
his investigation the Inspector obtained statutory
declarations in November 2003 from both Complainants, the Respondent and a
(another taxi driver) to ‘the incident’ at the airport. The
statutory declarations contained detailed accounts of the
The complaint involves sections 4(1), 19(1)(j) and (r), 20, 21, 28, 88 and 90
of the Act. These sections are set out below.
S.4 Interpretation
In this Act, unless the
contrary intention appears -
“guide dog" means a dog that is trained to provide assistance to a
person who has a visual, hearing or mobility impairment;
“impairment” includes
(a) the total or partial loss of a bodily function;
(b) the presence in the body of an organism which has caused or is capable of
causing disease;
(c) the presence in the body of organisms impeding, capable of impeding or which
may impede the capacity of the body to combat disease;
(d) total or partial loss of a part of the body;
(e) the malfunction or dysfunction of a part of the body;
(f) the malformation or disfigurement of a part of the body;
(g) reliance on a guide dog, wheelchair or other remedial device;
(h) physical or intellectual disability;
(j) psychiatric or psychological disease or disorder, whether permanent or
temporary; and
(k) a condition, malfunction or dysfunction which results in a person learning
more slowly than another person without that condition,
malfunction or
dysfunction;
19. Prohibition of
discrimination
(1) Subject to subsection (2), a person shall not discriminate against
another person on the ground of any of the following attributes:
(c) sexuality;
(e) marital status;
(f) pregnancy;
(g) parenthood;
(h) breastfeeding;
(j) impairment;
(k) trade union or employer association activity;
(m) religious belief or activity;
(n) political opinion, affiliation or activity;
(p) irrelevant medical record;
(q) irrelevant criminal record;
(r) association with a person who has, or is believed to have, an attribute
referred to in this section.
is not unlawful for a person to discriminate against another person on any of
the attributes referred to in subsection (1)
if an exemption under Part 4 or 5
20. Discrimination
(1) For the purposes of this Act, discrimination includes –
(a) any distinction, restriction, exclusion or preference made on the basis of
an attribute that has the effect of nullifying or
impairing equality of
opportunity; and
(b) harassment on the basis of an attribute,
in an area of activity referred to in
(2) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), discrimination takes
place if a person treats or proposes to treat another
person who has or had, or
is believed to have or had –
(a) an attribute;
(b) a characteristic imputed to appertain to an attribute; or
(c) a characteristic imputed to appertain generally to persons with an
less favourably than a
person who has not, or is believed not to have, such an attribute.
(3) For discrimination to take place, it is not necessary that –
(a) the attribute is the sole or dominant ground for the less favourable
treatment; or
(b) the person who discriminates regards the treatment as less
favourable.
(4) The motive of a person
alleged to have discriminated against another person is, for the purposes of
this Act, irrelevant.
21. Discrimination by refusing to allow guide dog, &c.
(1) For the purposes of this Act, a person discriminates on the ground of
impairment against a person with a visual, hearing or mobility
impairment if the
person treats the person with the impairment less favourably because the person
has a guide dog.
(2) Subsection (1) applies notwithstanding that it is the practice of the
person to treat less favourably other persons who have dogs.
(3) Nothing in this section shall limit the operation of section 20 in
relation to discrimination on the ground of impairment.
(4) This section does not affect the liability of a person with a guide dog
for any damage caused by the guide dog.
28. Areas of activities
This Act applies to prohibited conduct in the areas of –
(a) education;
(c) accommodation;
(d) goods, services and facilities;
(e) clubs; and
(f) insurance and superannuation.
88. Orders after hearing
(1) If, after the hearing of a complaint, the Commissioner finds the
prohibited conduct alleged in the complaint is substantiated,
the Commissioner
may make one or more of the following orders:
(a) an order requiring the respondent not to repeat or continue the prohibited
(b) an order requiring the respondent to pay to the complainant or another
person, within a specified period, an amount, being an
amount not more than that
prescribed, that the Commissioner considers appropriate as compensation for loss
or damage caused by the
prohibited conduct;
(c) an order requiring the respondent to do specified things to redress loss or
damage suffered by the complainant or any other person
because of the prohibited
(d) an order declaring void all or part of an agreement made in connection with
the prohibited conduct, either from the time the
agreement was made or
subsequently.
(2) In this section, the
specified things a respondent may be required to do, include, but are not
limited to the following:
(a) employing, reinstating or re-employing a person;
(b) promoting a person;
(c) moving a person to a specified position within a specified
(3) In this section, "damage", in
relation to a person, includes the offence, embarrassment, humiliation, and
intimidation suffered
by the person.
(4) If, after the hearing of a complaint, the Commissioner finds the
prohibited conduct alleged in the complaint is not substantiated
Commissioner shall make an order dismissing the complaint.
90. Conduct of proceedings
(1) In the conduct of proceedings under this Act, the Commissioner
(a) is not bound by the rules of evidence and the Commissioner may obtain
information on any matter as the Commissioner considers
appropriate;
(b) shall act according to equity, good conscience and the substantial merits of
the case without regard to technicalities and legal
(c) may give directions relating to procedure that, in the Commissioner's
opinion, will enable costs or delay to be reduced and will
prompt hearing of the matters at issue between the parties;
(d) may draw conclusions of fact from any proceeding before a court or
(e) may adopt any findings or decisions of a court or tribunal that may be
relevant to the proceedings; and
(f) may conduct proceedings in the absence of a party who was given reasonable
notice to attend but failed to do so without reasonable
At the outset the Respondent announced that he did not wish to
contest the Complainants’ allegations or give evidence on oath.
evidence at hearing was accordingly limited to the following:
contents of the
statutory declarations described in paragraph 1.5. Under s.90 of the Act the
Commissioner may obtain information
as the Commissioner considers
appropriate;
the Complainants’
evidence on oath that the contents of their said statutory declarations were
true and correct;
the evidence of the
Complainants as to damage;
Respondent’s cross-examination of both
Complainants;
the concession by the
Respondent that he had paid without dispute the penalty of $110 stipulated in
the Infringement Notice described
in paragraph
3.2 In view of the Respondent’s attitude
the Complainants elected not to call their witnesses.
3.3 There was no dispute on the facts, but some disagreement between the
parties on their respective demeanours during the incident
at the airport. This
slight variation in the evidence had no effect on the final determination of the
3.4 In summary, as described in section 1 above, Complainant 1 has an
impairment, requires the assistance of a hearing dog, and was
refused transport
by the Respondent taxi driver because he had a hearing dog. At the time of the
Complainant 1 was
accompanied by Ivy and his elderly mother Toni Davison (Complainant
Complainant 2 was walking with the
aid of crutches after a recent operation on a broken
Complainant 2 was also refused
transport by the Respondent because of her association with Complainant
the Complainants had waited in the
taxi queue for
10-15 minutes for their taxi, and when their turn came in excess of 20
people remained in the
Complainant 1 showed Ivy’s
written certification to the Respondent and explained that it was unlawful to
refuse transport to
a person accompanied by a “hearing
the Respondent refused to
transport the Complainants and Ivy, and described Ivy as “a
the Respondent did not
radio his “base” to seek advice, and steadfastly refused to
recognise the entitlements of the
Complainants;
the next taxi driver in
the queue was willing to transport the Complainants and Ivy, and the next member
of the public in the taxi
queue refused to travel with the Respondent until it
was ascertained that the Complainants and their dog had successfully secured
transport in the next taxi.
cross-examination by the Respondent the Complainants agreed that they had made
several allegations of discrimination in
the past. However, rather than lending
support to the Respondent’s contention that the Complainants were
“gold diggers”
motivated by greed rather than principle, in my view
this evidence tended to support an entitlement to compensation for aggravation
of loss or damage in that it demonstrated that the Complainants were yet again
forced to suffer unfavourable treatment – and
in this instance in the
presence of so many members of the public.
3.6 The Complainants maintained that, at least initially, they were only
interested in receiving an apology from the Respondent, and
“apology” offered by the latter at conciliation was qualified and
unacceptable.
3.7 On the question of damage Complainant 1 alleged that at the time of the
incident he was publicly humiliated, embarrassed and inconvenienced.
to the incident he claimed to suffer from stress, sleeping difficulties and a
reluctance to travel in taxis – preferring
instead public transport or a
private minibus. Complainant 1 did not provide any medical evidence to support
his claim. Complainant
2 confirmed her son’s embarrassment, sleeping
difficulties, and fear of rejection by taxi drivers, and also stated that delay
caused by the incident inconvenienced her and resulted in pain and suffering
(because of her broken leg).
4.1 In the conduct of proceedings,
section 90 of the Act suspends the rules of evidence and entitles me to inform
myself on any matters
I consider appropriate. In this way I am able to take
notice of the prosecution file of the Inspector of Commercial Passenger Vehicles
and rely on the affidavits of the parties on their witnesses (see paragraph
4.2 Section 19 of the Act prohibits discrimination against a person on the
ground of a number of attributes including impairment (s.19(1)(j))
association with a person who has an attribute (s.19(1)(r)). The Respondent did
not contest, and I formally find, that he discriminated
against Complainant 1 on
the basis of his attribute of impairment and Complainant 2 on the basis of her
attribute of association
with Complainant 1.
4.3 Section 20 states inter alia that discrimination takes place where a
person with an attribute is treated less favourably than
a person without that
attribute. Section 21 states that for the purposes of the Act discrimination on
the ground of impairment includes
treating a person with an impairment less
favourably because the person requires a guide dog (defined in section 4(1) of
I find that the Respondent, in refusing to transport the Complainants,
treated them less favourably on the ground of their said attributes
would treat persons who do not possess such attributes.
4.4 Section 28 restricts the Act to prohibited conduct in specified
“areas of activities” including ‘goods, services
facilities” (s.28(d)). I find that the Respondent, at the time of the
prohibited conduct, was clearly refusing to provide
the “service” of
transport by taxi and accordingly, his refusal is within an area of activity
contemplated by the Act.
Compensation for Loss or Damage
Having found the actions of the Respondent to be prohibited conduct under
the Act and having found the allegations in the complaints
to be substantiated,
I would normally assess the impact of the conduct on the Complainants in order
to determine the extent of damages.
However, at the conclusion of the evidence I indicated to the parties that I
proposed to make findings in favour of the Complainants.
(For the record, I
found the evidence of the Complainants on the question of damage to be
credible.) Rather than assessing damages
myself, I then offered them the
opportunity to resolve the question of damages for themselves through
conciliation. In taking this
course I was conscious, and I reminded the
parties, of the prominent status of conciliation in the resolution of complaints
the Act. I informed the parties that if conciliation was unsuccessful
then I would assess damages.
The parties accepted my invitation to conciliate and were provided with a
Conciliator from the Commission. Prior to hearing, the
parties had already been
provided with several recent decisions on point from HREOC and the Federal
Magistrates Court – so
they had a fairly good grasp of a range of relevant
damages awards.
Determination
In the event, and after conciliation, the parties were able to agree on
damages and I formally made the following findings, and the
following formal
orders by consent –
I find the prohibited conduct
alleged by the First Complainant, Chris Blackham-Davison, to be substantiated on
the basis that he has
been discriminated against in contravention of ss.19 and
20 of the Anti-Discrimination Act (“the Act”) – which
to discrimination based on an attribute, in this case impairment. Also I find
that he has been discriminated against in contravention
of s.21 of the Act which
deals specifically with discrimination where the Complainant has a guide
I find the prohibited conduct
alleged by the Second Complainant, Toni Davison, to be substantiated on the
basis that she has been
discriminated against as an associate of
Mr Blackham-Davison in contravention of ss.19 and 20 of the Act.
I find that the prohibited
conduct engaged in by the Respondent, Kenneth Joils, to be in the area of the
provision of goods, services
and facilities which is an area contemplated by
s.28 of the Act.
The Respondent is not to
repeat or continue the prohibited conduct.
The Respondent is to pay to
the Complainant
Chris Blackham-Davison the sum of Seven Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($750.00)
as compensation for the inconvenience, embarrassment and
humiliation caused by
the prohibited conduct. Payment is to be made to the Anti-Discrimination
Commission (“ADC”) for
payment out to the First Complainant on the
following basis:
• $250 within one week of the date hereof.
• $30 per month commencing 1 May 2004 and continuing on the first of each
month thereafter until the balance of $500 is paid
Respondent is to pay to the Complainant
Toni Davison the sum of Seven Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($750.00) as
compensation for the inconvenience, pain and suffering caused
by the prohibited
conduct. Payment is to be made to the ADC for payment out to the Second
Complainant on the following basis:
• $250 within one week of the date hereof.
• $30 per month commencing 1 May 2004 and continuing on the first of each
month thereafter until the balance of $500 is paid
day of April 2004.
COMMISSIONER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (77.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter