URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTSC/2025/63.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:22:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The King v Robertson [2025] NTSC 63 (25 August 2025)
The King v Robertson
[2025] NTSC 63
PARTIES: THE KING
ROBERTSON, Jerry
TITLE OF COURT: SUPREME COURT OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: 22322307
DELIVERED: 25 August 2025
HEARING DATES: 27 & 28 March 2025, 10 & 11 July 2025
JUDGMENT OF: Barr J
CATCHWORDS:
CRIMINAL LAW — Evidence — Criminal trial — Judicial
discretion to admit or exclude evidence — Tendency evidence
—Intent to cause serious harm — Fact in issue — Historical
incidents involving deceased and other
female partners — Significant
probative value — Probative value significantly outweighs prejudicial
effect — Tendency
evidence admissible
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
Ebborn v The King
[2025] NTCCA 2
[2009] NSWCCA 306
201 A Crim R 451
GBF v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 135
Lynch v The
[2025] NTCCA 5
REPRESENTATION:
Crown: D Dalrymple, D Payne
Accused: J McMahon SC, Bronwen Robertson
Solicitors:
Crown: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Accused: North Australian Aboriginal Justice Agency
Judgment category classification: B
Judgment ID Number: Bar2503
Number of pages: 27
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
AT ALICE SPRINGS
The King v Robertson
[2025] NTSC 63
No. 22322307
JERRY ROBERTSON
CORAM: BARR J
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 25 August 2025)
[1] The accused
is charged with the murder of Kumanjayi Jurrah (‘the deceased’),
contrary to s 156 of the
Criminal Code
(NT). The offence is alleged
to have taken place on or about 14 July2023.
[2] The facts
set out in the following paragraphs [3] to [14] are taken from the Crown case
[3] The accused
and the deceased had first commenced their relationship at some time before
January 2000. In the years which followed,
there were many periods of
separation, some of which lasted years, and during which one or both of the
parties had a relationship
with a different domestic partner.
[4] From an
early time the relationship between the accused and the deceased was marred by
violent and controlling behaviour on the
part of the accused. On many occasions
their ‘troubles’ came to the attention of the police, on some
occasions as a result
of reporting by the deceased herself and on other
occasions because the police were called by other persons.
[5] On some of
the occasions referred to in the previous paragraph, the deceased provided
police with a formal statement to enable
the prosecution of the accused. On
occasions the deceased asked for protection by way of a police DVO, or for the
accused to be taken
into custody overnight. Sometimes the deceased told the
police that she did not want any action taken against the accused.
[6] The accused
was convicted of assaulting the deceased, with circumstances of aggravation, on
four occasions. The assaults were
committed on 18 June 2001, 6 November 2001, 11
August 2009 and 25 September 2022. All but one involved the use of a weapon
harm. There were many other occasions when the deceased reported that
she had been assaulted by the accused with a weapon, and in
the period from
January 2000 onwards, many DVOs were put in place for the protection of the
[7] The accused
and deceased resumed their relationship in 2022 after several years spent apart.
Sometimes the deceased stayed with
family at Hidden Valley town camp but mostly
she would stay with the accused in a place they called “the
saltbush”, a
scrub area near the Mercure Hotel, in Stott Terrace, Alice
[8] Recurring
sources of tension and conflict in the resumed relationship included royalty
money, control by the accused over the
deceased’s keycard, the
deceased’s attempts to retrieve her keycard and other belongings, and
mutual jealousy accusations.
The Crown acknowledges that the violence in the
relationship did not always involve the deceased being a passive participant,
the discrepancies in size, weight and capacity for applying violent force
were such that the deceased was generally the dominated
and often injured
[9] During 2022
and the first half of 2023, when interacting with police, the deceased
increasingly referred to attacks with weapons
by the accused and expressed
concerns about the risk she faced from him.
that period, violent assaults committed by the accused, or other incidents
involving the threat of violence by the accused,
took place on 4 April 2022,
6 May 2022, 27 June 2022, 25 September 2022 and 6 July 2023. They are
respectively incidents 7, 5, 4,
2 and 1 set out in Table ‘A’ of the
further amended tendency notice, extracted in par [22] below. It is not
to here separately describe those incidents, given that they are
described in the Table, but they are important components of the
unfortunate
narrative of events which ultimately led to the death of the deceased.
[11] In the
afternoon of Friday, 14 July 2023, the accused and the deceased were
unsuccessful in attempts to obtain alcohol. They
consumed an unknown quantity of
hand sanitiser together. At about 9 PM that day, they were dropped off on Stott
Terrace near their
saltbush campsite. From there, the accused and the deceased
started to make their way to their tent, which was about 70 metres from
road. At some point along the trail, the accused engaged in a lengthy assault or
series of assaults on the deceased, involving
a large number of applications of
force to various parts of her body.
[12] The Crown
is not in a position to particularise the sequence in which the applications of
force took place but asserts that it
can be inferred from the spread and nature
of injuries sustained (which included multiple blunt force trauma bruising to
that they took place over an extended period of time.
applications of force included multiple strikes with a mini sledgehammer
weighing 2.086 kg.
The accused
struck a substantial blow to the deceased’s head with that sledgehammer,
causing injury and bleeding. Specifically,
it caused a large gaping laceration
in the left temporal region of the scalp and caused a small depressed fracture
(7 millimetres
long) to the underlying skull.
cause of death was described as “respiratory failure due to extensive
chest and head injuries and hypovolaemic shock due
The forensic
pathologist noted extensive soft tissue haemorrhages and internal bruising
across various parts of the deceased’s
body, including the chest, side,
back and head. She also noted injuries to the deceased’s left leg, from
the hip to the ankle,
and a number of associated fractures. There were many
external and internal signs of injury to the deceased’s left arm,
with defensive injuries, that is, consistent with her attempts to
protect herself.
[15] Senior
counsel for the accused informed the court on 10 July 2025 that there will be no
issue at trial that (1) the accused committed
the acts which caused the fatal
injuries and that (2) the acts were deliberate acts. It will be conceded that
the fatal injuries
were not caused by accident and that there was no third-party
involvement. Although those concessions will need to be the subject
admissions at trial, I assume for the purposes of this decision that relevant
admissions will be made
prosecuting the murder charge, the Crown does not allege that the accused
intended to kill the deceased. Rather the Crown
contends that “it can be
inferred from the available evidence (including in respect of the past and
ongoing relationship between
the accused and the deceased) that the violence was
accompanied by a willingness and desire to bring about a result whereby the
would suffer harm that would be significant and
long-standing”.
[17] A person
commits the offence of murder contrary to s 156
Criminal Code
the person engages in conduct; (b) the conduct causes the death of another
person; and (c) the person intends to cause the
death of, or serious harm to,
that ... person by that conduct. The word ‘conduct’ in this context
means an act, or physical
action. To ‘engage in conduct’ is to
perform an act. A person’s conduct ‘causes’ death or harm if
substantially contributes to the death or harm. The meaning of ‘serious
harm’ for present purposes is physical harm that
endangers or is likely to
endanger a person’s life, or that is or is likely to be significant and
long-standing. The definition
includes ‘the cumulative effect of more than
one harm’. The Crown’s contention, extracted in the previous
is thus that the accused engaged in violent conduct against the
deceased with intent to cause her serious harm, in the sense of
harm that was likely to be significant and
long-standing.
[18] I turn to
consider the Crown’s application to adduce tendency evidence.
[19] By Notice
dated 6 June 2025, given pursuant to
Evidence (National
Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
(“ENULA”), the Crown notified the
intention to adduce tendency evidence. The Notice provided that the tendency
related to the following facts in issue in the
proceedings:
Whether the accused caused the injuries which GJ
(‘the deceased’) suffered on the night of 14 July 2023 and/or in the
early morning of 15 July 2023;
To rebut any defence proposition that the
injuries suffered by the deceased were the result of an accident or some event
not involving
the application of violent force by the accused;
Whether the accused struck or otherwise applied force to the deceased on the
night of 14 July 2023 or the early morning of 15 July
2023 with an
intention to cause serious harm.
[20] In the
light of the concessions (proposed admissions) referred to in [15] above, the
first and second of the facts in issue are
no longer truly in issue. The third
remains, and should be the focus of my consideration of probative
Although the nature and
extent of the injuries described in [13] and [14] might be sufficient to prove
conduct engaged in by the
accused with intent to cause harm that was likely to
be significant and long-standing, the Crown in addition seeks to adduce tendency
evidence in relation to the issue of intent.
tendency sought to be proved is the tendency of the accused to:
(a) have a particular state of mind, namely:
(i) a violent disposition towards his current or former domestic partner
including GJ, and a preparedness to act on that disposition,
in particular after
consuming alcohol;
(ii) a willingness and desire to inflict injuries on his current or former
domestic partner likely to require medical treatment and/or
to be disfiguring in
particular after consuming alcohol.
(b) act in a particular way, namely:
(i) to use violent force to cause harm to a current or former domestic partner,
including GJ, in particular by the use of weapons
of convenience and in
particular after consuming alcohol.
(ii) to continue a commenced assault against a current or former domestic
partner by way of multiple sequential applications of force,
including where
conduct is paused to locate a weapon (or replacement weapon).
[22] The Tables
below set out the various incidents and the evidence relied on by the Crown of
threatened or actual applications of
force to the deceased and two other female
victims, with relevant particulars:
Table A – GJ incidents
reverse chronological order]
Date, Time & Place
Circumstances
Witness(es) / Evidence
The accused made a threat to GJ articulated in terms consistent with a
contemplation of causing serious harm.
6/7/23, afternoon, Alice Springs
The accused and GJ were living rough in Alice Springs. They had gone to the
Yeperenye Centre in the town area. GJ approached Police
who were at the entrance
of the bottle shop and reported that the accused was threatening her (“he
told me I’ll hit you
with axe”), and that she was frightened
(“I don’t wanna die”).
- Representations
on BWV from GJ.
Thorneycroft (Police)
- Kahlil Currie
- Rachael Hayden
- Callum Innis
The accused hit GJ to the head with a rock three times, causing a
laceration and bleeding, and also scratched GJ’s neck, causing
abrasions. After the arrival of the Police the accused made a threat to GJ
consistent with contemplation of a particular
outcome in terms of the degree of
future harm to be caused to her.
25/9/22, evening, Alice Springs
GJ had been drinking with family members at Hidden Valley Camp and then
went with them to the saltbush area near the Mercure Hotel
to keep drinking. GJ
was sitting down with others when the accused walked over and hit her with a
rock to the head, using both hands.
This caused pain and bleeding from a
laceration to the top of GJ’s right forehead. The accused dropped the rock
and scratched
GJ’s neck, causing cuts and abrasions. Police arrived at
nearby Mueller Street in response to reports of a domestic disturbance.
observed to be bleeding from the laceration from her forehead and told Police
that she had been hit with a big rock three
times. She was concerned about
getting back her keycard which was in JR’s possession. The accused was
arrested for the purposes
of serving a domestic violence order. While in Police
custody at the scene and in the presence of GJ, the accused shouted out in
Warlpiri: “I’m gonna hit you GJ – I’m gonna make you
bleed.” GJ declined at that time to make a statement.
(representations on BWV and in GJ Police statement).
- Dale Spera
- Nicholas Snook
- Steve Haig
- Peter Heaft
photographs
- Certificate of
proceedings.
statement of facts.
Not pressed
The accused hit GJ multiple times to the back with a large rock, and also
punched her and struck her with a chair.
27/6/22, night, Alice Springs
GJ and the accused were at a bush camp near the Mercure Hotel, together
with another Aboriginal woman AW and AW’s partner Chris.
AW phoned 000 for
hitting his wife. Police attended
and spoke first to AW and then to GJ. GJ said:
“I been really crippled from the big rock”, that she had been hit
the rock three times, and that “he been punch me”. She also
said she had been hit with a chair and tried to show Police
the chair. GJ said
she wanted to make a statement. Police were unwilling to do so while she was
still under the influence of alcohol,
and wanted to take her to the Hospital. GJ
told Police that to start off with they had been drinking “good
went on to say “but he’s a jealousing man”.
Police retrieved GJ’s keycard from JR’s possession and
the Alice Springs Hospital, where she reported having been hit with a large rock
several times. On examination she was
very tender over the mid thoracic spine
and posterior ribs.
Williams (000 call and initial BWV).
(representations on BWV and to ASH staff).
- Simon Gillett
- Yumbi Yenga
Yenga (Police)
After assaulting GJ and being taken into Police custody, the accused made a
threat to GJ articulated in terms consistent with a contemplation
serious harm
6/5/22, late afternoon, Alice Springs
The accused and GJ had had a fight in which the accused’s face was
scratched. The accused was then seen to be punching GJ and
another woman outside
the front of the Alice Springs Library.
The accused caused a large lump to GJ’s face. The women sought refuge
in the library. The accused was still attempting to gain
access to the Library
until he realised the Police had arrived. Police spoke first to the accused, and
then to GJ who walked out
once she had seen he was with Police.
The accused had GJ’s bag and phone. At one point GJ said to Constable
Charteris: “Cause I’m getting sick of it,
always hit me.”
While the accused was in the back of the Police van, and still in close
proximity to GJ, he said to GJ in Warlpiri
on two occasions “I’m
going to stab you.”
- Amy Brown (000
(representations on BWV)
- Christopher
Myles (Police)
Charteris (Police)
Not pressed
The accused assaulted GJ by punching her over an extended period of time
causing severe pain to her left wrist/forearm and to her
back. The assault
included a bite to GJ’s left hand, and a blow to the ear causing
4/4/22, early morning, Alice Springs
The accused and GJ were camping in the saltbush area across from the
Mercure Hotel (at that time still being used as a Covid 19 quarantine
At about 7 am GJ came over to the Mercure and sought assistance from the
security guard at the entrance. Police were called
and arrived to find GJ
sitting down near the entrance nursing her left wrist/forearm. Police also noted
dried blood around her right
ear. GJ was unable to move the fingers on her left
hand and also complained of pain to her back:”...my back too, really
pain”...”He
was hitting me – there was no sleep”...
“Last night, right up to morning time:...”That’s why I been
run this way.” GJ also said that when she ran away “he was looking
for, I don’t know what for, might be nulla nulla.”
GJ asked for a
restraining order and for assistance in getting back her clothes. GJ was taken
to the Alice Springs Hospital. ED staff
recorded that her left arm and upper
back were very hyperalgesic, and that range of motion was very limited at the
elbow and wrist
due to pain. Arrangements were made for GJ to be taken to the
Women’s Shelter.
(representations on BWV and to ASH staff)
- Nicol Fawcett
- Dylan Hart
The accused pushed GJ to the ground and kicked her to her right hip
(causing an extensive haematoma and a lumbar transverse process
fracture), and
to her left eye (causing a 4cm open wound with significant tissue swelling)
while wearing steel-capped boots, and
then picked up a rock and struck her with
it to the left side of her head. (causing a 3cm open wound to her left
24/5/11, early morning, Alice Springs
GJ had been drinking with family at a residence in Larapinta on the night
of 23/5/11. In the early morning of 25/5/11 the accused
(her then ex-domestic
partner) came to the unit and became jealous and angry. He assaulted her and
caused the injuries. After a further
period drinking at Warlpiri Camp, GJ went
to the Sobering Up Shelter, and was taken from there to the Alice Springs
Hospital. She
told Hospital staff that she had been kicked with steel-capped
boots. A CT scan revealed a fresh lumbar vertebral transverse process
(this was treated conservatively). Police were called to the Hospital and took
a statement from GJ. In the statement GJ
disclosed not just the assault on
24/5/11 but also an assault the week before when the accused had hit her to the
left side of the
head with a big rock.
(representations to ASH staff and to Police in GJ Police statement).
- Alain Diamond
(former Police)
Mawhinney (former Police)
The accused threw a tennis ball-sized rock at GJ from 4 metres away, which
hit her in the scalp causing a laceration wound and bleeding.
The accused
subsequently bit GJ to the right cheek, breaking open the scar tissue of a
pre-existing injury.
11/8/09, night, Alice Springs
The accused and GJ had been drinking together behind Hoppy’s Camp a
few hours earlier, but GJ had left and gone to House 12.
The accused came to
House 12 and argued with GJ. He picked up the rock and threw it at GJ. The
argument continued and the accused
bit GJ to the right cheek, where there was
already a large area of scar tissue. Photos taken by Police show the laceration
scalp with dried blood descending through her hair to the neck,
and the fresh wound to GJ’s cheek. The accused subsequently
pleaded guilty
to assaulting GJ.
- Certificate of
proceedings
summary of facts
Police injury photos
The accused stabbed GJ twice with a knife, once to the right side and once
to the right buttock. GJ required hospitalisation and surgery.
The stabbing
resulted in a penetration of the “peritoneal reflection” but there
was no visceral injury.
30/3/09, late night, Alice Springs
The accused, together with his then girlfriend, had come to the house at
Hidden Valley Camp, where GJ was staying. It was late at
night and GJ had been
sleeping outside the house. GJ woke up and there was an argument between her and
the accused about the accused
staying there with girlfriend. The accused started
chasing GJ with a knife. GJ tried to get away and hide, but the accused caught
up with her and stabbed her twice. He stopped when a family member
intervened.
(representations to ASH staff and to Police, in GJ Police statement)
- Sarah Firth
Not pressed
Not pressed
The accused struck GJ with a star picket while she was sleeping, breaking
her left forearm. GJ woke up but was still on the ground
when the accused
applied further force to GJ’s head
6/11/01, evening, Alice Springs
The accused and GJ were separated and there was a full non-contact DVO in
place. During the afternoon of 6/11/01 the accused was drinking
Little Sisters Camp, and GJ was drinking outside House 7 Little Sisters Camp.
The accused approached GJ and told her she
shouldn’t be drinking alcohol.
GJ told the accused that he couldn’t come near her, invoking the DVO. The
accused then
accused GJ of having a new boyfriend. At about 7pm the accused
returned to the outside of House 7, by which time GJ was sleeping
accused was holding a star picket, which he swung and broke GJ’s arm. He
then hit GJ’s head. GJ was admitted
for treatment at Alice Springs
Hospital and underwent surgery to pin the bone. She was also treated for a
bruised and grazed left
- Certificate of
proceedings
summary of facts
The accused punched GJ twice to the stomach when she was 32 weeks pregnant,
and a short time later threatened to throw a stone at
GJ. After being restrained
by one of GJ’s family members, the accused followed GJ into a room and
stabbed her approximately
5 times to the stomach and buttocks with a spoon.
After the accused’s arrest he called out to GJ threatening to kill
18/6/01, night, Alice Springs
GJ was at House 7 Little Sisters Camp. The accused knew that GJ was heavily
pregnant. The accused came there heavily intoxicated,
and began arguing with GJ.
A fight ensued inside the house. The accused punched GJ twice to her stomach,
causing her to collapse
to the ground. He then ripped off all her clothes
leaving her naked. GJ screamed out for help and the accused left the house. The
accused returned a short time later armed with a rock the size of a house brick.
He raised the rock above his head and was about
to throw it, when he was
restrained by one of GJ’s family members. It was at this point that the
accused followed GJ into a
bedroom and started stabbing her with a spoon. After
Police arrived and the accused had been arrested and placed in the back of the
Police van the accused called out to GJ: “you fucking bitch, I’ll
fucking kill you.”
- Certificate of
proceedings
summary of facts
(representations to Police and GJ Police statement)
- Scott Reinke
(former Police)
Not pressed
Not pressed
Table C – MG incidents
Date, Time & Place
Circumstances
Witness(es) / Evidence
Accused choked MG and then struck her with a large stick, causing a
displaced fracture above the left elbow.
24/5/17, after 6pm, Alice Springs
The accused and MG had been drinking alcohol at a campsite in bushland near
Yipirinya School, and were both intoxicated, despite a
DVO restraining the
accused from being in MG’s company when drinking or under the influence of
alcohol. The accused became
angry for a reason he did not disclose, and choked
MG with both hands to the point where she could not breathe. When she tried to
protect herself, the accused walked away, armed himself with the stick, and then
returned to assault MR with it. MR required surgery
(open reduction and internal
fixation of the left distal humerus bone) and the injury constituted serious
- Certificate of
proceedings;
- Tendered Crown
- X-ray images
Not pressed
Not pressed
Not pressed
Table E – PR incidents
Date, Time & Place
Circumstances
Witness(es) / Evidence
Accused armed himself with a long pair of scissors and after walking behind
PR accusing her of infidelity, stabbed her multiple times
(including twice to
the forearm as she was trying to defend herself, and subsequently 4 times to the
25/8/05, night time, Alice Springs
The accused and PR were at the Trucking Yards camp. PR had raised her arm
to defend herself after the accused had pushed her to the
ground, and upon
seeing that he had the scissors raised above his head ready to stab her. The
stab wounds to PR’s buttocks
were inflicted after PR had rolled over on
her side in an attempt to shield herself. PR suffered severe muscle damage to
arm, plus lacerations to the head, chest and legs.
- Certificate of
proceedings
sentencing facts
- PR (committal
proceedings evidence)
Not pressed
15/8/05, night time,
After drinking a large amount of alcohol, the accused started to harass PR
she was going to the
toilet. The accused grabbed a screwdriver which was lying on the ground next to
him, and stabbed PR once to
the lower leg. After a period of continuing jealous
harassment, the accused picked up the screwdriver again and stabbed PR twice
the left side of her head, and then poked her once in the upper back. All of
PR’s injuries were bleeding. PR was medevacked
to Alice Springs Hospital
and was treated for a laceration to her head.
- Certificate of
proceedings
sentencing facts
Tendency evidence
[23] Tendency
evidence is placed before the jury as evidence tending to prove the guilt of the
accused. Tendency is relied on as circumstantial
evidence in proof of the
offence charged.
The jury is asked
to reason by inference that, because the accused acted in a particular way on
some other occasion or occasions,
he acted in the same way on the occasion the
subject of the charge at trial.
Evidence that an accused had a particular tendency is adduced in order to render
more probable the proposition that, on the particular
occasion relevant to the
proceeding, the accused had a particular state of mind (or acted in a particular
way), in order to provide
the foundation for an inference to that
ENULA provides for the admissibility of tendency evidence subject to the
requirements of notice and significant probative value:
tendency rule
(1) Evidence of the character, reputation or conduct of a person, or a
tendency that a person has or had, is not admissible to prove
that a person has
or had a tendency (whether because of the person's character or otherwise) to
act in a particular way, or to have
a particular state of mind unless:
(a) the party seeking to adduce the evidence gave reasonable notice in writing
to each other party of the party's intention to adduce
the evidence; and
(b) the court thinks that the evidence will, either by itself or having regard
to other evidence adduced or to be adduced by the
party seeking to adduce the
evidence, have significant probative value.
(2) Subsection (1)(a) does not apply if:
(a) the evidence is adduced in accordance with any directions made by the court
section 100
(b) the evidence is adduced to explain or contradict tendency evidence adduced
by another party.
The tendency rule is subject to specific exceptions concerning character
of and expert opinion about accused persons
(sections 110
provisions of this Act, or of other laws, may operate as further
exceptions.
Section 101
of the ENULA has application to criminal proceedings and provides, so far as is
relevant for these purposes, that tendency evidence
cannot be used against a
defendant unless its probative value substantially outweighs any prejudicial
effect. It provides:
101 Further restrictions on tendency
evidence and coincidence evidence adduced by prosecution
(1) This section only applies in a criminal proceeding and so applies in
addition to
sections 97
(2) Tendency evidence about a defendant, or coincidence evidence about a
defendant, that is adduced by the prosecution cannot be
used against the
defendant unless the probative value of the evidence outweighs the danger of
unfair prejudice to the defendant.
(3) This section does not apply to tendency evidence that the prosecution
adduces to explain or contradict tendency evidence adduced
by the defendant.
(4) This section does not apply to coincidence evidence that the prosecution
adduces to explain or contradict coincidence evidence
adduced by the
Dictionary in the ENULA defines “probative value” of evidence to
mean “the extent to which the evidence
could rationally affect the
assessment of the probability of the existence of a fact in issue”. The
Crown contends that the
proposed tendency evidence is “relevant to and
significantly probative of specific intent”, that is, whether the accused
intended to cause serious harm to the deceased.
test of “significant probative value” requires something more than
mere relevance.
In the present
case, the proposed tendency evidence would have “significant probative
value” if it could rationally affect
the assessment of the probability of
the remaining fact in issue in some important
This resolves to a
judicial evaluation about the reasoning processes open to the hypothetical jury:
whether the jury would rationally
think it likely that the evidence is important
in relation to the determination of that fact in
[28] I approach
the evaluation in a two-step process. The first step is to assess whether the
evidence of previous conduct would be
probative in establishing the tendencies
alleged by the Crown, extracted in par [21] above. If an inference of tendency
can be sustained,
the second step is to consider whether that tendency makes it
more probable that the accused engaged in the conduct alleged by the
the intention to cause serious harm to the deceased.
opinion, the evidence of numerous incidents over a period of more than 20 years
proves a tendency on the part of the accused,
in particular when intoxicated by
alcohol, to have a violent disposition or inclination to violence directed at
his then-current
or previous domestic female partners and a preparedness to
deploy weapons and/or otherwise use violent force to inflict serious injury
injuries on those women.
[30] Senior
counsel for the accused submitted that violence carried out in the distant past
cannot sensibly be used to establish a
state of mind or an intent in conduct
engaged in 25 years later. He contends that it is “even plainer where
there are a series
of relevantly similar episodes of a similar nature through
the intervening years”.
oral submissions, defence counsel contended that the Crown should not be
permitted to adduce “the earliest material”,
because (if I correctly
understand the submission) the historical events occurred so long ago that
evidence about them could not
have significant probative value, as required by
ENULA. The gap is so great that “strong
inferences” could not be drawn in relation to specific intent in 2023.
counsel also contended, as an additional reason to exclude evidence of
those historical incidents which involved a victim or victims
other than the
deceased, that there was a real risk of unfair prejudice, in that the probative
value of the evidence does not outweigh
the prejudicial effect it may have on
the accused, with the result that
ENULA prohibits the use of the
judgment, events from many years ago are very relevant in the present case to
prove the tendencies alleged by the Crown.
In other cases, for example where
conduct relied on to prove a tendency occurred many years previously and had not
been repeated,
the historical conduct might not be particularly probative of the
alleged tendency. In the present case, however, evidence of events
place many years ago should properly be considered with evidence of events in
the intervening period from 2001 to July
2023. The greater the number of
manifestations of the alleged tendency during that period, the greater the
probability of the existence
of the tendency. Regularity of occurrence is also
an important consideration. The submission of senior counsel quoted in [30] is
correct, but for the reverse reason to that advanced. In my opinion, the
tendency is better proven where there are a series of relevantly
episodes of a similar nature through the intervening years.
acknowledge that
a tendency may be proven in a
particular case by a limited number of relevant incidents. For example, the
Victorian Court of Appeal
GBF v The Queen
recognised a tendency on the
basis of “only two incidents of its manifestation”, explaining its
decision as follows:
.... as logic dictates,
and the common law similar fact cases confirm, an accused may have a tendency to
engage in a particular kind
of criminal behaviour which he or she has
demonstrated on only very few occasions and yet which may still be significantly
of the fact that he or she has so acted on a further occasion. It
depends upon the nature of the tendency. ...
[33] However,
the fact that a tendency
be proven in a particular case by evidence
of a limited number of relatively recent incidents does not preclude the Crown
from proving
the alleged tendency in a more comprehensive way by reference to
relevant historical incidents. Proof of the tendency in that way
increase the prospects of a guilty verdict, but that is not unfair
characterisation of the substance of the proven tendency in [29] is a
re-statement (in slightly different terms) of the several
distinct tendencies or
sub-tendencies alleged in the tendency notice, save for that in par (b)(ii). The
significance of the asserted
sub-tendency in par (b)(ii) is that a tendency to
engage in multiple sequential applications of force and/or pausing to obtain a
weapon or replacement weapon suggest an intent to cause not only additional harm
but also more serious harm. Indeed the use of a
weapon, whether deployed at the
outset or at a later stage in an assault, is itself an indication of intent to
cause harm and, depending
on the facts, serious harm. I will say more about par
(b)(ii) in [50] below.
‘numerous incidents’ involving the deceased, referred to in [29],
are incidents 14, 13, 9, 8, 4, 2 and 1 in Table
A. The incidents involving other
women are incident 1 of the MG incidents (pressed by the Crown) in Table C and
incident 1 of the
two PR incidents in Table E. There are nine incidents
altogether. I discuss all those incidents in [36] – [45] below.
[36] Incidents
14 and 13 of the incidents involving the deceased took place respectively in
June and November 2001.
[37] In incident
14, the heavily intoxicated accused assaulted the deceased with multiple
sequential applications of force: twice
punching her to the stomach; shortly
afterwards threatening her with a large rock and attempting to throw it at her
(until he was
restrained), then stabbing her several times with a spoon to her
stomach and buttocks. When arrested, the accused made a threat to
[38] In incident
13, there were two separate applications of force by the intoxicated accused. He
used a star picket to fracture the
deceased’s forearm. He then struck her
on the head.
[39] The first
incident involving PR took place in August 2005. The accused stabbed the victim
multiple times with a long pair of
scissors to the forearm and buttocks, in the
process causing severe muscle damage to her left arm.
[40] Incident 9
of the incidents involving the deceased took place
in August 2009. There were two separate applications of force by the intoxicated
accused. He threw a tennis ball-sized rock at the deceased, causing a scalp
laceration and bleeding, and then bit deceased to the
cheek causing a fresh
wound in existing scar tissue.
[41] Incident 8
of the incidents involving the deceased took place in May 2011. There were
multiple sequential applications of force,
starting with the accused pushing the
deceased to the ground and kicking her to the hip causing an extensive haematoma
and a lumbar
transverse process fracture. The accused was wearing steel-capped
boots. He kicked the deceased to the left eye causing a 4 cm open
wound. He also
struck the deceased with a rock to the left side of her head causing a 3 cm
scalp wound.
[42] Incident 1
of the MG incidents took place in May 2017.
were two separate applications of force by the intoxicated accused. He first
choked the victim with both hands to the point
where she could not breathe. He
then armed himself with a large stick and re-commenced the assault on the victim
by striking her
above the elbow causing a fracture of the left distal
[43] Incident 4
of the incidents involving the deceased took place in June 2022. The accused
struck the deceased to the back several
times with a large rock, causing
tenderness over the mid-thoracic spine and posterior ribs.
[44] Incident 2
of the incidents involving the deceased took place in September 2022. There were
two kinds of application of force
by the accused. He first hit her three times
to the head with a rock, causing a laceration to her forehead and bleeding. He
dropped the rock and scratched the deceased on the neck, causing cuts and
abrasions. After his arrest, he made a threat (to make
the deceased bleed)
indicative of an intent to cause serious harm or, at least, a state of mind in
which he envisaged causing serious
harm to the deceased, whether by use of a
weapon or with his bare hands.
[45] Incident 1
of the incidents involving the deceased took place on 6 July 2023, just over a
week before her death. The accused
threatened to hit the deceased with an axe.
The specific reference to a sharp and heavy weapon is indicative of an intent to
serious harm or, at least, a state of mind in which the accused envisaged
causing serious harm to the deceased by use of the axe.
[46] Eight of
the nine incidents took place over a period of 21 years, from mid-2001 to late
2022. For present purposes, I will treat
the two incidents in 2001 as one,
notwithstanding that they took place five months apart. For the same reason, I
will treat the two
incidents in 2022 as one incident. It can be seen that
incidents took place in 2001, 2005, 2009, 2011, 2017 and 2022. The gaps in
between incidents are respectively four years, four years, two years, six years
and five years. The average gap is about four
years. I note the average gap
between incidents
would be considerably less than that.
[47] There is an
explanation or partial explanation for the gaps. For example, the accused served
a gaol sentence of three years and
four months from 26 August 2005 to 25
December 2008 for, inter alia, unlawfully causing grievous harm to PR in August
2005. The accused
was sentenced to a gaol term of four years and six months for
unlawfully causing serious harm to MG on 24 May 2017; he was in prison
May 2017 until released on parole on 14 December 2020. His criminal record
(exhibit P7) provides evidence of several other
prison sentences for violent
offending from 2001 onwards, including a sentence of two years (with a
non-parole period of 14 months)
for the aggravated assault of the deceased in
November 2001, and a sentence of five months (suspended after four months) for
aggravated assault of the deceased in August 2009.
[48] The accused
spent more than eight years in gaol from mid-2001 to late 2022. The nature of
the alleged tendency is such that it
would not manifest during the periods of
time the accused spent in custody.
[49] I accept
the Crown submission that the accused’s tendency to have a particular
state of mind involved a persisting mindset
that was enduring, and
“triggered from time to
It is not necessary
for me to make a finding as to the precise trigger for each incident, whether it
was alcohol or sexual jealousy,
or a combination, or some other trigger.
numerous incidents summarized in [36] – [45] provide proof of the tendency
described in [29] above. They also provide
proof of the tendency alleged in par
(b)(ii) of the tendency notice. The accused’s conduct and words attributed
to him demonstrate
an intent to cause serious harm and/or a state of mind in
which he envisaged intentionally causing serious harm and/or represented
attempt to cause serious harm and/or actually causing serious harm. Of the nine
incidents identified by me, five involved multiple
applications of different
kinds of force.
involved the deployment of at least one weapon. A further three incidents
involved the deployment of the same weapon several
In two of the incidents,
the accused made serious threats: that he would hit the deceased and make her
bleed; and that he would hit
her with an axe. In four or possibly five
incidents, the accused was intoxicated or had been
The combined evidence
has significant probative value. It is not necessary for all aspects of the
alleged tendency (or sub-tendencies)
to be present in each incident relied
conclusion, I am satisfied that evidence of the nine incidents has significant
probative value in that it could rationally
affect to a significant degree the
assessment of the probability of whether the accused struck or otherwise applied
force to the
deceased with an intention to cause serious harm. I am further
satisfied that the probative value of that evidence outweighs the
unfair prejudice to the accused.
[52] This ruling
is intended to permit the Crown to lead tendency evidence limited to the
incidents specified by me. I have not determined
objections or dealt with
defence argument in relation to admissibility on grounds other than tendency
(and consideration of prejudicial
effect under
--------------------
Amended Outline dated 6 June
The head section weighed about 1.8
Hypovolaemic
emergency condition in which severe blood or other fluid loss (for example, from
internal bleeding) makes the heart unable
to pump enough blood to the body. This
Outline, 6 June 2025, par 42
Ebborn v The King
[2025] NTCCA 2
[2022] NSWCCA 145
per Bastin AJA, Hamill J and Dhanji J agreeing at [53] and [54]
respectively.
[2004] NSWCCA
, per Howie J; Santow JA and Bell J agreeing.
R v Cittadini
[2008] NSWCCA 256
(2008) 189 A
– [23] per Simpson J; McClellan CJ at CL agreeing.
Jacara Pty Ltd v Perpetual
Trustees WA Ltd
[2000] FCA 1886
(2000) 180 ALR 569
–[73]; S Odgers,
Evidence Law
, Thompson Law Book Co, Looseleaf Service, [EA.97.120];
(1996) 89 A Crim R 457
(1997) 91 A Crim R 356
(1997) 42 NSWLR 702.
[2005] NSWCCA 437
(2005) 227 ALR 311
[2009] NSWCCA 306
(2009) 201 A Crim R 451
DSJ v The Queen; NS v The Queen
[2012] NSWCCA 9
(2012) 215 A Crim R 349
[71], [72];
(1997) 91 A Crim R 356
op cit, [EA.97.120];
[2005] NSWCCA 437
(2005) 158 A Crim R 504
[2009] NSWCCA 306
(2009) 201 A Crim R 451
DSJ v Director of Public
Prosecutions (Cth)
[2012] NSWCCA 9
(2012) 215 A Crim R 349
Defence written
submissions in reply, 27 June 2025, par 15.
GBF v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 135
See the discussion of
‘prejudicial effect’ and ‘unfair prejudice’ in
[2009] NSWCCA 306
201 A Crim R 451
– [59] per Campbell JA. See also
[2018] HCA 40
Oral submission in reply, 11
Incidents 14, 9, 8, and 2
involving the deceased, and the incident involving MG.
Incident 13 and 4 involving the
deceased, and the incident involving PR.
Incidents 14, 13, 9 (and
possibly 4) involving the deceased, and the incident involving MG.
See, by way of example,
Lynch v The King
[2025] NTCCA 5
– [49], [77].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (314 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter