URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTRTCmr/2015/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:22:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Tate -v- MPZ Builders Pty Ltd [2015] NTRTCmr 19 (15 May 2015)
REASONS FOR THE ORDER OF THE COMMISSIONER OF TENANCIES
INQUIRY - Tuesday, 7 April 2015
ALAN TATE (‘Tenant’)
MPZ BUILDERS PTY LTD (‘Landlord’)
RT1415-0587
This is a determination of an Application by the Tenant dated 20 March 2015
(“the Application”) in respect of premises
being 140 Flynn
Circuit, Bellamack in the Northern Territory of Australia (‘the
premises’), seeking orders under the
Residential Tenancies Act
(‘the Act’) as follows:
Termination
and Permission for Tenant to Give Up Possession pursuant to section 96C(3)
and 100A(2) of the Act.
Compensation
pursuant to section 122 of the Act.
A Notice of Inquiry dated 24
March 2015 was posted to the parties. The Inquiry was conducted on Tuesday, 7
April 2015. The following
parties appeared at the Inquiry and made
submissions:
Tate, Applicant/Tenant in the company of his wife, Jasmin Tate; and
Ryan, Senior Property Manager, Complete Real Estate NT for MPZ Builders Pty Ltd,
Respondent/Landlord
The evidence before the Inquiry consisted of the
documents submitted by the Applicant/Tenant in support of the Application and
under tab “Applicant’s documents” on the Commissioner of
Tenancies file numbered RT1415-0587 including:
of Claims dated 20/03/15
Declaration
to Landlord to Remedy Breach (RT04b) dated 12/03/15
between the Parties (various dates)
Declaration dated 9 April 2015
to the Respondent/Landlord’s response to the Applicant/Tenant’s
Statutory Declaration
Advertisement
of the premises with photographs
The Respondent/Landlord’s documents consisted of a bundle of
documents comprising emails between the parties from 5 February
to 26 March
2015, a work order dated 24 February 2015, two handwritten pages of notes,
a copy of the RT04b Notice to Landlord, Unattested
Declaration of the
Applicant/Tenant and copy of Section 96C of the Act. These documents are kept
under tab “Respondent’s
documents” on the Commissioner of
Tenancies file numbered RT1415-0587.
I also took oral evidence from both parties in the Inquiry.
On the basis of the above evidence, I find there is a tenancy agreement
between the Landlord and the Tenant in respect of the premises
meaning of and subject to the provisions of the Act. The tenancy agreement is
the standard REINT lease. The key details
of the tenancy agreement are as
Duration: Fixed term commencing 27 August 2014 and ending 25 August
Rent: $ 720.00 per week payable weekly/fortnightly in advance
Security Deposit $ 2,880.00
The Notice to Landlord to Remedy Breach (RT04b)
The Applicant/Tenant served the RT04b on the Respondent/Landlord on 12 March
2015 (Breach Notice). The Breach Notice included the
information required under
section 96C of the Act. The compliance date of 20 March 2015 was more than 7
days after the service date
as required by the Act.
The requested repairs were:
Fix or Repair or Replace – the Air
Conditioner
Fix or Repair or Replace – the Electronic Sprinkler System
I find the Applicant/Tenant issued the Breach Notice in accordance with
section 96C of the Act which was personally served on the
/Landlord in accordance with section 154 of the Act.
According to the Applicant/Tenant, the Respondent/Landlord did not remedy the
breach or take steps to his satisfaction to do so by
the compliance date, in
accordance with section 96C(2)(d) of the Act.
The Application to the Commissioner of Tenancies (RT01)
The Applicant/Tenant lodged an Application to the Commissioner concerning the
RT04b seeking orders for termination of the tenancy
and permission to give up
possession of the premises. The Application included the required information
pursuant to section 126
of the Act. The application was made within 14 days of
the compliance date pursuant to section 96C(4) of the Act.
I am satisfied that the RT01 was completed in accordance with the Act.
The Submissions of the Applicant/Tenant
The Applicant/Tenant moved into the premises on 27 August 2014. The
photograph from the Advertisement shows a ground floor double-brick
has four bedrooms, two bathrooms and an open plan kitchen, dining and living
area (“the open area”). The
Advertisement also said that it had
“fully reticulated gardens”.
The Applicant/Tenant said that any repairs attended to by
the Senior Property Manager were carried out in good time and efficiently.
Applicant/Tenant said that any maintenance carried out by the Owner was always
delayed. According to the Applicant/Tenant,
the Owner of the premises would
always send a “mate” around to check on any reported defect and the
response times to
requests for repairs. This resulted in delays and some of
them were very long delays.
The Applicant/Tenant and his wife selected the premises
because it had a sprinkler system which was important because he is often
on business. In addition, his wife had back surgery scheduled and she would not
be able to water the garden. She was also
very house proud and they wanted a
During the initial inspection, the Applicant/Tenant noticed that the grass
was dying and uncared for. The Senior Property Manager
told him that, as the
premises had been vacant for a while, the Owner had the power disconnected while
it was unoccupied. That is
why the pop-up sprinklers had not been operating.
After they moved in, there were problems with the sprinkler system and the
air conditioners. These problems were reported to the
Senior Property Manager
on 28 August 2014.
It was later found that some of the problems were caused by the power being
turned off while the premises were unoccupied. For instance,
the sprinkler
system would not work properly once the power was back on.
The Applicant/Tenant said he was told that the Owner would not have the
sprinkler system repaired until the Dry season because there
should be enough
rain during the Wet to maintain the lawn and gardens.
At the time of declaring his Statutory Declaration on 9 April 2015, the
sprinkler system was still not operating.
Conditioner
On Friday, 6 February 2014, the Applicant/Tenant
notified the Senior Property Manager about the air conditioning. He said:
I wish to advise that the air conditioner in the main living room of the
house is not working. I phoned yesterday and spoke with
Jess and advised her of
the fault. She advised me that she would be organising repairs. Unfortunately
as you are aware the owners
of this property have failed to make good on their
promises to rectify a number of outstanding issues with the property and we are
concerned that we may be left without an air conditioner.
Both my wife and myself understand that this is through no fault of Complete
Realty but rather reflects on the owners unwillingness
to maintain the property
as per their obligations as per their obligations of the tenancy agreement.
My wife and I feel that in the Darwin climate an air conditioner is an
essential part of a house and must be maintained in good working
Therefore we bring this matter to your attention and serve notice that the
repair has been requested and phoned through yesterday.
This email is
confirmation of this request.
This air conditioner serviced the kitchen, dining, lounge, living areas and
the hallways (ie the open plan area). The main bedroom
had its own air
conditioner which was working.
The Applicant/Tenant and his wife were confined to their bedroom any time
they were at home because it was the only room which had
air conditioning. His
wife found it uncomfortable to be on the bed because of her back and would have
been more comfortable in the
lounge room while she was recuperating from
surgery. He said that the loss of air conditioning was during the hottest part
year and that it was “really most unbearable”.
The Senior Property Manager attended the premises at a routine inspection on
18 February 2015. She told the Applicant/Tenant that
the house must be very hot
and uncomfortable to live in without the air conditioner (in the open plan
She later advised the Applicant/Tenant that she had told the Owner about the
problem and that he said he would have a mate come out
to look at it. He wanted
to use his own contractors.
There was an attendance at the premises by the Owner about 21 February 2015
to inspect the air conditioner; he found that he could
not fix it.
The manufacturer of the air conditioner eventually became involved and it
became a warranty repair. The manufacturer worked out the
problem and said, on
12 March 2015, that the air conditioner needed a part. Later, the
manufacturer advised that they would not
have the part until May 2015. The
Senior Property Manager negotiated for the repair to occur earlier than that.
She also asked
the manufacturer if they would provide a portable air conditioner
while waiting for it to be repaired. They said “no”.
Email correspondence shows that the Senior Property Manager kept the
Applicant/Tenant informed of all communications with the manufacturer
conditioner.
The Applicant/Tenant and his wife went away between 23 and 26 March because
it was too hot to stay at home.
The air conditioning was eventually repaired on 26 March 2015, almost 7 weeks
after it was reported in February. (I note here that
it was first reported in
August 2014).
Back Surgery
In the meantime, the Applicant/Tenant’s wife had
back surgery in Sydney on 14 September 2014 and again on 10 December 2014.
had to travel in a wheelchair. She could not walk before the back surgery.
At the time the Applicant/Tenant and his wife moved in, they
found many of the lights were not working. There was a problem with
going off on a regular basis. There was a problem with the gas cooktop not
working properly, the roller door would not
operate and also, there were
blowflies coming in under the front door which was distressing for the
Applicant/Tenant’s Japanese-born
These were also reported with the main problems to the Senior Property
Manager on 28 August 2014.
The Applicant/Tenant and his wife were having trouble sleeping because of the
problems with the air conditioning and also the noise
from the smoke alarms.
The Applicant/Tenant eventually purchased batteries and six light globes to fix
part of the problem. However,
seven more light globes needed replacing at a
cost of $5.00 each. They decided to wait and let the Senior Property Manager
them because of the expense.
On 5 September 2014, while the Applicant/Tenant was away on business, his
wife reported finding an intruder in the kitchen. She is
Japanese and has
little English. He said in the Inquiry that it “freaked her out”.
She was terrified. Apparently,
the Owner did not realise that he had to give
notice to attend the premises, knock at the front door and wait to be let in.
to the Applicant/Tenant, this was not an isolated incident. The
Owner has been advised by the Senior Property Manager of his obligations
the Act about attending the premises.
The operation of the garage roller door was also affected by the power being
disconnected and would not work properly once the power
was back on. The
Applicant/Tenant said it could be operated manually. However, the
Applicant/Tenant’s wife was unable to
manually close the roller door
because of the surgery to her back.
A request for repair to the roller door was made on 15 September 2015.
The Owner came and had a look at it. He lubricated the door despite a notice
on the door stating “Under no circumstances should
this sliding door and
or its slides be lubricated”. A garage door technician looked at it
sometime later and said it was
an insurance issue because the door had been
lubricated which damaged the door. The door was eventually fixed on 6 October
The Applicant/Tenant and his wife have lost all faith in the Owner to keep
his obligations under the tenancy agreement and the Act.
The relationship
between the parties has deteriorated as a result of what Applicant/Tenant and
his wife have experienced as tenants.
The Submissions of the Respondent/Landlord
The Senior Property Manager appeared for the Respondent/Landlord at the
She confirmed that the Owner disconnected the power at the premises while it
was unoccupied and that the Owner would fix the sprinkler
system in time for the
Dry Season.
She said in the Inquiry that she had to explain to the Owner that he had to
give notice to attend the premises to carry out repairs,
and knock at the front
door and wait to be invited in.
The Senior Property Manager said that the Owner was aware of the
Applicant/Tenant’s wife’s medical issues. She also said
accepted as true the Applicant/Tenant’s submissions about his wife’s
medical issues at Inquiry.
The Applicant/Tenant gave oral notice of the faulty air conditioner on 5
February 2015. He confirmed it writing on the following
In an email dated 6 February 2015, the Senior Property Manager issued a work
order to MPZ Builders Pty Ltd (the Owner’s building
company) to inspect
the faulty air conditioner.
On 10 February 2015, Andrew South Principal & Director Complete Real
Estate, was advised that there has been no response to the
work order.
On 11 February 2015, the Applicant/Tenant was advised that Mr South would be
liaising with the Owner directly about the air conditioner
On 12 February 2015, the Applicant/Tenant was advised the Owner would be
attending the premises to inspect the air conditioner.
There were issues over
access to the premises because the Applicant/Tenant was not going to be at home
at the time the Owner was
There were also emails concerning an issue over a “certificate of
installation” of the air conditioner which was presumed
to have existed
and did not.
On 24 February 2015, a work order was sent to the manufacturer. “Please
attend to living room aircon. It wont work. Unit under
warranty. Proof of
purchase and installation attached. Tenant will not be home. Please call ____
(Real Estate Agent) to arrange
access to the house”. The manufacturer
sent a confirmation of receipt the same day.
The manufacturer arranged to be at the premises on 4 March 2015. It
identified the problem (the PC board needed replacing). The
part was ordered
and another day was arranged to attend and install the part. That date was
cancelled because the part was not available.
The Senior Property Manager
followed up with the Applicant/Tenant on 11 March 2015.
On 11 March 2015, the
Applicant/Tenant emailed Complete Real Estate:
I haven’t heard anything, and to be honest we desperately need the air
conditioning fixed as it is really hot at the moment.
Can you advise what more could be done to have this fixed.
She responded the next day to say the part was on back order (12 March 2015
at 9.31am).
On 12 March 2015, Applicant/Tenant attended Complete Real Estate and served
the RT04b Notice.
The Applicant/Tenant emailed the other Property Manager at 10.33 am to advise
her that he had served the Breach Notice on the office.
On the same day, Mr South wrote:
We understand your discomfort regarding the air conditioner not working and
empathise with you, but as you are well aware every effort
has been made to
rectify the situation and you have been kept informed throughout the whole
process. Currently the repair contractor
is waiting for the parts required
(hopefully they will be here next week which you are well aware of) and once
again they as well
as our office have been in contact with you keeping you up to
date on a regular basis. Unfortunately the landlord is unable to personally
manufacture the part and has taken all reasonable measures to fix the issue so
therefore your claim for compensation will not be
considered.
In regard to the automatic watering system you have been informed that the
landlord will be repairing it prior to the dry season and
that currently in the
height of the wet season it is not required.
Regarding the early release from your tenancy agreement. You have never been
informed or lead to believe by this office that the landlord
would consider such
a thing, you have only ever been directed to put whatever requests you have in
I hope this clarifies any misunderstandings you have.
The Applicant/Tenant responded to Mr South’s email on the same day.
Given the circumstances, it was a very polite email. He
was hopeful that the
repairs would happen soon. He requested a meeting with Mr South to discuss the
matter. He said that they had
been renting a property for weeks which had an
air conditioner which did not work and compensation was a reasonable request.
On 18 March 2015, one of the notes said,
Spoke to [the manufacturer] ETA middle of May, asked for Supervisor to call,
not good enough”.
The manufacturer returned the call and, according to the notes, the
“job” was “escalated”.
There were several more phone calls about accessing and shipping the part
sooner, and who would pay.
There was no more communication with the Applicant/Tenant until 19 March
On the same day, another Property Manager confirmed with the Applicant/Tenant
that the part was not available until May.
The other Property Manager told the manufacturer that the May date for
installing the part was unacceptable. She also asked if they
would supply a
portable air conditioner until the other one was fixed. The request was
declined. The manufacturer phoned back and
said they would send the part
When I asked the Senior Property Manager in the Inquiry about the idea of the
Owner installing a portable air conditioner, she was
unable to say whether
Mr South had asked the Owner about that.
On 19 March 2015, the Applicant/Tenant renewed his request for compensation
in an email.
On 20 March 2015, the manufacturer contacted Complete Real Estate and said
that would replace the air conditioner.
On 23 March 2015, the manufacturer contacted Complete Real Estate and said
that the part would arrive on 26 March. The Senior Property
Manager emailed Mr
South and the Applicant/Tenant.
The note for 26 March 2015 said that the make “attended today. All
Done”. This was confirmed in an email from the Senior
Property Manager to
the Applicant/Tenant.
On 26 March 2015, the Applicant/Tenant emailed the Senior Property Manager
and thanked her and other staff for their assistance but
said that he and his
wife were without air conditioning for 2 months and without a sprinkler system
for 6 months. He said he would
pursue his request to have the lease terminated
for reasons previously discussed with her. He added
We do not accept that a property we are paying rent for and the use of the
facilities provided as part of that lease arrangement especially
the maintenance
of items can be delayed months and months simply the owners determine that we
the tenants do not require the use
of those items (
In the Inquiry, in regards to the roller door on the garage, the Senior
Property Manager said that it was not intended to be operated
manually. On 30
September 2014, she advised the Applicant/Tenant that a new motor had to be
installed. It was eventually repaired
on 15 October 2014. This was six
weeks after it was reported.
The Respondent/Landlord’s written response to the
Applicant/Tenant’s Statutory Declaration included a statement that the
management agreement between the Owner and Complete Real Estate includes a
clause which permits the Owner to use his contractors.
They advised the
Applicant/Tenant that the owner uses contractors. The Owner is a builder by
trade. A copy of this agreement was
not provided to the Inquiry.
Judicial Notice
There is a doctrine of evidence which allows a court or tribunal to recognise
and accept the existence of a particular fact commonly
known by persons of
average intelligence without establishing its existence by admitting evidence in
a civil or criminal proceeding.
Both parties in evidence referred to the relevant period (ie February to
March 2015) being in the Wet Season. This period is one
of the hottest and
humid of the year in the Top End.
According to the Bureau of Meteorology website (BOM), there is no weather
station at Bellamack where the premises is located. The
closest two weather
stations to Bellamack which carry out “daily weather observations”
are Darwin (14.2 kms) and Middle
Point (35.7kms).
The mean or average daily temperatures for Middle Point for February 2015,
were 23.7 to 35.1, the highest temperature being 37.7 recorded
on 6 February
2015; and for March were 24.2 to 34.8, the highest temperature being 38.4
recorded on 21 March 2015. The mean relative
humidity at 9.00am for February
was 81% (the highest reaching 92% on 20 February). The mean relative
humidity at 9.00am for March
was 79% (the highest reaching 91% on 25 March).
The mean or average daily temperatures for Darwin for February 2015, were
24.9 to 32.6, the highest temperature being 34.3 recorded
on 19 February 2015;
and for March were 25.5 to 32.7, the highest temperature being 34.7 recorded on
12 March 2015. The mean relative
humidity at 9.00am for February was 80% (the
highest reaching 94% on 23 February). The mean relative humidity at 9.00am for
was 78% (the highest reaching 96% on 27 March).
Insofar as rainfall is concerned, BOM said that “For northern Australia
(defined as the region north of the South Australia–Northern
border), February–April 2015 was the eighth-driest on record, with
29% of northern Australia experiencing rainfall
in the lowest 10% of historical
observations (decile 1)”. The closest weather station to Bellamack,
Palmerston, recorded no
rain for 17 days, and 4 days of less than 10 mls of rain
in February 2015. In March, it recorded no rain for 16 days, and 7 days
than 10 mls of rain.
The claims by the Applicant/Tenant raise many issues under the Act and the
tencnay agreement.
Relevantly, section 57 provides for a landlord’s obligation to
(1) Subject to this Part, it is a term of a tenancy agreement that the
must ensure that the premises and ancillary property are in a
reasonable state of repair when a tenant enters into occupation of the
must maintain the premises and ancillary property in a reasonable
state of repair, having regard to their age, character and prospective
A landlord is not in breach of the term specified under
subsection (1) unless he or she:
(a) has notice of the defect requiring repair; and
(b) fails to act with reasonable diligence to have the defect
(3) A landlord is not in breach of the term specified under
subsection (1) if:
(a) the repairs were known to the tenant to be required at the time of
entering into the residential premises agreement;
(b) the repairs are not emergency repairs within the meaning of
section 63;
(c) the tenant has, in writing, waived the right to have the particular
repairs made; and
(d) the premises are habitable and meet all health and safety requirements
specified under any Act.
(4) For the purposes of this section,
ancillary property
includes gardening or watering equipment or other chattels provided in relation
to a garden but does not include vegetation, other
than a tree that poses a risk
to a person's safety.
The tenancy agreement provides:
THE OWNER AGREES:
To provide and maintain the Property in good and tenantable repair
and fit for human habitation
(*) subject to the obligations of the Tenant
under this Agreement and having regard to the age, character and prospective
the Property.
Cl 46 To comply with all lawful requirements in regards to health and safety
standards with respect to the Property.
my emphasis
The issues are discussed in the following paragraphs.
Conditioner
The premises was let on the basis that it had “air
conditioning in the bedrooms and the open plan areas.
On 5 and 6 February 2015, the Applicant/Tenant notified (orally and in
writing, on the respective dates), the Senior Property Manager
with the air conditioning, as required by the tenancy agreement (Clause 12 of
the tenancy agreement) and the Act
(section 58).
Despite a work order being issued on 6 February 2015 to MPZ Builders Pty Ltd,
the Owner did not carry out an inspection of the air
conditioner until some two
weeks later on 21 February 2015. A work order was emailed to the
manufacturer on 24 February 2015.
The Senior Property Manager was diligent in her dealings with the
manufacturer of the air conditioner to effect the repair once it
warranty matter. She kept the Applicant/Tenant up to date with all the
However, the air conditioner took seven weeks to be repaired from the
February 2015 notice.
The period of time in which these events occurred is one of the hottest
periods in the Top End calendar as the information from BOM
demonstrates (see
discussion of relative temperatures for February and March above under
“Judicial Notice”).
The temperatures during this time (the highest reaching 38.4 degrees on
21 March 2015) and humidity (the highest reaching 96% on 27
2015) are very high at this time of year.
No one could live in a house in the style of the premises without a fully
functioning air conditioning system for all usable spaces
inside the premises.
On the day the Applicant/Tenant lodged the Breach Notice, Mr South admonished
him for complaining about how long the process was taking.
Mr South said that
they were doing everything possible and keeping him up-to-date on the progress.
What Mr South did not take into consideration were the extreme climactic
conditions and the entirely unsuitable living conditions
Applicant/Tenant and his wife during the period the air conditioner was not
working; especially as she was recovering from
two serious episodes of back
surgery which had left her quite incapacitated.
The Senior Property Manager inquired with the manufacturer of the air
conditioner if they would provide a portable unit, which was
declined. That
option was not put to the Owner.
I am aware that the Senior Property Manager did not have very much influence
over the hastening of the manufacturer’s operations
in the supply and
installation of the part. Although, she did facilitate the repair being carried
out in March rather than May.
It was unreasonable of the Owner and/or Mr South to expect the
Applicant/Tenant and his wife to reside in this style of premises with
functioning air conditioner in the main bedroom for a period of seven weeks in
the hottest time of the year. I am also
of the view that it was dangerous
to do so and put the safety and welfare of the Applicant/Tenant and his wife at
The Owner and/or Mr South could have insisted very early in the piece on the
immediate replacement of the faulty air conditioner especially
since it was
under warranty.
Alternately, the Owner and/or Mr South could have taken remedial action by
installing one or two portable air conditioners in the
open plan area while he
and his wife were waiting for the manufacturer to carry out repair. I believe
that the hire and delivery
of one such unit may cost in the vicinity of $350.00
The provision of air conditioning is, therefore, a term of the tenancy
The Respondent/Landlord has breached that term by failing to act with
reasonable diligence to have the defect repaired after he was
first notified on
6 February 2015 (section 57(1) & (2)).
In failing to act with reasonable diligence, the Respondent/Landlord allowed
unliveable conditions to persist in the premises without
taking any remedial
action. In my view, the open plan area of the premises was not habitable and
did not meet health and safety
requirements (section 57(1) & (3)(d)).
Sprinkler System
The premises was let on the basis that it had “fully reticulated
There was an assumption held by the Respondent/Landlord that the Wet would
provide sufficient rain for the garden and he decided it
was not necessary to
fix the sprinkler system.
Climactic conditions have changed over the years in the Top End and that
assumption does not hold any longer.
In the Wet of 2014/2015, BOM reported it as “one of driest on
In fact, for more than half the period in February and March (59 days) there
were 33 days recorded with no rain and 11 days recorded
with less than
10 mls of rain.
It is more likely than not that the garden suffered as a result of the
failure of the sprinkler system to provide adequate water.
The Applicant/Tenant selected this premises on the basis of representations
in the Advertisement and wanted a lawn and garden with
an electronic watering
system because of his work commitments which took him away from home for periods
The provision of fully reticulated gardens is, therefore, a term of the
tenancy agreement.
The Respondent/Landlord breached that term by not carrying out the repair
when he was first notified on 28 August 2014 and given notice
under the Act on
12 March 2015 (section 57(1) & (2)).
Breach Notice
On 12 March 2015, the Applicant/Tenant served the Breach Notice on the
Respondent/Landlord in relation to the air conditioning and
sprinkler system
By 26 March 2015, the air conditioner had been repaired.
However, there was no attempt to repair the sprinkler system and it remained
inoperable.
The Respondent/Landlord did not remedy the breach in relation to the
sprinkler system or take steps to the Applicant/Tenant's satisfaction
as required by the Breach Notice.
Other Issues
It is disturbing that the Respondent/Landlord has demonstrated so little
familiarity and knowledge of his obligations under the Act.
Tenants have a right under a tenancy agreement and the Act to quiet enjoyment
of the premises (section 65). A landlord must not cause
interference with the
reasonable peace or privacy of a tenant in the tenant's use of the premises
(Clause 49 tenancy agreement and
section 66). A landlord must give a tenant at
least 24 hours’ notice before attending a property to carry out repairs
71) and it goes without saying that the landlord should knock on the
door and wait to be invited in. On the evidence of the Applicant/Tenant,
which the Senior Property Manager supported, the Owner has breached the
Applicant/Tenant’s quiet enjoyment of the premises
and privacy.
A landlord has obligations to ensure that smoke alarms are fully functioning
before a tenant takes up residence in a premises. If
advised by a tenant that
the smoke alarm is not working, the landlord is obliged to attend to it as soon
as practicable. (See Clauses
40 and 41 tenancy agreement, and reg13D
Emergency Regulations
). Although I have not heard evidence from the
Respondent/Landlord in relation to the allegations about the smoke alarms, it
not denied by the Senior Property Manager in any oral or written
submissions.
There is no stated time in which a landlord is obliged to carry out repairs
once a tenant has put him on notice of such repairs.
Section 96C(2)(d) of the
Act states that a compliance date for the carrying out of repairs under the Act
must not be less than seven
days. At the very least, seven days is a good guide
for determining the time in which an identified defect in a property ought to
investigated in the first instance. It would appear, based on the
Applicant/Tenant’s evidence, that the Respondent/Landlord
has been taking
far longer than seven days to respond to notifications of defects in the
Relief sought
The Applicant/Tenant and his wife want to be compensated for the period in
which they did not have full access to their home because
of the loss of the air
conditioning in the open plan area.
The Applicant/Tenant seeks compensation of $50.00 per week for the period he
and his wife were without air conditioning. The rationale
for this is that he
sought information from the Office of the Commissioner of Tenancies which
recommended $100.00 per week for this
loss. He wanted a quick settlement and
offered $50.00 in earlier negotiations with Mr South. This offer was rejected.
The Applicant/Tenant also seeks an orders terminating the tenancy agreement
and granting him permission to give up possession of the
In the event that the above orders are made, the Applicant/Tenant seeks two
weeks to vacate for hardship reasons. His wife is incapacitated
due to her back
surgeries and she is unable to do much of the physical work required in moving
I find the Respondent/Landlord failed to act with reasonable diligence to
have the defect in the air conditioner repaired after he
was first notified on 6
February 2015 (section 57(1) & (2)).
I find the Respondent/Landlord has failed to remedy the defect in the
electronic sprinkler system and failed to satisfy the Applicant/Tenant
has taken steps to do so in accordance with the Breach Notice served upon him by
the Applicant/Tenant on 12 March 2015 (section
96C(2)(d)).
The Applicant/Tenant has lost all faith in the Respondent/Landlord to keep
his obligations under the Act and the tenancy agreement.
It is appropriate in the circumstances to make an order for termination of
the tenancy agreement and permission for the Applicant/Tenant
possession pursuant to section 96C(3) and 100A(2) of the Act.
Under the Act, an order for possession has effect on the date specified in
the order, which must be no later than 5 business days
after the date of the
order, unless the operation of the order is suspended under section 105 (section
I note the Applicant/Tenant’s wife’s medical condition and the
request for a two week period to vacate after the date
of the order for
possession. In the circumstances, I consider this a reasonable request. I note
the considerations at section 105(2)
in the making of an order extending the
period of time for possession for hardship reasons. I have no reason to doubt
the Applicant/Tenant
will default on the rent and none of the matters listed
under section 105(2(a) are relevant in this situation.
Claim for Compensation
The premises is a four bedroom house for which the Applicant/Tenant is paying
$720.00 per week. According to the Applicant/Tenant
the officers at the
Commissioner of tenancies recommended $100.00 per week to compensate for the
loss of amenity in the air conditioning
The area of the premises not available to the Applicant/Tenant due to the
non-functioning air conditioner located in the open plan
area comprised the
kitchen, dining, lounge, living areas and the hallways.
It is my view that a suitable arrangement for the installation of portable
air conditioners while waiting for a permanent solution
ought to have been
canvassed within 7 to14 days of the report of the defect to the Senior Property
Consequently, I will make an order for compensation pursuant to section 122
of the Act for five of the seven weeks the Applicant/Tenant
was without air
conditioning to the open plan area of the premises.
Given the area made unavailable, and based on a conservative estimate of the
useable space, the Applicant/Tenant was unable to use
at least one third of the
total premises.
A third of the rent is $240.00 per week, multiplied by five weeks amounts to
In making an order for compensation under section 122 of the Act, I have
taken into consideration that the Applicant/Tenant took all
reasonable steps to
comply with his obligations under the Act, he did not consent to the
Respondent/Landlord’s failure to meet
his obligations to repair the air
conditioner, the Applicant/Tenant received no compensation from the
Respondent/Landlord, and the
Applicant/Tenant and his wife took steps to
mitigate their loss by confining themselves to the only air conditioned area in
the premises
and by taking a short break away (section 122(3)).
Accordingly, I order that:
tenancy is terminated effective forthwith and the Applicant/Tenant shall give up
vacant possession of the premises to the Respondent/Landlord
being 140 Flynn
Circuit, Bellamack NT, effective as at 9.00am on Monday, 1 June 2015 pursuant to
section 96C(3) and 100A(2) of the
Respondent/Landlord is ordered to pay the Applicant/Tenant forthwith
compensation for the loss of air conditioning to the premises
for a period of
five weeks in the amount of $1,200.00 pursuant to section 122 of the
Dated this Friday, 15 May 2015
Gabrielle Martin
Delegate of the
Commissioner of Tenancies
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (177 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter