URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTADComm/2003/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:16:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ankin, Gavin & Ors v Northern Territory of Aust [2003] NTADComm 1 (12 March 2003)
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION COMMISSION
NORTHERN TERRITORY
First Applicant
REGGIE BARA
Second Applicant
MARCUS CAMERON
Third Applicant
STANLEY KERR
Fourth Applicant
CLARENCE MAMARIKA
Fifth Applicant
DESMOND MAMARIKA
Sixth Applicant
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
REASONS FOR DECISION
1. These proceedings concern complaints of discrimination made by six Aboriginal
men and their legal representatives employed by
the North Australian Aboriginal
Legal Aid Service. The complaints arise because the men allege that the
Northern Territory Interpreter
Service failed or refused to provide each of them
with interpreters of their own language for the purposes of understanding and
to various criminal charges that had been laid against
1. The complaints allege that:
(a) the Respondent through the Northern Territory Interpreter and Translation
Service (“NTITS”) refused or failed to
provide interpreters in
Anindilyawka, Burarra and Kunwinjku to enable NAALAS lawyers to communicate with
their clients;
(a) the Respondent through NTITS, refused or failed to provide interpreters in
these languages for the Complainants’ appearances
(a) by refusing or failing to provide interpreters the Respondent has failed to
accommodate a special need of the Complainants.
1. The background to the complaints is a very unfortunate failure by the
Government of the Northern Territory over many years to
provide an adequate
interpreter service for Aboriginal people. A failure which persisted despite
the creation of the NTITS until
< > when the Aboriginal
Interpreter Service was created.
1. The essence of the complaints is a very powerful moral and practical argument
that the Respondent should have provided Aboriginal
interpreter service. That
the policy decisions of the Government not to do so in the past were not only
wrong but were unjustifiable
as the provision of an Aboriginal interpreter
service has always been feasible.
1. However, when considering such complaints it is important to have regard to
what Justice Burchett said in
(1989) 84 ALJR 241
“... when one comes to a court of law it is necessary always to ensure
that lofty aspirations are not mistaken for the rules
of law which courts are
capable and fitted to enforce. It is essential that there be no mistake between
the functions that are performed
by the respective branches of government. It
is essential to understand that courts perform one function and the political
of government perform another. One can readily understand that there
may be disappointment in the performance by one branch or another
of government
of the functions which are allocated to it under our division of powers. But it
would be a mistake for one branch
of government to assume the functions of
another in the hope that thereby what is perceived to be an injustice can be
1. The following issues arise for determination in these
proceedings.
(a) What was the nature of the service provided by
(a) Did NTITS refuse or fail to provide interpreters to the NAALAS lawyers to
communicate with their clients?
(a) Did NTITS refuse or fail to provide interpreters in the above languages for
the Complainants’ appearances in Court?
(a) Did the Complainants have a special
1. As to the complaint made by Gavin Ankin, I make the following findings of
(a) Gavin Ankin is an Aboriginal man from Maningrida. His first language is
(a) On 1 August 1999, Mr Ankin was arrested in Maningrida. He was charged with
sexual intercourse without consent pursuant to section
192(3) of the
and refused bail: RB 41.
(a) On 3 August 1999, Mr Ankin appeared in the Magistrates Court in Darwin
before Wallace SM. Ms Gowans, a solicitor employed by
NAALAS appeared for Mr
Ankin. The Court file indicates that an interpreter was required for the
committal: RB 50. There is no evidence
that Ms Gowans made a request to the DPP
in accordance with its policy to provide an
interpreter.
(a) On 4 August 1999, Ms Gowans sent a fax to the NTITS requesting the services
of an interpreter in
‘Burarra’ (Maningrida)
: see RB pages
27-28. The request was for an interview to obtain instructions in relation to
bail to be held at the Berrimah Gaol
on 5 August 1999 and then for an interview
and court appearance on 13 August 1999.
(a) On 6 August 1999, Ms Price, the Director of the office of Ethnic Affairs,
wrote to Ms Gowans acknowledging receipt of her request
dated 4 August 1999: see
RB page 29. Ms Price indicates that as she has
‘advised on several
recent occasions, the NTITS does not provide interpreting services in Aboriginal
languages’.
The letter refers Ms Gowans to the
Aboriginal Development which has information on Aboriginal people who have
interpreting skills that may be of assistance
(a) On 9 August 1999, NAALAS undertook its own inquiry in relation to
identifying an interpreter. It was not until 11 August 1999,
that Ms Smith from
NAALAS spoke to Ms Burns, the Coordinator of the Victim’s Support Unit of
the DPP and requested that she
assist in finding a Burarra interpreter. The
note indicates that Ms Burns phoned back that afternoon with a list of possible
interpreters
which are then set out in the memorandum: RB page
(a) On 13 August 1999, Mr Ankin appeared in Court before Wallace SM. Mr
Strickland represented him and Mr Perry appeared for the
Crown. The file note,
which is set out at RB page 36, indicates that no application for bail was made
on 13 August 1999. Mr Strickland
sought that the matter be adjourned for the
purpose of obtaining a psychiatric report. Mr Strickland did not give evidence
the Commission but the file note indicates that an interpreter was
available for Mr Ankin for his court appearance on 13 August 1999:
(a) Mr Ankin next appeared on the adjourned application for bail on 20 August
1999. Ms Gowans appeared for him on this occasion
and Mr Perry appeared for the
Crown. There appears to ave been no attempt made by NAALAS to arrange an
interpreter for this date.
There was no request made to any person at either
the NTITS or the DPP. The bail application was adjourned and as a result of
discussions
between Ms Gowans and the Prosecutor, the Prosecutor agreed to
provide an interpreter.
(a) On 23 August 1999, the DPP wrote to NAALAS indicating that they would
provide an interpreter but not pay the costs of the interpreter
assisting them
to obtain instructions from their client.
(a) On the same day, Mr Ankin lodged a complaint of race
discrimination.
(a) On 25 August 1999, Mr Ankin again appeared in Court. On this occasion Mr
Strickland appeared for him. Bail was granted with
a $25,000 a surety and the
file indicates that an interpreter was present. The matter was then adjourned
for an oral committal to
13 September 1999.
(a) There were then a number of further Court appearances between 16 November
1999 and 19 May 2000. On 19 May 2000, Mr Ankin appeared
in the Supreme Court
for sentencing before Chief Justice Martin. He was represented by Mr Strickland
and an interpreter was present.
He was sentenced to three years imprisonment
commencing from 16 November 1999: see RB pages
(a) In the complaint Mr Ankin alleges at RB page 16 that he was not provided
with the assistance of an interpreter in the Darwin
Magistrates Court on 3
August 1999. However, there was no request for an interpreter until 4 August
1999. This request was refused
by the NTITS on 6 August
(a) In relation to the effect of the alleged discrimination (see RB page 16), Mr
Ankin alleges that he could not be represented without
an interpreter and that
NAALAS was unable to obtain instructions in relation to making an application
for bail. It is alleged that
his detention between 3 August and 13 August was
solely attributable to the lack of an interpreter. It was further alleged that
his detention from 20 August to 25 August is also attributable to a lack of an
interpreter. However, the days spent in custody were
taken into account during
sentencing: see RB 48.
(a) There is no evidence that the time spent in detention between 3 - 13 August
and 20 - 25 August 1999 was a direct or indirect
result of not having an
interpreter. This is particularly so when there is evidence that an interpreter
was provided when a request
was made to the DPP. An interpreter was available
on 13 August 1999. It is clear that it was possible for an interpreter to be
organised prior to each court appearance and the failure of NAALAS lawyers to
attend to those matters should be a matter for which
the lawyers are
responsible. There can be no basis for the claim that the Government refused to
provide an interpreter on those
(a) In relation to the claim that Mr Ankin had a ‘special need’ on
3, 13 and 20 August 1999, there was no evidence to
lead to establish his
particular need and then that it was a special need because of his race. On 13
August 1999, he did have the
assistance of an interpreter. For the appearances
on 3 and 20 August 1999, no request had been
1. As to the complaint made by Reggie Bara, I make the following findings of
(a) Reggie Bara is from Groote Eylandt. His first language is
Anindilyawka.
(a) Following Mr Bara’s failure to appear in Court on 16 March 1999, a
warrant was issued for his arrest. Mr Bara was arrested
on 17 March 1999 at
Groote Eylandt and refused bail.
(a) On 18 March 1999, Mr Bara appeared in Court and Mr Batton, a solicitor
employed by NAALAS, appeared for him. Mr Peach appeared
for the Crown. No
application for bail was made and Mr Batton sought an adjournment. No request
was made for an interpreter and
there is no notation on the Court file about the
need for an interpreter. Mr Batton was not called to give evidence, so the only
inference which may be drawn is that any evidence he might give would not assist
(a) The matter was next in Court on 22 March 1999 and Mr Batton again appeared
for Mr Bara. Again no application for bail was made.
No request for an
interpreter was made.
(a) On 24 March 1999, Mr Bara was in Court represented by Mr Kenna, a solicitor
employed by NAALAS. He did not make an application
for bail. He did not refer
to the need for an interpreter.
(a) On 5 May 1999, Mr Bara appeared in Court. Ms McClintic, who did not give
evidence before this Commission, appeared for Mr Bara.
The Court files indicate
that Mr Bara would require an interpreter: see RB page 95. There is no evidence
that Ms McClintic made
a request pursuant to the DPP
(a) On 10 May 1999, Ms Gowans advised the Registrar of the Court of the need for
an interpreter for Mr Bara. There was no request
made to the NTITS and no
request to the DPP.
(a) On 12 May 1999, Mr Bara appeared in Court before Cavanagh SM. Ms Gowans
appeared for Mr Bara. During the committal proceeding,
Ms Gowans made an
application to abort the committal proceedings on the basis that no interpreter
was present in Court. Ms Musk
opposed the application and Cavanagh SM agreed
reluctantly to adjourn the proceedings part heard: RB page 96. There was an
to 17 May 1999 to hear argument about whether he required
interpreter.
(a) On 13 May 1999, the Registrar contacted Ms Gowans about the request for an
interpreter.
(a) On 16 May 1999, Mr Sheldon attended the Berrimah Correctional Centre and
undertook an interpreter test for Mr Bara. A copy of
the interpreter test for
Mr Bara is Exhibit C. The purpose of the test being to demonstrate that Mr Bara
did require an interpreter.
It was prepared to respond to Cavanagh SM’s
query about the need for an interpreter.
(a) On 17 May 1999, the matters were stood over to 21 May 1999 because of other
Court commitments of Ms Gowans and Ms Musk.
(a) On 21 May 1999, Mr Bara and Mr D Mamarika appeared in Court. Ms Gowans
appeared for both defendants. An interpreter was organised
and paid for by the
DPP to assist both defendants in the proceedings that
(a) On 7 June 1999, Mr Bara appeared in the Supreme Court for mention by way of
(a) On 7 July 1999, Mr Bara appeared in the Supreme Court for mention. The
matter was adjourned.
(a) On 22 July 1999, Mr Strickland and Mr Brown of NAALAS visited Mr Bara and Mr
D Mamarika at Berrimah. An interpreter was present
for the purpose of obtaining
instructions.
(a) On 8 September 1999, Mr Bara appeared in the Supreme Court and pleaded
guilty to five charges. He was represented by Mr Strickland
and the matter was
adjourned for sentencing. On that occasion an interpreter was present, arranged
and paid for by the DPP.
(a) On 22 September 1999, Mr Bara lodged a complaint of race
discrimination.
(a) On 22 October 1999, Mr Bara appeared in the Supreme Court for sentencing
before Martin CJ. The judge noted that Mr Bara had
been in custody since 17
March 1999. The Court sentenced Mr Bara to 18 months plus three months
mandatory sentence with a non-parole
period of nine months with the sentence
commencing on 17 March 1999. Mr Bara was also ordered to pay compensation of
$435: RB 115-122.
(a) It is important to note that with respect to Mr Bara, there has never ben a
request made to the NTITS with respect to interpreter
(a) The only requests made were to the DPP. All of those requests were met.
There is simply no evidentiary basis to support the
claim of a refusal to
provide services when no request for such services has ever been made to the
(a) There was no evidence lead in relation to the nature of Mr Bara’s
special need on 18 March, 22 March, 24 March, 5 May,
12 May, 21 May
1. As to the complaint made by Desmond Mamarika, I make the following findings
(a) Desmond Mamarika is from Groote Eylandt. His first language is
Anindilyawka.
(a) Following his failure to appear in Court on 16 March 1999, a warrant was
issued for his arrest. Mr D Mamarika was arrested on
17 March 1999 at Groote
Eylandt and refused bail.
(a) On 18 March 1999, Mr D Mamarika appeared in Court and Mr Batton appeared for
him. Mr Peach appeared for the Crown. No application
for bail was made and Mr
Batton sought an adjournment: RB 337. No request was made for an interpreter
and there is no notation on
the Court file about the need for an interpreter.
Mr Batton was not called to give evidence before the Commission, so the only
which may be drawn is that any evidence he might give would not assist
the Complainant.
(a) The matter was next in court on 22 March 1999 and Mr Batton again appeared
for Mr D Mamarika. Again, no application for bail
was made. No request for an
interpreter was made: RB 338.
(a) On 24 March 1999, Mr D Mamarika was in Court represented by Mr Kenna who did
not make an application for bail. He did not refer
to the need for an
interpreter. The matter was adjourned for a hand up committal: RB
(a) On 4 May 1999, Mr D Mamarika appeared in Court. Ms Gowans appeared for Mr D
Mamarika. The Court file indicates that they would
require an interpreter: see
RB page 338. On that occasion, Ms Gowans told Ms Musk from the DPP that NAALAS
would arrange for an
interpreter. There was no request made pursuant to the DPP
(a) On 12 May 1999, Mr D Mamarika appeared in Court before Cavanagh SM. During
the committal proceeding, Ms Gowans made an application
to abort the committal
proceedings because no interpreter was present in Court. Ms Musk opposed the
application. Cavanagh SM agreed
reluctantly to adjourn the proceedings part
heard. There was an issue about whether Mr D Mamarika required an interpreter.
matter was adjourned to 17 May 1999 to hear argument about whether he
required an interpreter.
(a) On 16 May 1999, Mr Kenna attended the Berrimah Correctional Centre and
undertook an interpreter’s test for Mr D Mamarika.
A copy of the
interpreter test for Mr D Mamarika is Exhibit D and Exhibit E in these
proceedings. The purpose of the test being
to demonstrate that Mr D Mamarika
did require an interpreter.
(a) On 17 May 1999, the matters were stood over to 21 May
(a) On 21 May 1999, Mr D Mamarika appeared in Court. Ms Gowans appeared for
both he and Mr Bara. An interpreter was organised and
paid for by the DPP to
assist both defendants on that day.
(a) On 12 July 1999, Mr D Mamarika appeared in the Supreme Court for mention.
The matter was adjourned.
(a) On 22 July 1999, Mr Strickland and Mr Brown of NAALAS visited Mr D Mamarika
at the Berrimah Gaol. An interpreter was present
for the purposes of obtaining
instructions.
(a) On 18 August 1999, Mr D Mamarika appeared in the Supreme Court before Riley
J. He was presented by Mr Strickland. On that occasion
an interpreter was
present: RB 355. The judge noted that Mr D Mamarika had been in custody since
17 March 1999. The sentence took
into account the time spent in custody: RB
(a) On 22 September 1999, Mr D Mamarika lodged a complaint of race
discrimination: RB 318-325.
(a) The complaint that was lodged by NAALAS makes allegations that there has
been discrimination or prohibited conduct with respect
to appearances between 5
May to 21 May 1999.
1. As to the complaint made by Marcus Cameron, I make the following findings of
(a) Marcus Cameron is a 25 year old man from Jabiru. His first language is
(a) On 11 May 1999, Mr Cameron was arrested in Jabiru for escaping lawful
custody: RB 158.
(a) On 24 May 1999, he appeared in the Darwin Magistrates Court before Wallace
SM, represented by Mr Kenna. Mr Peach appeared for
the Crown. A bail
application was made but it was opposed. He was then remanded in custody.
There is no indication on the Court
file that a request for an interpreted was
made by Mr Kenna on that occasion: RB 158, 161.
(a) On 26 May 1999, Mr Cameron again appeared in the Magistrates Court. On this
occasion Ms Gowans represented him and Mr Peach
appeared for the Crown: RB 161.
There was no application for bail and no indication that he required an
interpreter. The matter
was adjourned to Jabiru for 13 July
(a) On 4 June 1999, the matter was mentioned in Court by Mr Kenna. The purpose
of the mention was to vary the date for hearing 14
July 1999 at
(a) On 5 July 1999, Mr Cameron appeared in Court represented by Mr Kenna. The
matter was adjourned to 7 July 1999 for mention with
other matters at Darwin.
No bail application was made.
(a) On 5 July 1999, Mr Kenna wrote to the NTITS requesting an interpreter be
provided for his client in Kunwinjku: see RB pages
(a) On 6 July 1999, ‘Tim’ of the NTITS advised Mr Kenna by telephone
that his request for an interpreter for Mr Cameron
could not be provided because
NTITS did not provide interpreters in Aboriginal
(a) Mr Kenna did not make a request to the DPP.
(a) On the same day, NAALAS arranged for an interpreter for Mr Cameron to be
present for his Court appearance on 7 July
(a) On 7 July 1999, NAALAS lodged a complaint of race discrimination: see RB
(a) On 12 July 1999, the NTITS confirmed in writing that it was unable to
provide an interpreter for Mr Cameron as requested on 7
July 1999: RB
(a) On 15 July 1999, Mr Cameron appeared in Court represented by Mr Kenna. Mr
Peach appeared for the Crown. There was no application
for bail and the matter
was adjourned to 16 July 1999.
(a) On 16 July 1999, Mr Cameron appeared in Court again represented by Mr Kenna.
He pleaded guilty. He was sentenced to two months
imprisonment commencing on 21
May 1999. His parole was revoked and the prior convictions in relation to
resisting arrest, escaping
lawful custody, aggravated assault, aggravated
unlawful entry and assault and criminal damage were taken into account. By 20
1999, Mr Cameron’s sentence was
(a) A second complaint of race discrimination was lodged on 20 September 1999:
see RB pages 141-146.
(a) In relation to the allegations of race discrimination, it is clear that no
request was made to the DPP in relation to having
an interpreter present on 7
July 1999. In any event an interpreter was present on that day. In relation to
his appearance on 16
July 1999, there was no request made to NTITS or the DPP
for an interpreter to be present.
(a) There was no evidence lead to establish Mr Cameron’s special need
based on his race.
1. As to the complaint made by Stanley Kerr and Clarence Mamarika, I make the
following findings of fact:
(a) Stanley Kerr and Clarence Mamarika are juveniles who live on Groote Eylandt.
Their first language is Anindilyawka.
(a) They first appeared in Court on 2 July 1999, represented by Mr Jones of
NAALAS. Mr Jones advised the Court of their need for
an interpreter on this
occasion. A note was made on the file by Wallace SM and no application for bail
was made. Mr Jones did not
give evidence in the Commission, so there is no
evidence whether a request was made to the prosecutor. Mr Jones’ failure
give evidence would allow the Commission to draw the inference that he did
(a) On 6 July 1999, Mr Kerr and Mr C Mamarika appeared in Court. On this
occasion Mr Kenna appeared for Mr Kerr and Ms Gowans appeared
for Mr C Mamarika.
They advised the Court of the need for interpreters. It appears nothing was
done by NAALAS between 2 and 6 July
to secure an interpreter.
(b) On 6 July 1999, Ms Gowans contacted the NTITS and requested an interpreter
for both Mr Kerr and Mr C Mamarika. She indicated
that it was an urgent request
because they were juveniles in custody. It appears that no action was taken by
NAALAS prior to this
mention to organise an interpreter for 6 July 1999. The
request was faxed to NTITS at 11.15am indicating that an interpreter was
required for 10.00am that morning. NTITS advised that they were unable to
assist and suggested that they contact the Office of Aboriginal
Development.
(a) Ms Gowans then attempted to organise an interpreter through the interpreters
that NAALAS used on a regular basis and was advised
that none were
(a) Notwithstanding that no interpreter was available, Ms Gowans and Mr Kenna
proceeded with their application and Wallace SM unconditionally
released both of
the defendants into the care of NAALAS for the purposes of repatriation to
Groote Eylandt. The matters were then
adjourned to Groote Eylandt for mention
on 20 July 1999.
(a) Complaints of race discrimination was lodged that day without
instructions.
(a) On 12 July 1999, Mr Kerr was again arrested at Groote Eylandt on new
charges. He was refused bail by the police. He then appeared
in Court on 14
July 1999. Ms Gowns appeared for Mr Kerr on that occasion and advised the Court
of the need for an interpreter.
(a) On 16 July 1999, Mr Kerr again appeared in Court represented by Ms Gowans
and she again advised of the need for an interpreter.
No application was made
for bail or for release.
(a) On 20 July 1999, Mr Kerr again appeared in Court. On this occasion he was
represented by Mr O’Connell from NAALAS and
an interpreter was present.
He pleaded guilty and was sentenced to four months which was suspended after
four weeks from 20 July
(a) Mr C Mamarika was also arrested on 10 July 1999 at Groote Eylandt and
charged with further offences. The telephone bail application
(a) On 12 July 1999, Mr C Mamarika appeared in Court. On this occasion Mr Kenna
appeared for him. An interpreter had been located
at NAALAS for the purposes of
obtaining instructions and to appear at Court.
(a) On 12 July 1999, Ms Gowans made a request to the NTITS to have an
interpreter in Anindilyakwa language available for Mr C Mamarika.
Again on 12
July 1999, NTITS advised that NAALAS did not provide interpreters in such
Aboriginal languages and suggested that they
Development at Bachelor College.
(a) On 13 July 1999, Mr C Mamarika appeared in Court. He was represented by Mr
O’Connell and an interpreter was
(a) On 16 July 1999, Mr C Mamarika again appeared in Court and the matter was
adjourned. There was no application made for his
(a) On 16 July 1999, Ms Gowans requested the DPP provide an interpreter for Mr
Kerr and Mr C Mamarika for their appearances on 20
(a) On 20 July 1999, Mr C Mamarika appeared in Court. He was represented by Mr
O’Connell and an interpreter was present.
He pleaded guilty and was
convicted to three months detention suspended after one month to commence on 20
1. In making the above findings of fact it will be noted that I have largely
accepted the Respondent’s Summary of the Facts.
The Respondent’s
Summary of Facts is supported by the evidence.
................................................
SOUTHWOOD QC
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (260 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter