URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCCA/2024/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:18:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Richards v The King [2024] NTCCA 4 (22 March 2024)
Richards v The King
[2024] NTCCA 4
PARTIES: RICHARDS, Aiden
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: CA 2 of 2023 (22115401)
DELIVERED: 22 March 2024
HEARING DATE: 2 June 2023
JUDGMENT OF: Grant CJ; Blokland and Brownhill JJ
CATCHWORDS:
SENTENCING – Appeal against sentence – Severity – Sentence
manifestly excessive
Whether sentence manifestly excessive – Comparison of sentences imposed
for similar offending – Individual sentences towards
higher end of
permissible range but within range when all circumstances considered –
Minor degree of accumulation between individual
sentences ordered – Appeal
SENTENCING – Sentencing – Relevant factors on sentence –
Factual basis for sentence
Whether sentencing judge erred in determining appellant was aware of
victim’s age at the time of the offending by taking into
account the
appellant’s failure to give oral evidence at the sentencing hearing
– Determination not based on appellant’s
failure to give evidence
– Material before sentencing judge allowed inference to be drawn beyond
reasonable doubt that appellant
knew victim’s age at material time –
Appeal dismissed.
SENTENCING – Appeal against sentence – Mitigating factors –
Plea of guilty
Whether sentencing judge erred by failing to consider appellant’s pleas
of guilty and their value in mitigation – Failure
to expressly quantify
reduction granted for plea of guilty not an error – Sentences assuming
higher starting point within range
– Appeal dismissed.
Criminal Code 1983
Sentencing Act 1995
Bugmy v The Queen
(2013) 249 CLR 571,
Edmond & Moreen v The
[2017] NTCCA 9
Forrest v The Queen
[2017] NTCCA 5
[2010] HCA 45
(2010) 242 CLR 520
[2011] NTCCA 7
[2000] NTCCA 3
(2000) 10 NTLR 39
Markarian v The Queen
(2005) 228 CLR 357,
[1998] 4 VR 235
R v Olbrich
(1999) 199 CLR 270
[2007] VSCA 102
(2007) 16 VR 269
Strbak v The Queen
[2020] HCA 10
(2020) 267 CLR 494
[2018] NSWCCA 4
, referred to.
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: S Robson SC
Respondent: M Aust
Solicitors:
Appellant: Northern Territory Legal Aid Commission
Respondent: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 25
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Richards v The King
[2024] NTCCA 4
CA 2 of 2023 (22115401)
AIDEN RICHARDS
CORAM: GRANT CJ, BLOKLAND & BROWNHILL JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 22 March 2024)
[1] This is an
application for leave to appeal and an appeal against sentences passed by the
Supreme Court on 1 July 2022.
[2] Following
pleas of guilty to three counts on indictment, the appellant was sentenced as
Count 1: Sexual intercourse (fellatio) with MK, a child
under the age of 16 years, contrary to s 127(1)(a) of the
. Convicted and sentenced to three years imprisonment.
Count 2: Sexual intercourse (penile/vaginal intercourse) with MK, a child
under the age of 16 years, contrary to s 127(1)(a) of the
Criminal Code,
convicted and sentenced to three years imprisonment. Three months of this
sentence was ordered to be served cumulatively
on the sentence of imprisonment
imposed on count 1.
Count 3: Sexual intercourse (fellatio) with MK, a child under the age of 16
years, contrary to s 127(1)(a) of the Criminal Code, convicted
sentenced to three years imprisonment. Three months of this sentence was ordered
to be served cumulatively on the sentences for
count 1 and 2.
[3] The total
effective term was imprisonment for three years and six months. The sentence was
ordered to commence on 17 May 2021,
to reflect the time the appellant spent in
custody on remand. The balance of the sentence was suspended forthwith for two
supervision and associated detailed
conditions.
[4] All of the
offending took place on 15 May 2021 in the context of an ongoing episode of
sexual activity which included the offending
acts: fellatio, penile/vaginal
intercourse, followed by a further act of fellatio.
before the Supreme Court
circumstances of the offending
that at the time of the offending, the victim was aged 14 years and the
appellant was 20. The victim and the appellant were
known to each other. A few
months before the day of the offending, the victim was introduced to the
appellant by the appellant’s
girlfriend, LT. When LT introduced them, she
told the appellant the victim was 14 years old.
[6] After that
introduction, the appellant and victim sometimes contacted each other via the
Snapchat messaging application. On the
morning of 15 May 2021, the victim
number of the appellant’s
friends were present in the living room of his
appellant sat on a chair and pulled the victim over to him. She sat on his
lap. He asked her for kisses and cuddles.
[7] The conduct
immediately relevant to count 1 is as follows. The appellant pulled the
victim’s shirt up and removed her bra.
He kissed her on the lips and
sucked her neck. He fondled and sucked her breasts. He placed his hand around
her neck. Throughout
the offending he continued to have one of his hands on her
neck. He stood up and removed his shorts and underwear to expose his penis.
victim allowed him to insert his penis into her mouth. She then performed
fellatio until he ejaculated inside her mouth.
[8] With respect
to count 2, the appellant retrieved a mattress from the lounge room and took it
into the bedroom. He asked the victim
to remove her shorts and underwear. The
victim complied and lay down on the mattress. The appellant engaged in sexual
intercourse
with her. He did not use a condom and did not ejaculate.
[9] After the
offending which formed the basis of count 2, the victim dressed and lay down
next to the appellant. He rubbed his body
against hers. The appellant removed
his penis from his pants and placed one of the victim’s hands around his
penis. The victim
thought he wanted her to masturbate him so she kissed him on
his neck to attempt to prevent engaging in that conduct. The appellant
the victim on her lips and sucked her neck. He then engaged in a further act of
fellatio until he again ejaculated inside
her mouth, which formed the factual
basis of count 3.
[10] On all
three occasions the appellant had no reasonable grounds to believe the victim
was 16 years old.
[11] Shortly
after the offences were committed the appellant’s friend AC knocked on the
bedroom door. The appellant allowed
him into the room and told him he had a girl
in the room. The victim was hiding behind a desk and the appellant told her to
out from hiding. AC suspected she was under 16 years old and asked her how
old she was. She told him she was 14. AC told the appellant
he should not be
having sexual intercourse with her because she was too young. The appellant said
they were only ‘mates’
and told the victim not to tell anyone what
had happened.
[12] Sometime
after the discussion with AC, the appellant drove the victim to the home of her
friend, AT. Later, the victim and AT
caught the bus back to the
appellant’s home. They were informed the appellant was not home.
Nevertheless, they were invited
inside by KLT. They watched television until
they both fell asleep. Later the same evening the appellant woke both the victim
KLT up and took them into his bedroom. All three slept the rest of the night
in his bedroom. Throughout the night the appellant hugged
the victim and at
times KLT. On some occasions he rubbed his body against the victim’s body.
The victim and KLT left the appellant’s
to the Palmerston library.
[13] Later the
same day the victim disclosed what had taken place to her boyfriend LM. LM
called the police to formally report the
matter on the victim’s behalf.
The victim participated in a recorded interview with police and cooperated with
forensic procedures
undertaken at the Sexual Assault Referral Centre. As a
result of the testing, the appellant’s DNA was identified on her underwear
and in her vagina.
[14] The victim
also disclosed the offending to LT. The victim told her she did not know what to
do in the situation in which she
found herself with the appellant and so she
complied with the appellant’s requests.
appellant was arrested at his home on 17 May 2021. He declined to participate in
a record of interview with police. He remained
in custody from 17 May 2021 until
1 July 2022, the date of sentence.
[16] A victim
impact statement was tendered during the plea hearing. The victim’s mother
described the victim’s emotional
suffering and the stress which she said
affected the victim’s mental state and wellbeing detrimentally. She also
the negative emotional impacts on members of the victim’s
neuropsychological report authored by a clinical neuropsychologist was tendered
in the proceeding.
The diagnostic
conclusion was that the appellant demonstrated a globally reduced level of
cognitive function with the majority of
scores from testing in the borderline
range or below.
His full scale IQ
score of 67 was reported as being in the extremely low range. The areas of
particular impairment were said to be
in the higher attentional abilities,
verbal memory and aspects of executive functions. Ultimately the opinion
expressed was that
the appellant’s neuropsychological profile was
consistent with an established diagnoses of mild intellectual disability and
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (‘ADHD’). The
neuropsychologist also noted the appellant was acutely suicidal
with a complex
history of chronic suicidality, poor coping and a history of complex trauma. He
had been exposed to physical violence
from birth and into childhood and
adolescence. The report detailed the consequences of exposure to trauma on brain
development and
other physiological systems. The neuropsychologist concluded the
symptoms of intellectual disability and ADHD were likely significant
contributors to the offending
She noted, among other
recommendations, that the appellant had been approved as a participant of the
[18] The report
concluded with the observation the appellant was aware that sexual activity with
a young person was wrong.
[19] On the
issue of knowledge of the victim’s age, an addendum report from the
neuropsycholgist was obtained. The appellant
told her that when he saw the
victim, he thought she looked 16 or
This issue was explored in some
depth by the sentencing judge and has some relevance to the issue raised by
Ground 2, which is discussed
below. The appellant was reported to have expressed
regret for his actions. However, it was also reported he placed the blame
on other people. The neuropsychologist said the appellant accepted
that he would need to approach future relationships differently
and was willing
to seek guidance from trusted elders and formal support services.
conclusion as to his cognitive state was expressed as follows:
Cognitively, [the appellant] has significant impairments which
reduce his capacity to fully appreciate the intangible harms caused
actions (especially psychological harms). He has some insight into his own
cognitive limitations but does not fully appreciate
how these contributed to his
actions. He would benefit from further, direct education about how his symptoms
of [intellectual disability]
and ADHD impact his social interactions and
strategies to improve his capacity in this
[21] An NDIS
approval letter and NDIS plan summary were also tendered during the plea
[22] Two emailed
letters which supported the submission concerning the deprived and abusive
nature of the appellant’s childhood
and the effect of that background on
him were tendered to the Court.
One was from his mother and one from his foster carer.
pre-sentence report was ordered and
The appellant was not
initially considered suitable for supervision. A later report obtained pursuant
Sentencing Act
assessed him as suitable for general
supervision.
institutional report from Darwin Correctional Centre was obtained which detailed
the appellant’s security classification,
minor incidents or breaches of
discipline, limitations on his access to programmes while on remand, his
employment as a carer within
the prison and the recording of four ‘at
risk’ episodes.
appellant had no criminal history.
The sentencing
sentencing judge commenced his remarks by referring to a number of features
relevant to the appellant’s subjective
circumstances. He detailed the
appellant’s difficult background. He had regard to the physical abuse
perpetrated by the appellant’s
biological father on his mother when she
was pregnant with him and stated that as a result the appellant was born
prematurely and
hospitalised for five weeks after birth. He was physically
abused by his biological father from
The appellants’
difficulties at school were identified with respect to both academic progress
and behaviour. His Honour noted
the appellant was approved for the receipt of
disability services in year five and that in his early years he engaged with a
of services.
[27] The Judge
said that, at about 13 or 14 years of age, the appellant moved to Darwin with
his family. Disability services ceased
when he arrived in the Northern
Territory. Domestic violence perpetrated by his stepfather was identified by a
paediatrician.
At 15 he was
placed in foster care and had a positive relationship with his carer. Between 15
and 18 he obtained his driver’s
licence, his school attendance increased
and he saved $3000 to buy a car. He was taken off medication and completed a VET
Certificate
I and a Diesel Mechanic Certificate II. He worked on a casual basis
for his foster carer. At 18 the appellant moved back to live
with his mother and
stepfather. When his mother, stepfather and half siblings left Darwin in 2020,
the appellant remained in Darwin
and continued to live in the home rented by his
[28] In terms of
events closer to the date of the offending, the sentencing judge said that in
early 2021 the appellant became friends
with a group of adult teenagers. They
frequently stayed overnight although none of them paid rent yet. The appellant
referred to
them as ‘house mates’. The home became a regular
location where the group drank alcohol and smoked cannabis. Before meeting
group the appellant seldom drank alcohol. After being with the group he began
drinking daily, which continued up until the time
he committed the offences.
sentencing judge set out the agreed facts which are summarised above and
confirmed the appellant admitted the truth and accuracy
His Honour also set out
the following parts from the victim impact statement which was submitted on
behalf of the victim’s
emotional suffering that MK has had to endure because of this cruel act is
heartbreaking. MK lost her sense of safety. She has
lost trust in others and she
felt helpless in her situation. She feels betrayed and shocked and cannot
believe that it actually happened.
She has been angry and frustrated and her
sense of worth is gone.
MK experiences recurring thoughts of the incident, playing over and over in
her head. She has become detached from her family and
friends and does not enjoy
being around gatherings and events that she used to enjoy with family.
MK’s mental state is not good because of this incident... she does not
feel as though she can deal with this trauma and feels
unworthy of her life.
MK has multiple daily stressors that affect her wellbeing and mental state
and overwhelm her to the breaking point... Her behavioural
issues have been
excessive and worrying towards her family and friends ...she is trying to
distract herself from what has happened
and is constantly down.
This incident has not only affected MK but it has also affected her family.
MK's younger siblings see MK upset, crying, and taking
her frustrations out on
her parents, and they don't understand. MK had a great relationship with all her
siblings, as well as her
father and myself. Now because of this, relationships
are strained because this incident has changed her. As a mother, when something
like this happens to your child, you feel like you have let them down. As a
parent, your main job is to protect your child, and I
could not do that.
[30] During the
plea hearing an issue arose because of statements made by the appellant to the
neuropsychologist to the effect that
at the time of the offending he had
forgotten that he was told the victim was under 16 years. The sentencing judge
rejected the assertion
that the appellant forgot he had been told the
victim’s age and did not know her age. By reference to the agreed facts
sentencing judge determined that little weight should be given to
contradictory parts of the neuropsychological report including
the addendum
His Honour found beyond
reasonable doubt the appellant was aware that the victim was under 16 years. He
also found the appellant
lacked the capacity to understand the harm that may be
caused to girls if they have sexual intercourse while they are under the age
emphasise that he had taken into account the appellant’s deprived
upbringing, his relative youth and limited cognitive
capacity, the sentencing
judge remarked, “This is a case in which the principles of
[32] His Honour
set out portions of the neuropsychological reports dealing with that subject in
substantial detail and concluded as
circumstances, it seems to me that the appropriate sentencing disposition is a
disposition which, to some degree but a
moderated degree, reflects the need for
deterrence in such matters, denounces the conduct, and recognises that young
girls must be
protected from such activities. However, it is in the interests of
the community to endeavour to put arrangements in place to try
and ensure that
the offender can be successfully reintegrated into the community and is given
the utmost assistance to do so. It
is apparent he has accepted responsibility
for what he has done.
[33] Immediately
before passing the sentence the Judge again referred to the case law relevant to
deprived background, cognitive impairment
and mental health issues and stated:
“Those factors that I have raised, in particular, the
issues, are significantly
mitigatory.”
Ground 1: Mannifest excess
[34] Ground 1
asserted that the sentences of three years imprisonment on each count and the
total sentence of three years and six
months imprisonment were manifestly
excessive and, in particular, that the sentencing judge gave insufficient weight
to the appellant’s
deprived background, youth and cognitive
impairments.
principles governing an appeal against sentence based on this ground are well
known. A sentence is not to be disturbed on
appeal unless error is shown. The
presumption is that there is no error. Appellate intervention is warranted only
where the sentence
is such that in all the circumstances the appellate court
concludes error must have occurred or there must have been some misapplication
of principle even though it is not apparent from the reasons or remarks on
Manifest excess may be
identified if the sentence imposed is out of the range of sentences that could
have been imposed to such an
extent that there must have been error even though
it is impossible to identify.
determine whether a sentence is manifestly excessive or manifestly inadequate
requires consideration of all of the matters
relevant to fixing a
An appellate court
cannot simply substitute its own opinion for that of the sentencing judge. There
is no one correct sentence. Sentencing
judges are to be afforded as much
flexibility when sentencing as is consonant with consistency of approach and as
accords with the
applicable statutory
[37] Counsel for
the appellant on appeal made the observation that the sentencing judge did not
express a view on where the offending
fell on the scale of objective
His Honour was not
obliged to identify or use any particular form of words to express his view on
the gravity of the offending. The
process of instinctive synthesis eschews
formulaic sentencing reasons or remarks. In any event the sentencing judge made
to the salient features of the case relevant to objective gravity in
his remarks.
[38] On any view
this was a serious example of offending of this kind. Unlike a number of cases
involving young people as perpetrators
and victims, there was no relationship of
significance between the appellant and victims. They knew each other but the
facts reveal
they were introduced only a few months before the offending and
since that introduction there had been only messaging via Snapchat.
Whatever the
status of their acquaintance, they were not romantic partners. There was no
suggestion of mutual support.
[39] At 14 years
of age, it was not as though the victim was just about to turn 16. Unlike some
cases, she was not close to the age
of consent. Given the appellant was 20, the
age disparity between the victim and the appellant was of some significance. It
many cases where the offender is merely two to three years older.
However, it is acknowledged the offending is not in the same category
offending by a much older mature adult. Some hesitancy or uncertainty on the
part of the victim is evident in the agreed facts
relevant to count 3. Bearing
in mind the young age of victim, the acts of fellatio which ended with
ejaculation into the victim’s
mouth had a degrading and confronting
element. The victim’s engagement with the various sexual acts was clearly
at the direction
and control of the appellant.
[40] The victim
disclosed what had happened shortly afterwards. She told LT she did not know
what to do in the circumstances she found
herself in. The victim impact
statement reveals the detrimental impact on her emotional wellbeing, which is
the very detriment the
law is designed to protect young women and girls from. A
sentencing court is obliged to have regard to the emotional harm done to
addition, the appellant was dealt with for three separate counts. While in some
comparable cases multiple acts would be rolled
up into one count, the fact that
there were three instances, rather than a single instance, of prohibited sexual
activity elevated
the objective seriousness of the offending. Those features in
combination meant the offending could properly be dealt with as a serious
example of offending against s 127 of the
Criminal Code
comparative sentences relied on by the appellant demonstrate that the sentences
imposed in this matter are somewhat higher
than some sentences imposed in
similar cases dealt with under s 127 of the
Criminal Code
comparative sentences which involved victims who were 13 to 14 years old and
offenders aged from 18 to 23 years old attracted
sentences of imprisonment in
the range of 9 to 14 months following a plea of
[43] Counsel for
the appellant also referred the Court to two comparative sentencing tables which
included notes of sentencing
Table 1 included cases
where the offender was aged 18 to 24 years and Table 2 included cases of
offenders who were 25 years or older.
[44] Of the 71
sentences compiled in Table 1, only two matters have head sentences of over
three years. In relation to Table 2, of
the 39 sentences passed, eight had
sentences of three and a half years or above. Of 31 sentences that included head
sentences of
under three and a half years, approximately half of the offenders
were over the age of 30 years.
acknowledged that sentences for offending against s 127 of the
with the following characteristics have generally resulted in sentences
of less than two years imprisonment, often around one year
and seven to eight
months imprisonment. First, the sentence follows a plea of guilty. Second, the
offender is in their late teens
or early 20s. Third, the victim is between 13
and 16 years. Fourth, the context of the offending is within a relationship or
victim and offender are in some way acquainted. Fifth, there is an absence
of aggravating features such as a breach of trust, pregnancy
or a sexually
transmitted infection. Sixth, the offender has no criminal history or no
relevant sexual offending.
[46] Although
the offending here possessed some of those characteristics, it does not follow
that the resulting sentence fell outside
the permissible range. We have
emphasized already the matters which mark the seriousness of the offending. The
sentence is towards
the outer limit of the range for offending of this kind,
however we have concluded when all of the circumstances are considered,
not manifestly excessive. The process of fixing a sentence is not to be reduced
to the application of a mathematical formula.
While the examination of the range
of sentences is useful, there is no set tariff for offending of this kind.
[47] Counsel for
the appellant contends that if the appellant’s age, his cognitive deficits
and deprived circumstances throughout
this life were accepted, this should have
led to a sentence that was less than the term imposed. It was argued those
difficulties
served as a countervailing factor in moderation of the gravity of
the offending.
[48] We have
highlighted above how the sentencing judge took into account the
appellant’s cognitive impairment and difficult
personal circumstances from
a young age. The sentencing judge acknowledged he would apply the principles
Bugmy v The
He discussed the
appellant’s cognitive impairment in detail, in terms of its nature, extent
and effect as required by
appellant’s deprived background may be taken into account as a mitigating
by moderating the more
punitive elements of sentencing. The sentence was moderated to some degree. It
is clearly the case, as the
sentencing judge acknowledged, that the interests of
the community must still be served by the overall sentencing process. The
of the sentencing discretion requires a balance to be maintained
between the competing considerations as occurred here.
[49] The type of
background the appellant endured is sadly a feature reflected in many cases
before the Court. It would be unsurprising
if many of the defendants in the
comparative cases referred to above had experienced deprivations which are
similar to those experienced
by the appellant.
sentencing judge chose to suspend the balance of the sentence forthwith, which
illustrates a further way in which he took
matters into account. The conditions of the suspended sentenced show the
sentence was directed towards the appellant’s re-integration
rehabilitation. As well as standard conditions, the suspended sentence included
a condition that the appellant reside at Banksia
House and comply with a program
organised by TeamHealth; that he participate in counselling through CatholicCare
and the psychologists
provided at ATAPs as organised through his general
practitioner; and that he comply with a mental health programme developed by a
general practitioner.
[51] In our view
the suspended sentence and treatment conditions illustrate how the sentencing
judge had regard to the difficult personal
circumstances of the appellant,
including his cognitive deficits.
individual sentences were towards the higher end of the permissible range but
were within range when all of the circumstances
are considered. The sentences
were largely concurrent with some minor degree of accumulation that might be
expected. The overall
final sentence properly reflected the course of criminal
conduct. Ground 1 is not made out.
Ground 2: Appellant’s
awareness of the victim’s age
[53] Ground 2
asserted that the sentencing judge erred when determining adversely to the
appellant that he was aware of the victim’s
age at the time of the
offending by taking into account the appellant’s failure to give oral
evidence at the sentencing hearing.
[54] Counsel for
the appellant acknowledged the agreed facts stated that the appellant had
‘no reasonable grounds to believe
that the victim was or above, the age of
16 years.’ It may be accepted that part of the facts acknowledged no more
the victim was in fact aged between 14 and 16 years at the time of the
offences and that the appellant held no reasonable belief
that she was aged 16
or more. Agreement with those facts is not determinative of the
appellant’s subjective state of knowledge
of the age of the victim given
such awareness was in dispute.
[55] Despite the
appellant’s agreement with the facts which stated his former girlfriend
had told him the victim’s age
‘a few months’ before the
offending, the question remained whether the appellant had forgotten he was told
the victim’s
[56] If the
Crown sought to prove the appellant’s subjective awareness, it was for the
Crown to establish that matter beyond
[57] Aside from
the agreed facts, the evidential material on this issue was contained in the
neuropsychological report
Addendum Report.
The appellant
told the neuropsychologist that he had not recalled being told the
victim’s age a few months prior to the offences.
He also told her that
both the victim and his former girlfriend had told him that the victim was 18
when they first met and he thought
the victim was 16 or 17 because she smoked
cigarettes and drank alcohol. Given that the appellant’s cognitive
impairments included
problems with verbal recall, it was submitted there
remained a reasonable possibility that the appellant had forgotten what he was
told by his former girlfriend.
appellant relied on the following portion of the sentencing remarks in support
of a submission that the sentencing judge
erroneously relied on the failure of
the appellant to give evidence when he concluded the appellant knew the
appellant was 14:
The statements in the two reports of the neuropsychologists are
highly contradictory. I am not prepared to give them any weight, particularly
circumstances where the offender elected not to give oral evidence about these
issues. I do not accept the offender’s assertion
that he had no
recollection of his girlfriend telling him the age of the victim.
[59] We reject
the submission that the sentencing judge thereby fell into error. The sentencing
judge was there commenting on the
contradictions between the appellant’s
self-reported statements and the inability to reconcile them satisfactorily. In
circumstances the comment should be seen as no more than pointing to the
lack of clarity in the statements the appellant provided
neuropsychologist. There was no further direct evidential material to assist the
Court. No adverse inference was drawn against
the appellant in the fact-finding
process. There was ample additional evidence which the sentencing judge could
draw upon to conclude
the appellant knew the victim was 14.
[60] We note the
following passages from the Addendum Report which sets out the appellant’s
thoughts as described to the neuropsychologist
and some of her
conclusions:
appellant] said that he knew prior to the offending that it was unacceptable to
“sleep with younger girls” but he
was unaware of the legal age for
consent. When asked how old he guessed the victim was when he saw her, [the
appellant] said he thought
she looked 16 or 17. He recalled she “always
has a pack of ciggies on her and she was drinking with my ex...I assumed
older”. He also reported “when I see people drinking and
smoking I think they’re over 17”. When asked why
he thought this he
replied “because you don’t see a 14 year old walking around with a
pack of smokes and a can of alcohol...a
young person can’t go in and buy
It remains my opinion (as stated in question 6 of the original
neuropsychology report) that [the appellant’s] cognitive and
behavioural
impairments were significant causative factors on the day of offending. He said
he did not recall being told the victim's
age on the day of offending. This is
consistent with his severe verbal memory impairment seen in real world settings
and on formal
testing. He takes in a very limited amount of information and
struggles to retain this over as little as half an hour. He failed
to learn the
ages of people he lived with every day for months. It is not surprising that he
did not learn and retain a single piece
of information about a person he met
only once, several months prior.
On the day, his concrete, rigid thinking and his adherence to simple rules
meant that he made assumptions about the victim's age which
were incorrect.
Namely, that because she was drinking and smoking, she was likely to be at least
16. He also failed to identify that
her age was an important piece of
information. He was not familiar with laws about sexual consent.
[61] While this
provided some of the information relevant to the appellant’s mental state,
it was not the only evidence available
on the issue. The neuropsychological
report stated that the appellant was ‘distressed’ to find out that
the victim was
underage. The neuropsychologist
consistent with the report that that the encounter ceased immediately and he
transported her to a friend’s home elsewhere.
It is not clear, then, why
he reportedly attempted to engage her in a further sexual encounter later that
evening. If this did indeed
occur, [the appellant] stated that he was heavily
intoxicated at that stage. The effects of acute intoxication would exacerbate
of his existing cognitive and behavioural impairments. He is also highly
impulsive with very poor ability to consider the future
consequences of his
actions. This may partially explain his renewed attempts to engage with the
victim later that evening.
appellant’s statements to the neuropsychologist were not reliable and
could be put to one side. An inference can reasonably
be drawn from the balance
of the material before the sentencing judge in the agreed facts that the
appellant was aware the victim
was 14. First, the appellant was told she was 14
a few months before the offending. Second, the appellant had no reasonable
to believe she was 16 years. Third, the appellant said he and the victim
were only ‘mates’ when AC came into the room.
Fourth, the victim was
hiding until the appellant told her to come out from hiding, which was an
indication he had orchestrated her
hiding. Fifth, the appellant did not react
with surprise or distress when AC asked the victim how old she was and she said
14. The combination of those facts and circumstances allowed an
inference to be drawn beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant
victim’s age.
[63] Even if
there was error as alleged in the impugned part of the sentencing judge’s
remarks (the reference to the appellant
not having given evidence), reviewing
the evidential material ourselves, we conclude that the finding that the
appellant was aware
of the victim’s age beyond reasonable was not in
error. Ground 2 is not made out.
Ground 3: The guilty pleas
[64] Ground 3
asserted that the sentencing judge erred by failing to consider the
appellant’s pleas of guilty and their value
in mitigation.
[65] Leave was
granted by a Judge of the Court to appeal on this ground.
sentencing remarks contain no mention of any reduction in recognition of the
pleas of guilty. The appellant argued the sentencing
judge failed to consider
the guilty pleas and the value to be attributed to those pleas.
Sentencing Act
requires that a plea of guilty and its
timing be taken into account.
[68] While it
may be desirable and in the interests of transparency that a discount be
the failure to
expressly quantify a reduction granted for a plea of guilty is not an
[69] Pleas of
guilty are valuable in cases of this kind as a plea relieves young complainants
of the stresses attendant on giving
evidence. Nevertheless, failure to specify
how the plea of guilty is taken into account is not an error.
[70] Clearly the
sentencing judge was aware the appellant pleaded guilty to the three counts as
it is mentioned at the beginning of
the sentencing
sentencing judge also remarked it was apparent the appellant had accepted
responsibility for what he had
There was room for some
debate about the extent of his acceptance of responsibility given the dispute
over whether he was subjectively
aware of the victim’s age. It would not
be an error to lessen credit for the plea in those circumstances.
[72] Although
the sentences were longer than many sentences passed on other offenders, as
discussed above, the gravity of the offending
accounted for the resultant
sentences. The sentences would still be in range if the starting point for each
sentence here was in
the order of four years and reduced because of the pleas of
guilty. The sentences in the comparative tables discussed above were
which had been reduced because of pleas of guilty. Further, the suspension of
some two-thirds of the total sentence indicates
an acknowledgment of the pleas
of guilty. Such a disposition would have been unlikely had the case gone to
trial. Ground 3 is not
Accordingly, we make the following orders:
is granted to appeal on Grounds 1 and 2.
appeal is dismissed.
On 7 February 2023 a Judge of this
Court granted an extension of time within which to appeal. Leave to appeal was
refused on Grounds
1 and 2. Leave to appeal was granted on Ground 3.The
appellant applies for leave to be considered and determined by this Court of
Criminal Appeal with respect to Grounds 1 and 2.
The conditions of the suspended
sentence are set out at AB 99-100.
Agreed Crown Facts: Appeal Book
("AB") 101-104.
AB 108-124.
AB 126-135.
AB 136-138.
AB 193-198.
AB 202-204.
Forrest v The Queen
[2017] NTCCA 5
Edmond & Moreen v The Queen
[2017] NTCCA
Hili v The Queen
[2010] HCA 45
242 CLR 520
Markarian v The Queen
(2005) 228 CLR 357 at 371.
Outline of submissions for the
appellant, 18 March 2023.
Sentencing Act
See table: ‘
Sentences. Comparatives relied upon
Table 1 ‘Comparative
Sentencing Chart, 127 – Sexual Intercourse with a child under 16
y/o’ (Adult offender: age
18 y/o inclusive) (Victim: age 10 y/o – 15
y/o inclusive). Table 2 ‘Comparative Sentencing Chart, 127 – Sexual
Intercourse with a child under 16 y/o’. Offender: (25 y/o and over)
Victim: (10 y/o – 15 y/o).
(2013) 249 CLR 571.
[2007] VSCA 102
(2007) 16 VR 269.
[1998] 4 VR 235.
[2007] VSCA 102
(2007) 16 VR 269
Bugmy v The Queen
249 CLR 571 at [37].
R v Olbrich
Strbak v The Queen
[2020] HCA 10
(2020) 267 CLR 494.
AB 108-125.
AB 163-167.
[2018] NSWCCA 4
[2000] NTCCA 3
(2000) 10 NTLR
[2011] NTCCA 7
[2018] NSWCCA 4
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (250 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter