URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTSC/2025/64.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:22:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The King v KMD & Ors (No 7) [2025] NTSC 64 (2 September 2025)
v KMD & Ors (No 7)
[2025] NTSC 64
PARTIES: THE KING
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER DEPARTMENT OF ATTORNEY-GENERAL AND JUSTICE
TITLE OF COURT: SUPREME COURT OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: 21319440
DELIVERED: 2 September 2025
HEARING DATES: 17 June 2024, 13 June 2025
JUDGMENT OF: Brownhill J
CATCHWORDS:
CRIMINAL LAW – Mental impairment – Part IIA of the
Periodic review under s 43ZH(2) of the
Criminal Code
– Supervised person seeking revocation of
non-custodial supervision order – Whether supervised person is likely to
themselves or another person because of their mental condition –
Finding that risk is no more than merely possible –
Supervised person is
not likely to endanger themselves or another person because of their mental
condition – Determination
that supervised person should continue to be
subject to non-custodial supervision order with varied terms
Criminal Code Act 1983
(NT) s 43A, s 43ZG, s 43ZH, s 43ZI, s 43
ZK, s 43ZL, s 43ZM, s 43ZN, s 43ZO.
NOM v Director of Public Prosecutions
(2014) 36 VR 618
BXT17 v Minister for Home Affairs
[2021] FCAFC 9
(2021) 283 FCR 248
Executive Officer, Department of Health v KMD
(2024) 388 FLR 266
CEO (Department of Health NT)
[2025] HCA 4
(2025) 99 ALJR 474
KMD v CEO (Department
of Health NT)
[2024] HCASL
Garlett v Western Australia
(2022) 277 CLR 1
HFM043 v Republic of Nauru
[2018] HCA 37
(2018) 359 ALR 176
The Queen v KMD (No 2)
[2017] NTSC 18
The Queen v KMD (No 3)
[2017] NTSC 95
The Queen v KMD (No 4)
[2021] NTSC 27
The Queen v KMD
& Ors (No 5)
The King v KMD (No 6)
[2023] NTSC
, referred to.
REPRESENTATION:
Crown: R Everitt
Supervised Person: E Nekvapil SC
CEO Department of Health: I Read SC with H Riley
CEO Department of
Attorney-General and Justice: K Bremner with E Farquhar
Solicitors:
Crown: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Supervised Person:
CEO Department of Health: Solicitor for the Northern Territory
CEO Department of
Attorney-General and Justice: Solicitor for the Northern Territory
Judgment category classification: B
Judgment ID Number: Bro2508
Number of pages: 101
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
The King v KMD & Ors (No 7)
[2025] NTSC 64
No. 21319440
Supervised Person
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER DEPARTMENT OF ATTORNEY-GENERAL AND
CORAM: BROWNHILL J
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 2 September 2025)
Introduction
subject to a non-custodial supervision order (‘NCSO’) made under
Part IIA of the
Criminal Code Act 1983
[2] Section 43ZH
Criminal Code
permits the Court to conduct periodic reviews to
determine whether a NCSO should be continued, varied in its conditions, varied
a custodial supervision order (‘CSO’) or revoked, releasing the
supervised person unconditionally.
this periodic review, KMD sought orders that the NCSO be revoked and she be
released unconditionally. Ultimately, the Chief
Executive Officer of the
Department of Health (‘CEO Health’), with the support of the other
parties, sought orders that
the NCSO be varied to a CSO or, alternatively, that
the conditions of the NCSO be varied to enhance, not reduce, their risk
Procedural developments since the last
periodic review
[4] KMD was
first arrested on 7 May 2013. She was the subject of various interim custodial
orders until a CSO was first made on 3
June 2015. The CSO was continued
following various periodic reviews undertaken by the
September 2022, I delivered my first decision on the last periodic
In that decision, I found
(at [144]), on the basis of the evidence then before me, that the degree of
likelihood that KMD would act
on her delusional belief system in a violent way
in the community was low, but real rather than fanciful. Consequently, I found
whether the safety of KMD or the public would be seriously at risk if she
were released on a NCSO depended significantly upon the
terms of any such order
and the mechanisms in place to support KMD to live in the community in
compliance with such terms.
[6] On 16 June
2023, I delivered my second decision on the last periodic
In that decision, I held
(at [167]) that I was not satisfied that the safety of the public would be
seriously at risk if KMD was
released on a NCSO. Consequently, I held (at [168])
that I was obliged to vary the CSO to a NCSO.
[7] On 5 July
2023, I revoked the CSO and replaced it with the NCSO, which took effect from 12
July 2023. Essentially, the terms of
the NCSO were as set out in the draft NCSO
attached to the reasons in
. One significant difference was
that the role of the probation and parole officer was not
‘supervision’ of KMD as contemplated
by the draft NCSO, but
‘monitoring’ of KMD via electronic monitoring and liaison with the
Case Manager about relevant
ongoing factors. These included supports for KMD,
varying her curfew, seeking permission to stay at her parents’ properties
or reporting concerns about KMD breaching the terms of the NCSO. Another
difference was that KMD was not permitted to enter or remain
at the Coolalinga
Shopping Centre, essentially because it was a place where the victims, RL and
Mrs L, regularly attended.
October 2023, the conditions of the NCSO were varied. The variations included to
permit KMD to have overnight stays of up
to two nights per week at her
parents’ properties without permission; to permit the Case Manager, rather
than the probation
and parole officer, to grant permission for KMD to have other
overnight stays at her parents’ properties, or elsewhere in the
or to travel outside the Territory; and to remove from the role of the probation
and parole officer matters relating to
KMD’s mental state.
[9] Other less
significant variations were made to the NCSO on 21 February, 6 March
and 17 June 2024.
7 July 2023, the CEO Health filed an appeal to the Court of Criminal Appeal of
the Northern Territory against the orders I
made on 5 July 2023.
[11] On 11 July
2023, the Court of Criminal Appeal refused an application by the CEO Health to
stay the NCSO pending the appeal.
[12] On 17 June
2024, this periodic review commenced. There was a hearing at which various
witnesses gave oral evidence. KMD filed
written submissions. Orders were made
permitting the parties to file further written submissions in relation to the
periodic review,
with no further oral hearing contemplated. My decision was
otherwise reserved. On 24 July 2024, KMD filed further written
submissions.
[13] On 23 July
2024, the Court of Criminal Appeal, by majority, upheld the
The NCSO was set aside and
the CSO was confirmed. As a result, KMD was arrested and returned to custody at
the Darwin Correctional
August 2024, the periodic review was adjourned
October 2024, the High Court granted special leave to KMD to appeal from the
decision of the Court of Criminal
February 2025, the High Court allowed KMD’s appeal from the decision of
the Court of Criminal Appeal, set aside the
orders made by the Court of Criminal
Appeal on 23 July 2024 and remitted the matter for hearing by a bench
differently constituted
for reconsideration in accordance with the High
Court’s reasons.
Court also ordered that, subject to any further order of the Court of Criminal
Appeal, the orders I made on 5 July 2023
(revoking the CSO and making the NCSO)
were stayed for 14 days.
[17] On 7 March
2025, the appeal was listed for hearing before the Court of Criminal Appeal on
16 April 2025. The NCSO was varied,
in relatively minor respects, on 7, 12
and 17 March 2025.
[18] On 13 March
2025, KMD was released from custody and was again the subject of the NCSO.
[19] On 27 March
2025, the CEO Health discontinued the appeal.
[20] On 24 April
2025, the periodic review proceedings were re-opened and a further oral hearing
was listed for 13 June 2025, with
orders for the filing of any further evidence
and written submissions by the parties. Another relatively minor amendment was
to the NCSO.
[21] On 13 June
2025, without any prior notice to the Court, the CEO Health sought an
adjournment of at least eight weeks to obtain
a report from a psychiatrist
members of the public of
KMD being released from the NCSO or the subject of an
NCSO; and (b) the minimum conditions of a NCSO necessary to safely supervise
in the community on the alternative assumptions that she would participate in
any mandated psychiatric or psychological treatment,
or that she would not do
[22] I refused
that adjournment, for reasons given orally at the time. The further hearing of
the periodic review took place on 13
Current terms of
[23] As at the
date of the further hearing of the periodic review on 13 June 2025, the relevant
conditions of the NCSO were in the
following terms:
the period of the [NCSO], KMD is subject to the following conditions:
(a) KMD will be under the care of and receive support from a support team
comprising the following people:
(i) Janet Guy, social worker;
(ii) ... KMD’s mother;
(iii) ... KMD’s sister;
(iv) a General Practitioner nominated by KMD who has consented, in writing, to
act in this capacity after being provided with a copy
of the Court’s
reasons for decision in [
)] and this
[NCSO]; and
(v) a staff member of the Top End Mental Health Service (‘TEMHS’) or
another person nominated by the CEO (Health) to
act as the Case Manager,
(‘the Support Team’).
(e) If any of the members of the Support Team become unable or unwilling to act
in this capacity, KMD or the CEO (Health) (as applicable)
must nominate another
person who is able and willing to act in this capacity. The nomination is to be
made as soon as practicable
with the applicable party to give written notice of
the nominate to the Court, the other parties and the members of the Support
In the case of the General Practitioner, KMD will provide the Court with
their written consent to act in this capacity.
(f) KMD will undertake counselling with Janet Guy at least weekly, or at such
longer intervals as Ms Guy considers appropriate, being
not greater than
fortnightly, and informs members of the Support Team in writing (which may
include by email).
(g) KMD will attend all medical appointments advised by the General
Practitioner.
(h) The role of the Case Manager is to:
(i) liaise with members of the Support Team on a regular basis to discuss
KMD’s mental state and progress in the community;
(ii) be a point of contact for KMD’s Probation and Parole officer and any
member of the Support Team who has concerns about
KMD’s mental state to be
able to raise those concerns with the Support Team for consideration of
additional care, support or
intervention to be provided to KMD; and
(iii) in their discretion, grant permission for the overnight stays referred to
in condition 4(o); and
(iv) consult with KMD’s Probation and Parole officer, other members of the
Support Team and, if necessary, other members of
the TEMHS regarding the need
for any steps to be taken pursuant to ss43ZD or 43ZE of the
Criminal Code Act
(NT) or Order 6; and
(v) report significant concerns to the Director of Public Prosecutions for
consideration of the making of an urgent application to
the Court pursuant to
s 43ZE of the
Criminal Code Act 1983
(NT) and/or the Authorised
Person referred to in Order 6. Significant concerns are concerns held by the
Case Manager that KMD has
breached or is about to breach the NCSO, or that there
is a significant risk that KMD may harm herself or someone else, which may
warrant the taking of the action referred to; and
(vi) liaise with KMD’s Probation and Parole officer on a regular basis to
discuss the matters set out in condition 4(l).
(i) KMD will reside at [address].
(k) KMD will be under the ongoing monitoring of a Probation and Parole officer,
and must obey all reasonable directions of a Probation
and Parole officer
related to her monitoring.
(l) The role of the Probation and Parole officer is to:
(i) monitor KMD as provided by condition 4(k) and this condition;
(ii) facilitate the implementation of electronic monitoring pursuant to
conditions 4(v) and 4(w) ...;
(iii) monitor KMD’s compliance with her electronic monitoring;
(iv) liaise with the Case Manager in relation to KMD’s general well-being
and progress in the community and any matters of
concern arising from the
Probation and Parole officer’s dealings with KMD;
(v) liaise with the Case Manager in relation to any request communicated by KMD
to the Probation and Parole officer in relation to:
(1) seeking permission to
stay overnight at [her parents’ properties] (additional to the stays
referred to in condition 4(n))
(2) seeking permission to stay in the Northern
Territory but outside the greater Darwin area; and (3) seeking permission to
outside the Northern Territory; and
(vi) report any concerns that KMD has breached, or is about to breach, any
condition of this [NCSO] to the Case Manager or the Northern
(m) KMD will report to a Probation and Parole officer within two clear working
days of today;
(n) KMD may, without the permission of the Case Manager, have overnight stays of
up to 2 nights per week at [her parents’ properties]
(i) she notifies the Probation and Parole officer of her intended stay;
(ii) the notice to the Probation and Parole officer must:
(1) be by phone;
(2) be given by 10.00am on the business day immediately preceding the
intended overnight stay;
(3) identify the location of the intended overnight stay; and
(4) state the day she intends to return to the residence; and
(iii) she returns to the residence by 10.00pm on the nominated return day.
(iv) ‘Overnight’ means any period between the hours of 7pm and
(o) KMD may, with the prior permission of the Case Manager, have overnight
stays: (1) at [her parents’ properties] in addition
to those referred to
in condition 4(n); and (2) outside the greater Darwin area and within the
Northern Territory.
(q) KMD must not contact, directly or indirectly, or remain at any place where
the victims, RL, Mrs L or Mr I, may be living working
or visiting. KMD must not
enter or remain at any place within 5 km of the residences of RL or Mrs L.
(r) KMD must not enter or remain at any place within the Coolalinga Shopping
Centre, being the area bounded by the Stuart Highway
Service Road and
Fairweather Crescent.
(s) KMD is only permitted to have contact with the children R ... and M ... in
accordance with any parenting plan or order made pursuant
(u) KMD must not leave the Northern Territory without the prior permission of
the Case Manager.
(v) KMD must wear or have attached an approved monitoring device in accordance
with the directions of a Probation and Parole officer,
and allow the placing, or
installation in, and retrieval from, the premises or place of residence of such
machine, equipment or device
necessary for the efficient operation of the
monitoring device.
(w) KMD must comply with the electronic monitoring rules as set out in the Rules
for Electronic Monitoring document.
(x) KMD must not possess, use or have access to any firearm.
Periodic review and the issues for the
is a periodic review of a NCSO pursuant to s 43ZH(1) and (3) of the
Criminal Code
. By s 43ZH(1), the review is to determine whether the
supervised person may be released from the supervision order. By s 43ZH(3),
on completing the review of a NCSO, the Court may: (a) confirm the NCSO; (b)
vary the conditions of the NCSO; (c) vary the NCSO to
a CSO and impose the
conditions on the CSO the Court considers appropriate; or (d) revoke the NCSO
and release the supervised person
unconditionally.
‘Seriously at risk’ test
does not apply
[25] Section
43ZH(3) does not itself contain any express condition upon the exercise of the
Court’s discretion.
[26] Section
43ZH(3) is expressed differently to s 43ZH(2), which relates to a review of
a CSO. Section 43ZH(2) directs the exercise
of the Court’s power (by use
of the word ‘must’) to either release a person on a NCSO or confirm
or vary the CSO
depending upon the Court’s satisfaction on the evidence
available that the safety of the supervised person or the public will
seriously at risk if the person is released on a NCSO. If the Court is not so
satisfied, the Court ‘must’ release
the person on a NCSO and if the
Court is so satisfied, the Court ‘must’ confirm or vary the
contrast, s 43ZH(3) expressly confers a discretion (by use of the word
‘may’) on the Court and does not itself
expressly constrain the
exercise of that discretion, either by reference to the Court’s
satisfaction on the evidence available
that the safety of the supervised person
or the public will be seriously at risk or by reference to any other test.
[28] Similarly,
where an application is made (outside of a periodic review) for the revocation
of a supervision order, s 43ZD(4) expressly
confers on the Court a
discretion (by use of the word ‘may’) and does not itself expressly
constrain the exercise of
that discretion by reference to any test.
[29] Conversely,
upon a major review at the end of the term fixed under s 43ZG,
s 43ZG(6) and (7) direct the exercise of the Court’s
power (by use of
the word ‘must’) to either release a person unconditionally
(s 43ZG(6)) or confirm or vary the supervision
order depending upon the
Court’s satisfaction that the safety of the supervised person or the
public will or is likely to be
seriously at risk if the person is released
unconditionally. If the Court is not so satisfied, the Court ‘must’
the person unconditionally and if the Court is so satisfied, the Court
‘must’ confirm or vary the supervision order,
whether a CSO or a
NCSO (s 43ZG(7)).
unclear, therefore, whether the legislature has deliberately elected not to
apply the ‘seriously at risk’ test
to a periodic review of a NCSO
under s 43ZH(3), or has inadvertently omitted it. Either way, the
implication of the ‘seriously
at risk’ test into s 43ZH(3)
would not be an insertion of words in the case of a simple, grammatical,
drafting error which,
if uncorrected, would defeat the object of the provision;
rather that insertion would fill a gap in the legislation or would make
insertion which is too big, or too much at variance with the language in fact
used by the legislature.
parties took the approach that the ‘seriously at risk’ test does not
apply to a periodic review of a NCSO under
s 43ZH(3) (or an application for
revocation of a NCSO under s 43ZD).
[32] Even so, if
on a periodic review under s 43ZH(3), the Court were to be satisfied on the
evidence before it that the safety of
the supervised person or the public will
or is likely to be seriously at risk if either the NCSO were continued, or the
person were
released unconditionally, that satisfaction would, as a matter of
practicality, effectively drive the exercise of the Court’s
discretion.
Matters the Court must take into account
[33] Section
43ZM of the
Criminal Code
provides that, in determining whether to make
an order under s 43ZH(3), the Court must apply the principle that
restrictions on a
supervised person’s freedom and personal autonomy are to
be kept to the minimum that is consistent with maintaining and protecting
safety of the community.
[34] It is clear
from the terms of s 43M that the provisions of Part IIA seek to strike a
balance between the competing purposes of
protecting the safety of the community
and the rights of a supervised person to freedom and personal autonomy.
[35] It is also
clear from its terms that s 43M is directed to ensuring that any
curtailment of a person’s freedom and personal
autonomy is no greater than
necessary to maintain and protect the safety of the community.
[36] The term
‘community’ is broad and directs attention to the risk of harm that
the supervised person poses to the members
of the organised society with whom he
or she may happen to live from time to time, whether that be in the Territory or
another State
or Territory or outside
[37] Section
43ZN(1) of the
Criminal Code
provides that, in determining whether to
make an order under s 43ZH(3), the Court must have regard to: (a) whether
the supervised
person is likely to, or would if released be likely to, endanger
themselves or another person because of their mental impairment,
condition or
disability; (b) the need to protect people from danger; (c) the nature of the
mental impairment, condition or disability;
(d) the relationship between it and
the offending conduct; (e) whether there are adequate resources available for
the supervised
person’s treatment and support in the community;
(f) whether the supervised person is complying or likely to comply with the
conditions of the supervision order; and (g) any other matters the Court
considers relevant.
Reports under
[38] Section
43ZN(2) of the
Criminal Code
provides that the Court must not make an
order significantly reducing the supervision to which a supervised person is
subject unless
the Court has (relevantly): (a) obtained and considered two
reports, each being prepared by a psychiatrist or other expert
43ZN(2)(a)(i) reports’); and (b) considered the
reports submitted to the Court under: (i) s 43ZJ (‘initial
(ii) s 43ZK (‘periodic reports’); (iii)
s 43ZL(1) (‘victims’ reports’) and (iv) s 43ZL(3)
family reports’).
[39] The initial
reports were referred to in
, I also referred extensively to the periodic reports and reports
prepared under s 43ZN(2)(a)(i) prepared and tendered by the parties
purposes of that period review.
[41] I have
considered all of those reports for the purposes of this periodic review, but
need not repeat their contents here.
Periodic reports and
s 43ZN(2)(a)(i) reports
[42] The Court
received the following reports, which comprised both periodic reports and
s 43ZN(2)(a)(i) reports.
[43] Reports
were received from KMD authored by Janet Guy and dated 17 May 2024
(‘Ex SO70’) and 30 May 2025 (‘Ex
SO84’). Ms Guy is
the clinical social worker engaged by KMD to provide a periodic report for the
last periodic review, which
was based upon around 50 hours of counselling with
Under the NCSO, KMD is
required to continue regular counselling sessions with Ms Guy, and
Ms Guy is a member of the Support Team.
In addition to her reports,
Ms Guy gave oral evidence at the periodic review hearing.
[44] Reports
were received from the CEO Health authored by Matthew Chick and dated 17 May
2024 (‘Ex SO77’) and 30 May
2025 (‘Ex SO81’), with an
addendum report dated 11 June 2025 (‘Ex SO81A’). Mr Chick is a
registered nurse.
He has a Bachelor of Nursing and has completed formal mental
health first aid training and remote area nurse training. He has extensive
experience working in prisons and detention centres in various jurisdictions
including the Northern Territory, as a nurse, a health
care manager and in
executive or policy roles as part of the prison and Forensic Mental Health Team
(‘FMHT’). Since 2018,
he has been employed in private practice in
specialist support co-ordinator roles relating to the NDIS. Mr Chick has no
qualifications
in psychiatry or
psychology.
Under the NCSO,
Mr Chick is the Case Manager of the Support Team, engaged by the CEO
Health, having commenced in that role on 23
June 2023. In addition to his
reports, Mr Chick gave oral evidence at the periodic review hearing.
reports and the oral evidence of Ms Guy and Mr Chick are dealt with
Victims’ reports
[46] Mr I was
the victim referred to in
at [9]-[11] and [13]. He was
notified of the periodic review hearing as required by s 43ZN(2)(b) of the
Criminal Code
. He elected not to provide a report under
[47] Mrs L was
the victim referred to in
at [3]-[9].
[48] I received
a report from Mrs L dated 10 May 2024 (‘Ex SO78’). She said she
cannot describe her fear and terror at
being held at gunpoint by KMD in 2013.
She said the impact KMD’s actions had on her, her son and grandson, as
well as their
extended family, is horrendous. She said that if the NCSO is
lifted, she will never be able to feel safe in her home, workplace or
shopping and would be constantly living in fear. She said her family should be
protected and she sincerely hopes KMD will be
continually supervised as per the
original NCSO. She said her property and vehicles had been extensively
refurbished with security
cameras, lights and fencing to give some feeling of
protection, but every time a car approaches her house she is in fear of who
be behind the wheel. She is 75 years old and wants to enjoy life with her
adult sons and grandchildren. She asked the Court to consider
KMD’s actions had, and is still having, on her
[49] RL was the
victim referred to in
at [3], [6]-[11].
[50] I received
a report from RL dated 6 May 2024 (‘Ex SO79’). He said he does not
believe that KMD is remorseful for
her actions. He and his family are currently
living on a knife edge, dreading the day KMD reoffends. He said his mental state
every time he hears of another review with the possibility that her
restrictions will be lessened. He has very little protection
from the system as
it is. He referred to a contact with KMD at the airport in 2023 in respect of
which he contacted Police, who took
no action. He asked how he would be
protected from any future incidents that may occur. He asked the Court to retain
the current
NCSO because lives are at stake.
[51] Consistent
with my finding in
at [47], I find that RL and Mrs L (and Mr
I) have suffered significant and long-lasting adverse psychological and
emotional consequences
from the events of 7 May 2013. Further, I accept
that they hold genuine concerns for their personal safety if KMD were to be
unconditionally.
KMD’s family reports
Family background
family background is set out in
KMD’s family reports
[53] Section
43ZL(3)(a) refers to a report setting out the views of KMD’s next of kin
and the impact of KMD’s conduct
on the next of kin or other members of
KMD’s family. Section 43ZL(3)(b) refers to a report setting out the views
of the members
of KMD’s Aboriginal community.
[54] The Court
received letters from KMD’s aunt dated 15 May 2024 (‘Ex
SO71’), from KMD’s mother dated 17
May 2024 (‘Ex SO72’)
and from KMD’s sister dated 17 May 2024 (‘Ex SO73’). The
parties accepted that
these letters fell within s 43ZL(3) and they were
received as such. KMD’s mother and sister are members of the Support Team.
KMD’s sister replaced her aunt as a member of the Support Team when her
aunt took some leave from Darwin.
[55] In Ex SO71,
KMD’s aunt said that after KMD’s initial release from custody, KMD
lived with her and her husband, and
KMD’s aunt was a member of the Support
Team. She said that the Support Team met weekly for the first eight weeks, then
fortnightly,
then monthly. The meetings were video recorded and minutes were
generated by the Case Manager. KMD’s aunt referred to some
communication between KMD’s family members and the Case Manager, which led
her to feel that the Case Manager did
not have KMD’s interests at the
forefront, with the consequence that the best outcomes for KMD were not always
achieved. KMD
had made considerable efforts to obtain employment, which were
successful when she started work on 15 May 2024. KMD’s aunt
said that the
electronic monitoring device KMD was required to wear may have hampered her
efforts to obtain work, and its removal
would also enable her to work remotely.
She noted that KMD had lived in KMD’s aunt’s unit alone from October
February 2024, and KMD had travelled outside the Territory three times.
KMD’s aunt reiterated her and the family’s ongoing
guidance and
support for KMD. On behalf of KMD’s family and friends, she asked the
Court to release KMD from the NCSO unconditionally.
[56] In Ex SO72,
KMD’s mother said that KMD had made a remarkable way back into the
community, had obtained employment, which
had led her to be optimistic about her
future endeavours towards a satisfactory lifestyle within the social norms of
the wider community,
and had goals to build her own house and start a small
business on country, living and working on her country and among her family.
behalf of KMD’s family, she asked the Court to release KMD from the NCSO
unconditionally.
[57] In Ex SO73,
KMD’s sister said KMD had obtained employment and was looking for rental
accommodation while she planned to
build her own home on the family’s
property, which would permit her to be closer to family, live on her country and
her aging parents into the future. KMD’s sister referred to
KMD’s visit to see her in Brisbane, and KMD buying her own
car. She said
KMD is forward thinking, goal driven and determined to build her life and move
from strength to strength. She referred
to KMD’s compliance with the
conditions of the NCSO, the ongoing support of her family and asked that KMD be
released from
the NCSO unconditionally.
[58] Consistent
with my findings in
at [69], these letters confirm that KMD
a very supportive family who will continue to
provide her with many of the things which are considered important in the
rehabilitation
of offenders and reduction of risk of reoffending in the ordinary
criminal context (often called ‘protective factors’),
such as stable
housing, connection to culture and close familial bonds with people who live law
abiding lives. Even in the present
context of a periodic review under Part IIA
Criminal Code
, it was not disputed by any party that such matters
are protective factors which reduce the risk of reoffending by a person who has
committed acts of violence due to mental illness.
Letters from
[59] The Support
Team includes a General Practitioner (‘GP’) nominated by KMD who has
consented in writing to act in the
role. KMD’s initial GP retired in
February 2024. Another GP, Dr Leanage, is now performing that role.
[60] A letter
was received from Dr Leanage dated 16 May 2024 (‘Ex SO76’). Dr
Leanage said that he had met with KMD once
in person and four times over a
telehealth link in 2024. He said KMD’s thought content and processing was
intact, with achievable
life goals and sound decision making. He said there were
no fixed delusions or disturbances in perception currently, KMD’s
and judgement were fair, her mood was stable and there was no suggestion of any
mental health disorder. He said KMD’s
risk to herself and others remains
low. He said, on reflecting on past events, KMD was genuinely disappointed and
regrets them. KMD’s
long term goals were to build a life with purpose and
she was hopeful of putting her past behind her.
Leanage’s oral evidence was that he had had discussions with KMD about her
central or original diagnosis, and said that,
in his interactions with KMD, he
had not noticed anything that would warrant a referral to a
psychiatrist.
[62] A further
letter was received from Dr Leanage dated 13 June 2025 (‘Ex
SO85’). Dr Leanage said that, since KMD’s
more recent release from
custody, he had met with KMD twice over a telehealth link. He reported similar
observations about KMD’s
mental state to those in Ex SO76, despite
KMD’s ‘setback’ in late 2024 (being returned to custody). He
KMD had obtained full time work and stable accommodation, rekindled
former friendships and made new social connections and friendships.
Letters of support for KMD
letters of support for KMD were received by the Court.
[64] A letter
from her then employer dated 14 June 2024 (‘Ex SO74’) said that
KMD’s performance in her month of
employment was exemplary, she had
consistently exhibited the core values of the company, her work ethic,
trustworthiness and reliability
had been recognised by giving her the keys to
the business, she had focussed on continuous improvement, sought innovative
and demonstrated keen attention to detail. The company was planning to
promote her to a leading hand position in the future.
letters from two friends of KMD were also received (‘Ex SO75’
and ‘Ex SO86’). They attest to KMD’s
personal characteristics
and strengths and to their ongoing support of her and her unconditional
KMD’s 1st period in the community: July 2023 to
[66] KMD was
released from custody on 12 July 2023 and returned to custody on 23 July 2024.
From the time of her release, KMD resided
at the home of her aunt and uncle,
living with them, or living alone whilst they went travelling between November
2023 and February
Ms Guy’s recommendations
Ex SO70, Ms Guy recommended that: (a) the NCSO be revoked unconditionally; (b)
alternatively, the NCSO be revoked with a condition
that KMD not have any
that the Support Team’s functions
be redefined to ensure all members are
placing KMD’s best interests at the centre of decision
Chick’s recommendations
Ex SO77, Mr Chick recommended that KMD remain on the current NCSO, but
additionally be ordered
(a) engage fully with a psychiatrist to thoroughly explore ‘the principal
and differential diagnoses’, in order to demonstrate
‘her commitment
to being unconditionally discharged’;
(b) undertake therapeutic counselling with an appropriately qualified
forensically experienced practitioner to directly address the
index offending
behaviour and report to the Support Team and psychiatrist in writing; and
(c) be prohibited from applying for or possessing an Australian passport.
Ms Guy’s risk assessment
[69] In Ex SO70,
Ms Guy wrote that, across the 77 hours and
during which she
had engaged in counselling with KMD, there had been no evidence of any mental
health disorders,
no evidence of
depression, irritability, anxiousness, anger or malice towards
KMD’s mood had
been normal and she had been able to regulate her mood and
her thought processes
and thought content were logical and sequential, with no evidence of delusional
thoughts and no ideas or delusions
her thought processes
and content were congruent with her ability to make plans, follow through on
them, gather facts to make decisions,
address issues and seize opportunities to
achieve her goals,
and there was
no evidence of auditory or visual hallucinations or delusional
[70] In Ex SO70,
Ms Guy wrote that her discussions with KMD in their counselling sessions had
been forward focussed, and KMD was managing
appropriately.
She wrote that
KMD had no hesitation in calling Ms Guy or receiving Ms Guy’s calls,
indicating an open and therapeutic relationship.
During therapy with KMD, their
discussions had explored the past within the context of KMD navigating her
present circumstances and
making realistic future plans. KMD is aware she cannot
change the past or its outcome but can have, and does have, control over
Ms Guy wrote that KMD was mindful of the harm she caused, and had not
since her release attempted to engage with any of the persons
permitted to engage with, which shows that KMD makes good decisions about what
is in her best interests, and that her
ability to think about how she thinks is
excellent, which should alleviate concerns about safety or risk
[71] In Ex SO70,
Ms Guy assessed KMD’s risk to the safety and wellbeing of members of the
community as low, given her behaviour
Ms Guy wrote that,
after providing therapy and observing KMD’s behaviour over the period
since her release, KMD does not pose
a risk to herself and is not a risk to the
victims of the index offending or the community at
Ms Guy reasoned that if
KMD did pose an unacceptable risk, she would have manifested it before now.
Further, Ms Guy’s opinion
was that KMD does not require ongoing
psychiatric or psychological treatment or
Chick’s risk assessment
Ex SO77, Mr Chick wrote there has been no evidence of any kind since the
commencement of the NCSO that KMD has in any way
endangered any other
[73] Mr Chick
wrote that KMD had relatively stable housing, connection to culture and a very
supportive family, which offered a ‘measurable
reduction to the risk of
reoffending in the ordinary criminal
He wrote that
connection to country and culture had proven to be a significant supportive
factor for KMD and had a stabilising positive
Her numerous stays at
her parents’ property of one to two nights and of more extended durations
were reported to be without
incident. No concerns had been raised by Community
Corrections or the electronic management team, and they informed him that KMD
had followed directions from the Probation and Parole
Ex SO77, Mr Chick wrote
The perpetual
lack of treatment that KMD has received for her diagnosis, the ineffective
nature of counselling from Ms Janet Guy and
more particularly the decrease in
family support (being left to live alone) and the emergence of chaotic behaviour
are evidence that
KMD remains a risk to her victims specifically, and the
broader community more generally.
Ex SO77, Mr Chick wrote
refusal to acknowledge clinical diagnosis; refusal of pharmacological treatment;
expressed grief, trauma, anxiety and
feelings of panic, compulsion shock and
therapeutic counselling; refusal of psychiatric clinical assessment; withdrawal
of direct family support; failure to secure
employment; the emergence of chaotic
daily schedules; the fragility of her housing options and failure to secure
alternate accommodation;
her repeated episodes of agitation and discontent as
reported by Community Corrections; her misguided ruminations and agitation
the process of the Support Team and Case Manager in particular; her
willingness to ignore or give specific instruction for others
to ignore supports
(both on the phone and in person); her deliberate misrepresentation of
communication with Community Corrections;
her lie to both Batchelor and Adelaide
River clinic staff specific to her residential address; her ability to provide
different reasons
for travel cancellations; her failure to resolve her GP
nomination requirements within stipulated times; her request to have Corrections
operational and procedural guidelines disregarded or request for individual
Corrections staff to meet her requests; the identified
propensity for
systematised persecutory delusional ideation; and her solicitation of others to
perpetuate many of these concerns
all erode confidence that KMD poses little to
no risk to her victim [sic] or the broader community.
It is my opinion that living alone during this reporting period and the
emergence of hypervigilant and potentially persecutory related
behaviours has
increased KMD’s overall risk.
I ... believe it is unreasonable for KMD to be unconditionally
discharged.
Consideration of Mr Chick’s risk assessment
[76] I will
address each of the matters raised by Mr Chick in forming his opinion about the
risk KMD presents to the victims and the
community more
Assertion of ‘withdrawal of direct family
[77] In Ex SO77,
Mr Chick referred to KMD’s aunt taking leave from November 2023 to April
2024, leaving KMD living alone in
Mr Chick attributed the
‘emerged chaotic nature’ of KMD’s activities to KMD’s
aunt’s departure, stating
that this chaotic nature provides evidence that
KMD’s aunt’s direct supports were a protective
The asserted
‘chaotic behaviours’ are dealt with below.
[78] I reject Mr
Chick’s characterisation of KMD’s aunt taking leave and travelling
for five months as a ‘withdrawal
of direct family support’, which
implies that KMD had no other ‘direct family support’ in her
aunt’s absence
and that KMD somehow contributed to her aunt’s
‘withdrawal’ from her life. Both implications are inaccurate. During
this period, KMD was regularly staying at her parents’ properties,
spending considerable time with her family in person, engaging
daily with her
mother and sister by phone,
there is no doubt that she received much love and support from them during this
time. Further, KMD’s aunt has reiterated
her support for KMD and has
continued to be present in KMD’s life upon her return to
‘chaotic behaviours’ and ‘hypervigilant and potentially
persecutory related behaviours’
Ex SO77, Mr Chick wrote that, following KMD’s aunt’s departure,
electronic monitoring data of KMD’s movements
increasingly chaotic pattern of daily
activities’.
He referred
to KMD’s statements that, for her own peace of mind and safety, when she
shops or exercises, she does not keep
to a scheduled day or time, will vary her
route when exercising and goes to different shopping centres to shop, to avoid
into ex-inmates, prison officers or other
In Ex SO77, Mr Chick
wrote that Support Team meetings about this behaviour had also ‘revealed a
perceived risk of random gender-based
statements Mr Chick attributed to KMD were from a case note prepared by Ms Guy
KMD told Ms Guy that she
had been approached by an off duty prison officer when she was socialising with
a friend, who had asked
her questions about her alcohol use, her time out of
prison and what restrictions she had been placed on, which questioning made
feel uncomfortable. KMD also told Ms Guy that, while she was grocery shopping,
she ran into a former inmate. It was in this context
that KMD told Ms Guy about
being unpredictable in her shopping and exercise routines to avoid running into
and having to give information
officers, and people with whom she must not have contact under the NCSO.
cross-examination, Ms Guy said that it did not seem strange to her that a person
would go to different places to avoid running
into other inmates, that she did
ask KMD about this behaviour, and that KMD had said she did not want to run into
inmates who had
seen her at a particular place previously, and wanted to avoid
the risk of being assaulted whilst exercising by changing her routes
Ms Guy said she did not
feel that KMD was overreacting, being paranoid or feeling like she was being
persecuted as she did not sound
like that and her presentation was not like
other people Ms Guy had dealt with who were having paranoid
KMD did not say she
was being followed, she simply said she did not want to run into people from the
[82] Dr Leanage
gave oral evidence that KMD going to different and distant shopping centres in
order to avoid running into any prisoners
with whom she had been in custody did
not necessarily raise any alarm bells or red flags with
Ex SO77, Mr Chick wrote that he had discussed this behaviour with Dr Parker, and
those discussions supported earlier assessments
that KMD suffers from
systematized persecutory delusional ideation and ‘perhaps’ this was
driving KMD’s ‘chaotic
cross-examination, Mr Chick agreed that what Dr Parker said to him in their
discussion was that these thought processes and behaviours
be consistent with persecutory ideation and paranoia’ and that excessively
organised and disorganised behaviours ‘
be associated with
significant mental
He agreed that
the only basis for his statement Ex SO77 at [5.5] was Ms Guy’s record of
the conversation with KMD and what
Dr Parker said to Mr
Mr Chick said that, on
the basis of his experience, he was qualified to express the opinion that the
emergence of these ‘behavioural
changes’ supports earlier
assessments that KMD suffers systematised persecutory delusional
[84] Mr Chick
gave oral evidence that KMD’s change in behaviour commenced after she
lived alone, without her aunt
The change in behaviour
that concerned Mr Chick was what he described as ‘very disorganised or
chaotic and unreasonably thought-out
travel arrangements’ to do shopping
or exercise.
Mr Chick did
not accept Ms Guy’s explanation of this behaviour as
‘satisfactory’.
Chick described this as behaviour reaching ‘a non-normal level of
vigilance and anxiety’, which could be contrasted
with ‘an ordinary
explanation’ such as KMD just got out of prison and wanted to go shopping
in different places.
said KMD’s explanation was irrational because going to different places
would increase, not decrease, the risk of
running into more people, and that
irrationality elevated the risk of KMD causing harm to
The basis for that
conclusion was Mr Chick’s conversation with Dr
cross-examination, Mr Chick acknowledged that neither Ms Guy nor Dr Leanage
had reported any concerns as a result of this
behaviour, or any conclusions that
KMD was presenting with fixed ideas or persecutory
He also accepted that,
after he read Ms Guy’s case note, he called Ms Guy to discuss the
behaviour, but she was not persuaded
by anything he said about needing to raise
an issue or concern about the behaviour with anyone
He also accepted that
‘a woman of colour’, who has been imprisoned, might do things for
her own safety and peace of mind
that ‘a white man’, who has not
been imprisoned, might not
understand.
[86] Dr Parker
is a psychiatrist and, at least in 2015 and 2017, was the Director of Psychiatry
in the Top End Mental Health Service
who wrote reports about KMD in 2015 and
No report from Dr Parker
was tendered by the CEO Health in this periodic review proceeding and he was not
called to give evidence.
His opinions have been relayed to the Court by Mr
Chick, and KMD did not have the opportunity to cross-examine Dr Parker about
opinions. In those circumstances, they must be given little weight.
[87] Mr Chick
was the only witness who considered that KMD’s variations to her exercise
and shopping routines indicated any
suggestion of persecutory ideation and
paranoia or systematised persecutory delusional ideation. That view stemmed from
perception that this behaviour was irrational. I do not accept
that. KMD had encountered people she did not want to engage with during
routine activities, the engagements she had with those people made her feel
uncomfortable, and she sought to avoid encountering
those people again by
varying her routines. Even if doing so had the practical effect that she might
encounter other people with
whom she did not want to engage, that does not make
these variations so irrational as to disclose persecutory ideation and delusion.
Nor is it irrational for a woman regularly walking alone for exercise to make
variations to her route and times because of a concern
gender-based violence’.
Assertion KMD lied to two health
clinics about her residential address
Chick’s and the other evidence about this assertion is set out in the
section immediately below. Essentially, in the
context of the obligation on KMD
in condition 4(e) of the NCSO to nominate a new GP as a member of the Support
Team as soon as practicable
after her initial GP retired, KMD contacted two
health clinics seeking an appointment with a GP. She had previously been a
at one of them, and they were both geographically proximate to her
parents’ family home and properties.
[89] On the
basis of the evidence referred to below, I accept that KMD told administrative
staff at the Batchelor Clinic that she
lived in Batchelor or at her
parents’ properties. There is no evidence that KMD told anyone at the
Adelaide River Clinic that
she lived in those places. The evidence is that she
sought an appointment and was told she could not be seen because she lived in
[90] KMD was
permitted to have overnight stays of up to two nights per week at her
parents’ property, which is geographically
proximate to Batchelor, and KMD
was permitted to have additional stays there with permission. In addition,
KMD’s parents continue
to own the family home in
I accept that KMD
would naturally call both the family properties and the family home in Batchelor
‘home’ because they
are ‘home’ to
Noting that this evidence
is a report of what KMD said to another person, and does not purport to quote
her directly, I do not accept
that this was a deliberate untruth told to
deceive, ie a lie. Furthermore, even if it was deliberately untrue or a
misrepresentation,
it is an understandable thing to say given the difficulties
KMD was having engaging a new GP to satisfy the conditions of the NCSO.
event, even if it were a lie, there is nothing about that which suggests that
KMD is a risk to the safety of anyone.
Assertion KMD
‘failed’ to nominate a new GP within ‘stipulated’
[91] In SO77, Mr
Chick wrote that he was notified on 10 November 2023 that KMD’s nominated
GP intended to retire on 15 February
2024. He informed the Support Team that day
and ‘KMD was told’ to locate and nominate a replacement. Mr Chick
he raised the issue at every subsequent meeting of the Support Team
until Dr Leanage indicated consent to act on 29 April 2024.
[92] Mr Chick
wrote that Dr Crompton had indicated on 9 February 2024 that Dr Erickson had
accepted the role, but when Mr Chick contacted
Dr Erickson on 12 February 2024,
she had no knowledge of ‘the patient transfer or the weight or intrinsic
significance’
attached to the role and she subsequently declined it. In
cross-examination, Mr Chick agreed that he had explained to Dr Erickson
that the role required being a member of the Support Team and providing reports
to the Court, Dr Erickson said she would accept those
requirements,
Mr Chick sent Dr Erickson the ‘relevant documents appropriate to the
Court order’, which I take to be a
reference to
referred to in condition 4(a)(iv) of the NCSO. After
Dr Erickson received those documents Mr Chick discussed the case with her,
after that conversation, Dr Erickson declined the
[93] In Ex SO77,
Mr Chick wrote that he was contacted by Dr Kleinitz of the Batchelor Health
Clinic on 27 February 2024. The progress
notes written by Clinic staff were set
out by Mr Chick
and some email
correspondence was attached to Ex
Mr Chick wrote that KMD
told staff of the Batchelor Clinic that she lived in Batchelor or at her
parents’ property, whereas
her address on the Territory health system was
not in Batchelor. He also wrote that KMD had told staff of the Adelaide River
Clinic the same thing the day
[94] The annexed
email correspondence, extracted Batchelor Clinic notes, and extracts from the
PCIS and CCIS databases (explained
below), read with Mr Chick’s oral
evidence, show the following:
On 26 February 2024, the Primary
Health Centre Manager of the Adelaide River Clinic emailed the Clinic Manager of
the Batchelor Clinic,
to KMD and stating that KMD is unknown to the writer but a former patient at
Batchelor Clinic, she keeps ringing the Adelaide
River Clinic and asking for a
particular doctor, and was told that she is not eligible to be seen at the
Adelaide River Clinic because
she lives in Darwin. The writer also said
says she is a
Forensic Mental Health P[atien]t’ and asked if KMD was known to the Clinic
Manager of the Batchelor Clinic.
[95] An extract
of the PCIS database relating to KMD, identified as a ‘PCIS Alert’,
referred to three ‘Treatment
The first was
dated 29 August 2014 and stated:
[KMD] is Case Managed by the
Forensic Mental Health Team. Her CM is Yvonne Roberts Please call [phone number]
(May 21 – continue
to let Yvonne know anything re mental health) 29 Oct 21
DR BA – MSE when able + let FMHT know results)
[96] The second
Treatment Alert is not relevant.
[97] The third
Treatment Alert was dated 26 February 2024 and stated: ‘External Case
Manager contact’ and gave Mr Chick’s
name and contact details. As to
that entry, Mr Chick was not specifically aware of it, but from the time of his
engagement as the
Case Manager, would have expected it to be
[98] About two
hours later, the Clinic Manager of the Batchelor Clinic emailed Yvonne Roberts,
a clinical nurse in the Top End Mental
Health Service, based in
The email was also
copied to the Primary Health Centre Manager of the Adelaide River Clinic. The
email forwarded the initial email,
referred to KMD as ‘FMHT’s
client’, said KMD ‘has an open case in
with you’ and asked
for advice as to ‘how this should be dealt with’.
[99] An extract
of the CCIS database relating to KMD, identified as a ‘CCIS Alert’,
included a tab headed ‘Update
Person Risk’, which
Please carefully refer to Documents titled Risk Formulation
and Handover to Outsourced Case
Serious offending
history in the context of mental illness, mental illness continues to be
[100] Shortly
thereafter, Ms Roberts emailed the Clinic Manager of the Batchelor Clinic and Mr
Chick and copied in the Manager of
the Adelaide River Clinic, stating that she
was forwarding the emails to Mr Chick and stating:
As you have
gleaned there is much more to this case than meets the eye. [Manager, Adelaide
River Clinic], please don’t hesitate
to let us know if there are any
concerns that arise that are serious in nature.
[101] Mr Chick
then received a phone call from the Manager of the Batchelor Clinic and a doctor
at that Clinic, and had also called
the Manager of the Batchelor Clinic, having
a number of conversations of five minutes or
[102] Mr Chick
then emailed Ms Roberts and the Batchelor Clinic Manager, copying in the
Adelaide River Clinic Manager and saying:
Thank you for your
concerns and passing the details through to me.
As mentioned, the person in question is being managed by the CEO of Health at
this time and has the requirement to nominate a GP,
hence the pursuit of [the
doctor KMD had been asking for].
Thank you for clarifying with her the geographical requirements and current
non availability of [the doctor KMD had been asking for].
I understand she may have been a little forceful or agitated regarding her
inquiries and I would be grateful to receive case notes
regarding her inquiry if
they were made.
With regard to managing or dealing with contact in future, please maintain
the geographical limitations (she is unable to relocate
her physical address at
this time), and as previously detailed to her – an invitation to find a GP
in her local area.
If required – she can be directed to liaise (through her Support Team)
to contact me.
[103] Mr Chick
asked for the case notes so that he could compile more information about KMD
being agitated.
He said the
relevant firsthand records may include positive or negative information. I note
that none of the case notes before the
Court suggest any agitation or aggression
on KMD’s part.
[104] On 27
February 2024, Mr Chick received a phone call from a doctor at the Batchelor
Clinic saying KMD had advised she lives in
Batchelor or at her parent’s
The case notes entered
by the doctor of the Batchelor Clinic, as set out by Mr Chick, say that KMD
called the Clinic seeking an appointment
for an urgent medicolegal issue and was
told the GPs were fully booked. She asked to be called if there was a
cancellation. She said
she lived in Batchelor or at her parents’ station.
After KMD was phoned to tell her that an appointment had become available,
presented at the Clinic, but the doctor told the Clinic staff to tell KMD that
the doctor was not available on that day, so KMD
left the Clinic. The case notes
Appears not to be a resident (PCIS Address is [Darwin],
unclear history of where she is living now)
Reviewed file briefly
Complex patient. If sees a Dr – not suitable for a training doctor, so
not to be booked with GP registrar or RMO. RMP only.
However, can’t be
fitted in today, especially if not a resident and has such a complex
Need to clarify if she has become a resident of Batchelor ...
[105] Mr Chick
said the Clinic Managers of both Adelaide River and Batchelor Clinics had access
to the CCIS database, had spoken to
each other about KMD, and had also spoken to
Mr Chick about KMD.
cross-examination, Mr Chick agreed that, for each of the three GPs KMD had tried
to engage to comply with the NCSO, Mr Chick
had had a conversation with
Asked if each had declined
to be KMD’s GP after that conversation, he said Adelaide River and
Batchelor Clinics had declined
because KMD did not reside within their
geographical areas. He disagreed that it was not surprising that KMD struggled
GP to undertake the role of member of the Support Team, adding that
any doctor in the Northern Territory who ran a private clinic
would not have
access to the PCIS and the CCIS
re-examination, Mr Chick said that the PCIS and CCIS alerts are safeguards built
in to the systems to ensure continuity of
care and clinician safety, and there
are rules requiring a patient to be a resident of a clinic’s immediate
catchment area.
[108] That may
be so but, contrary to Mr Chick’s assertion about this
‘failure’ to nominate a GP in stipulated timeframes:
(a) There is no specific timeframe stipulated by condition 4(e) of the NCSO for
the nomination of a new GP. The requirement is for
a nomination ‘as soon
as practicable’ after a member of the Support Team becomes unable or
unwilling to act.
(b) With knowledge of the nature of the role and the requirement to submit
reports to the Court, Dr Erickson was willing to accept
the role, but declined
to do so after receiving the decisions and speaking to Mr Chick.
(c) The information about KMD on the PCIS and CCIS databases was accessible to
all Territory government health clinics. That information
caused the two clinics
KMD approached to contact Mr Chick about KMD’s request for an
appointment with a GP.
(d) After communications with Mr Chick, those two clinics refused to see KMD,
without giving her the opportunity to explain that
she spent a significant part
of each week staying at her parents’ properties, such that she may have
been considered by them
to satisfy the residence requirement.
(e) Mr Chick instructed those clinics to ‘maintain the geographical
limitations’ to KMD but had no authority to dictate
to them how to run
their medical practices.
[109] Despite
the difficulties in appointing a new GP, Dr Leanage’s consent to act was
received around two months after Dr Crompton
retired. In the context of
consultations approximately every two
this is not a
significant delay, let alone a ‘failure’ to comply with the NCSO,
which required a nomination as soon as
practicable after a person became unable
or unwilling to continue to act as a member of the Support
Assertion of ‘misrepresentation’ of
communications with Community Corrections
[110] In Ex
SO77, Mr Chick wrote that KMD had repeatedly made a false statement to members
of the Support Team to the effect that
she had been told by Community
Corrections (in the context of KMD’s interstate travel) that they could
refit her electronic
monitoring device after hours and did not have a problem
with her catching ‘red eye’
[111] In Ex
SO70, Ms Guy wrote that KMD did travel to Brisbane on a ‘red eye’
flight in April 2024, and her electronic
monitoring device was removed by after
hours Corrections officers at her home some five hours before the scheduled
Chick’s assertion that KMD made a false statement is inconsistent with the
evidence of Ms Guy about how Community Corrections
facilitated KMD’s
travel on a ‘red eye’ flight, and there is no other evidence to
support that assertion, let alone
that KMD ‘repeatedly’ made this
Assertion of ‘agitation’ towards the
Support Team, particularly Mr Chick
[113] None of
the numerous matters referred to by Mr Chick in Ex SO77 identify an
instance of KMD exhibiting ‘agitation’
towards the Support Team
generally. I reject that assertion.
[114] In Ex
SO77, Mr Chick wrote that KMD had expressed ‘extreme frustration’
after a hospital nurse had contacted Community
Corrections about an upcoming
medical appointment for KMD.
Chick wrote that KMD had focussed her frustrations on him, believing that he was
responsible, but he had no awareness of medical
appointments made at the
hospital for KMD.
[115] In oral
evidence, Mr Chick described this as ‘unreasonable persecutory
ideation’ because KMD ‘appeared to
fixate rather
demonstratively’ towards himself and the probation and parole officer
monitoring KMD in relation to that
cross-examination, Mr Chick
that, at the time he
wrote about this incident in Ex SO77, he was aware that, on 27 October 2023,
after Mr Chick had included the
same information in an earlier report, I stated
in Court that I accepted KMD’s evidence that she was concerned that her
be involved in or control her physical medical health regime,
upsetting to her.
Mr Chick said
that it was unreasonable to him, having worked in the Department of Health, or
as a general citizen, that a person
could reasonably have the opinion that
someone working with the Department of Health would breach confidentiality in
the way that
KMD believed had
[117] In Ex
SO77, Mr Chick wrote that he had not met KMD and had only been in her presence
once, which was on 6 March 2024 at Court.
He went to greet other members of the
Support Team who were present and KMD told him to stay away from members of her
In oral evidence, Mr
Chick described this as KMD ‘clearly’, not
‘aggressively’, telling members of her family
to stay away from
[118] Mr Chick
said this was not ‘normal social behaviour’ and ‘a piece of a
much larger puzzle’.
[119] I do not
resile from my earlier conclusion that KMD’s ‘agitated’
response to the contact from the hospital
to Community Corrections about a
physical medical appointment was understandable in the circumstances. I do not
accept that it is
evidence of unreasonable persecutory ideation. KMD’s
perception that her right to confidentiality of personal medical information
been breached was not unreasonable or illogical in the circumstances.
Assertions of ‘agitation and discontent’ and
‘aggression’ regarding Community Corrections
[120] In Ex
SO77, Mr Chick wrote that KMD had argued with Community Corrections about their
interpretation of the NCSO conditions
and made ‘unreasonable
requests’ about procedural or operational
He gave the example
that KMD had argued against the airport being an exclusion zone for electronic
monitoring purposes,
‘quite aggressive’ when Community Corrections phoned KMD’s
mother, instead of KMD, about a low battery
alert on KMD’s
[121] On 27
October 2023, after this incident had been included in an earlier report by Mr
Chick, I found that the electronic monitoring
device had not vibrated to alert
KMD that it had a low battery, and that she had provided her own mobile number
to the probation
and parole officer so she could be contacted in such an event,
but he had not passed it on to the electronic monitoring
cross-examination, Mr Chick said that the issue that concerned him about this
was KMD’s ‘aggressive’ response
to the probation and parole
officer, and he thinks KMD has a propensity for
aggression.
That view is based
upon the reports of other people made to him about their interactions with KMD,
and upon his only meeting with
KMD which occurred at Court, as described above.
[123] Mr Chick
gave oral evidence that the probation and parole officer had had many
interactions with KMD that were not ‘pleasant’
for him, and that if
someone stands their ground or is difficult, this does not really indicate a
willingness to comply with the
supervision order or an understanding of
[124] Mr Chick
appeared also to rely on matters relating to KMD making travel arrangements.
These matters are dealt with separately
[125] Aside from
the single encounter in person in Court, Mr Chick relied on what other people
had said to him about KMD’s conduct
and behaviour. Those people did not
provide any evidence and were not called at the hearing. KMD did not have the
opportunity to
cross-examine those other people. Consequently, this evidence
must be given little weight.
[126] I do not
accept that these matters are evidence of ‘aggression’ or a
‘propensity for aggression’. In
my observation of KMD whilst
representing herself before me on a number of occasions, she is an intelligent,
articulate woman, forthright,
determined and strong in character, and not afraid
to stand up for herself and speak her mind. I am aware from evidence received
across the course of my involvement in this matter that she is perceived as
difficult by public servants, correctional officers and
administrators because
she can be resistant to bureaucracy and policies and procedures. Those personal
traits are not evidence of
an unwillingness to comply with a supervision order
or a lack of understanding of process and, even if they were, that is not
of a propensity for aggression.
Assertion of a
willingness to ignore specific instructions
[127] It is not
clear what Mr Chick was referring to when he identified this as a factor
contributing to risk. Aside from the matters
referred to above and below, no
specific instance of a failure to follow a specific instruction has been
identified. In any event,
this matter seems to be a repetition of the factor
referred to immediately above.
Solicitation of others to
perpetuate many of Mr Chick’s concerns
[128] Again, it
is not clear what Mr Chick was referring to when he identified this as a factor
contributing to risk. There is no
specific instance referred to of KMD
‘soliciting’ others to do something.
Assertion of
failure to secure employment
[129] In Ex
SO77, Mr Chick wrote that KMD was currently unemployed, but her employment
opportunity was
‘measurable’.
Nevertheless, he cited this as a factor contributing to risk.
obtained employment and commenced work in around May 2024.
Assertion of ‘fragility’ of housing options and
‘failure’ to secure alternative accommodation
[131] In Ex
SO77, Mr Chick wrote that KMD’s housing was not
He said KMD’s aunt
felt ‘stressed’ having KMD stay with her, referring back to a part
in his report where he said
KMD’s aunt had said in Support Team meetings
that ‘the arrangement’ caused her significant
The context of that
statement indicates that KMD’s aunt was stressed by being a member of the
Support Team. That inference
is confirmed by KMD’s aunt’s letter to
the Court, in which she said that she welcomed with open arms, respect and love
her appointment to the Support Team. As meetings progressed, she requested many
times that the minutes (taken by Mr Chick) be amended
as they did not truly
reflect what was said. She also said she and KMD’s mother were constantly
being challenged about the
length of KMD’s stays at the properties and the
amount of time it took to travel there. Her perception was that situations
KMD were continuously misinterpreted by Mr Chick.
[132] On the
basis of this material, I reject Mr Chick’s assertion that KMD’s
aunt felt stressed at having KMD stay with
[133] In Ex
SO77, Mr Chick went on to say that the unit in which KMD was living was flooded
by stormwater in January 2024, which required
repair, which ‘precipitated
[KMD’s aunt] giving notice to KMD to vacate the property for
repairs’, and KMD had
been searching unsuccessfully for suitable
alternative accommodation since that
In the context of the
clearly loving relationship between KMD and her aunt, I do not accept Mr
Chick’s representation of the
situation as a formal transaction in which
KMD’s aunt demanded that KMD vacate the premises.
[134] In any
event, KMD secured rental accommodation around the time that she secured
employment, in May 2024.
cross-examination, Mr Chick was asked if he would qualify anything about his
risk assessment in Ex SO77 and he said that
since he wrote the report, KMD had
obtained employment, which would have resolved some of the ‘chaotic daily
and the need to find alternative accommodation had been
temporarily
of propensity for systematised persecutory delusional ideation
[136] It is not
entirely clear what Mr Chick was referring to in this factor contributing to
risk. It appears to be the following
[137] In Ex
SO77, Mr Chick wrote that Community Corrections had received a
‘perplexing’ phone call from KMD on 11 October
2023 in which she
appeared to be talking to herself and contesting her exclusion zone in
Coolalinga.
He wrote that KMD
was reminded of the boundaries of the exclusion zone and disconnected the call
without disclosing any further information.
Mr Chick said that the probation and
parole officer had noted that the initial conversation was
‘abnormal’ as KMD took
approximately five seconds to introduce
[138] Mr Chick
wrote that a Support Team meeting had established that KMD was with her aunt at
the time and likely talking to her
‘while ignoring’ the phone
cross-examination, Mr Chick agreed that this matter was one of the factors he
relied on when expressing his conclusions about
the risk KMD poses to the safety
of the public in Ex SO77.
also agreed
that, at the time
he wrote about this incident in Ex SO77, he was aware that, on 27 October 2023,
after Mr Chick had included the
same information in an earlier report, I stated
in Court that I accepted KMD’s and her aunt’s statements that, at
beginning of the phone call, KMD and her aunt were discussing with each
other where their car was in relation to the exclusion zone
boundaries.
Mr Chick said
that this phone call demonstrated to him ‘a lack of forethought and
planning amongst other things
He accepted
that KMD and her aunt were together at the time and talking about where they
were going, but thought it was relevant
to include in his risk assessment
because ‘[t]his is a very big puzzle that has lost
[140] I do not
resile from my finding that this was nothing more than a conversation between
KMD and her aunt as they were driving
and trying to ensure they were not
entering the exclusion zone, which occurred as and very shortly after
KMD’s phone call to
Community Corrections to confirm the boundary, was
answered. Even if it did demonstrate a lack of forethought and planning, which
do not accept, there is nothing about that which indicates or suggests
systematised persecutory delusional ideation.
[141] In Ex
SO77, Mr Chick wrote that KMD’s requests for travel over Christmas 2023
‘provide evidence of chaotic thoughts
complicating planning
‘evidence’ cited by Mr Chick was that KMD was unable to make the
same date travel request on consecutive occasions,
and had attempted to
‘circumvent the approval process entirely’ by claiming to have
booked an outbound flight but no
return booking had been made. KMD was reminded
of the approval process, including that a return date was required, and that any
needed to be vetted before permission would be
KMD subsequently
cancelled her request to travel at this time.
[142] Mr Chick
wrote that KMD’s requests for travel after Christmas 2023 ‘again
precipitated extensive discussions between
the Case Manager [ie, himself], the
Support Team and Community Corrections’ because KMD made multiple requests
for travel on
different dates, without address and itinerary details,
‘failed to support’ a notification process for itinerary variations,
‘contested’ the proposed electronic monitoring device disconnection
and re-connection times and requested that they occur
at times outside
operational and procedural guidelines, and asked to drive from Cairns to
[143] Mr Chick
wrote that KMD made a request for travel in April 2024 which ‘followed
previous patterns of persistent date changes’
and requests for electronic
monitoring device disconnection and reconnection outside procedural and
operational guidelines.
[144] It was put
to Mr Chick in cross-examination that these matters were irrelevant to risk and
he responded that: ‘It leads
to congruence of thought and forward
I assume Mr
Chick meant to say ‘
congruence of thought and
forward planning’.
[145] In the
context of travel restrictions, electronic monitoring, Community
Corrections’ policies and procedures about both,
flight schedules, the
cost of interstate travel, family and accommodation arrangements, and purchasing
a vehicle, difficulties identifying
a fixed travel itinerary that complies with
the policy and procedures are understandable. I do not accept that they
demonstrate or
suggest ‘chaotic thoughts’ or a propensity for
systematised persecutory delusional ideation.
remaining basis, then, for Mr Chick’s assertion of a propensity for
systematised persecutory delusional ideation is
the psychiatric evidence which
was before the Court in
, all of which I
took into account when determining that I was not satisfied that the safety of
the public would be seriously at risk
if KMD was released on a
Rejection of diagnosis and refusal of psychiatric clinical
assessment or treatment
[147] Similarly,
in coming to those conclusions, I took into account KMD’s longstanding
rejection of her diagnosis of a delusional
disorder and refusals to engage in
psychiatric clinical assessment or
[148] In Ex
SO77, Mr Chick wrote that KMD’s persistent resistance to engaging with
‘the therapeutic process’, and
her ongoing lack of insight and
paranoia, meant ‘it is unreasonable to consider KMD being unconditionally
discharged from her
[NCSO] without opinion from a forensically trained
specialised psychiatric assessment, and an accompanying thorough treatment
evidence, Mr Chick said that KMD’s unwillingness to engage in
‘testing’ of her mental illness, her insight
into her offending
behaviours, or her triggers that might exacerbate irrational thinking, were a
concern because, if there were no
issues, a person would engage effectively to
demonstrate that there were no
Chick’s opinion that it is ‘unreasonable to consider’ KMD
being discharged from the NCSO without a psychiatric
assessment and treatment
plan is potentially inconsistent with the High Court’s decision in
v CEO (Department of Health
The High Court held
(at [25]) that KMD was under no statutory obligation to cooperate with medical
experts (ie, to undertake a psychiatric
assessment), nothing in Part IIA of the
Criminal Code
makes such cooperation a prerequisite to the conduct of a
periodic review and the evaluation of the evidence on a periodic review
precluded by the failure to cooperate with psychiatric assessment. On that
basis, the High Court upheld KMD’s appeal
from the decision of the Court
of Criminal Appeal. I do not accept Mr Chick’s proposition as a statement
of principle, or the
approach the Court should take.
[150] In Ex
SO77, Mr Chick wrote that, as at 17 May 2024, Dr Das had recommended that KMD
undertake psychodynamic therapy, cognitive
behaviour therapy, grief counselling
and trauma therapy.
[151] Dr Das
wrote reports and gave evidence in the last periodic
Health did not tender any new reports written by Dr Das in this periodic review,
or call him to give any evidence. No evidence
was received by him about the
underlying bases of his recommendations, why he made them, or how the
recommendations would reduce
risk. KMD did not have the opportunity to
cross-examine Dr Das about these matters. Consequently, little weight can be
given to these
recommendations as expressions of expert opinion.
cross-examination, Mr Chick said that he and Dr Das had talked through things
that KMD could do if she was ‘committed
to demonstrating her resolve to
put these matters behind her’, and engaging in
all of these
therapies ‘would be beneficial to satisfying the Court that’ the
index offending was behind
cross-examination, Mr Chick denied that Ms Guy had provided KMD cognitive
behaviour therapy, and when referred to her statement
to that effect in Ex
he said: ‘I think
in her mind that she has,
He also denied Ms
Guy had provided KMD grief counselling, and when referred to her statement to
that effect in Ex SO70,
he said: ‘Episodically,
Chick’s comments provide no basis to disregard Ms Guy’s
evidence, which I accept, that she has undertaken cognitive
behaviour therapy
and grief counselling with KMD. Consequently, KMD has recently engaged in two of
the four therapies recommended
[155] If one
accepts Mr Chick’s proposition that engagement in some or all of these
recommended therapies is a basis for the
Court to accept KMD’s commitment
to ‘putting these matters behind her’, she has so engaged and her
commitment is
demonstrated.
Expressions of grief, trauma, anxiety
and feelings of panic, compulsion, shock and weariness
[156] The basis
in Ex SO77 for this risk factor is a reference to
This passage was
dealing with a submission by KMD that she did not have a mental illness in May
2013 because her actions were a response
to her feelings of grief, anxiety,
panic, compulsion, shock and weariness.
[157] Mr Chick
did not explain how KMD’s feelings in 2013 bore on his assessment of her
risk in 2024. There is therefore no
basis upon which to accept that these
feelings do so bear.
Assertion of ‘ineffective’
counselling with Ms Guy
[158] In Ex
SO70, Ms Guy wrote that she had undertaken mental state examinations and
provided counselling utilising psychoanalysis,
motivational interviewing,
cognitive behavioural therapy, narrative therapy and humanistic therapy during
77 hours and 50 minutes
of therapeutic interaction via telephone calls or
teleconferencing which permitted face to face contact and views of KMD’s
living environment.
discussions have explored the past within the context of KMD navigating her
present circumstances and making realistic future
[159] In Ex
SO77, Mr Chick wrote that Ms Guy ‘continued to describe KMD as
“guarded”’ and to say that any
attempt to initiate therapeutic
discussions or reflect on the events surrounding the index offending were met
with immediate defensive
prohibitive
responses’.
wrote that this has prevented ‘measurable progress’ by meaningful
exploration of the underlying issues and has
impeded KMD’s ability to
reflect on and process her
experiences.
[160] There is
no indication in Ex SO77 of where Mr Chick heard or found Ms Guy describing KMD
as ‘guarded’. There is
no such statement in Ex SO70 or in any of the
case notes annexed to that report of Ms Guy’s seven counselling sessions
KMD between 29 February and 14 May 2024.
cross-examination, Ms Guy was asked if she had told Mr Chick that she had
tried to investigate KMD’s thoughts about
the past and KMD became very
defensive and did not want to do so, and Ms Guy
Each time I
had contact with KMD, we did discuss different aspects of her past at different
times. And on occasion, it wasn’t
that sort of defensive, but [she was]
wanting to move forward and not dwell on the past. She ... didn’t want to
the things from the past.
... She [was not] being defensive or – she was quite open about what
had happened, and she has got an understanding that she
can’t change the
things that happened. ...
[162] Ms Guy
able to delve into what were the causes of KMD’s
mental state at the time of the index offending, which KMD had discussed with
her in the therapy, and they had also discussed that KMD had not had any contact
with her sons, and how KMD was dealing with
[163] In Ex
SO77, Mr Chick wrote that Ms Guy ‘appears ineffective’ in providing
‘any genuinely therapeutic clinical
counselling’, and her mental
state reports were done ‘anecdotally rather than
Mr Chick described the behaviour referred to in
above (ie, the ‘chaotic’
behaviours and daily schedule) as ‘apparent hypervigilant, obsessive and
consuming thoughts
which are significantly affecting
s behaviour’.
He said it was ongoing and underreported, which demonstrated that Ms Guy’s
counselling was ineffective. Mr Chick said this
was because KMD was
‘obstructive’ to resolving feelings of extreme grief, trauma,
anxiety or compulsions that contributed
to her index offending; the counselling
with Ms Guy was ‘forward looking rather than forensic’; and there
had been little
to no therapeutic progress in meaningfully exploring open and
honest retrospective therapy.
[164] I do not
accept Mr Chick’s assertion that Ms Guy’s counselling with KMD has
been ‘ineffective’. I have
already rejected his assertion about
KMD’s ‘chaotic behaviours’. I also reject that Ms Guy
to ‘report’ these ‘behaviours’ to
the Support Team, given that they were contained in her case notes which
all been provided to Mr Chick and the Support Team. I also reject his
assertion that KMD is ‘obstructive to resolving’
her feelings of
grief, trauma, anxiety or compulsion that contributed to her index offending,
and that the counselling is not ‘forensic’,
as they are inconsistent
with Ms Guy’s evidence as just referred to. Nor is there any
identified basis for Mr Chick’s
assertion that there had been
‘little to no therapeutic progress in meaningfully exploring open and
honest retrospective therapy’.
It is not known how he would measure
KMD’s ‘therapeutic progress’. The bases for Mr Chick’s
assertion of
ineffectiveness are therefore not made out.
cross-examination, Mr Chick agreed that ‘therapeutic’ is about
healing, and when it was put to him that Ms Guy’s
approach was
therapeutic, he said: ‘I think ... Ms Guy is
over-invested’.
Chick’s characterisation of Ms Guy as ‘over-invested’ is met
by Ms Guy’s characterisation of her
relationship with KMD as ‘open
and therapeutic’
her interactions with KMD as
‘therapeutic’.
Mr Chick’s approach to his assessment of KMD’s risk
cross-examination, Mr Chick maintained that each of the matters referred to in
the passage from Ex SO77 set out in paragraph
Asked if he
had marshalled all of the matters referred to in this passage to try, on behalf
of the CEO Health, and make a case against
KMD’s application for
revocation of the NCSO, Mr Chick said: ‘It’s my position that the
NCSO should be continued.
[168] Another
example of this approach is as follows. In Ex SO77, Mr Chick wrote that he
had received correspondence from RL and Police
after RL had seen KMD at the
Darwin airport on the day she travelled to Brisbane to visit her
RL was recorded as
being ‘quite shocked’, ‘a bit irate’ and ‘gravely
concerned’ that KMD’s
electronic monitoring device had been removed
for the purposes of that travel without him being informed. Mr Chick wrote that,
KMD ‘strenuously denied’ having seen RL, as reported at
Support Team meetings, RL advised that KMD ‘definitely
Whether KMD saw
RL or not is unnecessary to decide and, other than these conflicting hearsay
reports, there is no evidence upon which
I could do so.
cross-examination, Mr Chick agreed that in an earlier report to the Court
referring to RL being at the airport on this occasion,
he had concluded that
‘KMD managed the event appropriately through immediate avoidance action
and the likelihood of a recurrence
is extremely
negligible’.
his conclusion made what was set out in Ex SO77 about this encounter irrelevant
to risk, he said: ‘Not according to
the victim impact
statements’.
re-examination, Mr Chick said that if he had been able to interact with KMD
directly he would have ‘a much better sense
of things as they really
are’ through a thorough clinical assessment of his own, rather than
receiving information about KMD
appears to be an attempt to explain Mr Chick’s extensive reliance upon
matters that are trivial, or for which there
is an obvious and less sinister
explanation, and an acknowledgement that he has relied on matters that may well
be irrelevant to
risk, as I have found that the vast majority of them are.
[172] Ultimately,
Mr Chick concludes that:
(a) KMD ‘remains a risk’ (paragraph
above); and
(b) the factors he listed ‘erode confidence that KMD poses little to no
risk’ (paragraph
to the victims and the broader community.
observed in
(at [164]-[165]), in cases of this kind, where a
supervised person has committed an act of violence for which they were found not
guilty by reason of mental impairment, the limb of risk associated with the
magnitude of harm is virtually static and will effectively
remain indefinitely,
so there will always be some element of risk. This means a satisfaction that
there is no risk is not attainable.
Furthermore, the statute does not prescribe
any specific test for the continuation or revocation of a NCSO and does not
the test as being whether there is ‘little to no risk’.
[174] For all of
the above reasons, Mr Chick’s conclusions are of little assistance in this
periodic review.
KMD’s return to custody: July 2024 to
[175] KMD was
returned to custody on 23 July 2024 and released from custody on 13 March 2025.
[176] In Ex
SO81, Mr Chick wrote that upon KMD’s arrest, she was described as
‘co-operative with police and engag[ing]
[177] In Ex
SO84, Ms Guy wrote that KMD’s behaviour after hearing of the Court of
Appeal’s revocation of the NCSO reflected
a high level of self-regulation
under extreme stress.
[178] In Ex
SO81, Mr Chick wrote that, at the prison, KMD was placed ‘at risk’
and housed in the ‘at risk’
cells at the prison due to concerns
‘high risk’
to her safety and the safety of others. She was
thereupon described as ‘very guarded when asked questions, not wanting to
much emotion’. KMD reportedly told staff that she did not need to
engage with prison health staff.
[179] In Ex
SO84, Ms Guy wrote that the classification of KMD as ‘at risk’ was
at the ‘directive’ of Mr
It is unknown where
Ms Guy obtained that information and she is not in a position from which
she would necessarily have it. I cannot
accept this assertion.
[180] In Ex
SO81, Mr Chick wrote that, on 24 July 2025, KMD did not acknowledge or make eye
nursing staff and rolled her eyes when
asked if she would be happier going off ‘at
She reportedly
said the psychiatrist was ‘a spy for FMH’ and that she would not
talk further. Mr Chick wrote that KMD
refused to interact with ongoing efforts
to engage with her about ‘affective / psychotic disturbance, self harm
ideation or
behaviour’.
[181] In Ex
SO84, Ms Guy wrote that, during this time, KMD felt repeatedly pressured to
engage in assessment, felt distrustful of
the psychiatrist, and was told she
would not be moved to the general population accommodation until she submitted
to a psychiatric
evaluation.
[182] Mr Chick
wrote that, on 25 July 2024, the psychiatrist determined that KMD should be
taken off ‘at risk’.
[183] Mr Chick
wrote that Corrections Officers reported that KMD refused to leave the ‘at
risk’ cells.
2025, KMD said to a mental health nurse that she did not want to speak to them
and did not want to see anyone from FMHT
and asked that they respect her wishes
and go away, then lay back on the mattress and faced the
KMD maintained that
attitude during all medical and support staff engagements and refused to leave
the ‘at risk’
Mr Chick described KMD
as being ‘passive aggressive and curt’.
September 2024, KMD was placed in the general women’s section of the
She refused to engage
with mental health supports for the duration of her time in
[185] Mr Chick
wrote that, on 11 November 2024, KMD was reported by Corrections staff to be
making ‘multiple demands, complaints
and accusations’.
[186] In Ex
SO84, Ms Guy wrote that, when received into custody, KMD was issued an orange
remand shirt, signifying she had been classified
as having been charged with a
new offence or had breached her NCSO, and she protested that she had not done so
and asked for a review
classification.
[187] While KMD
was detained, all counselling sessions with Ms Guy were
[188] Mr Chick
wrote that KMD’s refusal to engage with clinical support during her time
in custody perpetuates the concern that
she is ‘perpetually unwilling to
engage in the recommended pathway to become unconditionally discharged from her
and her remaining in the ‘at risk’ cells was ‘an
attempt to further exert control over her circumstances’,
‘reinforces previous psychiatric
[189] Ms Guy
wrote that, following her return to custody, KMD remained composed and, despite
the adverse and disorienting circumstances
and emotional strain of her
re-detention, conducted herself with dignity, patience and integrity, including
representing herself
in the appeal to the High
Ms Guy described
KMD’s behaviour as a ‘principled refusal to engage’ with the
Forensic Mental Health Team ‘under
coercive circumstances’ which was
conducted ‘calmly, without
escalation’.
that KMD demonstrated ‘psychological resilience under extremely
challenging
conditions’.
, I noted the evidence that KMD had never, during her time in custody,
expressed ideas of self-harm.
I found that there is
no risk that KMD would endanger herself. Similarly, I noted the evidence that,
during her time in custody,
KMD had never acted violently towards, or
threatened, another person.
Neither at the time of her arrest, nor at the time of her receipt into custody,
was there any suggestion by her conduct that KMD
intended to harm herself or
another person. It is therefore likely that being placed into the ‘at
risk’ cells, and being
prevailed upon to engage with members of the FMHT
as a consequence, came as a surprise to KMD and upset or annoyed her. I
find that her refusal to leave the ‘at risk’ cells after
she was permitted to do so was a form of passive protest against
being placed
‘at risk’ in the first place. Mr Chick appears to accept as much by
characterising this as ‘an attempt
to further exert control over her
circumstances’. Mr Chick did not explain how that attempt
‘reinforces previous psychiatric
opinion’ or what opinion in
particular he was referring to.
aspect of KMD’s behaviour upon her return to custody therefore adds
nothing to the risk factor comprising her pre-existing
and ongoing unwillingness
to engage with psychiatric assessment and treatment.
period in the community: March 2025 to present
[192] KMD was
released from custody on 13 March 2025 and was again subject to the conditions
of the NCSO.
Ms Guy’s recommendations
[193] In Ex
SO84, Ms Guy essentially repeated her recommendations from Ex SO70, as set out
in paragraph
Mr Chick’s recommendations
[194] In Ex
SO81, Mr Chick repeated his recommendations from Ex SO77, as set out in
addition, he recommended re-constitution of the Support Team by:
(a) exploring some alternative case management process (not identified) due to
KMD’s refusal to engage with any representative
of the CEO Health; and
(b) addressing (in some unidentified way) that KMD’s family members
‘no longer have any immediate proximity to KMD’
demonstrated a failure to recognise or reluctance to report the emergence of the
‘potentially clinically significant’
chaotic behaviour.
[196] In Ex
SO81.A, Mr Chick wrote that the ongoing constitution of the Support Team
‘is untenable’ because of: (1) Ms
Guy’s failures (referred to
below) to report in her case notes or notify the Case Manager of three breaches
of the conditions
of the NCSO and her apparent support for further breaches; (2)
KMD’s mother’s lack of clinical forensic expertise and
unavailability for meetings; (3) KMD’s sister’s location
interstate meaning she is unable to provide ‘any
real time concerns (if
any) about KMD’s mental state or needs’. Mr Chick wrote that KMD and
the other members of the
Support Team ‘have complete disregard for the
significance of breaches of Order 4(s)’. He recommended that
‘breach[es]
be recorded against KMD of’ conditions 4(s) (contact
with her children) and 4(q) (not entering within 5km of the residences
Ms Guy’s risk assessment
[197] In Ex
SO84, Ms Guy essentially repeated the matters referred to in Ex SO70, noting
that previous psychiatric risk concerns have
not manifested, even under
stressful conditions or during her recent incarceration and
Chick’s risk assessment
[198] In Ex
SO81, Mr Chick essentially repeated the matters referred to in Ex SO77. He added
that nothing he has observed since his
appointment as Case Manager had dissuaded
his concurrence with KMD’s previously identified propensity for
systematized persecutory
delusional ideation and
Employment, housing, family support
[199] In Ex
SO81, Mr Chick wrote that KMD had secured full-time employment in an office
administration role, and she had secured ‘relatively
[200] In Ex
SO84, Ms Guy stated that, by recommencing with her employer shortly after her
release (on 7 April 2025), KMD demonstrated
a high degree of adaptability
and self-direction.
[201] Mr Chick
wrote that the Support Team reported KMD had experienced significant stress
following her release due to damaged or
lost belongings and housing and
financial insecurity, but Mr Chick noted that KMD had re-engaged well with her
Counselling
with Ms Guy
[202] In Ex
SO81, Mr Chick wrote that KMD’s counselling sessions with Ms Guy did not
resume until 4 April 2025, for reasons
He wrote that Ms
Guy’s reports provide no indication that there has been any therapeutic
discussions or reflection on the events
surrounding the index offending, which
remains a significant barrier to ‘measurable
[203] In Ex
SO84, Ms Guy wrote that, during her counselling sessions with KMD, which had by
then amounted to around 80
she had utilised a
variety of therapeutic approaches including psychoanalysis, motivational
interviewing, cognitive behavioural therapy,
narrative therapy and humanistic
Ms Guy wrote that
KMD engages in self-reflective therapy and recognises the impact of past trauma
without fixating on what cannot
findings set out above as to Mr Chick’s views that the counselling with Ms
Guy is ‘ineffective’ are equally
applicable here.
Support Team meetings resumed
[205] In Ex
SO81, Mr Chick wrote that the reinstatement of the Support Team meetings was
complicated by engagement or response failures
Meetings were
recommenced on 22 April 2025 and had been held fortnightly since
Earlier assertion of ‘chaotic’
[206] In Ex
SO81, Mr Chick wrote that Ms Guy’s reports suggested that KMD’s
daily routine had been significantly more
stable than as reported in Ex SO77 and
electronic monitoring data had been sought to confirm that.
[207] Regardless,
my findings set out above as to Mr Chick’s assertion of
‘chaotic’ behaviours are equally applicable
NCSO breach by entering exclusion zone on 11 April 2025
[208] In Ex
SO81, Mr Chick reported that, on 11 April 2025, KMD was a passenger in her
employer’s company car when it entered
the Coolalinga Shopping Centre car
park. The driver was not aware of the exclusion zone and did not tell KMD about
the planned stop
to purchase food. KMD remained in the car and immediately
evidence establishes that KMD’s entry into the exclusion zone was
unintentional and occurred through no fault of
[210] I find
that it was not a breach of the conditions of the NCSO.
breach by having unplanned contact with M
statutory declaration made on 10 June 2025 by JC, KMD’s former partner and
the father of her son, M, was received into
evidence (‘Ex SO83’). M
is now 14 years old.
[212] In Ex
SO83, JC said that, around two to three months before, he had run into KMD and
she asked if she was able to see M, JC
had said that M does not know KMD, and JC
did not want ‘the boat rocked’ as it had just been him and M while
in custody. JC told KMD that he would speak to M and that he understood
KMD is M’s mother. JC was not willing to give KMD his
phone number, but he
accepted KMD’s phone number so M could call her if he wished. JC told KMD
he did not want anything to
do with her and KMD told JC the same thing, saying
she just wants to see M. JC then left.
[213] JC said
that, the next morning, he told M that he bumped into M’s mother, had her
phone number and M could have it if
he wanted. JC told M he would not stop M
from calling her. JC said that M told him to keep KMD’s number as he just
leave things how they are because he does not know KMD. They did not
speak about that again.
[214] In Ex
SO83, JC said that, a short time later, he and M were at a shopping centre when
KMD came running up from behind them,
ran in front of them and stopped, raising
both arms out in front of her and pleading for a hug from M as she looked at JC.
He understood
KMD to be asking JC if she could hug M. JC said he was standing
there in shock and nodded his head. He felt very awkward and thought
M gave KMD a hug, looking at JC in a way that conveyed to JC that M felt very
awkward. JC felt that KMD was very loving.
She asked M if he knew who she was
and M said: ‘Yeah, you are my mum.’ They all stood there for a bit
and then JC said
goodbye to KMD and walked away with M. As they walked away, M
told JC that it was a very awkward situation. JC said he did not feel
happy about this encounter, but felt that KMD should not have done what she did.
JC said that, since that encounter, every
time they go to that shopping centre,
M asks JC if his mother is going to ‘jump out of the bushes
[215] In Ex
SO84, Ms Guy wrote that KMD had had ‘meaningful and positive’
at a shopping
Ms Guy wrote that
when KMD asked M for a hug, M smiled at her and said she could. Ms Guy also
wrote that JC’s acceptance of
KMD’s phone number suggested his
willingness to support ongoing contact and potentially re-establish a
relationship between
[216] It is
apparent that what Ms Guy wrote about the encounter recounted what KMD had told
her about it. It reflects KMD’s
perception of it.
[217] Although
the contact between KMD and M was unexpected, rather than planned, it was
intentional in the sense that KMD could have
avoided any contact and walked away
when she saw JC and M at the shopping centre. KMD’s actions were clearly
intentional, not
accidental. She must also be taken to have been aware of the
condition that she not have any contact with M except in accordance
parenting plan or order under the
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law Act
). Consequently, I find that it was an
intentional breach of the conditions of the NCSO.
breach, and the earlier provision of KMD’s phone number to facilitate
of any contact between KMD and M
for many years and KMD’s wish to have contact with M as relayed to JC in
her encounter some
months before, and JC’s response to that expressed
wish, which was to accept KMD’s phone number for the purposes of contact
with KMD if M wanted that to occur. M did not want to take up the offer, but KMD
was not informed of that directly. That M did not
want to have contact could
have been inferred by KMD from the lack of contact from him thereafter, but it
would have been a difficult
inference for KMD to draw and understandable that
she did not.
[219] Understandably,
this encounter after many years of non-contact made M feel awkward. It is
possible that his comments to JC when
they have been to the same shopping centre
since then demonstrate some anxiety on his part about any further encounters
To date, his decision has been that he does not want further contact
with KMD at this stage and his wishes must be respected.
breaches by having contact with R
statutory declaration made on 10 June 2025 by R, KMD’s son with RL, was
received into evidence (‘Ex SO82’).
R is now 18 years old, turning
[221] In Ex
SO82, R said that, on 3 June 2025, he was driving in RL’s car on the
Stuart Highway when he heard a beeping noise,
looked out the window and saw a
blue SUV car which sped up parallel to him and he saw a woman in that car by
herself. The woman waved
and a short time later drove off. R was wondering who
the woman was and then realised that it was probably his mother as she was
dark-skinned female with curly hair. R called RL and told him what had happened,
not because R was concerned or bothered by it,
but because he thought RL would
be concerned. He and RL went to the Police Station a couple of hours later to
report what had happened.
evidence establishes that a dark-skinned woman with curly hair in a blue SUV
beeped her horn, drove up next to the
car R was driving, waved at him and then
drove off. The woman might have been KMD, because she arguably fits that
description, but
in the absence of any other evidence, it cannot be inferred on
the balance of probabilities that it was KMD. Consequently, I do not
accept that
KMD engaged in this conduct.
[223] In Ex
SO82, R also said that, several months previously, KMD had requested to be his
friend on Facebook. R did not see the request
straight away as he does not use
Facebook much. When he did see it, he ignored it as he did not care to accept
the request.
[224] In Ex
SO84, Ms Guy wrote that R had initiated online contact by adding KMD as a friend
on social media, along with KMD’s
[225] As regards
to who initiated this contact, Ms Guy’s version of events is not
consistent with R’s. He said KMD made
the request. I accept his evidence
that KMD did so.
[226] In Ex
SO81.A, Mr Chick noted the reference in Ms Guy’s report (Ex SO84) to KMD
having contact with her son, R, and said
that clarification is required as to
the operation of condition 4(s) of the NCSO, given that R is no longer a
[227] Condition
4(s) provides that KMD is only permitted to ‘have contact’ with the
children in certain circumstances.
[228] Making a
friend request of a person on Facebook can fall within the term
‘contact’, but barely so, given that the
person to whom the request
is made can choose to accept that request or ignore it. If they ignore it, no
further contact can be engaged
in through Facebook.
[229] Condition
4(s) of the NCSO refers to ‘the children’ and contact only in
accordance with a parenting plan or order
made under the
Family Law Act
At the time of these contacts, R was not a child and could not have been subject
to any parenting plan or order. The CEO Health
argued that the reference to
‘children’ was by way of identification rather than an intent that
the condition only apply
when R was a child, with the effect that after he
turned 18 and could not be the subject of any parenting plan or order, the
prohibition
on contact was absolute. KMD argued that, in its terms, condition
4(s) ceased to apply to R when he turned 18 because he no longer
fell within the
word ‘children’.
[230] As these
submissions demonstrate, condition 4(s) is ambiguous in its terms, with the
effect that KMD may well have believed
that she was not breaching the condition
by reaching out to R on Facebook (or by waving at him from a car).
[231] In any
event, it is unnecessary to decide which is the ‘correct’
construction when the likelihood is, and I am satisfied,
that any breach was
unintentional.
Asserted ‘failures’ by Ms Guy to
report these contact breaches
[232] In Ex
SO84, Ms Guy referred to the contact with KMD’s children as set out above,
but wrote that KMD had consistently complied
with all NCSO
conditions.
[233] In Ex
SO81.A, Mr Chick noted references in Ms Guy’s report (Ex SO84) to KMD
having contact with her sons, R and
He wrote that these
with KMD on 28 May 2025, or reported
by Ms Guy in the Support Team meeting on
6 June 2025.
wrote that when he raised the contacts in the Support Team meeting, Ms Guy
‘continued to support KMD re-establishing
a relationship with her sons,
notwithstanding the NCSO
conditions’.
wrote that Ms Guy did not express any concern that these contacts contravened,
and any future contact would further contravene,
the condition of the
He also wrote that Ms
Guy’s reporting of these matters was ‘consistent with a significant
assessment bias’.
[234] Under the
NCSO, Ms Guy is not tasked with ‘policing’ KMD’s compliance
with the conditions of the NCSO. The
members of the Support Team are to provide
care and support to KMD (condition 4(a)), Ms Guy is to provide weekly to
fortnightly counselling
sessions to KMD (condition 4(f)), Support Team meetings
are to discuss KMD’s mental state and progress in the community (condition
4(h)(i)), Support Team members may raise concerns they have about KMD’s
mental state with the Case Manager (condition 4(h)(ii)),
and members of the
Support Team are able to share information with each other about KMD and her
mental state (condition 5). It is
the role of the Case Manager to report
concerns that KMD has breached or is about to breach the NCSO to the Director of
Public Prosecutions
for consideration of the making of an urgent application to
the Court under s 43ZE or the CEO Health (condition 4(h)(v)).
circumstances where Ms Guy did not have any concerns about KMD’s mental
state arising from her contacts with R and
M, there was no requirement on her to
‘report’ these contacts to the Case Manager or the Support Team. Mr
criticisms of Ms Guy in this regard are therefore
unwarranted.
NCSO breach by entering exclusion zone on 3 June
[236] In Ex
SO81.A, Mr Chick wrote that, on 3 June 2025, he was informed by Community
Corrections that electronic monitoring data
showed that KMD had entered the 5km
exclusion zone around the residences of RL and Mrs L at 12.19pm and remained
there until 12.39pm.
showed that she was at an address adjacent to the Stuart Highway. Community
Corrections had called KMD twice, with the calls
going to her message
Mr Chick asked
Community Corrections to notify
Community Corrections
did not notify Police as they took the view that notification was to be made by
Mr Chick. At 12.58pm, Mr Chick
was informed that KMD was no longer in the
exclusion zone.
He decided to
said his call was answered by KMD who
hung up after he identified himself. Mr
Chick informed Community Corrections about that
He was told Community
Corrections called the employer and the person who answered told them they did
not have a KMD there. KMD did
not respond to the messages left on her phone by
Community Corrections.
[237] Mr Chick
wrote that KMD had later informed Community Corrections that she had gone to the
location for work purposes, she ultimately
accepted that she had entered the
exclusion zone, she was aware Mr Chick had called her at work, she usually has
her phone on her
and has good mobile coverage, and she described how to have a
call put through to her at
Community Corrections
said KMD was understanding that they were having trouble reaching her.
[238] Mr Chick
wrote that the specifics of KMD’s exclusion zone locations had been
thoroughly discussed with KMD on numerous
occasions, including after she entered
the exclusion zone on 11 April
[239] KMD did
enter the exclusion zone, travelling just inside its outer boundary. On the
basis that the location of the exclusion
zone had been discussed with her on
numerous occasions, and her agreement with Community Corrections that she had
entered, I find
that KMD was aware that she entered the exclusion zone, making
this an intentional breach. She did so, remaining there for 20 minutes,
purposes relating to her employment, and was subject to continual monitoring
whilst there.
Whether KMD is likely to endanger herself or
another person because of her mental condition – s 43ZN(1)(a)
KMD is not likely to endanger herself
[240] As already
mentioned, in
, I concluded that there was no risk that, if KMD
were released, she would endanger herself because of her mental
There is no
evidence received in this periodic review to alter that conclusion.
relevant issue is whether KMD is likely to endanger another person because of
her mental condition.
Meaning of ‘likely to
matter is concerned with the
that KMD would engage in acts of
violence which would expose other persons to
[243] The word
‘likely’ can, depending upon its context, have a range of meanings
including ‘probable’ (as
in, more likely than not) or a chance that
is more than merely possible.
similar context to the present, the Victorian Court of Appeal held in
Director of Public Prosecutions
, that the focus of a similarly worded
provision is upon the extent of the chance, risk or peril of some harm
materialising.
It requires an
assessment of the likelihood of the risk materialising and whether or not that
more than merely possible
is the critical consideration, not the
gravity of the harm that may eventuate.
Is KMD likely to endanger
another person?
, I concluded that the likelihood that KMD would act on her delusional
beliefs and endanger members of the public is low, but real
rather than
), on the basis of the evidence then before me, I confirmed that
conclusion.
[246] Since that
time, KMD has been in the community under an NCSO for over 15 months (up to the
date of the hearing in the second
tranche of this periodic review). She has not
engaged in any act of violence against any person, nor has she threatened any
with violence.
[247] The CEO
Health argued that the period of time during which KMD has been in the community
thus far is insufficient to ‘substantiate
a reduction to her level of
risk’. This submission was founded upon the psychiatric evidence to the
effect that KMD’s
delusions developed over several years before she
engaged in the acts of violence the subject of the index offending in 2013.
submission cannot be accepted. It has now been over 12 years since KMD has
engaged in any act of violence. The CEO Health’s
approach effectively
disregards the lengthy period of time in which KMD was in custody before being
released. That period commenced
at the time when KMD’s delusions were
florid but there were no further acts of violence whilst in custody. Further,
no basis upon which to infer that any new delusions would only commence
after KMD was released into the community such that the likelihood
members of the community may be expected to arise some years thereafter.
[249] The 15
months that KMD has spent in the community to date, without committing or
threatening any act of violence, without demonstrating
any evidence of
delusional or incongruent thinking, with only two minor breaches of the
conditions of the NCSO, and with all of the
protective factors (employment,
stable accommodation, family support and cultural connections) leads me to the
conclusion that the
chance or risk that KMD would harm another person because of
her mental condition is no more than merely possible.
[250] I have
addressed above the matters relied upon by Mr Chick in reaching his conclusions
to the psychiatric evidence taken into
and, given his conclusions, they are of little
assistance in this periodic review.
[251] On the
basis of all of the evidence before me, including that which relates to the
period since 12 July 2023, I find that the
chance or risk that KMD would harm
another person is no more than merely possible. Consequently, I find that KMD is
not likely to
endanger herself or another person because of her mental
The need to protect people from danger –
s 43ZN(1)(b)
observed in
(at [154]-[155]), this matter brings into
consideration both the likelihood of endangering people and the magnitude of the
harm to people which, on the basis that past behaviour is a reasonable
predictor of at least the capacity for future behaviour, KMD’s
offending makes the magnitude of the risk of harm to others high.
[253] Where a
risk of a high magnitude is no more than merely possible, there remains some
need to protect people from danger, just
as there will always remain some risk
as a consequence of KMD’s index offending.
The nature of
the mental condition – s 43ZN(1)(c)
[254] Nothing
received on this periodic review causes me to revise the findings I made in
and maintained in
(at 157]-[158]) that KMD
has a mental condition, namely a delusional disorder, whereby she holds a system
of delusional beliefs on
which she has acted and may
Relationship between the mental condition and the offending
conduct – s 43ZN(1)(d)
[255] Again,
nothing received on this periodic review causes me to revise the findings I made
(at [159]) that on 7 May 2013,
KMD acted on her delusional belief system, with serious aggression and violence
towards three other
people, firing six shots from a gun at or towards those
people, causing two of them physical harm.
Whether there are
adequate resources available for KMD’s treatment and support in the
community – s 43ZN(1)(e)
[256] It is
irrefutable that there is treatment and support available to KMD in the
community. No party submitted to the contrary.
Whether KMD is
complying or likely to comply with the conditions of the NCSO –
s 43ZN(1)(f)
[257] Aside from
the two intentional breaches of the NCSO found above, KMD has complied with the
conditions of the NCSO since 12 July
2023. Up to the date of the hearing,
that was a period of over one year and 11 months.
[258] The two
breaches were of a minor nature and did not give rise to any additional risk of
harm to any person.
[259] I reject
the submission of the CEO Health that these two breaches are demonstrative of an
attitude of non-compliance on the
part of KMD. There is no suggestion of any
pattern of non-compliance from which such an attitude could be
The CEO Health’s primary position: Revoke the
NCSO and place KMD on a CSO
primary position of the CEO Health was that there is no practicable alternative
consistent with maintaining and protecting
the safety of the community other
than to commit KMD to custody on a CSO. This position was founded upon the
evidence relied upon
by the CEO Health in the previous periodic review.
submission is somewhat surprising given my decision in
CEO Health’s abandonment of its appeal against that decision, and where
the only new evidence relied on by the CEO
Health in this periodic review is the
evidence of Mr Chick, whose recommendations were not for KMD to be returned to a
CSO, but for
KMD to remain on a NCSO, albeit varied in certain ways.
[262] Seemingly
in response to the recommendations of Mr Chick (their own witness), the CEO
Health argued that a condition that KMD
engage in psychiatric treatment is a
condition no more than the minimum necessary to protect the safety of the
public, KMD will not
comply with such a condition and, consequently, she should
be placed on a CSO and returned to custody.
[263] As the CEO
Health acknowledged, in
, I rejected that submission and
determined that the evidence now relied on in this periodic review did not lead
me to that conclusion.
[264] None of
the evidence received on this periodic review has caused me to reach the
conclusion that a CSO is the only way to maintain
and protect the safety of the
Outcome: Vary the conditions of the NCSO
[265] On the
basis of the conclusions set out above, particularly that the risk or chance
that KMD would endanger another person because
of her mental condition is no
more than merely possible, I consider that it is appropriate on this periodic
review for KMD to continue
to be subject to the NCSO, but to vary its terms
considerably.
[266] I do not
consider it appropriate at this time to release KMD unconditionally, noting: (a)
the ongoing fears and concerns of
the victims for their safety; (b) the period
of one year and three months that KMD has been in the community under the NCSO;
(c) that the nominal period for the major review does not expire until 7 May
2029. I consider that a further period in the community
subject to conditions
protective of the victims’ safety, but without oversight of a care and
support team, strictures of monitoring
and movement limitations is appropriate.
Applying the principle that restrictions on KMD’s freedom and personal
autonomy are
to be kept to the minimum that is consistent with maintaining and
protecting the safety of the community, I consider this to be a
necessary step
along the way to demonstration that a NCSO is unnecessary to protect the victims
and members of the community from
danger of harm.
[267] I intend
to effectively remove the supervision and monitoring of KMD’s movements,
to reduce the exclusion zone around
the residence of the victims (the breadth of
which was a consequence of the requirements of electronic monitoring), and to
the limitations upon KMD’s freedom of movement. KMD will be
prohibited from entering within 500 metres of the victims’
residences and
from contacting them or entering or remaining where they are working or
visiting, save in limited circumstances. The
intention is that, if KMD is in a
public place (such as a shopping centre) and becomes aware of the presence of
one of the victims,
she must depart from that place to ensure that she does not
have any contact with them. The limited exceptions are hospitals or dentists
emergency medical or dental treatment and airports, bus stations or other
transport hubs. The intention is that, in such circumstances,
KMD will be
required to conduct herself in a way that ensures that she has no contact or
interaction with the victims.
[268] I intend
to vary the condition as to KMD’s residence so that she is simply required
to reside in the Northern Territory,
thereby ensuring she continues to be under
the jurisdiction of this Court.
[269] I intend
to remove the restriction on contact with R, because he is an adult and capable
of deciding for himself whether or
not to engage with KMD. If he does not wish
to do so, like any parent of an adult under the general law, KMD will be
required to
comply with his wishes and not stalk, harass or otherwise unduly
persist with unwelcome contact.
[270] I intend
to retain but vary the restriction on contact with M, which is to operate whilst
he is a child, such that KMD may only
have contact with M if he and his father,
JC, consent or in accordance with a parenting plan or order under the
. This is to acknowledge that M is of an age where he is capable of
expressing his wishes regarding contact with KMD and he is in
the care of his
father. Their wishes about contact with KMD are to be respected, but the
condition acknowledges the rights of any
parent of a child to pursue their legal
entitlements under the family law.
[271] I will
retain the condition that KMD not have access to firearms.
[272] I will
remove condition 5, as it is no longer necessary. I will remove condition 6
given the conclusions below that the CEO
Health is no longer the
‘appropriate person’. I will retain condition 7 authorising the
Northern Territory Police to
apprehend KMD if she breaches any condition of the
NCSO, thereby ensuring that its conditions are practically and immediately
enforceable.
Complaints that the NCSO is not working
conclusions above make it unnecessary to consider the CEO Health’s
alternative submission that the Support Team under
the NCSO is no longer
functional.
The appropriate person
[274] The CEO
Health submitted that, given the terms of the current NCSO, the CEO Health is
not the ‘appropriate person’
within the meaning of
Criminal Code
. This submission was made in relation to the current terms
of the NCSO, particularly those relating to the Support Team, and the
the Case Manager. Nevertheless, the submission has a broader application.
[275] Division 5
of Part IIA of the
Criminal Code
deals with supervision orders. The
provisions of Division 5 confer certain functions on ‘the appropriate
person’. Relevantly,
s 43ZK(1) provides that, if the Court makes a
supervision order, the appropriate person must, at intervals of not more than 12
until the supervision order is revoked, prepare and submit a report to
the Court on the treatment and management of the supervised
mental impairment, condition or disability. That report is to contain details of
the treatment, therapy or counselling
that the supervised person has received,
and the services that have been provided to them, since the last report and
details of any
changes to the prognosis of the supervised person’s mental
impairment, condition or disability and to the plan for managing
(s 43ZK(2)).
[276] The term
‘appropriate person’ is defined in s 43A.
[277] Paragraph
(a) of the definition refers (relevantly) to a supervised person who is detained
or in custody in, or receives treatment,
services or assistance in, at or from,
an approved treatment facility or an approved temporary treatment facility
within the meaning
Mental Health and Related Services Act 1998
(NT). Under the current NCSO, and the varied NCSO, KMD does not fall within that
[278] Paragraph
(b) of the definition refers (relevantly) to a supervised person who is detained
or in custody in, or receives treatment,
services or assistance in, at or from,
a prescribed person, organisation or facility or a person, organisation or
facility who or
which is a member of a class of prescribed persons,
organisations or facilities. There does not appear to be any person,
organisation
or facility or class of persons, organisations or facilities
prescribed within this provision.
[279] Paragraph
(c) of the definition refers to a person who is a represented adult as defined
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
(NT). KMD does not
fall within that paragraph.
[280] Paragraph
(d) of the definition refers to a person who is held in custody in a custodial
correctional facility or is under the
supervision of a probation and parole
officer under the
Parole Act 1971
(NT). Under the current NCSO, and the
varied NCSO, KMD does not fall within that paragraph.
[281] It follows
that there is no ‘appropriate person’ in relation to KMD, under the
current NCSO or the varied NCSO.
The consequence of that is that there is no
authority with a statutory obligation to prepare a report under s 43ZK for
the next periodic
review. Given that the CEO Health will not be providing any
treatment, therapy, counselling or services to KMD under the terms of
NCSO, there is no significant difficulty with that.
[282] The CEO
Health did not seek to be removed as a party from these proceedings, so it will,
on the next periodic review, have the
same rights as any of the other parties to
tender evidence and make submissions about what the disposition should be at
Next periodic
[283] The next
periodic review will be within 12 months from the date of delivery of this
Disposition
[284] I make the
following orders:
(1) The non-custodial supervision order made on 5 July 2023 remains in effect
with the conditions varied as follows:
(a) Conditions 4(a) to 4(x), 5 and 6 are deleted and replaced with the
4(a) KMD will reside in the Northern Territory.
4(b) KMD must not:
(a) have contact, directly or indirectly, with RL, Mrs L or Mr I (‘the
(b) enter or remain at any place where the victims are living, including within
500 metres of their residences;
(c) enter or remain at any place where the victims are working or visiting,
except in the case of:
(i) a medical or dental emergency for KMD or a member of her family; or
(ii) an airport, bus station, or other transport hub for the purposes of
KMD’s travel.
4(c) Until M turns 18 years old, KMD is only permitted to have contact,
whether directly or indirectly, with M:
(a) with his consent and the consent of his father, JC; or
(b) in accordance with any parenting plan or order made pursuant to the
Family Law Act 1975
4(d) KMD must not own, possess, use or have access to any firearm.
(b) Condition 7 is renumbered as condition 5.
----------------------------------
The prior procedural history of
this matter is set out in
The Queen v KMD (No 5)
[2022] NTSC 69
’) at [1]-[19].
The Queen v KMD (No 2)
[2017] NTSC 18
The Queen v KMD (No 3)
[2017] NTSC 95
The Queen v KMD
[2021] NTSC 27.
Queen v KMD (No 6)
[2023] NTSC 51
Chief Executive Officer, Department of
Health v KMD
(2024) 388 FLR 266.
v CEO (Department of Health NT)
[2024] HCASL 271.
v CEO (Department of Health NT)
[2025] HCA 4
(2025) 99 ALJR 474.
Taylor v Owners – Strata Plan No
(2014) 253 CLR 531
at [38] per French CJ, Crennan and Bell JJ. See
also at [65] per Gageler and Keane JJ. See also
HFM043 v Republic of Nauru
[2018] HCA 37
(2018) 359 ALR 176
per Gageler and Nettle JJ;
Minister for Home Affairs
[2021] FCAFC 9
(2021) 283 FCR 248
per Markovic,
O’Callaghan and Anastassiou JJ.
Garlett v Western Australia
at [101] per Kiefel CJ, Keane and Steward JJ), referring to the word
‘community’ used in the
High Risk Serious Offenders Act 2020
(WA), which is a legislative scheme similar in nature to
Criminal Code
[70], [84]-[85], [91], [93]-[97], [110]-[113].
[17]-[21]. Ms Guy’s qualifications are there set out.
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Ex SO70, [30.3].
Ex SO77, [8].
Ex SO70, [3.2].
Ex SO70, [6.2].
Ex SO70, [8.2].
Ex SO70, [9.1].
Ex SO70, [13.1].
Ex SO70, [13.3].
Ex SO70, [14]; Transcript, 17
June 2024, pp 22-23.
Ex SO70, [29.7].
Ex SO70, [29.10].
Ex SO70, [21.1].
Ex SO70, [29.12].
Ex SO70, [30.6]; Transcript, 17
June 2024, pp 22-23.
Ex SO77, [6.1].
Ex SO77, [5.27].
Ex SO77, [5.10].
Ex SO77, [6.7].
Ex SO77, [6.11].
Ex SO77, [5.2].
Ex SO70, [28.1].
Ex SO77, [5.4].
Ex SO77, [5.4].
The case note was annexed to a
report written by Ms Guy on 16 February 2024.
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Ex SO77, [5.5].
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Ex SO71, p 2.
Ex SO71, p 2.
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Ex SO77, [5.25].
Ex SO77, Annexure MC1.
Ex SO77, [5.26].
This was Mr Chick’s oral
evidence: Transcript, 17 June 2024, p 45.
‘PCIS’ is the
Primary Care Information System used by and available to all health clinics
operated by the Northern Territory
Department of Health. This was Mr
Chick’s oral evidence: Transcript, 17 June 2024, p 45.
Transcript, 17 June 2024, pp
This was Mr Chick’s oral
evidence: Transcript, 17 June 2024, p 46.
‘CCIS’ is the
Community Care Information System used by the Northern Territory Department of
Health to record mental
health information. It is not accessible by primary
health clinics generally and is only accessible by mental health clinicians,
is accessible by a primary health clinic manager. This was Mr Chick’s oral
evidence: Transcript, 17 June 2024, pp 47, 48,
The content of those documents
is unknown.
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
‘PCIS’ is the
Primary Care Information System used by and available to all health clinics
operated by the Northern Territory
Government. This was Mr Chick’s oral
evidence: Transcript, 17 June 2024, p 45.
Ex SO77, [5.25].
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Dr Leanage had seven
consultations with KMD over around 13 months: Ex SO76 and Ex SO 85.
Ex SO77, [5.22].
Ex SO70, [29.3].
Ex SO77, [5.14].
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Transcript, 27 October 2023,
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Ex SO77, [3.1].
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
p 44. In Ex SO77, Mr Chick described this as KMD telling him to stay away
from members of her family: [3.1].
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Ex SO77, [5.11].
Ex SO77, [5.12].
Ex SO77, [5.13].
Transcript, 27 October 2023,
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Ex SO77, [5.7].
Ex SO77, [5.2].
Ex SO77, [5.7].
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Ex SO77, [5.15].
Ex SO77, [5.16].
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Transcript, 27 October 2023,
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Ex SO77, [5.18].
Ex SO77, [5.19].
Ex SO77, [5.20].
Ex SO77, [5.21].
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
[42]-[43], [56]-[68], [74]-[76], [139], [147] and
[102]-[110], [152], [161], [166(e), (i), (j)].
Ex SO77, [6.4, last dot
point], [6.9].
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
KMD v CEO (Department of Health NT)
[2025] HCA 4
(2025) 99 ALJR 474.
Ex SO77, [6.5].
[24], [31]-[36], [39], [44], [46]-[49], [54]-[68], [74], [77]-[82], [88]-[89],
[103]-[104];
at [6]-[8], [93]-[99], [152], [155].
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Ex SO70, [27].
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Ex SO70, [21.2].
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
at [18] and [114], which refer to Ms Guy’s evidence about cognitive
behaviour therapy with KMD.
The citation in Ex SO77 is
at [90], but is clearly intended to refer to
Ex SO70, [3.2], [5.2],
Ex SO70, [29.7].
Ex SO77, [5.2].
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Ex SO77, [6.4].
Ex SO77, [6.3].
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Ex SO70, [29.7].
Ex SO70, [3.2].
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Ex SO77, [6.17].
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Transcript, 17 June 2024,
Ex SO77, [6.11].
Ex SO81, [5.1].
Ex SO84, [8].
Ex SO84, [10].
Ex SO81, [5.2].
Ex SO81, [5.3].
Ex SO84, [13].
Ex SO81, [5.4].
Ex SO81, [5.5].
Ex SO81, [5.6].
Ex SO81, [5.8].
Ex SO81, [5.9], [5.10].
Ex SO84, [11].
Ex SO81, [5.11].
Ex SO81, [7.3], [7.6].
Ex SO84, [2.3].
Ex SO84, [3.2].
Ex SO84, [3.3].
at [166(n)].
Ex SO84, [91], [94].
Ex SO84, [84].
Ex SO81, [7.6].
Ex SO81, [6.6], [7.10].
Ex SO84, [4.2], [26].
Ex SO81, [6.7].
Ex SO81, [6.3].
Ex SO81, [6.10].
Ex SO84, [4(b)].
Ex SO84, [64].
Ex SO84, [90].
Ex SO81, [6.5].
Ex SO84, [4].
Ex SO81, [5].
Ex SO84, [6].
Ex SO81.A, [1.6].
Ex SO84, [78(a)], [86],
Ex SO81.A, [1.1].
Ex SO81.A, [1.2], [1.4].
Ex SO81.A, [1.4], [1.7].
Ex SO81.A, [1.7].
Ex SO81.A, [1.7].
Ex SO81.A, [2.1].
Ex SO81.A, [2.3].
Ex SO81.A, [2.4]-[2.5].
Ex SO81.A, [2.6].
Ex SO81.A, [2.7].
Ex SO81.A, [2.8].
Ex SO81.A, [2.9]-[2.10.
Ex SO81.A, [2.11].
NOM v Director of Public Prosecutions
[2012] VSCA 198
(2012) 38 VR 618
per the Court.
[151]-[153].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (589 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter