URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTLC/2022/22.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:20:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Green v NT of Australia [2022] NTLC 22 (7 November 2022)
Green v NT of Australia [2022] NTLC 22 (7 November 2022)
CITATION: Green v NT of Australia [2022] NTLC 022
PARTIES: Leslie John Green
Northern Territory of Australia
TITLE OF COURT: LOCAL COURT
FILE NO(s): 21940174
DELIVERED ON: 7 November 2022
DELIVERED AT: DARWIN
HEARING DATE(s): 4 June 2021
JUDGMENT OF: Judge Austin
CATCHWORDS:
Practice and Procedure – Amendment Pleadings – Defence -
Statute of limitations - Contract – terms and conditions
of employment
– inclusion enterprise bargaining agreements – contractual
obligation – aspirational statement –
implied condition to provide
safe working environment.
Limitation Act 1981
Local Court (Civil
5.09, 5.13, 7.02 (e) (iv) 28.02
Wickham Point
Development Pty Ltd v Commonwealth of Australia
[2019] NTSC
Commonwealth of Australia v Mewett
(1995) 59 FCR 391
Helen Secretary & Ors v Northern Territory of Australia
Burnham v City of Mordialloc
[1955] VicLawRp 94
Harvey v John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
[2005] NSWCA 255
Ketteman v Hansel Properties Ltd
[1987] 1 AC 189
Queensland v J L Holdings Pty Ltd
[1997] CLR 146;
Aon Risk Services Australia v Australian National University
[2009] 83 ALJR 951
[2009] HCA 27
Sheldon v McBeath
Coburn v Colledge
[1897] UKLawRpKQB 62
[1897] 1 QB 702
Argyropoulos v Layton &
[2002] NSWCA 183
Larking v Great Western (Nepean) Gravel
[1940] HCA 37
[1940] 64 CLR 221
Clutha v Millar (No.3)
[2002] NSWSC
Midland Bank Trust Co Ltd v Hett, Stubbs & Kemp
(1979) Ch 384
[1978] 3 All ER 571
Argyropoulos v Layton & Anor
[2002] NSWCA
REPRESENTATION:
Plaintiff: Mr Piper
Defendant: Mr Grove
Solicitors:
Plaintiff: Piper Ellis and Associates
Defendant: Ward Keller
Judgment category classification: C
Judgment ID number: [2022] NTLC 022
Number of paragraphs: 81
IN THE LOCAL COURT
AT DARWIN IN THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
No. [2022] NTLC 022
Leslie John Green
Northern Territory of Australia
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
7 November 2022
JUDGE AUSTIN
Interlocutory Application:
Plaintiff has sued the Defendant for pecuniary damages arising out of alleged
breach of employment contract at the workplace.
There is no claim for personal
injury and the claim is based in contract.
matter was listed for a hearing on 21 June 2021.
Initiating Statement of Claim was filed by the Plaintiff on 28 October 2019. An
amended Statement of Claim was filed on 8 October
Defence was filed by the Defendant on 28 April 2020. An Amended Defence was
filed on 26 October 2020.
23 April 2021 the Defendant filed a FORM 25A interlocutory application. However
the application was not served on the Plaintiff
until 11 May 2021. The Defendant
is seeking the court’s leave for the following order:
An order that the defendant has leave to amend the defence to add the
following paragraph
The Plaintiff is statue barred from pursuing the action for breach of
contract by operation of section 12(a) of the Limitation Act.1981
application was initially listed for a hearing by the court on 17 May 2022,
however the application was adjourned to allow service
of the Plaintiff and then
listed to accommodate counsel for the applicant’s availability, to Friday
4 June 2021 - three weeks
prior to the hearing
Plaintiff opposes the application to amend the defence, firstly on the basis of
the futility of allowing the amendment.
the Plaintiff submits the proceedings are at a point where the case management
requirements and the public interest in finalising
litigation are such that any
amendment to allow a statute of limitation defence at such a late stage so close
to the hearing would
result in incurable prejudice to the defendant, and a costs
order will not address or remedy that prejudice.
Employer submits that an order for costs will adequately address any prejudice
and the amendment is not futile.
Issue for the court is whether the defendant should be granted leave to amend
the pleadings so close to the hearing date and if
the amendment is granted
whether an order for costs will adequately address any prejudice to the
17 June, 2 weeks prior to the hearing and after consideration of the
defendant’s application, the court made orders refusing
application to amend the defence and dismissing the application. I advised the
parties that I would hand down written reasons
for decision at a future
were reserved.
Application to Amend Pleadings to Include the
Limitation Defence:
Employer seeks leave to file amended pleadings relying upon the decision in
Wickham Point Development Pty Ltd V Commonwealth of
in support of their
application.
amendment sought as attached to the Employers application, are to include a
limitation defence.
defence that the proceedings are statute barred must be specifically pleaded.
This is so notwithstanding that the statute extinguishes
the cause of action:
Limitation Act
(1981) NT (the Act).
for instituting an action founded on contract
is three years from the date on which
the cause of action first accrues
S12 of the Act provides:
in contract, tort etc.
(1) Subject to subsection (2), the following actions are not maintainable
after the expiration of a limitation period of 3 years
from the date on which
the cause of action first accrues
to the Plaintiff or to a person through
whom he claims:
(a) an action founded on contract (including quasi-contract) not being a
cause of action which is evidenced by a deed;
(b) an action founded on tort including a cause of action founded on a breach
of statutory duty;
(c) an action to enforce a recognisance; and
(d) an action to recover money recoverable by virtue of an enactment, other
than a penalty or forfeiture or sum by way of penalty
or forfeiture.
for the purpose of calculating a limitation period, starts running from when the
cause of action accrues. When the cause of
action arises will differ depending
on the type of action a Plaintiff is looking to maintain. In short, a cause of
action will accrue
when all elements required to establish the particular claim
come into existence. That may occur at once or progressively over a
example a cause of action based on a breach of contract occurs when the breach
itself occurs. An example may be the giving of
negligent advice by a lawyer. The
cause of action arises in contract when the negligent advice is
63 of the Act provides that, on the expiration of the limitation period fixed by
the Act, the cause of action is extinguished.
However, the effect of s68A is
that the benefit of the extinction of the cause of action is waived by the
defendant if the bar is
not pleaded:
Commonwealth of Australia v
per Lindgren
a limitation defence is raised or anticipated, there is usually no doubt that
the limitation period has run out and the only question,
in personal injury
cases, is whether the Plaintiff should be granted an extension of the limitation
period (s44(1)
Limitation Act
the defendant argues in this case that there are real issues for determination
under the limitation defence, which is when
the Plaintiff’s cause of
action first arose, and that this issue can be dealt with at the hearing of the
employer contends that its application meets the criteria espoused by Associate
Judge Luppino at para 3 in
Wickham Point (supra – references
“... subject to case management requirements and the public interest
in finalising litigation promptly utilising the Courts
resources, in general
Courts liberally allow amendments to pleadings provided that the application is
made in good faith, any prejudice
to the other party can be adequately addressed
with an Order for costs and the amendment is not futile, namely that the amended
would not be liable to be struck out.
the more recent decision of
Helen Secretary & Ors v Northern Territory of
Associate Justice
again set out the applicable
principles relevant to amending pleadings. They are (references omitted)
a) applications for leave to amend should be made in good faith;
b) an amendment must not result in prejudice or injustice to other parties which
cannot be remedied by an order for costs;
c) the amendment must disclose an arguable case;
d) as the Court is not concerned with the merits, a pleaded case will be allowed
even if it has low prospects of success;
e) however, an amendment that is bad in law will not be allowed as it would be
futile to allow an amendment that is liable to struck
f) an amendment cannot be embarrassing or prejudicial to a fair trial;
g) a pleading must set out the case to be met with clarity so that the Defendant
can properly plead to it;
h) the requirements of proper pleading, both at common law and pursuant to Rule
13 of the Supreme Court Rules (“SCR”),
must also be complied with.
to the foregoing considerations, to case management requirements, to the public
interest in finalising litigation promptly
and properly utilising the
Court’s resources, Courts liberally allow amendments to pleadings.
amendment to a pleading may also be refused if a party has deliberately framed
his case a particular way and the opponent may have
conducted his case
differently had the new issues been previously raised:
Burnham v City of
Harvey v John Fairfax Publications Pty
particular, a late application to add a limitation defence may be refused if the
parties have, until that stage, fought the case
on other grounds:
Hansel Properties Ltd
the High Court in
State of Queensland v J L Holdings Pty
Particularly
pertinent is the High Court’s decision in
Aon Risk Services Australia v
Australian National University
The High Court allowed the appeal and expressly overruled its previous judgment
Queensland v JL
case management concerns are only relevant in exceptional circumstances.
Instead, courts must always consider the public interest
in the efficient use of
court resources when determining whether to grant indulgences such as amendment
of pleadings and adjournments.
Honour Chief Justice French at paragraph [4-6] held:
for the dissenting judgment of Lander J in the Court of Appeal, the history of
these proceedings reveals an unduly permissive
approach at both trial and
appellate level to an application which was made late in the day, was
inadequately explained, necessitated
the vacation or adjournment of the dates
set down for trial, and raised new claims not previously agitated apparently
a deliberate tactical decision not to do so. In such circumstances,
the party making the application bears a heavy burden to show
why, under a
proper reading of the applicable
of Court, leave should be
the proper exercise of the primary judge's discretion, the applications for
adjournment and amendment were not to be considered
solely by reference to
whether any prejudice to Aon could be compensated by costs. Both the primary
judge and the Court of Appeal
should have taken into account that, whatever
costs are ordered, there is an irreparable element of unfair prejudice in
unnecessarily
delaying proceedings. Moreover, the time of the court is a
publicly funded resource. Inefficiencies in the use of that resource,
from the vacation or adjournment of trials, are to be taken into account. So too
is the need to maintain public confidence
in the judicial system. Given its
nature, the circumstances in which it was sought, and the lack of a satisfactory
explanation for
seeking it, the amendment to ANU's statement of claim should not
have been allowed. The discretion of the primary judge miscarried.
appears that a factor in the decision of the primary judge and of the Court of
Appeal was the decision of this Court in
JL Holdings
. That case arose out
of an entirely different factual setting. However, to the extent that statements
to amend pleadings in that case suggest
that case management considerations and questions of proper use of court
resources are to
be discounted or given little weight, it should not be regarded
as authoritative. For the reasons set out more fully below, I would
appeal. I agree with the orders proposed in the joint judgment
summary the Court held:
Judicial Officers must now consider the wider public interest in the
efficient use of limited court resources when deciding whether
applications to amend pleadings;
Parties are not entitled to raise any arguable case at any stage of
proceedings, subject only to payment of costs;
Amendments that produce delay impact on the entire court system and affect
parties who wish to use the court system
is necessary for the court to consider the following matters:
a) the nature and extent of the amendment proposed;
b) the question of lapse of time and delay;
c) any explanation offered for the delay in raising the subject matter of the
proposed amendments;
d) any unfairness or prejudice occasioned to the Plaintiff in the event of any
amendment being granted;
e) that the amendment is so fruitless that it would be struck out if it appeared
in an original pleading;
f) that it will require a further hearing after judgment has been reserved;
g) that the application is made mala fides;
h) that an order for costs is not sufficient to cure any prejudice to another
party to the proceedings:
Heath v Goodwin
(1986) 8 NSWLR 478
the application of case management principles so
The Merits of the
Application:
The Plaintiff’s Case
paragraph 5 and paragraph 7 of the Plaintiff’s amended Statement of Claim
(SOC), the Plaintiff’s case is pleaded that
the defendant breached an
express and an implied term of the employment contract between the defendant and
the Plaintiff where the
defendant failed to:
a) take all reasonably practical steps to prevent harassment and bullying in the
work place (the Enterprise Agreements paragraph
59: express term); and/or
b) provide a safe and healthy system of work (implied term).
Plaintiff’s case is that the breaches of the express and the implied terms
of the contract are the 20 pleaded allegations,
set out in paragraph 5a) –
5t) (express term) and paragraph 7 (implied term – relying on the same
breach allegations
in paragraph 5a) – 5t).
Plaintiff argues that upon its proper construction the case pleaded is a
continuing breach of both the implied and/or express
terms of the contract.
Plaintiff argues his cause of action in contract commenced in late 2015 or early
2016 when he was transferred to Tennant Creek
to commence his position as
Fire Officer and there followed a continuous and cumulative
series of relevant events which constitute the breach of the terms of
employment contract and culminated in his appeal to the
Public Sector Appeals
) and the decision of the Board on 14 March 2019 (the
), or his forced uplift from Tennant Creek by his employer (which
occurred earlier in time).
Plaintiff submits that since the evidence shows a continuing omission to take
steps which would have prevented a) or provided
b) (the contract terms above in
paragraph 31) there is difficulty in postulating a succession of breaches. The
Plaintiff’s
case is that most, if not all, of the relevant events occurred
on or after 28 October 2016 and as such the Plaintiff’s cause
based in contract is not statute barred.
Plaintiff asserts the employer’s conduct, the disciplinary proceedings,
subsequent to the supervisor Ferguson’s conduct,
forms part of the alleged
continuing breach and, significantly, that the cause of action accrued either
when the Plaintiff was uplifted
from Tennant Creek by the defendant on or about
12 April 2017, or in the alternative upon 3
party intervention (the
Board’s Decision
on 14 April 2018). The Plaintiff asserts that both
of these occurred within the limitation period.
Plaintiff claims that upon its proper construction:
Statement Of Claim
(SOC) does not plead separate causes of action
for every event or action alleged during the time period particularised in
b) it is not open to the Plaintiff to plead a separate cause of action for the
events and actions alleged given the nature of the
case in contract.
time of occurrence of the breach will turn on the construction of the particular
contract, see
. In that case, an
architect breached the contract in the design of the footings. The Court held
that, in performing the contract,
there was always the possibility (even if it
were impractical) for the correction of the mistakes to take place and the
had a continuing duty to do so. The Court held that, in that case, the
breach occurred when the contract ended and the work handed
over - as it was
from that time that the architect ceased to have a role that would have allowed
correction.
Plaintiff claims the notion of a continuing duty, as postponing the accrual of a
breach of contract in his case, due to nature
of the continuing duty as opposed
to the defendant’s contention.
The Defendant’s
applicant defendant’s contention is that there are arguably distinct
causes of action pleaded in paragraph 5 of the SOC,
accruing each time the
defendant did something alleged in paragraph 5 as particularised.
applicant alleges that the
breach occurs on 30 August 2016 and the
alleged breaches are confined to the supervisor Ferguson’s conduct
asserted in paragraph
5 of the SOC paragraph 5a) – g). As such the cause
of action is statute barred by the
Limitation Act
as the SOC was filed on 28
October 2019.
applicant asserts the conduct of the employer pleaded to in paragraphs 5h) - t)
is not pleaded as part of the alleged breach of
contract and cannot be relied on
by the Plaintiff to ground his cause of action, even though it falls within the
limitation period.
The applicant asserts it is arguable that the pleadings
disclose separate and distinct causes of action pleaded such that they are
statute barred by the
Discussion:
of the defendant’s contention, the Plaintiff has nonetheless pleaded not
only that the supervisor Ferguson’s
conduct is part of the alleged breach
but that the defendant’s conduct attributable to the employer on or after
2016 constituted part of the continuous breach of the
defendant’s contractual duties. The disciplinary action taken by the
defendant against the Plaintiff is pleaded as commencing on or around 27 and 28
October 2016 and occurs within the limitation period.
remain of the view that while it may be arguable generally that the
Plaintiff’s case could be pleaded as separate and distinct
breaches or
causes of actions, the nature of this particular case is that the Plaintiff
alleges that the defendant breached their
contractual obligations (see paragraph
28 above) due to multiple and cumulative acts/omissions attributable to the
supervisor Ferguson
the employer as a continuous course of conduct.
Isolated incidents are not alleged as breaches of the terms of the
definition at law of what is required to prove
bullying and/or harassment
in the work place of and by its very nature usually and by necessity may require
more than just one isolated act and/or omission
by the offending party. A
workplace where an employee is subject to bullying and harassment may constitute
an unsafe and unhealthy
work environment.
terms bullying and harassment are by their very definition both at common law
and in statute variously defined, as requiring
of certain behaviours by a person or group of persons who act in an unreasonable
way towards another targeted person AND their behaviour
creates a risk to health
isolated incident of a certain behaviour may constitute offensive or
unreasonable behaviour that is unacceptable in the workplace
but without it
being repeated it may not reach the threshold of bullying behaviour or
harassment unless it is repeated.
institution of disciplinary proceedings by the supervisor Ferguson and the
action of the disciplinary proceedings by the defendant
on and about 28 October
2016 onwards is relied on by the Plaintiff as the alleged breach of the terms of
the contract of employment.
Accrual of a Cause of Action in
Contract / Limitation Period:
statutory period begins to run the moment that the cause of action accrues, that
is usually, when the breach of the contract occurs.
Care must be taken to
identify precisely the obligation in issue and the time at which it was
Exactly when the breach occurred, and a cause of action therefore
arose, depends on a construction of the contract.
Coburn v College
Cause of Action
was found to be:
...every fact which it would be necessary for the Plaintiff to prove, if
traversed, in order to support his right to judgment of the
Court. It does not
comprise every piece of evidence which is necessary to prove each fact, but
every fact which is necessary to be
Court should consider the alleged breach relied upon by the Plaintiff to found
his cause of action. Provided the alleged breach
arose within the statute of
limitation period, the Plaintiff’s cause of action will be in
CONTINUING BREACH ARGUMENT
Continuing obligations and the accrual of the cause of
on Contracts
Chitty on Contracts
, Sweet & Maxwell,
London, 1989, at 1,256:
If the breach consists in a failure to act, it may be held to continue die
in diem until the obligation is performed or becomes impossible
or performance
or until the innocent part elects to treat the continued non-performance as a
repudiation of the contract. Thus the
failure of a solicitor to register an
interest in land or diligently prosecute legal proceedings will ordinarily
constitute a continuing
breach of his retainer, and the client’s cause of
action will not become barred until six years after registration ceases to
possible or until the proceedings are struck out for want of prosecution. [at
1256 footnotes omitted].
Larking v Great Western (Nepean) Gravel Ltd
discussed the concept of
‘continuing breach’ and the notion of a continuing obligation,
If a covenantor undertakes that he will do a definite act and omits to it
within the time allowed for the purpose, he has broken his
covenant finally and
his continued failure to do the act is nothing but a failure to remedy his past
breach and not the commission
of any further breach of his covenant. His duty is
not considered as persisting and, so to speak, being for ever renewed until he
actually does that which he promised.
On the other hand, if his covenant is
to maintain a state or condition of affairs,
as, for instance maintaining a
building in repair, keeping the insurance of a life on foot, or affording a
particular kind of lateral
or vertical support to a tenement,
then a further
breach arises in every successive moment of time during which the state or
condition is not as promised
, during which, to pursue the examples, the
building is out of repair, the life uninsured, or the particular support
unprovided.
effect of a continuing obligation has also been expounded on as follows in the
decision cited by the applicant in these proceedings,
Clutha v Millar
per Austin J at
Where the continuing duty is contractual, it may be plausible to say that
the continuing failure to discharge it gives rise to a series
of causes of
action, while the failure continues. This is because contractual causes of
action accrue upon breach, and it seems artificial
and unacceptable to say, in
the case of a continuing failure to discharge a continuing contractual duty that
the only breach that
has occurred is the failure to perform the duty when it
first arose.
also note that the notion of a continuing obligation has been applied in cases
involving limitation defences in both
contractual
I am not required to decide the merits of any limitation defence, I am not
persuaded by the defence submission. If that is
what was the submission; that
the notion of continuing breach is not available to the Plaintiff in the manner
in which they have
pleaded their case.
case pleaded is that the defendant failed to fulfil their contractual
obligations to
maintain a state or condition of affairs
relation to both of the contractual terms alleged to have been breached by the
applicant failing to:
a) take all reasonably practical steps to prevent harassment and bullying in the
work place (the Enterprise Agreements paragraph
59.(express term); and/or
b) provide a safe and healthy system of work (implied term).
evidence relied on by the Plaintiff to prove his case is that the cause of
action accrued when the defendant breached the duty
by either involuntarily
uplifting him from his position as lead firefighter at Tennant Creek as a result
of the outcome of the disciplinary
proceedings or due to the third party
intervention of the
Board’s decision,
such that the obligation
became impossible to perform
Defence Argument for
Delay in relying on Limitation Defence:
originating SOC was filed on 28 October 2019 and the Defence was filed on 28
April 2020. An amended SOC was filed on 8 October
2020. An amended defence was
filed on 26 October 2020. Particulars were sought by defence of the allegations
of the bullying conduct
constituting the breach via email on 4 December 2020.
The Plaintiff replied on 12 April 2021.
applicant argued that it was not until the receipt of the answer sought to the
particulars on 12 April 2021 that the applicant
was able to properly identify
the case against them and so they sought leave to file the amended defence to
include the limitation
period. The defendant asserts that before that time it
was not apparent that the Plaintiff relied on both the supervisor
conduct and the disciplinary proceedings to ground the bullying
Plaintiff asserts his case is pleaded that the conduct of Ferguson is
particularised as conduct that occurred prior to the disciplinary
proceedings
and that the defendant, through Mr Green’s superiors, failed to act to
prevent bullying and harassment in the workplace
as they were obligated to do
under the express and implied terms of his employment contract, and that instead
they instigated disciplinary
proceedings against him.
Plaintiff counters that at all material times, including before the amended
statement of claim was filed on
28 October 2019
, the particulars of the
conduct alleged in both the originating SOC and the amended SOC and the timing
thereof has not materially
altered in any way. The Plaintiff submits that at all
times the particulars of the conduct pleaded included both Ferguson conduct
to 30 August 2016, the failure of his superiors to take action
disciplinary proceedings after that.
Plaintiff asserts that in both the original and amended SOCs at paragraph 5) the
Plaintiff specifically pleaded the timing of
Ferguson’s alleged bullying
conduct without alteration:
On dates between 1 January 2016 and
30 August 2016, the Plaintiff was bullied by Ferguson, who: (allegations
Significantly
the Plaintiff submits that the effect of paragraph 4 and paragraph 5 of the
originating SOC of 28 October 2019 and the
amended SOC of 8 October 2020 is that
the particulars regarding the disciplinary proceedings are repeated in almost
identical terms:
Between late 2015 and 14 March 2018 the Defendant failed to prevent
bullying and harassment in the workplace, or provide a safe and
healthy work
environment in breach of paragraph 59 of the Enterprise Agreement and/or the
implied term.
Plaintiff further submits that the particulars of the impugned conduct in
paragraph 5) in both SOCs are also materially identical
and were not materially
altered in any way and included both allegations of bullying by Ferguson failure
of his superiors to act
the disciplinary proceedings which commenced
on or about 27 and 28 October as well to assert a continuous course of conduct
defendant which constituted the breach of contract.
Plaintiff submits that paragraphs 5e), f), g) of the SOC of 28 October 2019 were
not materially altered in any way and became
respectively paragraphs 5e), f), g)
of the amended SOC of 8 October 2020. Those paragraphs articulate the time frame
in which the
Plaintiff alleges the superiors became aware of the bullying
alleged by Ferguson and failed to act, after 30 August 2016.
Plaintiff then submits that paragraphs 5h) – s) of the originating SOC of
28 October 2019 were not altered in any material
particulars and became
respectively paragraphs 5h) – s) of the amended SOC of 8 October 2020.
Those paragraphs pleaded to the
disciplinary proceedings instigated by Ferguson
on or about 27 and 28 October 2019. An additional paragraph 5s) was inserted
the amended SOC documenting the
directions.
Plaintiff alleges, contrary to the Defendant’s submissions that the SOC of
28 October 2019 include the disciplinary proceedings
as part of the failure to
prevent the bullying conduct/failure to prove a safe and healthy work
environment alleged and particularised.
Plaintiff submits that this was clear on the face of the original SOC and then
on the amended SOC of 8 October 2020, well before
the email requesting
particulars of the alleged breach in December. The response to the email of the
defence on 12 April 2021 simply
confirmed what was in the pleadings and was of
no surprise to the defence. It did not disclose any new dates or particulars. In
event Ferguson’s conduct was always asserted as bullying conduct up to
30 August 2016 and particularised as such in the original
Conclusion:
have carefully examined the SOCs and the Defences. I have considered the request
for particulars of 4 December 2020 and the Plaintiff’s
reply of 12 April
2021. I agree with the Plaintiff’s submission generally that the request
for particulars of the pleadings
resulted in the Plaintiff restating what was
already pleaded in both SOCs, that is, the Plaintiff relied on all the
allegations pleaded
in paragraph 5 including from paragraph h) onwards, to
ground the alleged breaches of both the express and implied terms of the
of employment.
do not find that the pleadings were equivocal to the extent that the defendant
was only able to clarify as of 12 April 2021 that
the Plaintiff was relying on
the disciplinary proceedings as part of their claim for breach.
importantly, I find that at all material times leading up to the request for
particulars, the applicant was on notice that the
Plaintiff had pleaded the
conduct of Ferguson and his superiors prior to 28 October 2016 as bullying and
harassment; and a failure
to act to prevent bullying and harassment; and a
failure to provide a safe and healthy work environment. Yet, despite this the
had not included the limitation defence in the original Defence or the
Amended Defence.
find that no reasonable explanation was offered by the applicant for why the
amendment was sought so late and so close to the hearing.
explanation focused on the seeking and furnishing of particulars of the amended
SOC. As discussed above, I find the defendant
has been aware of the
Plaintiff’s claim for continuing breach since the originating SOC filed on
28 October 2019, and thereafter
when the amended SOC was filed on 8 October
2021. The defendant has also been aware of the range of dates of alleged
bullying by
Ferguson and alleged failure of Mr Green’s superiors to
prevent such conduct, and the range of dates of the alleged continuing
which included both Ferguson’s conduct and the disciplinary proceedings up
to the request for particulars. The particulars
simply restated what was in both
also don’t agree with the applicant’s submission that allowing the
amendment would not result in the hearing being in
jeopardy and that any issues
the Plaintiff would seek to rely on as a result of amendment could necessarily
be dealt with at the
hearing. I am told otherwise by the Plaintiff and I accept
those submissions from Counsel. Amendment would very likely have resulted
adjournment. This was a case where the Plaintiff had run his case on a
particular basis and he would have been required to
go back to determine why the
SOC had not been filed at an earlier time to seek an extension of time under the
Act. It would necessarily
have required further discovery and submissions and
proper enquires to be made.
I accept that an order for costs would not have remedied those prejudices faced
by the Plaintiff in delaying the hearing in
order to meet the necessity to seek
an extension of time to deal with what is essentially a new defence raised very
close to the
hearing date. The hearing date is only 3 weeks out. Further this is
not the only prejudice that may have been caused to the
is well known that litigation can and does have emotional effects on parties and
those emotional effects, and the possible exacerbation
of those effects by any
delay in the progress of the action, are relevant considerations to be taken
into account on an application
of this kind. As Lord Griffiths said in
Ketteman v Hansel Ketteman v Hansel Properties
Justice cannot always be measured in terms of money and in my view a judge
is entitled to weigh in the balance the strain litigation
imposes on litigants,
particularly if they are personal litigants rather than business corporations,
the anxieties occasioned by
facing new issues, the raising of false
I do not think it would be reasonable to allow the defendant an opportunity to
amend the defence to plead the limitation
defence given the lack of a reasonable
or satisfactory explanation for the delay in the defendant seeking to apply to
amend at this
late stage in the proceedings. I have also made the decision based
on how the Plaintiff has run his case to date and the fact the
hearing dates
would be in real jeopardy in order to allow the Plaintiff time to meet any new
defence if leave to amend is granted.
Plaintiff is a personal litigant and the defendant is the Northern Territory of
Australia. I do find that the prejudice that would
be suffered by the Plaintiff
cannot be fairly cured by an order for costs in his favour at this stage in the
proceedings. Were this
matter to be adjourned, there would, in my view, be force
in the Plaintiff’s submissions based on delay and the principles
High Court Case of
Aon Risk Services Australia Limited v Australian National
defendant’s application for leave to amend the defence to lead
Limitation Act
(NT) is refused.
will hear the parties as to costs of the interlocutory Application filed 23
[2019] NTSC
Commonwealth of Australia
(1995) 59 FCR 391
Helen Secretary &
Ors v Northern Territory of Australia
[2019] NTSC 73
Burnham v City of
[1955] VicLawRp 94
[1956] VLR 239
Harvey v John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
[2005] NSWCA 255
[1987] 1 AC
Queensland v J L
Holdings Pty Ltd
(1997) CLR 146 ;
Aon Risk Services
Australia v Australian National University
[2009] 258 ALR 14
[2009] 83 ALJR
[2009] HCA 27
Queensland v JL Holdings
(1997) CLR 146;
Sheldon v McBeath
(1993) Aust Torts Rep 81-209
Coburn v College
[1897] UKLawRpKQB 62
[1897] 1 QB 702
, at 707 per Lord Esher; applied in
Argyropoulos v Layton & Anor
[2002] NSWCA 183
, at [42] per Santow
Larking v Great
Western (Nepean) Gravel Ltd
[1940] HCA 37
(1940) 64 CLR 221
Clutha v Millar
[2002] NSWSC 642
Contractual
Bank Trust Co Ltd v Hett, Stubbs & Kemp
[1979] Ch 384
[1978] 3 All ER
Sheldon v McBeath
(1993) Aust Torts Reports 81-209)
(Argyropoulos v
Layton & Anor
[2002] NSWCA
[1987] AC 189
220; This passage was cited with approval in
Queensland v JL Holdings Pty Ltd
[1997] HCA 1
(1997) 189 CLR 146
, 155 per Dawson, Gaudron and McHugh JJ and
affirmed by the Majority Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel ad Bell JJ in
Risk Services Australia Limited v Australian National University
at paragraph
Risk Services case - Supra
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (329 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter