URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTSCFC/2021/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:23:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Queen v Calica [2021] NTSCFC 2 (26 May 2021)
The Queen v Calica
[2021] NTSCFC 2
PARTIES: THE QUEEN
CALICA, Yves
TITLE OF COURT: FULL COURT OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: 21922685
DELIVERED: 26 May 2021
HEARING DATE: 29 May 2020
JUDGMENT OF: Grant CJ, Southwood, Kelly, Blokland & Barr JJ
CATCHWORDS:
SENTENCING – Mitigating factors – Consequences under
SENTENCING – Relevant factors on sentence – Establishing relevant
SENTENCING – Subjective considerations on sentence –
Deportation
Sentencing may not take into account the prospect of an administrative order
for deportation arising from the offending in order to
craft a sentence designed
to avoid the prospect of deportation – The prospect of deportation is not
generally a relevant consideration
in determining whether or not to fix a
non-parole period –Subject to the facts being established by evidence, the
of hardship suffered as a result of deportation, and loss of the
opportunity to settle permanently in Australia may, in appropriate
circumstances, be taken into account in mitigation of sentence – The
sentencing court cannot be asked to speculate about that
prospect or as to the
impact of deportation on the offender – The same principles concerning
liability to deportation have
application to the cancellation of the approval of
citizenship.
Sentencing Act 1995
Crimes Act 1914
Guden v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 196
(2010) 28 VR 288
The Queen v Shrestha
[1991] HCA 26
, followed.
[2016] NSWCCA 107
Bensegger v The Queen
(1979) WAR 65
Breuer and Chaney
(1986) 32 A Crim R 1
Christodoulou v R
Cohen v Western Australia (No 2)
[2007] WASCA 279
Costa v The Queen
[2016] VSCA 49
(2016) 258 A Crim R 60
Dauphin v R
[2002] WASCA
Director of Public Prosecutions (Vic) v Zhuang
[2015] VSCA 96
(2015) 250 A Crim R
(1997) 95 A Crim R 108
HAT v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 427
Hickling v Western Australia
[2016] WASCA 124
Western Australia
[2006] WASCA 143
Konamala v The Queen
[2016] VSCA
Kristensen v The Queen
[2018] NSWCCA 189
Markovic v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 105
(2010) 30 VR 589
Maxwell v R
[2020] NSWCCA 94
[2010] ACTSC 27
Monim and Osman v The Queen
(unreported,
Western Australian Court of Criminal Appeal, 21 June 1972),
Muldrock v The
[2011] HCA 39
Norris v The Queen
[2020] NTCCA 8
[2011] WASCA 105
R v Aniezue
[2016] ACTSC 82
R v Berlinsky
[2005] SASC 316
R v Bob; ex parte A-G (Qld)
[2003] QCA 129
(1971) 1 NSWLR 544
R v Chi Sun Tsui
(1985) 1 NSWLR 308
[2003] NSWCCA 216
(2003) 139 A Crim R 398
R v Da Silva
[2020] QCA 176
[2005] NSWCCA 258
R v Griffiths
(Unreported,
Victorian CCA, 29 April 1998),
(unreported, NSW Court of
Criminal Appeal, 20 July 1998),
(Unreported,
Victorian CCA, 7 December 1982),
[2004] NSWCCA 456
Latumetan and Murwanto
[2003] NSWCCA 70
[2017] SASCFC
R v Leng Khem
[2008] VSCA 136
R v MAO; Ex parte
Attorney-General (Qld)
[2006] QCA 99
(2006) 163 A Crim R 63
[2007] VSCA 183
(2007) 16 VR 682
R v Mesdaghi
[1979] 2 NSWLR 68
[1992] NTCCA 1
(1992) 59 A Crim R 227
R v Mirzaee
[2004] NSWCCA
R v Norris; Ex parte Attorney-General
[2018] QCA 27
[2005] NSWCCA 94
R v Qin; Qin v Regina
[1977] 2 NSWLR 876
(2003) 1 Qd R 76
R v Schelvis
[2016] QCA 294
[2016] QCA 58
(2017) 265 A Crim R 117
Schneider v The Queen
[2016] VSCA 76
Silvano v The Queen
[2008] NSWCCA 118
[2011] VSCA 427
(2011) 216 A Crim R 535
The Queen v MAH
[2005] NTCCA 17
Urahman v Semrad
[2012] NTSC 95
(2012) 229 A Crim R 11
Veness v The Queen
Weng Kong Chan
(1989) 38 A Crim R 337
Zaharoudis and
(1986) 22 A Crim R 233
, referred to.
REPRESENTATION:
Crown: G Dooley
Defendant: I Read SC with N Redmond
Solicitors:
Crown: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Defendant: Northern Territory Legal Aid Commission
Judgment category classification: A
Number of pages: 98
IN THE FULL COURT OF THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
The Queen v Calica
[2021] NTSCFC 2
No. 21922685
YVES CALICA
CORAM: GRANT CJ, SOUTHWOOD, KELLY, BLOKLAND AND BARR JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 26 May 2021)
GRANT CJ, KELLY, BLOKLAND AND BARR JJ:
[1] On 20 February 2020, Yves Calica pleaded guilty to one count of causing
serious harm to Callien Jensen contrary to s 181 of the
Criminal Code
(NT). The maximum penalty for the offence is 14 years’
imprisonment.
[2] During the course of sentencing submissions, counsel for Mr Calica
informed the court that Mr Calica was 22 years old and was
21 at the time of the
offending. He was born in the Philippines city of Marikina and migrated to
Australia with his family at the
age of 16. Both of his parents are also from
the Philippines, and he and his immediate family lived and worked in Alice
He is a permanent resident of Australia, but not an Australian citizen
and is liable to cancellation of his visa and
deportation
upon sentence or upon
completion of his sentence, subject to a discretion in the Minister to grant him
a fresh visa.
[3] In addition, counsel for Mr Calica drew the Court’s attention to
the fact that Mr Calica has had his approval for Australian
citizenship
withdrawn or suspended, it is not clear which. Apparently he had approval for
citizenship but had not yet taken the
oath when he was charged with the offence.
[4] Counsel for Mr Calica submitted to the sentencing judge that the Court
should have regard to the likelihood of Mr Calica being
deported when sentencing
him, and that the withdrawal of approval for him to become an Australian citizen
was likewise a relevant
consideration.
[5] Counsel for Mr Calica acknowledged that the decision of the Court of
Criminal Appeal in
The Queen v
was to contrary effect, and
drew the Court’s attention to conflicting decisions in other
judge has reserved the following
questions of law for the consideration of the Full Court pursuant to
Supreme Court Act 1979
Question 1:
Is a sentencing court prohibited from taking into account the prospect of an
administrative order for deportation arising from the
offending which is the
subject of the proceedings?
Question 2:
Is a sentencing court prohibited from taking into account the cancellation of
the approval of citizenship arising from the offending
which is the subject of
the proceeding?
The Queen v MAH
The Queen v MAH
involved an unsuccessful appeal against conviction
on the ground that the verdict was unreasonable or could not be supported having
regard to the evidence, and a successful Crown cross-appeal against inadequacy
of sentence.
[7] One of the grounds of the Crown cross-appeal was that the sentencing
judge had erred in taking into account as a relevant consideration
that, if sentenced to a term of imprisonment for 12 months or more, the
respondent may not be granted a visa to remain in
Australia, or alternatively
that his existing visa may be cancelled. In the relevant part of the sentencing
remarks, the sentencing
judge said:
You are here under a temporary protection visa. The
Migration Act
permits the Minister to refuse to grant a visa or to cancel a visa if the person
does not pass the character test. A person will
fail the character test if the
person has a substantial criminal record. A person has a substantial criminal
record if the person
has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment of twelve
months or more. Such a sentence would leave you vulnerable to action of that
In my view, the prospect of such exposure is not a matter that should lead me
to impose a sentence that I would not otherwise regard
as appropriate. The
exposure is a consequence of you committing an offence of this level of
seriousness. However, in a case such
as this where the appropriate head sentence
is in the order of imprisonment for twelve months, it is permissible to take
that consequence
into account in determining where, within the appropriate
range, to fix the head sentence. I have adopted that
[8] On appeal, Mildren J (with whom Thomas and Southwood JJ agreed) said:
“In my opinion, the possibility of deportation is
an entirely irrelevant
matter for sentencing purposes.” In support of that proposition, his
Honour quoted the following passage
from the Western Australian Court of Appeal
Dauphin v R
In my opinion, this submission is without merit. In
R v Chi Sun Tsui
(1985) 1 NSWLR 308
at 311, Street CJ (with whom the other members of the Court
were in agreement) said that "the prospect of deportation is not a relevant
matter or consideration by a sentencing Judge, in that it is the product of an
entirely separate legislative policy area of the regulation
of society". Those
remarks were cited with apparent approval by Brennan and McHugh JJ in
[1991] HCA 26
(1991) 173 CLR 48
at 58. Furthermore, as McPherson JA explained in
[2001] QCA 531
, taking the prospect of the applicant's
deportation into consideration has the potential to "produce a regime under
which visitors
or non-permanent residents [are] sentenced more leniently than
Australians who [have] committed the same kind of offence. That cannot
proper result in the administration of
[9] His Honour also cited the New South Wales cases of
and the Queensland case of
in support.
[10] In the same case, Southwood J noted that there was a dichotomy between
authorities in Western Australia and New South Wales on
the one hand, and
Victoria on the other, in relation to whether the prospect of deportation of an
offender is a relevant sentencing
consideration, and expressed the view that the
approach adopted by Western Australia and New South Wales was the correct one.
Honour said:
In my opinion the approach adopted by the Court of Appeal in New South Wales
and the Supreme Court in Western Australia is the correct
approach. The risk of
deportation is a risk that is a product of an entirely separate legislative
policy area of the regulation of
society. To take such a risk into account is
potentially to undermine that legislative policy. It also has the potential to
a regime under which visitors or non-permanent visitors may be sentenced
more leniently than Australians who have committed the same
kind of offence. I
agree with Steytler J [in
Dauphin v R
(supra)] that such a result cannot
be a proper result in the administration of
Subsequent Northern Territory authority
Southwood J
heard appeals against two sentences imposed on the appellant by the Court of
Summary Jurisdiction for two Commonwealth
offences; engaging in conduct that
caused harm to a Commonwealth public official, and causing damage to property
owned by the Commonwealth.
The sentencing magistrate recorded convictions on
both charges and sentenced the appellant to three months’ imprisonment
(fully suspended) on the first charge and a 12 month good behavior bond on
the second charge.
[12] The appellant, who was a refugee in immigration detention, appealed
against both sentences,
, on the ground that the sentencing
magistrate had erred in failing to exercise his discretion under
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) not to record a conviction, because
convictions may result in the Minister for Immigration refusing to issue him
with a visa.
[13] In dealing with that ground of appeal, Southwood J noted that there were
uncertainties about whether the Minister would issue
the appellant with a visa,
but that if the convictions were not set aside there would be a greater risk
that the Minister may refuse
to issue a visa because the appellant failed the
character test. His Honour reviewed the authorities in the various
He noted that in New South Wales, Queensland, Western Australia
and the Northern Territory the approach seemed to be that it was
impermissible
for a sentencing judge to reduce an otherwise appropriate sentence in order to
avoid the risk of an administrative
authority making a decision adverse to the
person. Conversely, in Victoria the prospect of the administrative authority
adverse decision is a factor which may be relevant to the impact that
a sentence of imprisonment will have on an offender, and should
therefore be
taken into account on sentencing (subject to production of evidence that such an
adverse decision is likely). Similarly,
the loss of the opportunity to live
permanently in Australia might also be taken into account in mitigation as an
extra-curial punishment.
Southwood J concluded by saying:
There is some force in the Victorian authorities in a case such as this where
a refusal to grant the appellant a visa may result in
him remaining in
immigration detention indefinitely. However, courts in the Northern Territory
are bound by the decision of the
Court of Criminal Appeal in
they must disregard the possibility that a person such as the appellant may be
refused a visa if they are convicted of a crime
committed while they are in
immigration detention.
[14] Counsel for the accused acknowledges that the authority prevailing in
this jurisdiction would appear on its face to preclude
a sentencing court from
taking into account for sentencing purposes the prospect of an administrative
order for deportation or the
cancellation of the approval of citizenship. The
question which presents on this reference is whether that authority does in fact
preclude a sentencing court from taking liability to deportation into account
for any sentencing purpose, and, if so, whether it
should be overruled.
Previous decisions of the Court of Appeal and the Court of Criminal Appeal
should only be overruled in exceptional
circumstances, and the power to do so
must be exercised with caution and only when compelled to the conclusion that
the earlier decision
is fundamentally wrong or plainly erroneous.
Contexts in which liability to deportation has been considered
[15] The question of whether a court sentencing a foreign offender to
imprisonment in this country may or should take into account
the prospect of the
offender being deported has been considered in Australian courts in three
different contexts.
[16] First, courts have considered whether it is proper to take the prospect
that the offender may be deported into account in determining
whether to fix a
non-parole period (“the non-parole cases”).
[17] Second, courts have considered whether it is proper to take the prospect
of deportation into account so as to impose a sentence
designed to avoid such a
consequence (“the threshold cases”).
[18] Third, courts have considered whether a sentencing judge may or should
take the prospect of deportation into account in mitigation
of sentence as one
aspect of the offender’s personal circumstances (“the mitigation
[19] Notwithstanding that different considerations apply in each of these
three contexts, cases in one category have been cited from
time to time as
authority in cases from a different category.
The non-parole cases
[20] The issue considered in these cases is whether the court should refuse
to fix a non-parole period (or “minimum term”)
on the ground that
the offender was a non-citizen liable to be deported at the end of his sentence.
The non-citizen appellants argued
that the fact that they were going to be
deported was
a relevant consideration and that, by taking it into
account, sentencing judges had wrongly deprived them of the benefit of a
The New South Wales authorities
[21] Initially, the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal took the view
that many aspects of parole are not appropriate in the
case of an offender who
will be deported as soon as he is released from
[22] This approach was reversed by the New South Wales Court of Criminal
That case involved
an appeal by a non-citizen of French origin who
had been sentenced to five years’ imprisonment on a charge of unlawfully
opium. He had no prior convictions and otherwise creditable
antecedents. The sentencing judge refused to fix a non-parole period
ground that the offender was a French national liable to the prospect of
deportation. The offender appealed to the New South
Wales Court of Criminal
Appeal against the severity of his sentence and the failure to fix a non-parole
period. The appeal was allowed.
Street CJ (with whom Begg and Lusher JJ
agreed) opined that the considerations relevant to the determination of whether
non-parole period were those set out in the parole legislation, ie the
nature of the offence and the antecedent character of the
offender. With
respect to the submission that the earlier decision in
was to contrary effect,
Street CJ stated:
The case is not, in my view, to be regarded as laying down as a proposition
of law that a non-parole period should be withheld when
the person being
sentenced is a foreign national or an alien and faces a prospect, be it certain
or merely contingent, of being deported
in consequence of that
[23] The Court ultimately held that the discretion of a judge to withhold the
specification of a non-parole period was only exercisable
if by reason of the
nature of the offence or the antecedent character of the person convicted the
judge formed the view that it was
undesirable to specify a non-parole period.
The fact that a person was not a national of Australia and faced the prospect of
deportation
on completion of the sentence was, by itself, no justification for
not specifying a non-parole period. As a consequence, the earlier
following the decision in
turned on the construction
of the New South Wales legislative provisions concerning the fixing of
non-parole periods which specified
the matters that the court should take into
consideration when deciding whether to fix a non-parole period.
[24] That was confirmed in
which involved an
application for leave to appeal against the severity of a sentence of five
years’ imprisonment for arson,
the major complaint being that the
sentencing judge had declined to fix a non-parole period. Street CJ again
pointed to the statutory
grounds as the only basis on which a non-parole period
could be withheld and stated (footnotes omitted):
It should be made plain, as apparently there still is some doubt about the
, that, notwithstanding whatever merit there might be,
in point of general penal philosophy of parole, in withholding a non-parole
period for persons facing the prospect of being deported, the discretion to
withhold a non-parole period is, by the terms of the
statute, expressly limited
and confined to one or both of the two grounds specified in s 4(3), that is
to say the nature of the offence,
or the antecedent character of the person
convicted. The prospect of deportation is not an admissible or relevant factor
in deciding
whether or not to exercise the discretion under s 4(3) of the Act.
It is for the legislature, not the courts, to decide whether
this is an element
to be weighed.
[25] The parole legislation was subsequently amended to allow a court to
decline to fix a non-parole period “for any other reason
which the court
considers sufficient”, after which the rationale for not taking the
prospect of deportation into account also
changed. The New South Wales Court of
Criminal Appeal took the view that whether a person would be deported at the end
of an appointed
minimum term was a matter for the Executive Government; and that
the courts should deal with foreign offenders in the same way as
[26] That approach was determined in
R v Chi Sun
which was an
appeal against severity of sentence decided after the legislative amendment.
The appellant was an illegal immigrant
from Hong Kong who had pleaded guilty to
a charge of receiving stolen property. There was evidence that the appellant
had connections
to a criminal Chinese gang. One ground of appeal was that the
sentencing judge had refused to specify a non-parole period. In so
the sentencing judge had said:
Thus it is that in no circumstances, if parole were granted, would the
prisoner ever serve any portion of his sentence within the
community under
rehabilitative supervision. Were this the first occasion that this man had
entered this country illegally, and were
it the first occasion he had offended
against the law, perhaps other considerations would apply. However, satisfied
as I am that
the very reason for his being here was to perpetrate a criminal
lifestyle established, on the evidence before me, elsewhere, it would
unrealistic for the court to consider that the provision of parole, namely, the
supervised service of part of his sentence in
the community, has any application
to the circumstances of this
[27] The Court of Criminal Appeal sought and obtained evidence from the New
South Wales prison authorities and the Commonwealth immigration
authorities as
to their policies and practices, in light of which Street CJ (with whom Slattery
CJ at CL and Roden J agreed), stated:
The two matters of serving out sentences passed by criminal courts and of
implementing the immigration laws stand in entirely separate
compartments. The
Commonwealth stands back in order to allow the criminal and penal laws and
orders to be carried through to the
point where the criminal is freed from
custody. The Commonwealth then proceeds in accordance with the policy enunciated
by the Minister
[28] Save for the first sentence, this was a conclusion based on that
evidence and not a statement of principle or public policy.
The Court went on
to consider whether the amendment to the legislation would allow a court to take
into account the prospect of
deportation as a relevant factor weighing against
specifying a non-parole period, and held that it did not. In so holding, Street
CJ referred to a provision of the
Probation and Parole Act
(NSW), which provided that the Parole Board was not authorized to refuse parole
to a prisoner by reason only that the prisoner may
become liable to be deported
The legislature has in [the relevant section of the
Probation and Parole
] answered the policy consideration in terms which indicate that the
rehabilitative philosophy that underlies the parole legislation
is not to be
regarded as impinging in any way upon the deportation of a prisoner, once that
prisoner is free from the custodial restraints
of a State or Commonwealth
sentence. The discretion to withhold a non-parole period is exercisable for the
two specific reasons enunciated
in s 21(1)(a) as well as “for any
other reason which the court considers sufficient”: s 21(1)(b).
Holding the view, as
the prospect of deportation is not a relevant
matter for consideration by a sentencing judge, in that it is the product of an
separate legislative and policy area of the regulation of our
, I do not consider that that prospect can be weighed as “for
any other reason” within
s 21(1)(b).
(Emphasis added)
[29] This approach was followed in
R v Latumetan and
those cases, the sentencing judge had refused to fix a non-parole period on the
ground that the offender was liable to
be deported and would therefore not be
able to serve a period of supervision in the community; and in each case the
Court of Criminal
Appeal held that this approach was in error.
Sully J (with whom Smart J agreed) said:
[W]hether such a person will or will not be deported at the end of an
appointed minimum term is not a matter for the Courts, but for
the Executive
Government; and that, so far as the Courts are concerned, such a person should
be dealt with as though he or she were
a national of this country, it being left
to the proper processes of the Executive Government, and the public
administration machine
otherwise, to deal with the question of
deportation.
R v Mirazee,
Kirby J (with whom Sperling J agreed) said:
Where an offender would otherwise qualify for a finding of special
circumstances, because it is recognised that he or she would benefit
longer than usual period of supervision, then such a finding should be made.
The sentencing Judge should not refrain from
such a finding because it is
believed likely that the offender may be deported at the end of the non-parole
period, and that supervision
therefore would not be provided in
R v Latumetan and Murwanto
the Court articulated a broader
principle, potentially applicable to circumstances other than non-parole cases.
Studdert J (with
whom Shaw J agreed) said:
It is well settled that the prospect of deportation was not a matter properly
to be taken into account for sentencing purposes. In
being so influenced by this
factor, her Honour fell into error; see
R v Chi Sun Tsui
(1985) 1 NSWLR
R v Shrestha
[1991] HCA 26
(1991) 173 CLR 48
R v Montenegro
(unreported) NSWCCA 15 February 1991;
(unreported) NSWCCA 19
October 1990;
(unreported) NSWCCA 23 August 1991;
(unreported) NSWCCA 27 March 1992 and
(unreported)
NSWCCA 20 July 1998.
[33] It should be noted for these purposes that all of the cases cited in
support of this broader proposition were non-parole cases.
The Western Australian authorities
[34] There is also a line of Western Australian authority on the question
whether the immigration status of an offender should be
taken into account in
determining whether to fix a non-parole period (referred to in that jurisdiction
as a “minimum term”).
In Western Australia too, the early cases
largely depended on the construction of the relevant Western Australian
legislation.
[35] That legislation was amended a number of times. When the earlier cases
were decided, the relevant Western Australian statute
provided that where a
court sentences a person to a term of imprisonment of 12 months or more,
... fix a minimum term ... during which ... the
convicted person is not to be eligible to be released on parole.” The
sub-section provided that the court “is not required to fix a
minimum term if the court considers that the nature of the offence
antecedents of the convicted person render the fixing of a minimum term
inappropriate.” As was the case in New South
Wales when the legislation
was amended to provide for a broader discretion as to whether to fix a minimum
term, the basis for the
decisions became correspondingly more generalized.
[36] The early Western Australian cases concerned Commonwealth offences. The
relevant Commonwealth statute provided that the law
relating to the fixing of
non-parole periods (minimum terms) in the jurisdiction in which the offender was
tried would apply, but
that if a non-parole period was fixed, the discretion
whether to grant parole after the expiration of that period would be exercisable
by the Governor General, not the parole authority in the jurisdiction in which
the sentence was imposed. It also provided that it
must be a condition of any
parole so granted that the offender be under the supervision of a parole
Bensegger v The
the appellant was
convicted of importing and possessing 12.67kg of heroin in eight packages hidden
under an imported Jaguar. He
was sentenced to 10 years’ imprisonment on
each charge to be served concurrently. The sentencing judge declined to fix a
term because of the nature of the offence, stating: “In addition
he was a Foreign National who initially planned the offence
outside Australia
and came to Australia on a one month visa for the purpose of completing the
offences.” The appellant appealed
against the sentence on the ground,
, that the sentencing judge erred in declining to fix a minimum
[38] In considering the appeal, Burt CJ pointed out that the legislation did
not confer a discretion to fix a minimum term: it conferred
a discretion
to fix a minimum term. Further, that discretion could only be
exercised on the grounds set out in the probation and parole legislation,
that “the nature of the offence and the antecedents of the convicted
person render the fixing of a minimum term inappropriate”.
[39] The Court was told that “Commonwealth Executive Practice”
where a minimum term was fixed, was for the Governor-General
to order a federal
prisoner to be released on parole as soon as the minimum term expired and, where
the prisoner was a foreigner,
for him to be deported by an order of the
Commonwealth Minister under the Commonwealth
Migration Act
respondent argued that this meant that any minimum term became effectively the
maximum term, and the parole provisions in the
Commonwealth legislation
(requiring supervision as a condition of parole) would be frustrated. Burt CJ
rejected this submission
as “both misconceived and misdirected”,
pointing out that under the
Migration Act
the Minister could deport the
foreign prisoner at any time during his term of imprisonment or on the
expiration of it, and said:
But that is not a matter which in any way affects the exercise of the
discretion of a judge exercising jurisdiction under the [relevant]
decline to fix a minimum term ... and I emphatically reject the submission that
in the exercise of that discretion the court
should have any regard to the
practice referred to by counsel. Indeed I think it would be improper and
positively wrong to do so.
It is unthinkable that a Court should ignore the
criteria laid down for the exercise by it of its discretion and decline to make
an order with the intention expressed or unexpressed that it should operate so
as to deny the occasion for the exercise by the Governor-General
of a discretion
which has been conferred on him by statute. And this is so whether or not there
exists such a “practice”
by which the discretion of the Minister is
or usually is exercised.
[40] Burt CJ referred to and approved the earlier decision of the Court of
Criminal Appeal in
Monim and Osman v The
to similar effect, in
which the Court had set aside a decision of the sentencing judge not to fix a
minimum term in the case of foreign
offenders, saying:
The fact that the applicants had their homes in Egypt and were likely not to
remain in this State after their release from custody
are not circumstances
which can be said to relate to the nature of the offence and to their
antecedents, both of which matters are
required to be considered by the court to
render the fixing of a minimum term inappropriate.
[41] His Honour also cited the New South Wales decision in
(supra), which he regarded as to the same effect. Lavan SPJ agreed with
that result but expressed the view
obiter dicta
that “the term
‘antecedents’ is wide enough to include such a circumstance as the
alien nationality of an
(dissenting) considered that in determining whether it was inappropriate to fix
a minimum term, it was necessary to remember
the purpose sought to be achieved
by fixing a minimum term, namely, “to provide for mitigation of punishment
of the prisoner
in favour of rehabilitation through conditional freedom, where
appropriate, once the prisoner has served the minimum time that a
determines justice required that he must serve having regard to all the
circumstances of the offence.” His Honour thought
that purpose unlikely
to be advanced if the prisoner were to be deported before any such period of
conditional freedom had run its
In the result, the
Court allowed the appeal by majority and fixed a minimum term of six years.
[42] The Western Australian legislation was subsequently amended to provide
that the court
fix a minimum term if the court considers the nature
of the offence, the circumstances of its commission or the antecedents of the
offender or any of those things considered together renders the fixing of a
minimum term appropriate.
Zaharoudis and
was decided
after that amendment. The two appellants had each been convicted and sentenced
to imprisonment for 12 years for the federal
offence of being knowingly
concerned in importing large quantities of cannabis resin. They appealed
against the severity of their
sentences, including the failure to fix a minimum
term. The sentencing judge had said:
It has been suggested that I should set a minimum term so that in due course
you can be released on parole and serve out part of your
sentence in the
community under supervision. That suggestion only has to be put to demonstrate
its futility. You are all aliens
in this country. You have no right to remain
here as free citizens. To contemplate the prospect of you serving any period on
would be a complete perversion of the parole system as it operates.
Accordingly, I do not propose to set minimum
[44] The majority in the Court of Appeal held that the antecedents for
sentencing purposes included that each applicant “with
his eyes open, came
to Australia illegally and that each deceived the authorities as to the purpose
of his visit, and each came for
one purpose only, that being to import narcotics
in bulk and for-profit.”
Burt CJ (with whom Kennedy J agreed) concluded that those antecedents, together
with the nature of the offence and the circumstances
of its commission, could
not sustain the opinion that the fixing of a minimum term was
appropriate.
However, the
majority reiterated, with reference to
that an offender’s liability to deportation is not
sufficient or proper reason for refusing to fix a minimum
the applicants were
convicted of bringing 1,775 kilograms of cannabis into Australia in
Chaney’s yacht. Each was sentenced
to a term of imprisonment for 10 years
and in both cases the sentencing judge declined to fix a minimum term. The
relevant legislation
was the same as it was when
Zaharoudis and Salihos
was decided. The applicants appealed against those sentences, including the
failure to fix a minimum term.
[46] Burt CJ (with whom Kennedy J again agreed) repeated what he had said in
Zaharoudis and Salihos
and said that the sentencing judges would
have erred had they found that liability to deportation
the fixing of a minimum term inappropriate. However, if the fact that each
applicant is a foreign national is regarded as being
entirely neutral, the
general question will remain whether, having regard to the matters referred to
in the legislation, the fixing
of a minimum term is appropriate. Burt CJ
concluded that the nature of the offence, the circumstances of its commission
offenders’ antecedents sustained a positive judgment that it was
not appropriate to fix a minimum term in either
[47] Brinsden J agreed (referring to
Zaharoudis and Salihos
that the fact that a person is a prohibited immigrant liable to deportation,
standing alone, is not decisive of whether to fix a minimum
term. However, the
person’s antecedents would include the person’s nationality and
status as a prohibited immigrant,
and that was a matter which could be taken
into account.
the Court of Appeal
held that the sentencing judge’s discretion had miscarried in failing to
fix a minimum term for the
reason that the prisoner would be
deported on release. The sentencing judge had said:
There is no point in my fixing a minimum term. I trust you will be deported
as soon as your imprisonment is
[49] However, that miscarriage of the discretion notwithstanding, the Court
of Appeal considered in all of the circumstances that
the fixing of a minimum
term was not justified. In making that finding, the Court adopted the approach
Zaharoudis and
[50] The legislation was amended again shortly thereafter to provide that the
order that a convicted person be eligible for parole. If the
Court so ordered, the non-parole period was fixed by statute. The
legislation
provided further that in determining whether to make an order that the convicted
person be eligible for parole the Court
may have regard to all or any of:
(a) the nature of the offence;
(b) the circumstances of the commission of the offence;
(c) the antecedents of the convicted person;
(d) circumstances relevant to the convicted person which might be relevant at
the time they would become eligible for release on
parole; and
(e) any other matter the court thinks relevant.
[51] The discretion given to the Court thereafter became one of declaring
eligibility for parole in a general sense, rather than fixing
a non-parole
period, and the limitations on the matters the Court could take into account in
determining whether to exercise the
discretion, which had formed the basis of
the reasoning in the earlier cases, had all but disappeared.
The decision of the High Court in
The Queen v Shrestha
[52] The issue considered in the non-parole cases came before the High Court
The Queen v
after the amendments to the Western Australian legislation referred to
immediately above. Shrestha was a foreign national
who was convicted in Western
Australia of three offences relating to the importation of heroin and sentenced
to a total of 12 years’
imprisonment. The sentencing judge declined to
order that he be eligible for parole, saying:
[T]he facts of your case, your personal circumstances and the fact of your
immigration status in my view prevent me in this case from
making you eligible
for parole.
[53] Shrestha was given leave to appeal against the severity of his sentence,
including the refusal to order that he be eligible for
parole. The Court of
Criminal Appeal allowed the appeal, reduced his sentence to nine years and
ordered that he be eligible for
parole. The Crown was granted special leave to
appeal to the High Court against the order that the appellant be eligible for
[54] Considering this question in light of the broader legislative provision,
the majority in
(Deane, Dawson and Toohey JJ) said:
All of the considerations which are relevant to the sentencing process,
including antecedents, criminality, punishment and deterrence,
are relevant both
at the stage when a sentencing judge is considering whether it is appropriate or
inappropriate that the convicted
person be eligible for parole at a future time
and at the subsequent stage when the parole authority is considering whether the
should actually be released on parole at or after that
[55] The majority went on to consider the benefits of fixing a non-parole
period, which are not limited to giving the convicted person
a period of
conditional liberty in the community under supervision. They include providing
an incentive to good behaviour while
in prison in order to earn parole, and the
fact that the retention by a prisoner of some control over his or her future
is conducive to retaining self-respect and to eventual rehabilitation.
The majority also emphasized the importance of ensuring that
authorities were given the ability to exercise compassion where appropriate, for
example if the convicted person became
terminally ill.
[56] The majority rejected the contention that Australia has no interest in
providing a regime intended to assist the rehabilitation
of a foreign offender
with no ties to the country, and held that Australia has:
(a) an interest in the well-being and rehabilitation of all people within its
prisons; and
(b) moral and treaty obligations to treat all who are subject to criminal
proceedings in this country humanely and without discrimination.
[57] The majority acknowledged that there was more force in the contention
that deportation would remove the offender from the possibility
of effective
supervision and of a return to prison should the parole conditions be breached.
However, they concluded that the likelihood
of an offender being deported once
released should not
compel a sentencing judge to conclude that
it is inappropriate to fix a non-parole period. The reasons given for that
(a) that deportation is outside the control of the prisoner;
(b) that even if deportation is inevitable and supervision therefore impossible,
other considerations (for example compassionate
grounds) may make the granting
of parole desirable; and
(c) that breach of an Australian parole order may have adverse consequences for
the prisoner in the other country (for example aggravating
the seriousness of
later offending which may be committed during the parole period).
[58] The majority also emphasized that the fixing of a non-parole period does
not mean that the foreign offender will necessarily
be granted parole.
Considerations such as the impossibility of supervision can be taken into
account by the parole board at the
appropriate time.
[59] The majority concluded that factors such as the liability of a foreign
offender to deportation and the consequent impossibility
of supervision on
parole do not
of themselves
compel a sentencing judge to decide that it
is inappropriate for such an offender to even be considered for parole.
Consequently,
they upheld the decision of the Court of Criminal Appeal to order
that the appellant be eligible for parole. In coming to that conclusion,
majority did not say explicitly that the fact that a foreign offender would be
liable to be deported was not a factor that should
be taken into consideration
at all in determining whether or not to fix a non-parole
However, the tenor of
the reasons (summarized above) suggests that the view of the majority was that
this was a consideration more
properly taken into account by the parole
authorities at the later stage of deciding whether or not to grant
[60] The minority (Brennan and McHugh JJ) were of the view that the fact that
a foreign offender was likely to be deported
a relevant consideration
for the Court to take into account in deciding whether to fix a non-parole
In doing so, they
emphasized that eligibility for a parole order is part of the sentence and
“calls for an evaluation of all
the relevant circumstances and
consideration of all the sentencing
They concluded
that only in exceptional circumstances would it be appropriate for a court to
fix a non-parole period in sentencing
an offender who came to Australia on a
short term visa in order to commit a serious offence, who has no ties to this
country and
is liable to deportation as a prohibited immigrant on his release
from prison.
The principles to be drawn from the non-parole cases
[61] The position after
is that a court is not precluded from
fixing a non-parole period merely because the offender is liable to be deported.
Further, the
majority judgment suggests, but does not expressly decide, that the
prospect of deportation will not generally be a relevant consideration
determination, and is more properly considered by the parole authorities at the
later stage of deciding whether to grant
parole (in the event that the court
determines to fix a non-parole period having regard to what are the relevant
considerations).
The focus of the majority in
coming to those
conclusions was on the purpose and utility of parole. That is, the prospect of
deportation does not militate against
the fixing of a non-parole period because
there is a public interest in the well-being and rehabilitation of all people
within Australian
prisons, including foreign nationals.
[62] The position in Western Australia before
was that the
prospect of an offender being deported was not, of itself, sufficient reason to
decline to fix a non-parole period.
However, there were conflicting statements
as part of the offender’s antecedents, or as an otherwise relevant
factor in determining whether to set a non-parole period.
The matter is now
governed by statute.
[63] The position in New South Wales is that the prospect of deportation
should not be taken into account when deciding whether to
fix a non-parole
period because it is a matter for the executive, not the courts, to determine
whether a person will be deported
at the end of an appointed minimum term, and
the courts should deal with a foreign offender in the same way as a domestic
That rationale focuses on the division of responsibility between the
courts and the executive, and broad notions of equal justice,
rather than the
purpose and utility of parole. This position has been maintained in New South
Wales cases that post-date
[64] There have been more general statements of principle in some non-parole
cases, originating with the passage from
R v Chi Sun Tsui
to the effect that the
prospect of deportation is not a relevant matter for consideration by a
sentencing judge because it is the
product of an entirely separate legislative
and policy area of societal regulation. These statements, although made in the
of non-parole cases, have been adopted and cited in support of the
proposition that the prospect of deportation is not a relevant
consideration at all, and is therefore precluded from being taken into account
in mitigation of sentence.
[65] Some cases also quote
as authority for this proposition,
although on proper analysis the reasoning of the majority turned on matters
specific to non-parole
periods. By way of example, it was said in
that the passage
R v Chi Sun Tsui
was quoted without apparent disapproval by Brennan
and McHugh JJ in
That observation in
Dauphin v The
has in turn been quoted in subsequent cases, including by the Northern
Territory Court of Criminal Appeal in
The Queen v MAH
(supra). However,
Brennan and McHugh JJ were in the dissenting minority in
in any case, they came to the conclusion that only in exceptional circumstances
would it be appropriate for a court to fix
a non-parole period in sentencing an
offender who came to Australia on a short term visa in order to commit a serious
offence and
is liable to deportation as a prohibited immigrant on his release
from prison. That conclusion clearly contemplates that the prospect
deportation is a relevant sentencing consideration for parole purposes at least,
and the minority said explicitly that it was
“a consideration which is
material to the proper exercise of the court's [sentencing]
discretion”.
The threshold cases
[66] The question in the threshold cases is whether it is proper to take the
prospect of deportation into account so as to impose
a sentence designed to
avoid that consequence. In every case where this issue has been considered, the
court has stated that it
is not permissible to take into account the prospect of
deportation for that purpose.
applicant was a US citizen who had applied for leave to appeal against a
decision by the sentencing judge refusing to reopen
a sentence of three
years’ imprisonment for child sex offences. The application to reopen the
sentence had been made after
the applicant received a notice from the Department
of Immigration of an intention to consider revoking his visa on character
Leave to appeal was refused. The Queensland Court of Appeal held that
it would have been improper for the sentencing judge to re-open
the sentence
with a view to imposing a lesser sentence for the purpose of avoiding the
consequence of deportation. McPherson JA
(with whom Thomas JA and Mullins J
agreed) said:
I consider that the process of sentencing should not seek to anticipate the
action that some other authority or tribunal, lawfully
acting within the limits
of a proper discretion, may take in future, by so adjusting the sentence as to
defeat, avoid or circumvent
that result. See, although in a different sentencing
R. v. Booth
[2001] 1 Qd.R. 393
, 400, where it was said to be
wrong to attempt to circumvent a specific legislative direction by deliberately
imposing a lesser sentence
in order to avert
[68] McPherson JA saw this as an instance of the more general principle
articulated by Street CJ in
R v Chi Sun Tsui
that “the prospect of
deportation is not a relevant matter for consideration by a sentencing judge in
that it is the product
of an entirely different legislative policy area of the
regulation of
R v Bob; ex parte A-G
offender argued that the sentence should be re-opened because the judge had been
misinformed that the prospect of deportation
was enlivened only by a sentence of
more than 12 months, rather than, as is the case, 12 months or more. De Jersey
CJ, Davies JA
and Atkinson J held that the trial judge rightly did not take the
prospect of deportation into account. De Jersey CJ said:
Indeed, as the Judge rightly pointed out during the reopening proceedings,
what was proposed then, and what is renewed here now, that
is “to fashion
a sentence which would not otherwise be considered appropriate solely to
circumvent the
Migration Act
”, would not be a correct approach to
the matter. Her Honour described that as “the very thing that ought not to
that is fashioning a sentence solely to defeat the exercise of a
discretion under
section 501
Migration Act
”. I respectfully
R v MAO; Ex parte Attorney-General
the trial judge, in
sentencing the respondent for indecent dealing with a female child under 12
years, took into account that a sentence
in excess of 12 months’
imprisonment could potentially expose the respondent to deportation pursuant to
s 50C of the
Migration Act 1958
(Cth). He therefore sentenced the
respondent to 11 months and three weeks. On appeal by the Crown, the respondent
argued that the
risk of deportation came within the purview of “any other
relevant circumstance” which the sentencing court was entitled
into consideration under the relevant Queensland legislation. The Court of
Appeal (de Jersey CJ, Williams and Keane JJA)
rejected that argument. De Jersey
CJ said, citing
It is impermissible for a Judge to reduce an otherwise appropriate sentence
to avoid a risk of deportation. That is well-established
by comparatively recent
R v Kansiz,
the Victorian Court of Criminal Appeal considered the case of an applicant who
was found guilty of assaulting a police officer in
the course of his duty and
who pleaded guilty to a range of other offences. He was liable to be deported
if he received a sentence
of imprisonment for 12 months or more. He sought leave
to appeal against the severity of his sentence of three years’
imprisonment
on a range of grounds, including that the sentencing judge failed
to give any or any proper weight to the risk of the applicant being
McInerny J (with whom McGarvie J agreed) said:
It was not necessary to decide whether it was relevant for the sentencing
judge to take the prospect of deportation into account because
he had decided
that a sentence of imprisonment of more than 12 months was warranted.
So far as the authorities go, the view of this court has, I think, in general
terms, been that deportation is an administrative decision
which has nothing to
do with the court and that the court must impose the sentence which in its view
is appropriate irrespective
of the possibility of deportation.
Once the learned trial judge decided that a sentence of imprisonment for a
period in excess of twelve months was appropriate, the
risk of deportation had
to be accepted by the applicant. It would not have been proper for his Honour
to have imposed a substantially
smaller sentence than the sentence which he
thought appropriate simply to avoid the risk of deportation.
[72] In the subsequent Victorian case of
the applicant was
a New Zealand citizen who was found guilty of a single charge of arson and
sentenced to imprisonment for 15 months
suspended after five months. He sought
leave to appeal against both conviction and sentence. As the
then stood, the Minister had a discretion to deport him as he had been
sentenced to imprisonment for 12 months or more. The sentencing
judge was not
informed of this and did not take into account the risk of deportation. The
appellant contended that this was an error.
Leave to appeal was not granted.
Tadgell JA (with whom the other members of the Court agreed) said:
Quite apart from anything else, it would be unseemly, as I think, for a court
to attempt to formulate a sentence in order, on the
one hand, to accommodate, or
on the other hand, to avoid the possible exercise of an administrative
[73] In the South Australian case of
(dealt with in
more detail below), Doyle CJ said at [27]:
In any event, at the end of the day the Judge had to impose an appropriate
sentence having regard to the relevant circumstances. It
would be wrong for the
Judge to impose a lesser sentence than was appropriate on the basis that the
shorter the sentence the better
the prospects of the Minister permitting Ms
Berlinsky to avoid deportation.
[74] In the same case, Bleby J (agreeing with Doyle CJ) made the following
additional remarks at [46]:
It is not for this Court to attempt to influence in any way the decision on
the appellant’s visa application, and the determination
of the proper
sentence in this case cannot be influenced in any way by the effect it may have
on that decision.
[75] Gray J agreed (at [68]) that it was to be accepted that a court should
not construct the sentence so as to avoid the operation
of the provisions of the
Commonwealth migration legislation. However, Gray J would have allowed the
appeal on the basis that under
the sentencing legislation, the relevant
sentencing factors included the effect of the sentence on the appellant’s
infant child.
He concluded that in this limited context it was appropriate to
have regard to the probable consequences of the appellant’s
deportation on
[76] The Northern Territory Court of Criminal Appeal decision in
(supra) was also a threshold case. The error which the sentencing
judge had committed was to hold that where, as in that case, the
appropriate
head sentence is in the order of imprisonment for 12 months (ie the threshold at
which the risk of deportation arises)
it is permissible to take that consequence
into account in determining where, within the appropriate range, to fix the head
However, the Court of Criminal Appeal expressed the principle in
general terms to be that “the possibility of deportation
is an entirely
irrelevant matter for sentencing purposes.” The other Northern Territory
Urahman v Semrad
was also a threshold
[77] The principle underlying the approach adopted in the threshold cases is
that the power to exclude or remove a non-citizen under
Migration Act
(Cth) is a fundamental incident of sovereignty over territory which
cannot be curtailed or undermined by the courts. The legislative
authority for
Migration Act
Constitution
confers authority on the Parliament to make laws with respect to
“naturalization and
The power is
expressed in unqualified terms. It authorizes the enactment of laws with
respect to non-citizens generally. Such
laws may either exclude the entry of
non-citizens, or a particular class of non-citizens, into Australia or prescribe
upon which they may be permitted to enter and remain, and may also
provide for their detention and removal. In
Chu Kheng Lim v Minister for
Immigration
Brennan, Deane
and Dawson JJ stated that
“the power to exclude or expel even a
friendly alien is recognised by international law as an incident of sovereignty
over territor
”. That principle has been long acknowledged in
Migration Act
sets out the object of the Act in
terms which include the removal or deportation from Australia of non-citizens
whose presence in
Australia is not in the national interest. It is in
recognition of the Parliament’s power to make laws for those purposes
the fact that it has done so, and with regard to the principles of comity which
govern the interaction between the various arms
of government, that the courts
do not design sentences in order to undermine those purposes.
The mitigation cases
[79] The question in the mitigation cases is whether liability to deportation
is a matter connected to an offender which a sentencing
court may properly take
into consideration as meriting a lesser penalty. As noted at the outset, there
is a dichotomy between authorities
in Western Australia and New South Wales on
the one hand, and Victoria, Queensland, the Australian Capital Territory and
on the other, in relation to whether the prospect of deportation of an
offender is a relevant sentencing consideration which may
mitigation.
The New South Wales authorities
[80] There are conflicting decisions in New South Wales on whether the
prospect of deportation can be taken into account in mitigation
of sentence, and
the matter has not yet been resolved. In
which was the first
case in which the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal considered the issue,
the Court adopted the position
now taken by the courts in Victoria.
case involved an unsuccessful appeal by the Director of Public Prosecutions
against a sentence of 32 months’ imprisonment
with a non-parole period of
20 months imposed on the respondent for the crime of manslaughter. The Director
contended that the sentence
was manifestly inadequate.
[81] One of the factors mentioned by both Adams and Hulme JJ (with whom
Tobias JA agreed) which led to the dismissal of the appeal
was that the trial
judge was correct in taking into account in mitigation the extra-curial
punishment which the respondent would
suffer as a result of his inevitable
deportation from Australia and the loss of the opportunity of becoming an
Australian citizen.
Hulme J said at [13]-[15]:
One of the factors to which I refer as justifying the period of 4 years
arises from the fact that the presence of the Respondent and
his family in
Australia was pursuant to a visa that allowed temporary residence. He hoped to
settle in Australia but the result
of his offence is that his family have had to
leave, and on completion of the custodial portion of his sentence, he will also
to leave Australia. The second factor concerns the consequence of his
custodial sentence. He has lost the tiling business which
he had established
and which was, it would seem, an asset of significant value. At the time of the
offence he was tiling a 130 unit
development for Meriton Apartments.
These two matters are not insubstantial and one may fairly say, in practical
terms, punishing consequences of his offending. I would
regard an opportunity
for someone in the situation of the Respondent of permanently settling in
Australia with his family as something
of real value to him. I should perhaps
add that, while I have mentioned what has happened to the Respondent’s
family, I do
not regard the hardship they suffer from not being allowed to
settle here as falling within the highly exceptional.
In light of these losses, the conclusion at which I have arrived is that his
years starting point, while lenient, was not manifestly
inadequate.
[82] Adams J said at [48]:
These considerations lead me to conclude that this offence falls well within
the least culpable category of manslaughter, having regard
also to the
subjective features of the case: the respondent’s remorse and contrition;
his previous good character so far as
non-immigration offences were concerned;
the inevitability of his deportation following release, together with his family
(especially
distressing for his children) and the loss of the opportunity of
becoming an Australian and of raising his family here; and the difficulties
faced in gaol because of his limited English language skills. It follows that
the learned trial judge’s starting point of
four years was at the high
rather than the low end of appropriate punishment. The Crown appeal cannot
succeed at this point.
[83] This approach was reversed in subsequent decisions. In
the Court relied on
the principles established in the non-parole cases, and did not make reference
to the decision in
That case involved an appeal by the Director of
Public Prosecutions against a sentence of imprisonment for 18 months with a
period of 12 months imposed following the respondent’s plea of
guilty to one count of escaping lawful custody. The maximum
penalty for that
offence was imprisonment for 10 years. One of the grounds of appeal was that
the sentencing judge had inappropriately
taken into account an expectation that
the respondent would be deported as soon as the custodial portion of any
sentence was served.
[84] Wood CJ at CL (with whom Hislop and Johnston JJ agreed) said at
It is established principle that the fact of deportation is irrelevant as a
sentencing consideration, it being a matter exclusively
for the Executive
Government:
NSWCCA 20 July 1998 and
R v Latumetan and
[2003] NSWCCA 70.
Moreover the High Court has held that a foreign
national should receive the benefit of being eligible for release on parole:
Shrestha v The Queen
[1991] HCA 26
(1991) 173 CLR 48
at 71 per Deane, Dawson and Toohey
The fact that the Respondent would be or might be deported to Vietnam, was
accordingly an immaterial factor in structuring a sentence
in this case and
error would be demonstrated if it could be established that it became a factor
in determining any aspect of the
sentence including the selection of an
appropriate commencement date.
[85] However, the reasons for sentence in that matter, which were described
by the Court of Criminal Appeal as “exceedingly
succinct”, did not
expressly state that liability to deportation had been taken into account in
formulating the sentence.
The Director relied on an implication said to arise
from exchanges between the bench and counsel during the submissions on sentence.
Ultimately, the Court of Criminal Appeal was not persuaded that the sentencing
judge had erred in this respect.
and the non-parole cases were relied on in subsequent Court
of Criminal Appeal decisions, although, given the result in
remarks by Wood CJ at CL which are extracted above were
already discussed, the non-parole cases involved arguably different
considerations. That is particularly so in the High Court
decision in
in which the decision of the majority depended heavily
on public policy considerations relating to the objects and value of having
prisoners eligible for conditional release on parole.
applicant sought leave to appeal against a sentence of eight years’
imprisonment with a non-parole period of five years
for importing a trafficable
quantity of heroin into Australia. The applicant was a citizen of Vietnam and a
holder of a Resident
Visa which permitted her to remain in Australia
indefinitely. The sentencing judge noted that it appeared likely that she would
be deported on her release from custody. One ground of appeal was that the
sentencing judge “erred in failing to have regard
to: (a) the
applicant’s loss of her right to remain in Australia; and (b) the effect
of the applicant’s deportation to
Vietnam as a form of extra-curial
punishment on the
applicant.”
The applicant
contended that “[the applicant’s] forced return to Vietnam is a
significant extra-curial punishment and
should have been taken into account as
[88] Buddin J (with whom Brownie AJA and Latham J agreed) cited the passages
extracted above with approval. His Honour added at
Moreover, the sentencing judge did not have any evidence before him upon
which to base a conclusion as to whether or not the applicant’s
deportation would eventuate at some time in the future.
Even more fundamentally, there was no evidence before the sentencing judge
that would enable a conclusion to be drawn that were the
applicant to be
deported, that such a state of affairs would necessarily constitute additional
punishment in the relevant sense (as
to the principles which apply to the
question of “extra-curial” punishment, see
[2003] NSWCCA 216
139 A Crim R 398).
In the absence of any such evidence, it is quite impossible
to know what weight, if any, should then be attributed to it. That
would be a sufficient basis upon which to dispose of the present ground.
[89] Buddin J went on to distinguish
on the following grounds:
(a) There was an evidentiary basis for the finding in
deportation would be an extra-curial punishment.
(b) The general principle concerning the hardship which the sentencing process
will occasion to the offender’s dependants was
a matter that apparently
played a part in influencing the court to take the course which it did in
(c) People who commit offences of the kind which the applicant committed,
involving as they do a contravention of the
Customs Act
, may well, for
strong reasons of policy, stand in a very different position to that of the
respondent in
[90] Although these three factors may be valid points of distinction between
the circumstances under consideration in
certainly do not suggest, either alone or in combination, that the prospect of
deportation is never a relevant factor in sentencing.
In fact, the approval of
notwithstanding, it would appear to have been accepted in
there may be circumstances in which it is a relevant consideration.
R v Qin; Qin v
involved an appeal by
the appellant against his conviction on charges of indecent assault and sexual
intercourse without consent,
and a Crown cross-appeal against sentence on the
ground of manifest inadequacy. One of the grounds of the Crown appeal was that
the sentencing judge impermissibly took into account the possibility of
deportation. The sentencing judge had referred to
as authority for the proposition that the threat of deportation
a relevant factor because those cases “focused upon not
discriminating against potential deportees” in determining whether
a non-parole period, and the potential for deportation, even if not technically
a punishment, was “at least something
which increases the seriousness of
the consequences of the sentence that is
[92] In the Court of Criminal Appeal, Grove J (with whom McClellan CJ at CL
and Blanch J agreed) questioned the correctness of the
sentencing judge’s
approach. As his Honour pointed out, quite logically and correctly with
respect, both cases referred to
by the sentencing judge were about
taking potential deportation into account and “provided no basis for
applying the converse”.
Grove J cited
and relied on the passage from that case which is
extracted above. However, Grove J concluded that the appeal was not a suitable
vehicle for determination of any perceived dispute or doubt about the principle
because there was no indication that the sentencing
judge had in fact taken the
possibility of deportation into account by reducing the sentence which he
otherwise would have imposed.
Court of Criminal Appeal considered an application for leave to appeal against a
sentence imposed for the offence of persistent
sexual abuse of a 12-year-old
girl. One ground of appeal was that the sentencing judge had erred in failing
to consider whether
to make a finding of special circumstances, one of which was
said to be the risk of deportation. A finding of special circumstances
necessary before the sentencing judge could depart from the ratio between the
head sentence and the non-parole period otherwise
fixed by statute. As such,
the proposed ground of appeal was not against a failure to fix a non-parole
period. On proper characterisation,
it was a contention that the risk of
deportation should have been taken into account as a mitigating factor. Schmidt
J (with whom
Bathurst CJ and Wilson J agreed) said at [79]:
It appears that the applicant is at risk of deportation once his sentence is
served. This was not a relevant consideration on sentence,
even in fixing the
applicant’s non-parole period. Deportation is a matter for the Executive
Government (see
R v Van Hong Pham
[2005] NSWCCA 94
referring to
Shrestha v The Queen
[1991] HCA 26
(1991) 173 CLR 48).
[94] This approach was reaffirmed by the Court of Criminal Appeal in
Kristensen v The Queen
The appellant had been sentenced to imprisonment for one year and nine months
for the federal offence of using a carriage service
to send indecent material to
a person under 16 years of age. He appealed on the basis that the sentencing
judge did not have regard
to the utilitarian value of his guilty plea. It was
common ground on the appeal that the sentencing judge had made a material error
in that respect. It then fell to the appeal court to resentence the offender.
[95] In the process of doing so, Payne JA (RA Hulme and Button JJ agreeing)
made reference to the statements in
to the effect that
the risk of deportation was not a relevant consideration on sentence. His
Honour then reviewed the different
approach taken by the courts in Victoria and
Queensland, and the amendments to the
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) made in
2014 inserting
. The former provision deemed the
applicant to not meet the character test, on the ground that he had a
“substantial criminal
record” and/or he had been convicted of a
“sexually based offence involving a child”. The latter provision
such that although the decision to cancel the applicant’s visa
was mandatory and automatic, the applicant could apply to have
the decision
revoked. It was common ground that there was no evidence about the making or
outcome of any application to the Minister
to revoke the cancellation of the
applicant’s visa.
[96] Having conducted that review, Payne JA stated at [34]-[35]:
I see no reason based on the provisions of the
Migration Amendment
(Character and General Visa Cancellation) Act 2014
(Cth) to adopt any
different approach to sentencing in New South Wales. It remains the case that,
, the applicant here is at risk
of deportation once released from prison. True it is that the statute now has an
automatic application,
subject to safeguards and ultimately to review. The
possibility of deportation was not, in
, a relevant consideration on sentence, even in fixing the
offender’s non-parole period. Deportation was a live issue in cases
as the present under the migration law prior to 2014. After the amendment,
deportation remains a matter for the Commonwealth
Executive Government, subject
to review within the Constitutional structure.
Even if the Victorian and Queensland approach to this question were to be
adopted, this is a case where the evidence about the applicant’s
deportation does not rise beyond mere speculation. If there is to be a challenge
to the long standing New South Wales approach
to the relevance of possible
deportation to sentencing, this case is not an appropriate vehicle for such a
challenge. I do not propose
to take the applicant’s possible deportation
into account.
[97] This approach was most recently reaffirmed by the New South Wales Court
of Criminal Appeal of
which was delivered on
8 May 2020. Johnson J (with whom the other members of the Court agreed)
stated at [123]-[124]:
I have considered submissions made on the question of special circumstances.
I do not regard the prospect of the Applicant’s
deportation to New Zealand
as being a factor assisting him on the question of special circumstances. The
prospect of deportation
is irrelevant to the structuring of a sentence and it is
an error to use deportation to determine any aspect of a sentence:
[2005] NSWCCA 94
[2016] NSWCCA 220
It is impermissible to consider the fact of deportation in determining the
length of a non-parole period for an offender who is
likely to be deported:
[2004] NSWCCA 315
at [25]-[26], although an offender who is likely to be deported should not
be denied a finding of special circumstances if the person
would otherwise
qualify for such a finding.
I do not consider that the Court should reduce the sentence that would
otherwise be imposed on the Applicant, or structure the sentence
differently,
because he is anxious about the prospect of deportation:
[98] That remains the position in New South Wales.
The Western Australian authorities
[99] The Western Australian cases have applied the principles in the
non-parole cases (including
Chi Sun Tsui
) in support
of the conclusion that the prospect of deportation is not a relevant
consideration for sentencing purposes at all. In
addition to the rationale in
the non-parole cases – that deportation is a matter for the executive and
not something that is
proper for the courts to take into account – the
Western Australian courts have placed emphasis on the fact that to take the
prospect of deportation into account in mitigation of sentence would result in
more favourable treatment being given to foreign offenders
than to Australians
who have committed similar offences, and that this would be unjust.
Dauphin v The
Steytler J (with whom
Anderson and McKechnie JJ agreed) said at [21]-[22]:
Counsel for the applicant informed the Court that she had recently been
advised that the applicant will be deported to New Zealand
at the completion of
his sentence. She suggested that this should be taken into account by the Court
when considering the appropriate
sentence to be imposed, particularly in light
of the prospect of reconciliation between the applicant and his de facto partner
the fact that the applicant no longer has any connection to his country of
In my opinion, this submission is without merit. In
R v Chi Sun Tsui
(1985) 1 NSWLR 308
at 311, Street CJ (with whom the other members of the Court
were in agreement) said that "the prospect of deportation is not a relevant
matter or consideration by a sentencing Judge, in that it is the product of an
entirely separate legislative policy area of the regulation
of society". Those
remarks were cited with apparent approval by Brennan and McHugh JJ in
[1991] HCA 26
(1991) 173 CLR 48
at 58. Furthermore, as McPherson JA explained in
[2001] QCA 531
, taking the prospect of the
applicant’s deportation into consideration has the potential to
“produce a regime under which
visitors or non-permanent residents [are]
sentenced more leniently than Australians who [have] committed the same kind of
That cannot be a proper result in the administration of
Houghton v Western
the appellant
accepted that the possibility of deportation could not be taken into account as
a reason for a reduction of sentence
(on the authority of
However, he
submitted that he would suffer hardship in the course of serving his sentence
because the possibility of deportation
had rendered him ineligible for a minimum
security rating, home leave or work release, and argued that such hardship
should be taken
into account.
[102] The Court of Appeal reviewed the authorities on when and how the
additional hardship and deprivation likely to be endured by
a prisoner because
of his subjective circumstances may be taken into account by a sentencing court.
Steytler P (with whom Murray
AJA agreed) did not reach a conclusion about
whether such matters could ever be taken into account, but held that even if
such consequences
could be viewed as giving rise to hardship of the kind that
should be taken into account in considering whether the sentence imposed
appropriate, it was not appropriate in the circumstances of the particular case
to alter the sentence which had been imposed
upon the appellant. This was so
even though Steytler P (with whom Murray AJA agreed) found that it was probable
that the possibility
of the appellant’s deportation would result in the
loss or diminution of the prospect that the appellant would achieve a minimum
security rating and be accorded home leave and other
privileges.
[103] These issues were considered again in
Cohen v Western Australia
The appellant
was a long term resident of Australia with no ties to his country of origin.
After being convicted of certain drug
offences he was declared a drug dealer and
the house inherited from his mother was forfeited to the Crown. He argued that
be suffering substantial additional punishment from the loss of the
house and the fact that he was likely to be deported and refused
re-entry into
Australia. The evidence was that the Minister had not yet made a decision as to
whether the appellant would be deported
when he was released. There was
additional evidence that, because he faced the possibility of deportation, the
prison policy was
that he would not be eligible for certain privileges (minimum
security rating and day work release).
[104] The appeal was allowed and the appellant's sentence reduced on the
ground that the sentencing judge should have taken into account
the substantial
additional punishment suffered as a result of the loss of the house, but not on
the ground based on the prospect
of deportation. The Court held that the
prospect of deportation and the possible loss of privileges were too speculative
into account. Steytler P (Buss JA concurring and McLure JA dissenting
on a different point) said:
There is no evidence that the appellant will be afforded the privilege (it is
not a right) of being moved to a lower security prison
if his visa is not
cancelled. Nor is there any evidence of when he would have been moved to a lower
security prison, if that was
to have happened but will not now happen.
Similarly, there is nothing to say that the appellant will definitely be granted
the privilege
of re-entry release (again, this is not a right) if he is not to
be deported. If he is to be granted that privilege, it will commence,
earliest, on 1 March 2012, six months before he is due to be released. As I have
said, no decision has yet been made whether
or not the appellant will be
deported. Consequently, the prospect of ineligibility for these privileges is
merely speculative at
this stage. The possibility that privileges that are
granted only at the discretion of the executive (and, hence, would not
have been taken into account when sentencing an offender) might be
denied seems to me to be an insufficient basis for interfering
sentences imposed.
was affirmed in
Ponniah v The
which was a
Commonwealth sentencing case.
In that case the Court took a more
definitive stance. Mazza J (with whom Pullin and Buss JJA agreed) said at
In my opinion, the prospect of deportation is not a mitigating factor.
Whether or not a person is deported is an executive decision:
Chu Shao Hung v
[1953] HCA 33
(1953) 87 CLR 575
, 583-584. In other cases, the prospect of
deportation has been held to be an irrelevant sentencing factor:
[2002] WASCA 104
[106] That position was repeated and amplified in
Hickling v Western
which was a state
sentencing case. Mazza JA and Mitchell J said at [57]:
It is obvious that the effect of the prospect of deportation upon a prisoner
has not been uniformly approached in Australia. However,
the position in Western
Australia has been long established. Senior counsel for the appellant did not
expressly ask this court to
. No request was made for a
bench of five judges to hear this matter. We have not been persuaded that the
decision in Dauphin is wrong.
We respectfully agree with the reasoning of
Steytler J in
. That reasoning is consistent with the approach in
this State with respect to other decisions of the executive arm of government
regarding release on parole and the prospect of an interstate prison
[107] The appellant contended that the Court should follow the decision of
the Victorian Court of Appeal in
Guden v The
(discussed in further
detail below). Mazza JA and Mitchell J rejected the proposition that it
was appropriate to consider liability
to deportation as a mitigating
circumstance at [60]:
Further, it is not apparent why, as a matter of principle, special mitigatory
weight should be given to the effect which the ‘prospect
deportation’ may have on the impact which a sentence of imprisonment will
have on the offender (
[25], [27]). Many offenders, if not every
offender, sentenced to a term of imprisonment suffer uncertainty — even
great uncertainty
— in prison about matters such as whether their
relationships will remain intact; their prospects of employment; whether they
will have somewhere to live upon release and where that might be. For some,
whether they will return home or back into the community
or town in which they
lived will be uncertain. These are regarded as matters which are unavoidable
consequences of imprisonment and
do not constitute mitigating circumstances. We
are unable to see the qualitative difference between these factors and the
of deportation even under the new regime.
[108] The principles which Mazza JA and Mitchell J considered to govern the
question may be summarised as
(a) Parliament may confer discretionary administrative power on an executive
officer, which is engaged only after a court exercising
judicial power has
imposed an appropriate sentence according to law. The determination of the
appropriate sentence remains a matter
for the exercise of the court’s
judicial discretion, applying appropriate sentencing principles.
(b) The sentencing discretion is not appropriately exercised by reference to
predictions about how such an administrative discretion,
which arises only after
sentence, may be exercised in the future.
(c) No special mitigatory weight should be given to the effect which a prospect
of deportation might have on the impact which a sentence
of imprisonment may
have on an offender. Many uncertainties arise as a consequence of imprisonment,
and there is no qualitative
difference between them and the prospect of
deportation.
(d) In any event, even if the prospect of deportation was mitigatory, the
appellant needed to demonstrate hardship as a result.
[109] McLure P referred to a passage in
suggesting that the
burden of imprisonment may be greater for someone serving a term of imprisonment
in the expectation of being deported
following release; that the loss of the
opportunity to settle permanently in Australia may be seen as a serious
consequence”; and that in an appropriate case it will be
proper to take these matters into account. Her Honour determined not
the Victorian approach for the following reasons, at [7]-[9]:
... [I]n order to assess the weight to be given to these matters in any
particular case, evidence would be required sufficient to
permit a sensible
quantification of the risk of deportation and it would also be necessary for an
offender to demonstrate that deportation
in his or her case would in fact be a
hardship ...
... [U]nder the current statutory framework, no assessment could be made at
the time of sentencing in that case of the risk of deportation
following the
applicant’s release and that deportation was therefore viewed as a
completely speculative possibility.
The law in Western Australia on the relevance of the prospect of deportation
in the sentencing process predates
. The position in this State is
that the prospect that an offender will be deported at the conclusion of his or
her sentence is, without
more, an irrelevant sentencing consideration. .... That
is also the law in New South Wales and was the law in Queensland until the
decision in
[2016] QCA 58.
[110] McLure P also held (at [10], citing
with approval) that
“the law relating to the deportation of offenders on character grounds
reflects an entirely separate legislative
policy”; further that “it
is an affront to the proper administration of criminal justice that offenders
who are liable
to deportation are treated more leniently than Australian
citizens”; and, finally, that “it is wrong to characterise
Commonwealth statutory administrative scheme for the deportation of non-citizens
on character grounds as additional punishment
for the offence(s) which trigger
its application” because “the purpose of that scheme is not penal or
punitive in character.”
[111] That remains the position in Western Australia.
The Victorian authorities
(discussed above), the Victorian Court of Criminal Appeal did not consider the
issues of extra-curial punishment or the possibility
that prison may weigh more
heavily on an offender anticipating deportation. The case was treated solely as
a threshold case.
(also discussed
above), was also a threshold case but the Court appeared to express a principle
of more general application. The
Court held that the sentencing judge was
“neither obliged nor entitled to speculate that what is a mere future
possibility
might or might not materialise into a
Minister’s power was completely discretionary, and therefore the prospect
of deportation was considered by the Court to
be “a complete speculative
possibility”. The Court also said it was “unable to derive any
assistance” from
“cases which have considered whether a non-parole
period may appropriately be fixed in the case of a foreign national to be
sentenced in this
the applicant appealed
against the sentence imposed on him for child sex offences on various grounds,
including that the sentencing
judge ought to have taken into account the
possible effect upon the appellant of the prospect of deportation. The
appellant had
made Australia his home, he believed that the child born to his
partner was his and he contended that his potential
relationship with the child was important to him. It was submitted that the
state of indecision brought about by the prospect of being forced to leave
Australia and of the consequence of this upon the potential
relationship with
his child would in itself be burdensome upon the appellant. Not knowing whether
he would be deported would, in
these circumstances, constitute a form of
extra-curial punishment sufficient to mitigate penalty, which the sentencing
judge incorrectly
disregarded.
[114] In dismissing the appeal, Pagone AJA said that although the sentencing
judge had correctly put out of her mind the prospect
or the possibility of the
appellant's deportation as such, she did permissibly take into account the
impact of the loss of the prospect
of being able to form a relationship with the
child in determining the weight to be given to the principle of specific
deterrence.
Her Honour had noted that the appellant had been punished for his
actions in ways that were not reflected in the sentence, and accepted
immigration consequences had helped bring home to him the seriousness of his
conduct, and firmed his resolve not to re-offend.
[115] That principle was picked up and refined in
Guden v The
which has been the
most influential of the Victorian cases.
Guden was a Turkish national
who was convicted following pleas of guilty to eight offences arising from a
single incident involving
an attack with a machete, including one count of
making a threat to kill and two counts of intentionally causing serious injury.
He was sentenced to a total effective sentence of eight years’
imprisonment with a non-parole period of six years. The sentencing
into account as a mitigating factor the probability that the offender would be
deported on his release from custody.
The offender appealed against the
sentence, contending that the sentencing judge “had attached insufficient
weight to his probable
deportation and its likely
consequences”.
was decided before the 2014 amendments, at a time when the Minister for
Immigration had a discretion to revoke an existing
visa or decline to renew one
if that person was sentenced to a term of imprisonment of 12 months or more.
[116] The Court (Maxwell P, Bongiorno JA and Beach AJA) concluded (at
[25]-[27]) that there is no sentencing principle which would
conclusion that the prospect of an offender’s deportation is an irrelevant
consideration in the sentencing process.
As with other factors personal to an
offender, the prospect of deportation was a factor which could bear on the
impact which a sentence
of imprisonment would have on the offender, both during
the currency of the incarceration and upon his/her release. Those potential
impacts included the following matters.
(a) The fact that an offender would serve his/her term of imprisonment in
expectation of being deported following release might well
mean that the burden
of imprisonment would be greater for that person than for someone who faced no
(b) Consistent with the view expressed by the New South Wales Court of Criminal
(supra), in an appropriate case the fact that a sentence
of imprisonment might result in the offender losing the opportunity of settling
permanently in Australia might operate as a punishing consequence.
[117] However, the Court went on to caution (at [28]-[29]), consistently with
the view expressed in
(supra), that a sentencing court
could not be asked to speculate as to the risk of deportation. In order
properly to assess the
weight to be given in any particular case to a risk of
deportation, evidence would be required sufficient to permit a sensible
quantification
of that risk to be undertaken. If defence counsel on a plea in
mitigation could say no more than that a term of imprisonment of
more than 12
months would, upon its expiry, enliven the power of the Minister for Immigration
either to revoke an existing visa or
to decline to renew one, then deportation
might properly be viewed as a completely speculative possibility. In the
absence of evidence
or an appropriate concession by the Crown, there would be no
error in a judge declining to take into account the possibility of deportation.
It would also be necessary for a prisoner to demonstrate that deportation in
his/her case would in fact be a hardship.
[118] In arriving at these conclusions, the Court gave express consideration
to the judgment of Brennan and McHugh JJ in
, in which their
Honours referred to the statement by Street CJ in
Chi Sun Tsui
stated at [19]:
The oft-cited statement by Street CJ – that the prospect of deportation
‘is not a relevant matter for consideration by
a sentencing judge’
– must therefore be understood as explained by, and limited to, the
statutory context in which it
arose and the particular issue which the Court was
addressing – that of the fixing of a non-parole period. There was no
for Street CJ to make, nor do we think his Honour intended to make, any
wider statement about the relevance of deportation as a factor
sentencing.
[119] The Court therefore concluded that
was also authority
only for that more limited proposition.
has been followed in Victoria in a number of cases,
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Vic) v Zhuang
Konamala v The Queen
Da Costa v The Queen
Schneider v The Queen
HAT v The Queen,
the Victorian Court of Appeal (Redlich JA, Neave JA and Lasry AJA agreeing)
summarised the position in these terms (citations omitted):
[T]his Court made clear in
that the prospect of deportation is a
factor which may be relevant to the impact that a sentence of imprisonment will
have on the
offender, both during the currency of their incarceration and upon
his or her release, and therefore, subject to the state of the
evidence that
such deportation is likely, it should be taken into account when sentencing. The
burden of imprisonment may be greater
for a prisoner who knows that following
his release he will be deported. Also, if the effect of receiving a sentence of
imprisonment
is that an offender will lose the opportunity of settling
permanently in Australia, this may be taken into account as a form of additional
punishment. But a sentencing judge is not required to speculate; there must be
evidence that enables a sensible quantification of
the risk that deportation
will in fact occur, and proof that deportation would in fact be a hardship for
that particular offender.
has now been followed in Queensland.
The Queensland authorities
[122] As discussed above,
“threshold” case, however McPherson JA (with whom Thomas JA and
Mullins J agreed) once again cited
R v Chi Sun Tsui
as authority for the
broader proposition that “the prospect of deportation is not a relevant
matter for consideration by a sentencing
judge in that it is the product of an
entirely separate legislative policy area of the regulation of society”.
R v MAO; Ex parte Attorney-General
was likewise
a threshold case, but, in that case too, de Jersey CJ cited
R v Chi Sun Tsui
as authority for the broader proposition. His Honour also referred back to
remarks he had made in
R v Bob; ex parte A-G
which might have
been seen to suggest that liability for deportation may be taken into
and said at [31]:
When I said that [the sentencing] Judge “was not obliged to take that
significantly into account”, referring to the possibility
of deportation,
my remark was no more than an obiter dictum. Insofar as it may imply a view that
the possibility of deportation could
have any relevance to the question of
penalty, it should not be followed.
[123] However, in
the Queensland Court
of Appeal undertook a review of the authorities and adopted the approach which
had been taken in
. The applicant in
was a Canadian
who had lived and worked in Australia for more than 10 years. He sought leave
to appeal against a sentence for drug
charges of six years’ imprisonment
with a parole release date after serving three years and four months. He
contended that
the sentencing judge had erred in treating the risk of
deportation as an irrelevant consideration.
[124] Although dismissing the appeal on the ground that the sentencing judge
was right to conclude there was insufficient evidence
to establish that
deportation would involve hardship to the applicant, Philippides JA, (with whom
Morrison JA and North J agreed)
stated that the reasoning that led the Victorian
Court of Appeal to its conclusion in
was “compelling”.
Her Honour stated at [15]-[16] (citations omitted):
The starting point for a discussion of the relevance of deportation is often
the statement of Street CJ in
R v Chi Sun Tsui
that “... the
prospect of deportation is not a relevant matter for consideration by a
sentencing judge, in that it is the product
of an entirely separate legislative
and policy area of the regulation of our society”. As Maxwell P explained
, that statement was made in the context of whether the prospect
of deportation was relevant when considering if a non-parole period
specified under legislation which prohibited the Parole Board from refusing to
release a prisoner on parole “by reason,
only that, in the opinion of the
Board, the prisoner may become liable to be deported”. The statement is
not to be regarded
as one of general application. To the extent that the
decision of this Court in
suggested in obiter remarks otherwise, it
ought not to be followed.
It is undoubtedly correct that, in an appropriate case, the prospect of
deportation may be a relevant factor, personal to the offender,
to be considered
in mitigation of sentence. The prospect of deportation may affect the impact of
a sentence of imprisonment, because
it makes the period of incarceration more
burdensome, and also because upon release, the fact of imprisonment will result
offender being deprived of the opportunity of permanent residence in
Australia. While the prospect of deportation may be a relevant
factor, the sentencing court cannot be asked to speculate about that prospect or
as to the impact of deportation on the
offender. Proof that deportation will in
fact be a hardship for the particular offender will be required.
[125] That case was followed in the same year by
in which Fraser
J (Morrison JA and Lyons JA agreeing) confirmed that liability to deportation
was potentially a relevant consideration,
but held at [81]–[82] that the
sentencing judge was not in error by not taking into account by way of
mitigation the hardship
which may have been suffered by the offender as the
prospect of deportation was entirely speculative.
[126] In the subsequent matter of
R v Norris; Ex parte
Attorney-General
respondent had pleaded guilty to trafficking in cannabis, producing a quantity
of cannabis exceeding 500 grams, possessing in
excess of 500 grams of cannabis,
and possessing an array of things for use in the production of cannabis. For
counts 1 and 2 the
respondent was sentenced to four years’ imprisonment
and 12 months’ imprisonment respectively, to be served concurrently.
term of imprisonment was suspended forthwith with an operational period of five
years. For count 3, the respondent was released
on probation on conditions for
a period of two years. For count 4 no additional penalty was imposed. The
respondent was a citizen
of New Zealand. He had resided in Australia on a visa
since he was two years old. The immediate suspension of the sentences of
imprisonment had the effect that the respondent’s visa was at risk of
cancellation, rather than a certainty of being cancelled.
[127] The Crown appealed against the sentence, contending that the sentencing
judge had infringed the principle set out in the threshold
cases, referred to
above. After reviewing the authorities, Gotterson JA (with whom Sofronoff P and
Philippides JA agreed) affirmed
the principle in those
but found that the
sentencing judge had not imposed the suspended sentences for that improper
purpose, but rather “to minimise
the risk of interruption to the
respondent’s rehabilitation that immigration detention beyond a fixed date
would entail.”
coming to that conclusion, Gotterson JA reaffirmed the approach taken by the
Court of Appeal in
, saying at [41]:
As the respondent correctly submits,
has been consistently followed
in this Court in its acceptance of the reasoned principle enunciated in
. I agree that that principle is correct and am of the view that it
ought to continue to be applied by sentencing courts in Queensland.
[128] The relevance of these matters for sentencing purposes was reaffirmed
by the Queensland Court of Appeal in
but in that case
the Court considered that the emotional and financial hardship for the family
could not be regarded as exceptional
because the applicant had separated from
his wife more than 4 ½ years before the sentence was imposed, and the
family had more
than three years to become accustomed to the prospect of the
applicant’s likely deportation.
[129] Accordingly, the position now adopted by the courts in Queensland may
be summarised as follows:
(a) in an appropriate case, the prospect of deportation may be a relevant factor
personal to the offender to be considered in mitigation
of sentence, because it
may make the period of incarceration more burdensome;
(b) in an appropriate case, the prospect of deportation may also affect the
impact of the sentence because the fact of imprisonment
will result in the
offender being deprived of the opportunity of permanent residence in
(c) the sentencing court cannot be asked to speculate about that prospect or as
to the impact of deportation on the offender, and
evidence will be required to
establish those matters, including proof that deportation will in fact be a
hardship for the particular
The Australian Capital Territory authorities
[130] The position in the Australian Capital Territory has yet to be
authoritatively determined by the Court of Appeal. The earlier
determined that
the offender’s deportation was not a relevant sentencing consideration.
Conversely, in
Refshauge J
affirmed the approach in
, in the context of federal child
exploitation offences, stating at [64]–[65], [67] that:
[I]n 2011, the [Victorian] Court of Appeal in
Guden v The Queen
; [25]–[27]
held that the prospect of deportation is a factor that may be relevant to the
impact that a sentence of imprisonment
must have on an offender, both during the
currency of the incarceration and upon his or her release, and that, therefore,
the prospects
of such deportation, subject to proper evidence about it, should
be taken into account. This approach has been followed since then.
[2011] VSCA 427
(2011) 216 A Crim R 535
at 568–9; [126]–[129];
Konamala v The Queen
[2016] VSCA 48
Junior v The Queen
[2016] VSCA 49
These courts have made it clear that the prospects of deportation is relevant
to sentencing ...
On the basis of this authority, I consider that I should take into account as
a factor that will bear heavily upon Mr Aniezue ...
that he will be
[131] Having regard to these conflicting decisions by single judges of the
Supreme Court, the position in the Australian Capital Territory
The South Australian authorities
[132] In the South Australian case of
the appellant
was given leave to appeal against her sentence of imprisonment for one year and
six months for various fraud related
crimes. She was a citizen of the United
Kingdom and had gained entry into Australia (and permanent residency) on a false
New Zealand
passport. Her status as a permanent resident had been terminated,
and she faced the real risk of deportation. At the date of sentencing,
the hearing of the appeal, a final decision had not yet been made by the
Minister. Her legal advice was that, if deported,
she was unlikely to be
permitted to take her son with her because the child’s father was an
Australian citizen. One of the
grounds of appeal was that the sentencing judge
erred in failing to take into account the risk of deportation and the consequent
risk that she would lose her son. As described above, the appeal was allowed by
the majority on other grounds, and by Gray J, including
on this ground.
[133] Doyle CJ emphasised the principles applicable to threshold cases, and
said at [27]:
As Ms Abraham QC, counsel for the respondent, correctly pointed out,
deportation is a matter for the Executive Government. It is irrelevant,
as a sentencing
consideration.
[134] Bleby J (agreeing with Doyle CJ) added at [46] that the effect on the
child was purely speculative, given the uncertainties
in the case.
[135] Gray J (dissenting on this point) said at [68]:
It is to be accepted that, when re-sentencing, this Court should not
construct the sentence so as to avoid the operation of the provisions
Migration Act 1958
(Cth). The task of the Court is to fix an appropriate
sentence having regard to all relevant factors. Those factors include the effect
of the sentence on a dependant infant child. Section 16A(2)(p) requires that
these matters be brought to account in the sentencing
process. In this limited
context it is appropriate to have regard to the probable consequences of the
appellant being deported.
[136] In contrast to the view of the majority in that case, in
(with whom Kourakis CJ and Vanstone J agreed) adopted the approach which has
more recently been taken by the Queensland
Court of Criminal Appeal, in saying
at [110]-[111], [113]:
R v Schelvis
it was argued that the sentencing judge should have
taken into account the effects of Ms Schelvis’ deportation being
inevitable ... upon being released on parole’ ...
Fraser JA (with whom Morrison JA and Peter Lyons J agreed) ... referred to a
line of authority in Queensland and Victoria which conflicted
with authorities
in Western Australia and in New South Wales about whether the prospect that an
offender may be deported should be
taken into account. His Honour accepted that
‘the risk of removal from Australia (must) be assessable rather than
merely speculative
before it may be taken into account by way of
mitigation’, following
I respectfully agree with that analysis. Leaving aside the fact that the
issue was not raised at the time of sentencing, the judge
did not err in failing
to take into account the prospect of deportation of Mr Zhang ...
[137] In the same year that
was decided, in
the Full Court
considered an appeal on the ground that the sentencing judge failed to take into
account the additional hardship the
appellant would suffer during the term of
his imprisonment because of the prospect that upon his release from prison he
deported to Albania. The Court observed (per Stanley J, Peek J and
Hinton J separately concurring), that there was conflicting authority
Australia and across the States as to whether the prospect of deportation is a
matter to be taken into account as a mitigatory
consideration when fixing
sentence. However, it was unnecessary to resolve the conflict on that appeal
because it was accepted that
a sentencing judge cannot speculate as to the
prospect of deportation. There must be evidence before the court that enables
a sensible quantification of the risk that deportation will, in fact,
occur, and proof that deportation would, in fact, be a hardship
during any term
of imprisonment for that particular offender. In this case, there was no
evidence before the sentencing judge as
to either of these issues.
[138] Most recently, these conflicting authorities were considered by the
Full Court in the case of
Parker J (Vanstone and Nicholson JJ agreeing) did not find it necessary to
resolve the issue, stating at [35]–[38]
The question of the relevance of possible deportation to sentencing came
before the Court of Criminal Appeal in
. Stanley J, with whom
Peek and Hinton JJ agreed, observed that
may have been decided
per incuriam
as no reference was made to the earlier decision in
. I note that
does not appear to have been
drawn to the Court’s attention. Stanley J concluded that it was not
necessary to resolve the conflict
between the authorities in this State and
interstate as the appeal could be decided on other grounds.
The relevance of deportation to sentencing again came before the Court of
Criminal Appeal in
. Nicholson J, with whom Kourakis CJ and
Peek J agreed, noted the conflicting approaches but found that it was
unnecessary to resolve
the question as the appeal could be decided on other
I also consider that it is unnecessary to resolve the conflict between
. The approach adopted in
also in New South Wales and Western Australia) is that the prospect of
deportation is not a relevant consideration in sentencing.
The alternative
approach adopted in
(and also in Victoria and Queensland) is that
the prospect of deportation will be a relevant consideration if “the risk
removal from Australia ... [is] assessable rather than merely
speculative”.
The Court cannot speculate about a decision that is still to be made by the
Commonwealth Minister or his delegate. Thus, the likelihood
of the applicant
being deported from Australia is, on the information before the Court, not
assessable. For that reason it is immaterial
which of the two lines of competing
authority is correct. On either view, the risk of deportation cannot be taken
into account in
determining the Court’s response to the applicant’s
repeated breaches of the recognisance release order.
[139] The conflicting authorities have not been resolved in any subsequent
case, and the question whether deportation is a relevant
sentencing factor
remains unsettled in South Australia.
The position to be adopted in the Northern Territory
[140] As described above, the courts in all Australian States and Territories
have adopted a uniform approach to the threshold cases.
That is, it is not
permissible to take into account the prospect of deportation in order to craft a
sentence designed to avoid the
prospect of deportation. There is no reason in
principle to depart from that position, and it is consistent in principle with
the Court of Criminal Appeal has said in relation to the threshold for
minimum non-parole periods in
Norris v The
[141] In non-parole cases, Northern Territory courts are bound by the
decision of the High Court in
. That is, a court is not
precluded from fixing a non-parole period merely because an offender is liable
to be deported. The prospect
of deportation will generally not be a relevant
consideration in determining whether to fix a non-parole period. It is more
considered by the parole authority at the later stage of deciding
whether to grant parole.
[142] That leaves the question whether liability to deportation is properly
taken into account as a mitigating circumstance. The
courts in New South Wales
and Western Australia have at various times given four principal reasons for
holding that the prospect
of deportation is not relevant to sentencing and
should not be taken into account in mitigation of sentence. They are:
(a) it is consistent with long-established authority (notably
R v Chi Sun Tsui
(b) it would be unfair and an affront to the proper administration of criminal
justice if offenders who are liable to deportation
were to be treated more
leniently than Australian citizens on that account;
(c) the purpose of the Commonwealth statutory administrative scheme for the
deportation of non-citizens on character grounds is not
penal or punitive in
character, and therefore not properly categorised as an additional or
extra-curial punishment for the offence(s)
which trigger its application; and
(d) the law relating to the deportation of offenders on character grounds
reflects an area of legislative policy entirely separate
from the criminal law.
[143] Turning first to the question of authority,
Chi Sun Tsui
are the seminal cases relied upon for the proposition that the
prospect of deportation is not a relevant sentencing consideration.
already observed, and has been observed by the courts of appeal in Victoria and
Queensland, both are non-parole cases.
The reasoning which led to the
conclusion that courts should not refuse to fix a non-parole period on the
ground that the offender
may be liable to deportation does not necessarily
support the conclusion that the prospect of deportation should never be taken
account for sentencing
It was unnecessary
for the Court in
R v Chi Sun Tsui
to state the principle so widely, and
the reasoning of the majority in
relied on principles peculiar
to non-parole periods and the purposes and benefits of eligibility for parole.
[144] Turning then to the concept of fairness, the criticism that it would be
an affront to the proper administration of criminal
justice that offenders
liable to deportation are treated more leniently than other offenders could be
levelled in relation to every
matter of personal circumstances which the courts
take into account in mitigation on the basis that they make prison more
for the offender. For example, the likely impact of incarceration on
an offender with young children is taken into account as a
mitigating factor if
the sentencing court is satisfied that anguish caused by that separation would
make the experience of imprisonment
more burdensome for the
uncontroversial that the physical and mental health of the offender leading up
to the commission of the offence, a history
of profound deprivation, and the
risk of loss of employment may operate as mitigating factors. The result in
each of these cases
is that an offender is treated more leniently than he or she
might otherwise be, and more leniently than another offender or class
offenders with different personal circumstances might be, but it is proper to do
so on ordinary sentencing principles.
[145] It is no doubt correct to say that the purpose of the deportation
regime is not penal or punitive, but rather is exercised for
the protection of
Australian society. However, it does not follow as a matter of principle that
the prospect of deportation and
the consequent loss of the opportunity to settle
permanently in Australia are excluded from consideration as extra-curial
or matters that may make prison more burdensome for the offender.
There are many other types of consequence not penal or punitive
in purpose which
the courts routinely take into account as extra-curial punishment. By way of
example, the purpose of removing a
disgraced lawyer’s practising
certificate is community protection, not punishment, but consequences of that
account in sentencing as an extra-curial
punishment.
To take a quite
different example, injuries sustained by an offender in the commission of the
offence may be taken into account
in mitigation of
[146] Generally, the approach taken by the courts when taking into account a
detriment as an extra-curial punishment has been to look
at the consequences,
rather than exclusively at the purpose, of the detriment under consideration.
So it is that extra-curial punishment
has been described as a “loss or
detriment imposed on an offender by persons other than the sentencing court, for
the purpose
of punishing the offender for his offence or at least by reason of
the offender having committed the
the Victorian
Court of Appeal confirmed that forfeiture of lawfully acquired property could be
taken into account as a form of extra-curial
punishment in mitigation of
sentence, explaining:
At common law, forfeiture of lawfully-acquired property has generally been
regarded as a mitigating factor in sentencing, since it
places the offender in a
worse position than he/she was before the commission of the offence. That is,
forfeiture has a punitive
or deterrent effect.
[147] In a more general statement of principle, in
Christodoulou v
Campbell JA observed at
The types of detriments that have been recognised as extra-curial punishment
that can be taken into account as mitigating factors
have all been detriments
that have come to be imposed on the criminal after the crime has been committed
in retribution for or as
a consequence of, his having committed the crime, or
detriments unintentionally arising from the criminal conduct.
[148] These statements of principle are certainly wide enough to encompass
loss of the opportunity to settle permanently in Australia
as a result of
committing an offence for which an offender is sentenced to a term of
imprisonment above the statutory threshold.
As the Court said in
on any practical approach the loss of the opportunity of settling permanently in
Australia may well be viewed as a serious “punishing
consequence” of
the offending. The fact that the purpose of the deportation regime is not penal
or punitive provides no compelling
reason in principle for excluding liability
to deportation from consideration entirely for sentencing purposes.
[149] In drawing that conclusion, we have had regard to certain observations
made by the High Court in
Muldrock v The
In that case the
Court said at [61]:
Sex Offenders Act
empowers the Supreme Court on the application of
the State of New South Wales to order the continuing detention in custody or the
extended supervision of a sex offender following the expiration of the
offender's sentence. Section 24A(1)(b) of the
Sentencing Act
that a court must not take into account as a mitigating factor the fact that the
offender has or may become the subject
of an order under the
Sex Offenders
. The appellant submits that it remains open to the sentencing court to
have regard to the availability of orders under the
Sex Offenders Act
not as a mitigating factor, but because the statutory scheme provides the means
for protecting the community from those sex offenders
who pose a continuing risk
of harm. From this it is said to follow that there is less justification for
incorporating consideration
of the protection of the community in the sentence
imposed on a sex offender. The notion that a sentence might be reduced to take
into account the existence of a regime outside the criminal law providing for
the detention of sex offenders may be thought to have
little to commend it as a
matter of principle. The Court of Criminal Appeal was right to reject the
submission. The expression "mitigating
factor" in s 24A refers to a factor
that is taken into account to reduce the sentence that would otherwise be
appropriate. It is
the function of the court sentencing an offender for a
criminal offence to take into account the purposes of criminal punishment
determining the appropriate sentence. A purpose of punishment is the protection
of the community from the offender. A court may
not refrain from imposing a
sentence that, within the limits of proportionality, serves to protect the
community in a case that calls
for it because at some future time the offender
may be made the subject of an order under the
Sex Offenders Act
[150] We do not take the High Court there to be saying that detrimental
consequences arising from the operation of any regime outside
of the criminal
law may not be taken into account as mitigating circumstances. First, in that
case the consequences of an order
under the sex offenders legislation was
expressly excluded as a mitigating circumstance by the sentencing legislation.
the Court's operative concern was that a possibility that the period
of detention might subsequently be extended should not warrant
the imposition of
a sentence which did not adequately meet the purpose of community protection.
That is no more than a specific
application of the general sentencing principle
that mitigating subjective factors cannot operate to lead to a sentence which is
disproportionate to the crime. The sentence imposed must ultimately reflect
both subjective factors and the objective seriousness
of the offence committed,
and cannot be less than the objective gravity of the offence
[151] We turn finally to consider the reason that “the prospect of
deportation is not a relevant matter for consideration by
a sentencing judge, in
that it is the product of an entirely separate legislative and policy area of
the regulation of our society”.
That proposition was first expressed
R v Chi Sun
and has been
repeatedly quoted in subsequent cases. The principle has been expressed in a
number of ways. It finds its clearest
and most specific expression in the
threshold cases. For example, in
McPherson JA (with
whom Thomas JA and Mullins J agreed) said at 78:
I consider that the process of sentencing should not seek to anticipate the
action that some other authority or tribunal, lawfully
acting within the limits
of a proper discretion, may take in future, by so adjusting the sentence as to
defeat, avoid or circumvent
that result.
[152] As we have already indicated, that more limited proposition may and
should be accepted. The broader proposition from
R v Chi Sun Tsui
been expressed with varying degrees of clarity and specificity in the context of
the non-parole cases. In
R v Chi Sun Tsui
, which was itself a non-parole
case, the rationale for the proposition was said to be that the Commonwealth
stands back in order
to allow the criminal and penal laws and orders to be
carried through to the point where the criminal is freed from custody, and
Commonwealth then proceeds in accordance with the policy enunciated by the
Minister on its behalf. While that analysis would
and does properly preclude
the courts from discharging the sentencing function in a manner which would
fetter or impair the exercise
of discretion by the immigration authorities, it
provides no rationale for excluding liability to deportation from consideration
as a mitigating circumstance.
[153] Similarly, the statements made in other non-parole cases provide no
rationale for the broader proposition. In
the only reason
given was that the fact of deportation was “a matter exclusively for the
Executive Government”.
, the reason given was that whether the offender will or will
not be deported at the end of the appointed minimum term is not a matter
courts, and the question of deportation “should be left to the proper
processes of the Executive Government, and the
public administration machine
which was primarily a threshold case, the Victorian Court of
Criminal Appeal said only that deportation is an administrative decision
has nothing to do with the court, and that the court must impose the sentence
which in its view is appropriate irrespective
of the possibility of
deportation.
described, the subsequent Victorian authorities did not seek to give that
principle any broader application.
[154] The reason why the courts should not take the liability to deportation
into account in determining whether or not to fix a non-parole
period is, as
expressed by the majority in
, because the risk of deportation
does not of itself undermine the purpose and utility of fixing a non-parole
period, or a subsequent
grant of parole, and is effectively an irrelevant
consideration. It is not because the determination whether or not to fix a
period might operate to trammel executive discretion in some relevant
sense. Similarly, there is no risk of a court impinging or
trespassing on the
domain of the executive when considering what sentence is just in all the
circumstances, including circumstances
personal to the offender. In doing so,
the court is acting entirely within its own domain. The operative sentencing
principle is
that all relevant matters personal to the offender should be taken
into account in sentencing.
[155] This principle is reflected in
Sentencing Act
(NT). Among the things a sentencing court must have regard to are
“any other relevant
circumstance”,
includes, with some limitations not relevant for present purposes, matters which
will render incarceration particularly burdensome
and the fact that an offender
will suffer additional punishing consequences outside the court process.
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) provides that, when
sentencing an offender for a Commonwealth offence, the court must take into
account “the character,
antecedents, age, means and physical or mental
condition of the
[156] For these reasons, we have come to the conclusion that the prospect of
deportation should be taken into account in the manner
accepted by the courts in
Victoria and Queensland,
(a) that the burden of imprisonment may be greater for a person serving a term
of imprisonment in expectation of being deported following
release than for
someone who faced no such risk; and
(b) that in appropriate cases, the loss of the opportunity to settle permanently
in Australia may be taken into account as a form
of extra-curial punishment.
[157] That conclusion is subject to two important qualifications. The first
of those qualifications is expressed in many of the cases
which have been
canvassed above. That is, a sentencing court cannot speculate about a decision
that is still to be made by the Commonwealth
Minister or his/her delegate. The
likelihood of the applicant being deported from Australia must be
“assessable rather than
merely speculative”. If defence counsel on
a plea in mitigation can say no more than that a term of imprisonment of 12
or more would enliven the power of the Minister to deport the offender,
then deportation is properly viewed as a completely speculative
possibility
which should not be taken into account. The onus is on the defendant to
establish on the balance of probabilities the
existence of any matter relied on
in mitigation, which means that the onus would be on the offender to establish
the likelihood of
deportation. The onus is also on the defendant to establish
that deportation in his or her case would in fact be a hardship likely
imprisonment more onerous, and such as to amount to extra-curial punishment.
[158] Allied to that qualification is the fact that the likelihood of
deportation will not always result in a reduced sentence. If
the evidence
establishes that the offender is likely to suffer extreme hardship as a result
of being deported – and perhaps
even persecution and death – it is
far from clear that releasing that offender earlier, to face those consequences
would be an appropriate response. The result will always depend on the
circumstances of the individual case.
[159] The second qualification relates to the view expressed in a number of
the cases discussed above (most notably in
and by Gray J in
), that hardship which liability to deportation will occasion to
the offender’s dependants is a matter which might also operate
mitigation. That view should not be accepted. In the first instance, reducing
the length of a sentence so as to accelerate the
deportation process is unlikely
to ameliorate hardship of that nature. Even leaving that aside, a sentencing
court may only have
regard to family hardship as a matter of mercy where the
degree of hardship is “exceptional” and considerably more severe
than the deprivation that would be experienced in the ordinary course due to the
imprisonment of a family
but even hardship of
that nature will not warrant a sentence designed to avoid the prospect of
deportation.
[160] The conclusions we have reached do not require any finding that the
decision of the Court of Criminal Appeal in
The Queen v
or the decision of
the Supreme Court in
and should be overruled. As we have stated, both were threshold
cases and the
rationes decidendi
are that it is not permissible for a
sentencing court to take the consequence of deportation into account in fixing a
head sentence
in a manner calculated to avoid such a consequence. Neither
decision is authority for the proposition that the possibility of deportation
an entirely irrelevant matter for sentencing purposes.
Answers to the questions referred to the Full Court
[161] In conformance with the reasons we have given, the questions of law
reserved for consideration by the Full Court are answered
as follows:
Question 1:
Is a sentencing court prohibited from taking into account the prospect of an
administrative order for deportation arising from the
offending which is the
subject of the proceedings?
(a) The court may not take into account the prospect of an administrative order
for deportation arising from the offending in order
to craft a sentence designed
to avoid the prospect of deportation.
(b) The prospect of deportation is not generally a relevant consideration in
determining whether or not to fix a non-parole period.
(c) Subject to the facts being established by evidence, the prospect of hardship
suffered as a result of deportation, and loss of
the opportunity to settle
permanently in Australia may, in appropriate circumstances, be taken into
account in mitigation of sentence.
(d) The sentencing court cannot be asked to speculate about that prospect or as
to the impact of deportation on the offender. The
likelihood of the applicant
being deported from Australia must be assessable on the evidence put before the
court, rather than merely
speculative. If defence counsel on a plea in
mitigation can say no more than that a term of imprisonment of more than 12
would enliven the power of the Minister to deport the offender, then
deportation is properly viewed as a completely speculative possibility
should not be taken into account. The onus is on the defendant to establish on
the balance of probabilities the likelihood
of deportation, and to establish
that deportation in his or her case would in fact be a hardship likely to make
imprisonment more
onerous, and such as to amount to extra-curial punishment
Question 2:
Is a sentencing court prohibited from taking into account the cancellation of
the approval of citizenship arising from the offending
which is the subject of
the proceeding?
The same principles expressed in answer to Question 1 concerning liability to
deportation have application to the cancellation of
the approval of citizenship.
SOUTHWOOD J:
[162] I have had the benefit of reading a draft of the reasons for judgment
of the plurality of the Court. Save to the extent of
any deviation which may
appear below, I agree with their Honours’ reasons for judgment and their
Honours’ answers to
the questions which have been reserved for the Full
[163] It seems to me that it is also useful to consider whether the manner in
which Australian courts have approached the three different
categories of cases
dealing with visa cancellation and removal is anomalous, or whether the
decisions, at least in Victoria, Queensland
and the High Court, have reached a
level of coherency which now reveals a consistent application of sentencing
principles.
[164] As described by the plurality of this Court, the courts in all
Australian jurisdictions have consistently held that it is not
permissible to
craft a sentence in order to avoid the prospect of visa cancellation and removal
from Australia (or to trigger it)
Migration Act 1958
This is a perfectly orthodox position which is of narrow application. The
approach is consistent with this Court’s
decision in
Norris v The
which among
other things held that it was not permissible for a sentencing Judge to
anticipate or evade a statutory consequence by
imposing a sentence less than
considered appropriate. There are sound reasons based on fundamental principles
for the existing approach.
The contrary approach is inconsistent with the
provisions of the
Migration Act
and the sovereignty of Australia. The
main object of the
Migration Act
is to regulate, in the national
interest, the coming to, and presence in Australia of non-citizens which is an
incident of sovereignty
over territory. The object is peculiarly a matter for
the Australian Parliament. Courts are not entitled to structure sentences
the aim of deliberately subverting a valid exercise of legislative power or
undermining the purpose and object of the legislation.
[165] As to the non-parole cases, the decision of the High Court in
Queen v Shrestha
is consistent with the sentencing principles of proportionality and equal
justice. It ensures that non-citizens do not receive a
harsher sentence simply
because they are liable to have their visa cancelled and be removed from
Australia. A sentence without a
non-parole period is a harsher sentence than a
sentence which has a non-parole period fixed by a court.
, the majority of the High Court stated at 70-73
The Crown's submission appears to us to be based upon pragmatism rather than
principle. In almost all cases, a foreign offender who
has "no ties to this
country, and whose sole purpose in entering Australia is to commit serious
crimes" will, under current legislative
provisions and executive policy, be
immediately deported by the Commonwealth authorities if released on parole. It
follows, so it
is said, that it can never be appropriate that such a person
should be eligible for release on parole. In essence, the argument advanced
support of that unqualified submission appears from the following extract from
the Crown's written outline: "Parole is a regime
intended to assist in the
rehabilitation within the community of persons released from a term of
imprisonment. ... Manifestly, this
community has no interest in providing any
such regime for foreign offenders with no ties to this country. Rather a trial
judge sentencing
such offenders should have regard only to the need to punish
them adequately for their crimes, having regard to all relevant aggravating
mitigating circumstances, and then to ensure that this community is freed from
their presence."
There are two aspects of that submission. The first would seem to be that
this country has no interest in, or responsibility for,
the rehabilitation of an
offender of the kind described, notwithstanding that he is or has been
imprisoned in an Australian gaol.
The other aspect is that, since deportation
will almost certainly render inappropriate or futile the supervision and other
which control and regulate release on parole, the system cannot, and
should not be concerned to, cope with such offenders.
It can be said at once that we find both aspects of the submission
unpersuasive. In so far as the submission involves an assertion
community is not concerned with the rehabilitation of a prisoner who has no ties
with this country and who will be deported
when released from gaol, it takes a
blinkered view of community concerns and interests and unjustifiably confines
them within strict
territorial limits. This country has a direct and significant
interest in the well-being and rehabilitation of all who are detained
gaols, whether or not their origins, ties or future prospects lie in this or in
some other country. It also has a responsibility,
both moral and under
international treaty, to treat all who are subjected to criminal proceedings in
its courts or imprisonment in
its gaols humanely and without discrimination
based on national or ethnic origins (see, e.g.,
International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
, (1965), Art.5(a);
Reg v Binder
[1990] VicRp 50
[1990] VR 563
, at 569-570).
To deny foreign offenders of
the kind in question the opportunity for the amelioration of their situation and
the incentive for reform
and rehabilitation which the parole system offers is
not to differentiate by reference to degrees of criminality or prospects of
rehabilitation. It is to discriminate against prisoners of that class because of
their origins, their place of residence and their
family ties. There is, for
example, no necessary difference in degrees of criminality between, on the one
hand, a New South Wales
resident, with no ties in Western Australia, who travels
to that State solely for the purpose of committing a serious crime there
the other hand, a New Zealand resident, with no such ties, who travels to
Western Australia solely for the purpose of participating
in that crime. Indeed,
the circumstances could well be such that the criminality of the New South
Welshman was much greater, and
the potential for rehabilitation much less, than
that of the New Zealander.
A Western Australian legal system which provided
that, regardless of the degrees of criminality or prospects of rehabilitation,
advantages of eligibility for release from custody on parole should be
available to the New South Wales resident but unavailable
to the New Zealand
resident would plainly discriminate between them by reference to the place
whence they came, that is to say, on
the grounds of residence or origin.
The other reason for rejecting the second aspect of the Crown's submission
relates to the function of the sentencing judge. As has
been said, a sentencing
judge is not ordinarily required or empowered to determine whether a convicted
person should in fact be released
on parole at some future time. He or she is
concerned to decide whether a prisoner should be eligible to be considered for
on parole at that future time. The likelihood of deportation, the lack
of ties with this country and the difficulty or even impossibility
of effective
supervision and enforcement of parole conditions are all factors which will
properly be taken into account by a parole
authority when considering, at that
time, whether the prisoner should be actually released on parole. Those factors
may, however,
conceivably vary, by reason of change of government policy or the
intervention of special circumstances, between the time of sentencing
time when the parole authority considers whether a prisoner should be released
on parole. More important, once it is recognized
that circumstances may well
exist in which, notwithstanding those factors, a parole authority will be
justified in releasing a foreign
offender of the particular class on parole,
those factors do not, of themselves, compel a sentencing judge to decide that it
is inappropriate
that such an offender should be eligible to be even considered
for parole at that time.
(Emphasis by italics added)
[167] The approach of the majority of the High Court in
recognises that in most Australian jurisdictions the fixing of a non-parole
period does not fix the date when a prisoner is
to be released from prison, it
simply fixes the minimum period that must be served in prison before the
executive may give consideration
to releasing a prisoner on parole. Whether a
prisoner is released on parole, or not, is usually a matter for the Parole Board
each jurisdiction.
[168] As to the third category of cases which are concerned with the
relevance of visa cancellation and removal of an offender in
the sentencing
process, the paramount issue is whether these factors may, in an appropriate
case, properly constitute mitigating
factors which may result in a reduction in
[169] While it is true that:
(a) unfairness may arise if an offender who is liable to visa cancellation and
removal from Australia receives a lower sentence but
is ultimately not removed
from Australia, and
(b) visa cancellation and removal from Australia are not sanctions which are
imposed for the purpose of punishing an offender,
the reasons given for the approach adopted in New South Wales and Western
Australia for not taking into account the prospect of visa
cancellation and
removal do not provide a valid basis for refusing to take that prospect into
account as a relevant factor when sentencing
an offender. This is demonstrated
by the plurality of the Court’s analysis of those cases.
[170] The Victorian and Queensland cases have taken the prospect of visa
cancellation and removal from Australia into account on the
following bases:
(a) the burden of imprisonment may be greater
for the person serving a
term of imprisonment in
expectation
of being removed following release
than someone who faced no such risk; and
(b) in appropriate cases, the loss of opportunity to settle permanently in
Australia may be taken into account
as a form of extra-curial punishment
[171] Provided it is established on the balance of probabilities by credible
and reliable evidence that:
(a) the offender will be removed from Australia at the end of that part of his
or her sentence which is required to be served in
prison, and
(b) the offender will suffer a loss or detriment as a result of his or her
removal from Australia which is beyond the ordinary loss
or detriment that a
person suffers as a result of being imprisoned (not every offender who is
removed from Australia will suffer
a significant loss or detriment),
the factors identified in the Victoria and Queensland cases are factors which
fall into the recognised categories of mitigating factors
which may reduce the
sentence which is imposed on an offender in an appropriate case. The ultimate
reference point is whether an
offender who is a non-citizen and is removed at
the end of his or her sentence will suffer more than an identically situated
who is not removed.
Visa cancellation and removal from Australia are relevant because removal from
may increase the impact of the sentence on the offender
key factors will be whether the offender’s prospects of future prosperity
and well-being will be significantly adversely
affected by visa cancellation and
removal, and whether they will lose contact with their family and community
support upon entering
the community in another country.
[172] There are four established or recognised categories of mitigating
factors or circumstances.
The first category of mitigating factors are those relating to the
offender’s response to a charge and include pleading guilty,
co-operating
with law enforcement authorities, and remorse. In the second category are those
factors which relate to the circumstances
of the offence and which contribute to
and to some extent explain the offending. These include provocation, duress, a
deprived circumstances, and mental impairment. The third category
includes matters personal to the offender, such as youth, previous
character, old age and good prospects of rehabilitation.
is concerned with
the effect or impact that the sanction of
imprisonment
is likely to have on the offender or the offender’s
relatives. Of relevance, this category includes: (a)
offender that is above the usual incidents of imprisonment, (b) exceptional
hardship to others, (c)
collateral consequences
of imprisonment which
constitute a loss or detriment above the usual incidents of imprisonment, and
extra-curial punishment
[173] Hardship to an offender includes the increased burden of imprisonment
as a result of ill health or old age, unduly harsh prison
conditions such as
maximum security or extreme lockdown conditions, strict prison conditions such
as those involved in protective
custody, and circumstances where a person may
come from abroad or a remote community and cannot speak English and will have no
or very little contact with relatives. Where a sentencing court takes
hardship into account the court may impose a lower sentence,
non-parole period, impose a suspended sentence, or impose a non-custodial
sanction. However, hardship to an offender
does not justify the imposition of a
sentence which is unacceptably disproportionate to the objective seriousness of
the offence.
The sentencing objectives of punishment, protection of the
community and deterrence remain important sentencing considerations.
[174] A sentence of imprisonment may result in collateral consequences which
impose a burden or loss on an offender which goes beyond
the usual incidents of
imprisonment. Such consequences may include loss of employment, deprivation of
reasonable opportunities for
future employment, disbarment from employment in a
particular field or profession, cancellation or suspension of trading or other
licences, damage to career prospects, loss of future income, diminution of
educational opportunities, loss of pension rights, public
opprobrium or
[175] Subject to certain factors including:
(a) the level of seriousness of a particular offence,
(b) the crime involving an abuse of the offender’s employment or
professional position, and
(c) the risk of the loss or detriment being known and taken into account by the
offender when the offender embarked on his or her
course of criminal conduct,
where a court decides to take the collateral consequences of imprisonment
into account the court may again impose a lower sentence,
reduce the non-parole
period or impose a suspended sentence of some other sentencing disposition.
Once again, the sentencing aims
of just punishment and deterrence remain
important sentencing objectives.
[176] Extra-curial punishment has been described as a “loss or
detriment imposed on an offender by persons other than the sentencing
the purpose of punishing the offender for his offence
or at least by reason
of the offender having committed the
In sentencing [an] offender the court takes into account what extra-curial
punishment the offender has suffered because the court
is required to take into
account all material facts
and is required to ensure that the punishment the
offender receives is what in all the circumstances is an appropriate punishment
and not an excessive punishment
. How much weight a sentencing Judge should
give any extra-curial punishment will, of course, depend on all the
circumstances of the
case. Indeed, there may well be many cases where
extra-judicial punishment attracts little or no weight.
[177] The above statement of James J in
punishment applies equally to a sentencing judge’s consideration of
hardship and the collateral consequences
of a sentence. The underlying
rationale for taking the effect or impact of the sentence on the offender into
account is the important
sentencing principle of proportionality.
Proportionality is the sentencing principle which requires a sentence to be
proportionate
to the gravity of the offence. The principle determines the upper
and lower limits of the range of appropriate sentences. What
is a proportionate
sentence in a particular case is to be determined by reference to all of the
circumstances of the case. The principle
is a guiding determinant of the extent
to which persons should be punished for their crimes. Logically, consideration
of the extent
to which a person should be punished must include consideration of
the impact of the sentence on the particular offender.
[178] In my opinion, the prospect of visa cancellation and removal from
Australia falls into the fourth category of mitigating factors
appropriate case, is most fittingly categorised as
a hardship to the offender
collateral consequence
of a sentence which may increase
the impact of a sentence on an offender beyond the usual incidents of a sentence
of imprisonment.
Visa cancellation and removal are not additional punishments
of the offender. This is particularly so under the current provisions
Migration Act
whereby visa cancellation, detention and removal from
Australia are the direct consequences of a sentence at a specified level. They
are not imposed to punish the offender for the crime he or she has committed.
However, the prospect of visa cancellation and removal
from Australia is
relevant because it is directly linked to the crime for which an offender is
sentenced and may mean that the burden
of imprisonment will be greater for such
an offender who (as is pointed out in the Victorian and Queensland cases) will
sentence in the expectation of being deported following release, and
may not be able to remain in Australia with the resulting loss
security benefits, employment, prospects of future employment, or loss of
business or assets.
[179] Analysed in this way it is apparent that: (i) consideration of
visa cancellation and removal is an orthodox part of the ordinary
process designed to ensure the offender receives in all the circumstances a
proportionate and not excessive sentence;
(ii) consideration of the prospect of
visa cancellation and removal by a sentencing court is not unfair nor is it an
affront to the
administration of criminal justice; and (iii) the fact that the
provisions of the
Migration Act
are not punitive and are concerned with
an area of legislative policy entirely separate from the criminal law does not
mean that the
prospects of visa cancellation and removal from Australia are
irrelevant factors for sentencing purposes. For the reasons stated
cancellation and removal from Australia are clearly relevant sentencing
considerations.
_______________________________
Although the term
“deportation” is most commonly used in this context, the process is
now more accurately described as
one of “visa cancellation and
removal”. Various amendments to the
Migration Act
(Cth) reduced the significance of the original deportation provisions. By 2005,
the Commonwealth had largely abandoned reliance
on criminal deportation
provisions in favour of the wide powers to cancel visas on character grounds,
detention and removal: see
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
and Indigenous Affairs v Nystrom
[2006] HCA 50
(2006) 228 CLR 566.
“deportation” is used in most of the cases under discussion, and we
have for convenience used that term compendiously
in these reasons to include
visa cancellation and removal.
Section 501(3A)
Migration Act
effectively provides for automatic visa cancellation if a
person is sentenced to imprisonment for 12 months or more and serves any
that sentence on a full-time basis in a custodial institution. In those
circumstances it is mandatory for the visa to be
cancelled. Application may be
Migration Act
to the Minister or
Minister’s delegate to overturn the cancellation.
The Queen v MAH
The Queen v MAH
Dauphin v R
[2002] WASCA
[2005] NSWCCA 94
per Woods CJ at CL (with whom Hislop and Johnson JJ agreed).
[2005] NSWCCA 258
per Buddin J (with whom Brownie AJA and Latham J agreed).
(2003) 1 Qd.R. 76
[5] per McPherson JA (with whom Thomas JA and Mullins J agreed).
The Queen v MAH
Urahman v Semrad
229 A Crim R 11
[2012] NTSC 95.
Urahman v Semrad
[2012] NTSC 95
R v Chapman
, following the approach in
(1969) 90 WN(NSW) 488
R v Macaulay
(1969) 90 WN(NSW) 682
; These cases are referred to by
Brennan CJ and McHugh J in
The Queen v Shrestha
[1991] HCA 26
(1991) 173 CLR 48
[1977] 2 NSWLR
WN(NSW) 488.
[1977] 2 NSWLR
at 878; also referring to
R v Macaulay
(1969) 90 WN NSW 683
explaining and distinguishing
R v Chapman
[1971] 1 NSWLR 544.
R v Mesdaghi
R v Mesdaghi
at 71. Street CJ added that to the extent
suggest or decide otherwise, they are to be regarded as no
longer correctly stating the law on this matter of discretion.
See, for example,
(unreported, NSW Court of Criminal Appeal, 20 July 1998) per Sully J (with
whom Smart J agreed).
R v Chi Sun Tsui
1 NSWLR 308.
R v Chi Sun Tsui
1 NSWLR 308
R v Chi Sun Tsui
1 NSWLR 308
R v Chi Sun Tsui
1 NSWLR 308
(unreported, NSW
Court of Criminal Appeal, 20 July 1998).
R v Latumetan and
[2003] NSWCCA 70.
R v Mirzaee
NSWCCA 315.
(unreported, NSW
Court of Criminal Appeal, 20 July 1998) at 6. These remarks are
as the Court dismissed the appeal.
R v Mirzaee
was decided after the High Court had
considered the question in the Western Australian context in
The Queen v
[1991] HCA 26
(1991) 173 CLR 48.
R v Latumetan and
(2003) NSWCCA 70
Bensegger v The Queen
(1979) WAR 65.
Bensegger v The Queen
(1979) WAR 65
Monim and Osman v The
(unreported, Western Australian Court of Criminal Appeal, 21 June
Bensegger v The Queen
(1979) WAR 65
Bensegger v The Queen
(1979) WAR 65
Zaharoudis and Salihos
(1986) 22 A Crim R 233.
Zaharoudis and
(1986) 22 A Crim R 233
Zaharoudis and Salihos
(1986) 22 A Crim R 233
Zaharoudis and Salihos
(1986) 22 A Crim R 233
Zaharoudis and Salihos
(1986) 22 A Crim R 233
at 236-238.
Breuer and Chaney
32 A Crim R 1.
Breuer and Chaney
32 A Crim R 1
Breuer and Chaney
32 A Crim R 1
Weng Kong Chan
A Crim R 337.
Weng Kong Chan
A Crim R 337
Weng Kong Chan
A Crim R 337
at 344-345 per Malcolm CJ; 346-347 per Wallace J.
The Queen v Shrestha
[1991] HCA 26
(1991) 173 CLR 48.
The Queen v Shrestha
[1991] HCA 26
(1991) 173 CLR 48
The Queen v Shrestha
[1991] HCA 26
(1991) 173 CLR 48
The majority did not treat the
prospect of deportation as a special case, but rather emphasised that all of the
considerations which
are relevant to the sentencing process are relevant when a
sentencing judge is considering whether to fix a non-parole period; which
begs the question whether the prospect of the offender being deported is a
relevant consideration.
After the Court of
Appeal’s decision, but before the High Court handed down its decision, the
Western Australian legislation
was amended to provide specifically that “a
court is not precluded from fixing a non-parole period merely because the
is, or may be, likely to be deported from Australia.”
The Queen v Shrestha
[1991] HCA 26
(1991) 173 CLR 48
at 63-66. Brennan CJ and McHugh J referred to “foreign
nationals and foreign residents”, by which they meant “non-citizens
who do not ordinarily reside in Australia”, but the case involved a person
liable to deportation and the reasoning encompassed
those who were unlikely to
remain part of the Australian community as a result of deportation. Their
Honours said at 65:
To take cognizance of the policy which affects the exercise of a power to
deport is to have regard to a circumstance relevant to the
evaluation of these
matters. ..... If, forming the opinion that the offender is likely to be
deported were he released on parole,
the court determines that an
eligibility-for-parole order should not be made, the court has not subordinated
its function to the
executive power; it has simply taken account of the effect
of a likely and valid exercise of an executive power on the offender's
availability to serve the remainder of his sentence on parole - a consideration
which is material to the proper exercise of the court's
discretion.
The Queen v Shrestha
[1991] HCA 26
(1991) 173 CLR 48
R v Chi Sun Tsui
1 NSWLR 308
R v Latumetan and Murwanto
[2003] NSWCCA 70
the Court expressed the principle in similarly general terms: “It is
well settled that the prospect of deportation was not
a matter properly to be
taken into account for sentencing purposes.”
Dauphin v The Queen
[2002] WASCA 104
The Queen v Shrestha
[1991] HCA 26
(1991) 173 CLR 48
[2003] 1 Qd R
[2003] 1 Qd R 76
McPherson JA noted that this
remark of Street CJ was cited without apparent disapproval in
Shrestha v The
[1991] HCA 26
(1991) 173 CLR 48
at 58. However, it was cited on that page by the
minority (Brennan and McHugh JJ) and, as already discussed above, they reached
the opposite conclusion.
R v Bob; ex parte A-G
[2003] QCA 129.
R v Bob; ex parte A-G
[2003] QCA 129
R v MAO; Ex parte
Attorney-General (Qld)
[2006] QCA 99.
R v MAO; Ex parte
Attorney-General (Qld)
[2006] QCA 99
(2006) 163 A Crim R 63
(Unreported,
Victorian CCA, 7 December 1982).
R v Griffiths
(Unreported, Victorian CCA, 29 April 1998).
R v Berlinsky
Re Patterson; Ex parte
(2001) 207 CLR 391
Shaw v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs
[2003] HCA 72
(2003) 218 CLR 28
; MIMA v Nystrom
[2006] HCA 50
Plaintiff M47/2012 v Director-General of Security and
[2012] HCA 46
; (2012) 292 ALR 243 at
Chu Kheng Lim
See, for example,
[1906] HCA 58
(1906) 4 CLR 395
at 400. The power of expulsion was referred to by
Gleeson CJ in
Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte
(2002) 212 CLR 162 at 170-174 and in
Re Woolley; Ex parte Applicants
(2004) 225 CLR 1
at [18], and more recently by Crennan J in
CPCF v Minister for Immigration
(2015) 255 CLR 514 at [193],
[216]-[218].
[2004] NSWCCA
[2005] NSWCCA
[2005] NSWCCA
[2005] NSWCCA 258
[2005] NSWCCA 258
R v Qin; Qin v Regina
[2008] NSWCCA 189.
R v Qin; Qin v Regina
[2008] NSWCCA 189
. The appellant was 52. He had lived in Australia for
many years, had an adult daughter here, and had been in a relationship with
Australian woman for some years. He had applied for citizenship and had been
informed that the application had been approved.
His citizenship had not yet
been granted, and the sentence had the potential to affect the decision whether
he would be granted
citizenship (as would the outcome of the appeal).
R v Qin; Qin v Regina
[2008] NSWCCA 189
[2016] NSWCCA
Kristensen v The Queen
[2018] NSWCCA 189.
Maxwell v R
Dauphin -v- The Queen
[2002] WASCA 104.
Houghton v Western
[2006] WASCA 143.
The appellant was born in the
United Kingdom, but had lived in Australia for all but 12 months of his life. He
had never taken out
Australian citizenship, but had been a permanent resident
for 10 years. As a result of his sentence, it was possible for the Minister
exercise discretion to cancel the appellant’s permanent residency on
character grounds.
Roberts-Smith JA considered
that the consequences of the appellant’s potential deportation did not
give rise to hardship of
the kind that should be taken into account in
considering whether the sentence imposed was appropriate, on the ground that it
not be said that the consequences were probable as they all involved
assessments and decisions yet to be made by the Executive.
Cohen v Western Australia
[2007] WASCA 279.
Cohen v Western Australia
[2007] WASCA 279
Ponniah v The Queen
[2011] WASCA 105.
Hickling v Western
[2016] WASCA 124.
Guden v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 196
The appellant was subject to
the “new regime” introduced by the 2014 amendments (discussed
above), and the Minister was
obliged to cancel his visa in the light of the
imposition of a term of imprisonment of 12 months or more, subject to his power
revoke such a decision. Previously the legislation provided that the
Minister had a discretion to deport. The change was not seen
to be significant
in terms of the applicable principles.
(Unreported,
Victorian CCA, 7 December 1982).
R v Griffiths
(Unreported, Victorian CCA, 29 April 1998).
R v Griffiths
(Unreported, Victorian CCA, 29 April 1998) at [9].
R v Griffiths
(Unreported, Victorian CCA, 29 April 1998) at [10].
R v Leng Khem
Guden v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 196
Guden v The
[2010] VSCA 196
(2010) 28 VR 288
TAN v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 427
216 A Crim R 535
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Vic) v Zhuang
[2015] VSCA 96
(2015) 250 A Crim R 282
Konamala v The Queen
[2016] VSCA 48
Da Costa v The Queen
[2016] VSCA 49
(2016) 258 A Crim R 60
Schneider v The Queen
[2016] VSCA 76
HAT v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 427
(2011) 256 FLR 201
[2011] VSCA 427
[2003] 1 Qd R
R v MAO; Ex parte
Attorney-General (Qld)
[2006] QCA 99
(2006) 163 A Crim R 63.
R v Bob; ex parte A-G
[2003] QCA 129.
R v Schelvis
R v Norris; Ex parte
Attorney-General
[2018] QCA 27.
Quoting the judgment of
McPherson JA (with whom Thomas JA and Mullins J agreed) in
“the process of sentencing should not seek to anticipate the action that
some other authority or tribunal, lawfully acting
within the limits of a proper
discretion, may take in future, by so adjusting the sentence as to defeat, avoid
or circumvent that
R v Norris; Ex parte
Attorney-General
was followed by the Queensland Court of Appeal in
[2018] QCA 340
[2018] 275 A Crim R 551
R v Da Silva
[2010] ACTSC 27
R v Aniezue
R v Berlinsky
His Honour cited
[1991] HCA 26
(1991) 173 CLR 48
Giri and Karki
[1999] NSWSC 1269
(1999) 109 A Crim R 499
R v Latumetan and Murwento
[2003] NSW CCA 70
[2002] QCA 323
[2005] NSWCCA 94
as authority for
this proposition.
A Crim R 117.
R v Arrowsmith
Norris v The Queen
[2020] NTCCA 8
Guden v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 196
(2010) 28 VR 288
R v Griffiths
(Unreported, Victorian CCA, 29 April
[2016] QCA 58.
Veness v The
[2020] NTCCA 13
Markovic v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 105
(2010) 30 VR 589
See, for example,
[2010] NSWCCA 87
, in which the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal
determined (at [92] and [95]) that the sentencing judge was entitled to take
into account effective “punishment” of the applicant which arose
beyond the confines of the sentences imposed by the
Court including the
revocation of his commission as Queen’s Counsel and the non-renewal of his
practising certificate.
(1997) 95 A
Cohen v Western Australia (No 2)
Silvano v The Queen
[2008] NSWCCA 118
[2007] VSCA 183
at 685; cited with approval in
HAT v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 427
(2011) 256 FLR 201
Christodoulou v R
[2008] NSWCCA 102.
Muldrock v The Queen
[2011] HCA 39.
Court cautioned against ignoring an established sentencing principle, namely,
protection of the community, because of the
existence of “a regime outside
the criminal law providing for the detention of sex offenders”. By
contrast, the approach
adopted by the Victorian and Queensland courts in taking
into account the prospect that an offender may be deported as part of its
consideration of the personal circumstances of the offender in the limited ways
in which these courts have done so, involves an application
of established
sentencing principles.
R v Chi Sun Tsui
(1985) 1 NSWLR 308
[2003] 1 Qd R
(unreported,
NSW Court of Criminal Appeal, 20 July 1998) at 6.
(Unreported, Victorian CCA, 7 December 1982).
See, for example,
[1992] NTCCA 1
(1992) 59 A Crim R 227
[2003] NSWCCA 216
(2003) 139 A Crim R
Sentencing Act
s 16A(2)(m).
Veness v The
[2020] NTCCA 13
The Queen v MAH
[2005] NTCCA 17.
Urahman v Semrad
[2012] NTSC 95
(2012) 229 A Crim R 11.
These matters are considered
in a very helpful article by M Bagaric, T Alexander and B Bagaric,
“Offenders Risking Deportation
Deserve a Sentencing Discount – But
the Deduction Should Be Provisional”
[2020] MelbULawRw 2
(2019) 43(2) Melbourne University Law
Review 423.
Norris v The Queen
[2020] NTCCA 8
The Queen v Shrestha
[1991] HCA 26
(1991) 173 CLR 48.
Discussed in M Bagaric, T
Alexander and B Bagaric, “Offenders Risking Deportation Deserve a
Sentencing Discount – But
the Deduction Should Be Provisional”
[2020] MelbULawRw 2
(2019) 43(2) Melbourne University Law Review 423.
Victorian Sentencing
Sentencing Report of the Victorian Sentencing Committee
359-360; M Bagaric, T Alexander and B Bagaric, “Offenders Risking
Deportation Deserve a Sentencing Discount –
But the Deduction Should Be
Provisional”
[2020] MelbULawRw 2
(2019) 43(2) Melbourne University Law Review 423
Silvano v The Queen
[2008] NSWCCA 118
per James J.
[2003] NSWCCA 216
A Crim R 398.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (901 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter