URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTWHC/2022/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:24:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Anthony Noaks v Northern Territory of Australia [2022] NTWHC 3 (31 March 2022)
Anthony Noaks V Northern Territory of Australia
PARTIES: ANTHONY NOAKS
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
TITLE OF COURT: WORK HEALTH COURT
FILE NO: 21935024
DELIVERED ON: 31 March 2022
DELIVERED AT: Darwin
HEARING DATES: 23 to 25 February 2021
DECISION OF: Judge Alan Woodcock
CATCHWORDS:
Appeal of notice – Misrepresentation
REPRESENTATION:
Worker: Joshua Nottle
Employer: Wade Roper SC
Solicitors:
Worker: Hall Payne Lawyers
Employer: Hunt and Hunt Lawyers
Decision category classification: B
Decision ID number: NTWHC003
Number of paragraphs: 35
IN THE WORK HEALTH COURT
AT DARWIN IN THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY OF
No. 21935024
Anthony Noaks
Northern Territory of Australia
REASONS FOR DECISION
(Delivered 31 March 2022)
JUDGE WOODCOCK
Worker Mr Anthony Noaks was employed by the Employer at the Alice Springs
Hospital, as a switchboard operator from 10 January
2018. The terms of
employment included a special provisions requirement that the employee is an
Aboriginal person. He claims that
on or about
29 March 2018 he sustained a
mental injury out of or in the course of his employment. The mental injury was
said to have arisen due
to bullying by “Co-worker P”.
Worker subsequently made a claim for compensation on or about 10 April 2018 in
accordance with the provisions of the
Act). The Employer accepted liability for the claim on 24 April 2018, backdated
to 29 March 2018.
11 March 2019, the Employer rejected liability for the claim by Notice of
Decision. The Notice of Decision is set out as follows.
Anthony Noaks
With regard to your claim for payment of benefits, (claim number
), as prescribed under the
, you are hereby
advised that your employer Northern Territory Government, Department of Health
(Central Australian Health Services)
acting on the advice of Gallagher Bassett
Services hereby:
Cancels payments of weekly benefits to you pursuant to Section 69 of the
14 days from your
receipt of this notice.
The reasons for this decision are:
You lodged a
claim for compensation on or about 10 April 2018, relating to incidents in 2018.
Liability for
this claim was deferred and subsequently accepted on 24 April 2018 and
back-dated to 29 March 2018.
You attended
a review on 13 February 2019 with Dr James Hundertmark, psychiatrist, in Darwin.
In relation to your compensable injury,
Dr Hundertmark has declared the
findings/diagnosis at this examination – Mixed Personality Disorder which
is not work-related.
claimant suffers from a mixed personality disorder which is not
work-related”
Worker’s incapacity is no longer a result of the work-related
injury/disease”
is my opinion that his mental state and the difficulties he is currently facing
are not linked to his work-based issues”.
In relation
to required treatment, Dr Hundertmark also states:
is in my opinion that he would benefit from seeing an experienced clinical
psychologist to work with his various mental
health issues at present. It is my
opinion that these issues are not predominantly related to the Workers’
Compensation concern”.
In relation
to your capacity for work, Dr Hundertmark also states:
“It is my opinion that Mr Noaks is capable of
commencing a graduated return to work program here in Darwin. It is my opinion
that he has a 0.4 FTE work capacity currently. Further it is my opinion that
this work capacity is likely to increase if placed in
a suitable position. It is
noted that there were very probably work performance issues when he was in his
role at the Alice Springs
Hospital. It important that he has some careful
vocational assessment and that he is in a role which he has suitable skills for
he states working for Top End Health Services here in Darwin”.
Hundertmark issued a Final Medical Certificate stating “the worker has
ceased to be incapacitated for work”, “the
worker has fully
recovered from the work related condition”, “no significant
psychiatric symptoms” and “no
psychiatric diagnosis”.
Considering
the abovementioned information Gallagher Bassett are of the opinion that you do
not have a work-related mental injury
and have therefore ceased to be
incapacitated for work by the work related injury.
The cessation
of you weekly benefits will also be accompanied by a cessation in the payment of
medication treatment.”
Worker disputes this decision and appeals the cancellation of his compensation.
The onus rests with the Employer to establish
the change in circumstances
warranting the cancellation.
Worker was clearly mistreated by other staff during his employment by the
Employer, but the extent of the same is in dispute.
In his Application, the
Worker claims his
co-worker “Co-worker P” harassed and bullied
him, and did so focusing on him being a white skinned person of Aboriginal
descent. Specifically he asserts he was called a “sook”,
“stupid”, a “bloody idiot” and or a
idiot”. Mr Noaks recalls “Co-worker P” saying that, "I don't
look aboriginal" and "[they] ha[d]
seen darker men than me" [sic].
his evidence the Worker gave a more detailed account. The racist remarks were
said to include remarks reviling his deceased
Aboriginal grandmother. These
remarks commenced on the very first day of his employment. “Co-worker
P” was said to have
regularly said and done things to him to insult him,
both on his own and in front of other staff members. He also details an instance
where “Co-worker P” facilitated a mock medical emergency telephone
call for the purpose of upsetting and humiliating
him. The mock emergency
purportedly left the Worker with the impression he had caused the death of a
person by virtue of his poor
performance. “Co-worker P” was not
called in evidence. I note their responses tendered into evidence in the
headed "discussion with [“Co-worker P”] 12 April 2018 in
relation to a formal complaint from Anthony Noaks".
P” denied calling the Worker a “friggin idiot” but did tell
him his work was “shit”.
The document notes, "[“Co-worker
P”] advised that they then did a mock MET call that Anthony wrote legibly
and then took
a break at their suggestion and that he seemed emotional."
relation to comments about the Worker’s aboriginality, “Co-worker
P” agreed they had said, "If it’s about
colour, you're whiter than
me". “Co-worker P” admitted to calling the Worker a
“sook” in correspondence to
a co-worker and seen by the Worker.
accept the Worker’s evidence that “Co-worker P” was regularly
rude and demeaning to him in the course of his employment,
amounting to
bullying. I accept the Worker’s account that
“Co-worker P”
facilitated a mock medical emergency phone call. These findings are consistent
with “Co-worker P”’s
account as quoted. I do not accept the
suggestion this was invented by the Worker at a time after the initial
Application. I accept
the Worker’s account of the mock emergency and am
satisfied he was distressed as a result. I also accept “Co-worker P”
said words to the effect that the Worker did not look Aboriginal and disparaged
his ethnicity, commencing on the first day of his
employment. I do not accept
comments were made about the Worker’s grandmother. Rather, it would seem
to me this is more of
a rationale as to why comments about the Worker’s
ethnicity hurt so much (he takes such insults as an insult to his grandmother
who he reveres). I am satisfied that the bullying by “Co-worker P”
of the Worker was ongoing, persistent and racist.
I reject the suggestion that
this behaviour is trivial.
Worker gave evidence at length and was vigorously cross-examined for some hours.
It became apparent that he is a person of limited
capacity and at times an
indifferent historian of fact. He appears to me a person of limited literacy and
bad at filling out forms
as a result. He has a long history of mental health
issues, of which he is in complete denial. He has over the course of various
physical injuries come to use opioid medication recreationally, possibly he is
or was addicted to them. He has a number of physical
ailments as a result of
previous injuries. He revealed himself to be a fantasist as to his usual
recreational pursuits and some of
his former capacities. He has a long history
of threatening violence and often sexual violence to men, women and children in
perceived grievances with medical advisers, public servants,
administrators and co-workers in various settings (not in the work place
subject of these proceedings). He has at times during his numerous historic
interactions with medical advisers and service providers
been dishonest and
threatening.
James Hundertmark, Consultant Psychiatrist, prepared a report on 22 February
2019 subsequent to consulting with the Worker. He
Noaks denied earlier interactions with a counsellor, psychologist or
psychiatrist. It is again noted that he was deliberately
withholding information
during various portions of the interview."
Hundertmark diagnosed a mixed personality disorder predominately of the
borderline type. The Worker was said to have a range of
personality issues
including borderline and dependant issues, and accordingly no specific
personality diagnosis could be made. He
opined that the Worker’s lengthy
absence from work was related primarily to his personality difficulties rather
directly linked to workplace issues. Dr Hundertmark was unable to
comment on the effect of pre-existing issues due to the Worker’s
to comply with the process of assessment. He doubted the veracity of the
Worker’s presentation and history. He regarded
the Worker as having a
capacity to work.
the course of cross-examination, Dr Hundertmark remained unmoved.
Ash Takyar, Consultant Psychiatrist, prepared a report on 3 February 2020.
Takyar had reference to Dr Hundertmark’s report and set out the following
in terms of recorded medical history of the Worker
in the relevant (post injury)
“Mr Noaks described developing an unstable mood
state with suicidal thinking and suicidal behaviours. He reported having
intervention from the Alice Springs Emergency Mental Health Team. He
also had contact with a number of different general practices
in Alice Springs.
The available GP records were reviewed during the interview with Mr Noaks
present. We established that he first mentioned work issues
when at the Moore
Medical Clinic on Hartley Street in Alice Springs with Dr Brent Pannell. It
appears that his relationship with
Dr Pannell eventually deteriorated. Dr
Pannell wrote the initial Workers’ Compensation certificates in March
Mr Noaks admitted attending the Central Clinic in Alice Springs. He
acknowledged that he had sought opiate medication without actually
requiring it
for pain. He stated at our interview “it helped me with my moods and
that”. He stated “I told him
it was for pain but it was for making
me feel better”. He said they only gave him opiates like Endone a few
times. The case
notes from the Central Clinic confirmed that he only mentioned
Workers’ Compensation issues in his appointment on 4 May 2018
previously focussed on his need for opiate-based medication. He was previously
discussing the use of the antidepressant mirtazapine
in his consultations at the
Central Clinic.
His records from the Aboriginal Congress Clinic mentioned the workplace
issues at his first consultation of 17 May 2018. The first
interview notes that
he was upset and tearful during the consultation. He mentioned that his wife and
child were currently in another
country. He mentioned that he had overdosed on
mirtazapine tablets.
At interview Mr Noaks reported that he had overdosed on medications three
or four times after leaving his role at the Alice Springs
Hospital. He said that
on another occasion he had made an attempt at carbon monoxide poisoning by
parking his car in a garage and
keeping it running. He had contact with the
emergency mental health team at Alice Springs on seven or eight occasions. He
became stressed out and felt he did not really want to live. He denied
any deliberate self-harm by cutting. He said the he spoke
to his case manager at
Gallagher Bassett following the carbon monoxide poisoning attempt and they
called the ambulance and the police.
Mr Noaks said that he felt he got worse after taking medications
prescribed to him by the general practitioners. He said at times
he did not want
to deal with life anymore.
Mr Noaks said that he was asked by the Gallagher Bassett staff to move to
Darwin to be with his mother. He said he hates being in
Darwin. He said he loved
the opportunity he had to work with the Government in Alice Springs. He said he
is really angry, frustrated
and annoyed now. He said he is really angry and it
is not fair what has happened to him. He said he prefers the weather in Alice
Springs where it is cooler.
He described his mood state as being “pretty crap”. He said he
used to go rock climbing and “go on adventures”.
He said he used to
like cooking. He said now he has low energy.
He reported that his sleep was poor. He said on one occasion he had gone
“two weeks without any sleep”.”
Takyar was of the opinion the Worker presented with a DSM-5 major depressive
disorder with generalised anxiety disorder. Significant
symptoms and a lack of
improvement of the same were noted. The psychological condition of the Worker
arose from bullying and harassment
in the work place, he was at the time of the
report incapacitated and unable to work as a result.
cross-examination it was variously put that the Worker had a long, undisclosed
history of mental health problems and a fulsome
disclosure of the same may have
affected the diagnosis of the Worker, past and present. This was not conceded,
and should have been.
Takyar remained unmoved in his diagnosis and opinions.
the state of the evidence it is not possible to make a finding that the Worker
did or did not have a diagnosable mental illness
prior to the events the subject
of these proceedings. I am unable to accept Dr Hundertmark’s opinion that
the Worker’s
absence from work was as a result of an underlying,
pre-existing mixed personality disorder or an unspecified personality disorder.
He was said to have a range of personality issues including borderline and
dependant issues and accordingly no specific personality
diagnosis could be
made. He was noted to be evasive and
non-committal at the commencement of
the interview. He also refused to answer some questions. There was a limited
answering of the
doctor’s questions towards the end of the interview.
Perhaps understandably given this presentation Dr Hundertmark had misgivings
Hundertmark endeavoured to complete a report and give an opinion in the face of
the uncooperative and at times non-responsive behaviour
of the Worker. Frankly,
Dr Hundertmark was put in an unfair position where he, in my assessment, was
required to form a diagnosis
without anything approaching a useful history from
the Worker upon consultation.
Dr Hundertmark was briefed with less source
material relating to medical treatment of the Worker in the relevant period than
Having the benefit of considering all of the material and all of the
evidence, I do not accept the diagnosis of Dr Hundertmark.
Migendra Das, Consultant Psychiatrist, prepared a short form report on 16 March
2019 following consultation on the same day. The
report was prepared at the
request of Dr Christina Dixon. Dr Das diagnosed the Worker with “major
depressive disorder, current
episode severe”. He was not called in
evidence. I am respectfully unable to give weight to this report and
Gregory White, Consultant Psychiatrist, prepared a report on 18 May 2020 for the
purpose of a whole person impairment assessment.
He saw the Worker on 8 May
2020. He considered extensive documentation including the reports of Dr
Hundertmark and Dr Takyer. Dr
White diagnosed a major depressive disorder,
single episode and cluster B personality traits. He was not called in evidence.
little weight can be given to this diagnosis as a result.
Employer has pleaded that a diagnosis of acute adjustment disorder by Dr Achan
in a letter on 11 October 2012 is a particular
of the diagnosis by Dr
Hundertmark as above. The letter is a two page document from Dr Achan addressed
to the Worker’s treating
doctor outlining that after a presentation on 7
October 2012, that, “Clinically, Anthony Noaks does fit the diagnostic
of Acute Adjustment Disorder”. Doctor Achan was not asked to
complete a report or called in evidence. His diagnosis, like many
historic attempts to diagnose the Worker, differs from that of the two expert
witnesses (though this is something less than
a diagnosis it must be said). Dr
Achan was not called in evidence. I am respectfully unable to give this opinion
any weight. I do
not accept it makes out or assists in the process of making out
a pre-existing medical condition. The pleading therefore is not made
accept the diagnosis of Dr Takyar that the Worker suffered a major depressive
disorder with generalised anxiety disorder. The Worker
gave a history of current
symptoms. Dr Takyar was briefed with a variety of source materials relating to
his medical treatment. The
Worker did not disclose his long history of mental
health problems to Dr Takyer in circumstances where he is in denial. He believes
(it would seem to me erroneously but honestly) these problems arose from anger
issues. Nonetheless having closely watched the Worker
give his evidence,
rejected other parts of his evidence as unreliable, watched him struggle with
his challenges as previously mentioned,
I accept his history of ongoing symptoms
commencing in the relevant period as outlined to Dr Takyar that substantiate his
Though some symptoms may be akin to those suffered by the Worker
previously, the magnitude and combination of symptoms described
make out the
Worker has suffered from mental health problems all of his adult life, his
medical history makes this clear. In circumstances
where he does not accept
this, he has not provided his prior history to either of the expert witnesses.
The documentary history of
mental health problems is insufficiently cogent to
draw a rational conclusion as to a definitive mental illness prior to the
injury. The attempts to further investigate his mental illness
historically have not been followed up by the Worker. There are previous
endeavours at diagnosis that are not adequately founded in a meaningful history
for reasons discussed. A broad range of different
working diagnosis are made or
mused upon by various treating medical service providers; they are many and
varied. The state of the
evidence is such that I am unable to reach a conclusion
as to a diagnosable mental illness prior to the injury as pleaded. Though
clearly he was a vulnerable person with a history of need for medical assistance
and traumatic experiences, and consequently carried
with him personal
challenges. He was also possibly addicted to prescription opioids, but again I
cannot be satisfied of a diagnosable
medical condition for the same
Worker was clearly a vulnerable person with challenges when he commenced
employment with the Employer at the Alice Springs Hospital,
an institution that
provides treatment for ill or injured people in Alice Springs. However he was,
until on or about 28 March 2018
of sufficiently sound health to attend work and
complete his daily tasks as a switchboard operator. The Employer shows by virtue
of its pleadings and cross-examination of the Worker a lack of insight into the
potential effects of race based bullying in the work
place. “Co-worker
P”, under the guise of training, bullied the vulnerable special provision
Worker on the basis that
he was an Aboriginal person with light skin. I am
satisfied for reasons previously stated that this type of comment was especially
hurtful to the Worker. The mock emergency staged by “Co-worker P”
left the Worker believing a person had died as a result
of his incapacity to
including in the presence of co-workers.
a consequence of the ongoing bullying by his co-worker “Co-worker P”
in the workplace , I am satisfied the Worker suffered
an injury in the form of a
Major Depressive Disorder. I am satisfied the injury arose out of or in the
course of the Worker’s
employment with the Employer.
Employer has pleaded that the Worker has suffered from a primary personality
disorder at the time of the pleaded injury. For reason
previously stated I do
not accept this diagnoses, nor am I satisfied that the symptoms suffered by the
Worker as referred to by Dr
Takyar are as a result of previous physical or
mental injuries or disorders, given the state of the evidence in this regard.
Accordingly,
the pleaded particulars of the personality disorder are not
accepted as making out the same. I have accepted, after careful assessment
all the evidence, that they arose as a consequence of the injury he suffered in
the work place.
do not accept as pleaded that the Worker made misrepresentations that were false
and misleading. He is a man of limited literacy
and capacity who did his best
filling out forms and in the course of doing so made some errors. He is a man in
denial of his historic
mental health challenges and accordingly did not include
them in his discussions with the doctors. I have found him to be a person
fantasises about his preinjury activities and capacities and rejected that part
of his evidence. I have also found him to have
been on occasion untruthful and
threatening in the historic past. Clearly he was uncooperative with Dr
Hundertmark. None of this
however substantiates misrepresentation as
Employer pleads that it was wrong to accept liability for the Worker’s
injury in the first place. I have found that the
injury arose out of or in the
course of his employment. I have accepted the opinion of Dr Takyar that the
injury caused the Worker
to be incapacitated and unable to work as a result and
remained so at the time of the notice. This pleading is therefore not made
Employer has not discharged the onus of establishing a change of circumstances
warranting the cancellation notice of 11 March
2019. The Worker has successfully
appealed the cancellation notice.
Employer has counterclaimed on the basis that if the cancellation notice is
invalid the Worker’s weekly compensation payments
should be cancelled as
the Worker’s incapacity does not relate to his work injury but rather are
unrelated or relates to subsequent
injuries. For reasons stated above, I do not
accept that subsequent injuries causing the Worker’s incapacity have been
the above findings that injury arose out of or in the course of his employment,
and that the Worker remained unable to work
at the time of the notice, the
counterclaim cannot succeed and is dismissed.
am therefore satisfied the Worker is entitled to the relief as
following orders are made:
a) The Employer pay weekly benefits to the Worker from 25 March 2019 to date and
continuing in accordance with the Act.
b) The Employer pay interest on arrears of weekly benefits pursuant to
subsection 89(1) of the Act calculated from and including
25 March 2019 to the
date of payment of the arrears.
c) The Employer reimburse the Worker for payments he has already made of medical
expenses arising pursuant to section 73 of the Act,
in accordance with the Act.
d) The Employer pay the Worker’s medical expenses arising pursuant to
section 73 of the Act which have not been paid as at
the date of these Orders,
in accordance with the Act.
e) The Employer pay the Worker’s medical expenses arising pursuant to
section 73 of the Act which are incurred after the date
of these Orders, in
accordance with the Act.
Dated this 31
day of March 2022
Alan Woodcock
WORK HEALTH COURT JUDGE
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (163 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter