URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCA/2025/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:16:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Northern Territory of Australia v Austral & Ors [2025] NTCA 3 (28 March 2025)
Northern Territory of Australia v Austral & Ors
AP5 of 2023 (21508785)
PARTIES: NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
AUSTRAL, Ethan
AP6 of 2023 (21508784)
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
O’SHEA, Leroy
AP7 of 2023 (21510204)
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
WEBSTER, Keiran
AP8 of 2023 (21513348)
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
BINSARIS, Josiah
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
DELIVERED: 28 March 2025
HEARING DATES: 27 & 28 February 2024
JUDGMENT OF: Grant CJ, Reeves & Burns JJ
CATCHWORDS:
JUDGMENTS AND ORDERS – Damages – Exemplary and punitive
Whether error in awarding exemplary damages to each of the respondents
– Whether exemplary damages manifestly excessive –
Whether error in
refusing to award aggravated damages to the respondent Binsaris – Basis of
award of exemplary damages contrary
to pleadings, evidence and uncontested
findings of fact – Unnecessary to consider whether exemplary damages
manifestly excessive
– No evidence of subjective insult or humiliation on
which to award aggravated damages to the respondent Binsaris – Appeal
allowed – Cross-appeal dismissed.
Personal Injury (Liabilities and Damages) Act 2003
Supreme Court Act 1979
Youth Justice Act 2003
(NT) s 153, s 154, s 157
Ali v Hartley Poynton Limited
[2002] VSC 113
Amalgamated
Television Services Pty Ltd v Marsden
[2002] NSWCA 419
Ors v Northern Territory of Australia
[2020] HCA 22
(2020) 270 CLR 549
Bird v DP (a
[2024] HCA 41
(2024) 98 ALJR 1349
Byrnes v The Queen
[1999] HCA 38
(1999) 199 CLR 1
Carson v John Fairfax & Sons Ltd
[1993] HCA 31
(1993) 178 CLR 44
Channel Seven
Sydney Pty Ltd v Mahommed
[2010] NSWCA 335
(2010) 278 ALR 232
Cheng v Farjudi
[2016] NSWCA 316
93 NSWLR 95
Fontin v Katapodis
[1962] HCA 63
(1962) 108 CLR 177
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
Gipp v The Queen
(1998) 194 CLR 106,
Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church for the Diocese of Lismore
[2023] HCA 32
Gray v Motor Accident Commission
[1998] HCA 70
(1998) 196 CLR 1
[1938] HCA 45
(1938) 60 CLR 431
Harvard Nominees Pty Ltd v Tiller (No 4)
[2022] FCA 105
Henry v Thompson
[1989] 2 Qd R 412
House v The
(1936) 55 CLR 499
JB & Ors v Northern Territory of
[2019] NTCA 1
Lacey v Attorney-General
[2011] HCA 10
Lackersteen v Jones
(1988) NTSC 60
(1988) 92 FLR 6
Lamb v Cotogno
[1987] HCA 47
(1987) 164 CLR 1
LO & Ors v Northern Territory of Australia
[2017] NTSC 22
(2017) 317 FLR 324
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v
[2018] HCA 30
(2018) 264 CLR 541
New South Wales v Ibbett
[2006] HCA 57
(2006) 229 CLR
New South Wales v Ibbett
[2005] NSWCA 445
(2005) 65 NSWLR 168
[1973] 1 NSWLR 653
State of New South Wales v Riley
[2003] NSWCA 208
57 NSWLR 496
Sweeney v Fitzhardinge
[1906] HCA 73
(1906) 4 CLR 716
Uren v John
Fairfax & Sons Pty Ltd
[1966] HCA 40
(1966) 117 CLR 118
Victoria v Horvath
[2002] VSCA 177
(2002) 6 VR 326
Warren v Coombes
[1979] HCA 9
(1979) 142 CLR 531
White & Ors
v South Australia
[2010] SASC 95
(2010) 106 SASR 521
, referred to.
JUDGMENTS AND ORDERS – Interest – Pre-judgment interest
Whether error in refusing to allow pre-judgment interest on the general
damages awarded to each of the respondents – Once award
of exemplary
damages set aside no basis for refusing pre-judgment interest –
Cross-appeal allowed.
Supreme Court Act 1979
Haines v Bendall
[1991] HCA 15
(1991) 172 CLR 60
MBP (SA) v Gogic
CLR 657, referred to.
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant/Cross-Respondent: D McLure SC with T Moses
Respondents/Cross-Appellants: K Foley SC with J McComish
Appellant/Cross-Respondent: Solicitor for the Northern Territory
Respondents/Cross-Appellants: North Australian Aboriginal Justice Agency
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 76
IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF
THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Northern Territory of
Australia v Austral & Ors
[2025] NTCA 3
AP5 of 2023 (21508785)
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
Appellant/Cross-Respondent
ETHAN AUSTRAL
Respondent/Cross-Appellant
AP6 of 2023 (21508784)
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
Appellant/Cross-Respondent
LEROY O’SHEA
Respondent/Cross-Appellant
AP7 of 2023 (21510204)
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
Appellant/Cross-Respondent
KEIRAN WEBSTER
Respondent/Cross-Appellant
AP8 of 2023 (21513348)
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA
Appellant/Cross-Respondent
JOSIAH BINSARIS
Respondent/Cross-Appellant
CORAM: GRANT CJ, REEVES and BURNS JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 28 March 2025)
[1] This matter
involves both appeals by the appellant and cross-appeals by the respondents. The
appellant appeals against awards
of exemplary damages made in favour of each of
the respondents on the ground that damages of that nature were not properly
in the circumstances, or, in the alternative, that the quantum of
exemplary damages awarded was manifestly excessive. The respondents
cross-appeal
from a decision not to award pre-judgment interest on the general damages
awarded to each of them. In addition, the
respondent Binsaris cross-appeals from
a decision declining to award him aggravated damages.
proceedings have a long history. The events upon which they are based occurred
on 21 August 2014. On that date the respondents
were detainees at the Don Dale
Youth Detention Centre (
). All were housed within the Behaviour
Management Unit (
) in the Centre. By way of background to the events
which took place on 21 August 2014, approximately three weeks earlier, on 2
2014, the respondents, in company with another detainee within the BMU,
Jake Roper (
), had successfully escaped from the Centre. They gained
entry into the gym and armed themselves with long weight bars which they
an unsuccessful attempt to break the lock on one of the gates at the Centre.
They also brandished the bars to keep staff
at bay. The respondents and Roper
eventually managed to escape by climbing a fence and running away from the
Centre. Three of the
respondents were recaptured on 4 August 2014 and the
remaining respondent was recaptured two days later. Upon their recapture the
respondents and Roper were placed back in the BMU.
[3] On 21 August
2014, Roper again escaped from his cell, damaged property and caused a serious
disturbance within the BMU. It is
fair to say that he went on a rampage within
the BMU causing considerable damage to property and presenting a real danger to
Centre staff who may have attempted to bring him under control and return
him to his cell. For a period of time, the respondents
Binsaris and Austral
joined in the disturbance by damaging property within the cell they jointly
occupied but at all times they remained
within their cell. The other two
respondents remained in the cell they jointly occupied and took no part in the
disturbance.
unsuccessful attempts were made by Centre staff to calm Roper down, those in
charge of the Centre decided to deploy
order to subdue Roper so that he could be returned to his cell. CS gas is a tear
gas and riot control agent commonly used
by law enforcement agencies. When a
person is exposed to CS gas it causes a burning sensation and tearing of the
eyes, and intense
irritation of the nose and throat causing coughing and
difficulty breathing.
respondents were not the target of the deployment of the CS gas. The gas was
deployed to bring Roper under control in a manner
that would involve least
danger to him, Centre staff and the other detainees. Despite that specific
purpose and intention, the respondents
were exposed to the CS gas when it was
deployed by reason of their presence in the relatively confined space of the
[6] After the CS
gas had been deployed within the BMU, Roper was secured and the cells in the BMU
were unlocked. The respondents were
handcuffed with their hands behind their
backs and taken to a basketball court within the Centre where they were
decontaminated by
the use of a water hose.
The proceedings above and below
[7] Each of the
respondents subsequently commenced proceedings in the Supreme Court claiming
damages for assaults and batteries said
to have been committed against them
during this incident and in the following days. At first instance, the
respondents succeeded
on some of their claims, but not on their claims based on
the use of CS gas because the original trial judge (
the primary judge
held that the use of CS gas was lawful in the
circumstances.
Although it was
accepted that the CS gas fogger used to deploy the gas in the Centre was a
prohibited weapon under the
Weapons Control Act 2001
(NT), the primary
judge held that use of the CS gas in the circumstances was authorised by reason
of an exemption for prison officers
acting in the course of their duties, also
found in the
Weapons Control Act
, to the general prohibition on
possessing or using prohibited weapons.
respondents then appealed against the dismissal of their claims based on the use
of CS gas. This appeal was dismissed by the
The respondents obtained
special leave to appeal to the High Court. The High Court found that the use of
CS gas within the Centre
The basis for that
finding was that the words in
Weapons Control Act
“in the course of his or her duties” were limited to the
functions of a prison officer performing duties in a prison or
police prison,
and did not extend to a youth detention centre. The orders of the Court of
Appeal were set aside and the matters were
remitted to the Supreme Court,
constituted by a different judge, to assess damages for the respondents’
claims based on the
use of CS gas.
September 2023, a judge of the Supreme Court awarded damages to each
respondent.
The assessing judge
awarded damages as follows:
(a) To Josiah Binsaris – $220, 000 constituted by $20,000 in general
damages and $200,000 in exemplary damages.
(b) To Keiran Webster – $250,000 constituted by $30,000 in general
damages, $20,000 in aggravated damages and $200,000 in exemplary
(c) To Ethan Austral – $240,000 constituted by $25,000 in general damages,
$15,000 in aggravated damages and $200,000 in exemplary
(d) To Leroy O’Shea – $250,000 constituted by $30,000 in general
damages, $20,000 in aggravated damages and $200,000
in exemplary damages.
assessing judge declined to make any award of aggravated damages to Josiah
Binsarisas because he had not given evidence at
the trial upon which any award
could be made.
The assessing judge
also declined to award interest on the general damages awarded to the
respondents on the basis that they were
not commercial entities and would
“not be out of pocket by virtue of not being awarded interest for the sums
awarded for general
grounds of appeal and cross-appeal
appellant appeals from the orders made by the assessing judge awarding exemplary
damages to each respondent. The grounds
advanced by the appellant with regard to
each respondent are:
(a) The assessing judge erred in awarding exemplary damages to the respondent in
circumstances where the assessing judge did not
find, and it was not open on the
evidence to find, that any of the individual officers responsible for deploying
the CS gas engaged
in conscious wrongdoing and/or acted in contumelious
disregard of the respondent’s rights.
(b) The assessing judge erred in awarding exemplary damages on the basis that
the appellant “allowed an environment to exist
where senior officers did
not know the extent of their powers”.
(c) Alternatively, the award of $200,000 in exemplary damages to the respondent
(for a total of $800,000 to the four respondents
whose claims were heard
together) is manifestly excessive.
appellant seeks orders that the award of $200,000 in exemplary damages to each
of the respondents be set aside, and that
the respondents pay the costs of the
respondents filed notices of cross-appeal from the decision of the assessing
judge not to award interest on the general damages
awarded to each respondent.
Those notices plead that the assessing judge erred in declining to award
pre-judgement interest on the
grounds that:
(a) It was an error of principle to treat the award of exemplary damages as
justification for not awarding pre-judgement interest.
(b) It was an irrelevant consideration that the cross-appellant had been awarded
exemplary damages.
(c) It was an irrelevant consideration to treat the fact that the
cross-appellant was not a “commercial entity” as a
reason not to
award pre-judgement interest.
(d) It was an error of fact to find that the cross-appellant was not out of
pocket if pre-judgement interest was not awarded.
respondents assert that at the assessing judge should have awarded interest at
the rate of four percent per annum for the
period from 21 August 2014 to
the date of judgment on 1 September 2023.
addition, the notice of cross-appeal filed by the respondent Binsaris contends
that the assessing judge erred in declining
to award aggravated damages to him.
The particulars of that ground of appeal are:
In view of the
objective circumstances and the evidence given by the other plaintiffs, the
judge should have drawn the same inference
in respect of the cross-appellant as
she did in respect of the other plaintiffs about the existence of circumstances
of aggravation,
and awarded aggravated damages accordingly.
[16] The issues
which arise on this appeal may therefore be summarised as follows:
(a) Did the assessing judge err in awarding exemplary damages to each of the
respondents?
(b) If exemplary damages were available with regard to each respondent, did the
assessing judge err by awarding a manifestly excessive
(c) Did the assessing judge err in declining to allow interest on the general
damages awarded to each of the respondents?
(d) Did the assessing judge err in not awarding aggravated damages to Binsaris?
Whether error in awarding exemplary damages
[17] In our
opinion, the assessing judge did err in awarding exemplary damages to the
respondents. Before giving reasons for this
determination, it is necessary to
say something briefly about the nature of this appeal. Appeals are exclusively
creatures of statute.
generally speaking, three classes of appeals. They are:
(1) Appeal in the strict sense — in which the court has jurisdiction to
determine whether the decision under appeal was or
was not erroneous on the
evidence and the law as it stood when the original decision was given. Unless
the matter is remitted for
rehearing, a court hearing an appeal in the strict
sense can only give the decision which should have been given at first
(2) Appeals de novo — where the court hears
the matter afresh, may hear it on fresh material and may overturn the decision
from regardless of error.
(3) Appeal by way of rehearing — where the court conducts a rehearing on
the materials before the primary judge in which it
is authorised to determine
whether the order that is the subject of the appeal is the result of some legal,
factual or discretionary
error. In some cases in an appeal by way of rehearing
there will be a power to receive additional evidence. In some cases there will
be a statutory indication that the powers may be exercised whether or not there
was error at first instance.”
[18] The right
of appeal in the present matter is conferred by
Court Act 1979
(NT), which provides that a party to a proceeding in the
Supreme Court may appeal to the Court of Appeal from a judgment in the
proceeding.
On the hearing of an appeal, this Court is to have regard to the
evidence in the proceeding from which the appeal arises and has
power to draw
inferences of fact.
appeal this Court is empowered to give such judgment as, in all the
circumstances, it thinks fit.
tolerably clear from these provisions that the present appeal falls within the
third category of appeal described in
and is by way of rehearing.
In conducting an appeal by way of rehearing this Court is obliged to conduct a
“real review”
of the trial and the primary judge’s reasons. In
Fox v Percy
, the plurality stated:
Within the constraints
marked out by the nature of the appellate process, the appellate court is
obliged to conduct a real review
of the trial and, in cases where the trial was
conducted before a judge sitting alone, of that judge’s reasons. Appellate
are not excused from the task of “weighing conflicting evidence and
drawing [their] own inferences and conclusions, though
[they] should always bear
in mind that [they have] neither seen nor heard the witnesses, and should make
due allowance in this
[20] The conduct
of that task is informed and governed by the relevant appellate standard. In
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
, Gageler J
(as his Honour then was) identified two types of appellate standard: the
discretionary standard set out in
House v The
“correctness standard” adopted in
appeal of the former kind, “[i]t is not enough that the judges composing
the appellate court consider that, if they
had been in the position of the
primary judge, they would have taken a different course. It must appear that
some error has been
made in exercising the
discretion.”
. In an appeal
of the latter kind, “[t]he duty of the appellate court is to decide the
case – the facts as well as the
law – for itself. In so doing it
must recognise the advantages enjoyed by the judge who conducted the trial. But
if the judges
of appeal consider that in the circumstances the trial judge was
in no better position to decide the particular question than they
themselves, or if, after giving full weight to his decision they consider that
it was wrong, they must discharge their duty and
give effect to their own
[22] Justice
Gageler went on in
to observe that the line between these two
standards was “tolerably clear and workable”. His Honour described
following terms:
The line is not drawn by reference to
whether the primary judge’s process of reasoning to reach a conclusion can
be characterised
as evaluative or is on a topic on which judicial minds might
reasonably differ. The line is drawn by reference to whether the legal
applied or purportedly applied by the primary judge to reach the conclusion
demands a unique outcome, in which case the
correctness standard applies, or
tolerates a range of outcomes, in which case the
recently, the delineation has been similarly described as:
between questions lending “themselves to differences of opinion which,
within a given range, are legitimate and reasonable
answers to the
questions” in which event “it would be wrong to allow a court of
appeal to set aside a judgment at first
instance merely because there exists
just such a difference of opinion between the judges on appeal and the judge at
first instance”,
and questions to which there is but one legally
permissible answer, even if that answer involves a value
[24] It was
accepted by all parties that the correctness standard applies in the present
appeal in determining whether the assessing
judge erred in awarding exemplary
damages. There could only be one legally correct answer to the question whether
circumstances existed
to permit an award of exemplary damages. It follows that
this Court has an obligation to conduct a real review of the proceedings
the assessing judge and of her Honour’s reasons. In doing so, this Court
may draw its own inferences from the evidence
before the assessing judge. The
caveat that this Court should bear in mind that it has not seen or heard the
witnesses based upon
whose testimony the assessing judge gave the judgment is,
in the present case, of little moment as the assessing judge also did not
or see the witnesses give their evidence. As such, this Court is in as good a
position as the assessing judge to weigh the evidence
and draw conclusions of
[25] Turning to
the relevant principles, the circumstances in which it is appropriate to award
exemplary damages were considered by
the High Court in
Gray v Motor Accident
Commission (
The plurality in that matter stated (footnotes omitted):
damages are awarded rarely. They recognise and punish fault, but not every
finding of fault warrants their award. Something
more must be found. Although
they are awarded rarely, they have been awarded in very different kinds of
cases: ranging from abuse
of governmental power exemplified by
and its associated cases, through defamation cases of the kind
considered in
, to assault cases such as
Fontin v Katapodis
Because the types of case in which exemplary damages might be awarded are so
varied, it may be doubted whether a single formula adequately
describes the
boundaries of the field in which they may properly be awarded. Nevertheless, the
phrase adopted by Knox CJ in
Whitfeld v De Lauret & Co Ltd
“conscious wrongdoing in contumelious disregard of another’s
rights” describes at least the greater part of
the relevant field.
In considering whether to award exemplary damages, the first, if not the
principal, focus of the enquiry is upon the wrongdoer, not
upon the party who
was wronged. (The reaction of the party who is wronged to high-handed or
deliberate conduct may well be a reason
for awarding aggravated damages in
further compensation for the wrong done. But it is not ordinarily relevant to
whether exemplary
damages should be allowed.) The party wronged is entitled to
whatever compensatory damages the law allows (including, if appropriate,
aggravated damages). By hypothesis then, the party wronged will receive just
compensation for the wrong that is suffered. If exemplary
damages are awarded,
they will be paid in addition to compensatory damages and, in that sense, will
be a windfall in the hands of
the party who was wronged. Nevertheless, they are
awarded at the suit of that party and, although awarded to punish the wrongdoer
and deter others from like conduct, they are not exacted by the State or paid to
[26] Although
the question at issue in
was whether exemplary damages should be
awarded in circumstances where the criminal law had already been brought to bear
on the defendant
and substantial punishment inflicted, the principles expressed
in the foregoing passage are of general application. As that passage
recognises, it is not necessary for a person who has been subjected to an
actionable wrong to establish that the tortfeasor
acted with malice before an
award of exemplary damages may be made. Although conscious wrongdoing and
contumelious disregard form
the ground on which damages of that type are
ordinarily awarded, in
Lamb v Cotogno
the High Court
[T]he absence of actual malice does not disentitle the
plaintiff to exemplary damages. Whilst there can be no malice without intent,
the intent or recklessness necessary to justify an award of exemplary damages
may be found in contumelious behaviour which falls
short of being malicious or
is not aptly described by the use of that
[27] In the
later case of
State of New South Wales v Riley
, Hodgson JA stated to
similar effect:
In my opinion, as made clear in
“conscious wrongdoing in contumelious disregard of another’s
rights” describes the greater part of the field
in which exemplary damages
may properly be awarded, it does not fully cover that field. Similarly, malice
is not essential:
Lamb v Cotogno
. Conduct may be high-handed, outrageous,
and show contempt for the rights of others, even if it is not malicious or even
wrong-doing. However, ordinarily conduct attracting exemplary damages
will be of this general nature, and the conduct must be such
that an award of
compensatory damages does not sufficiently express the court’s disapproval
or (in cases where the defendant
stood to gain more than the plaintiff lost)
demonstrate that wrongful conduct should not be to the advantage of the
wrong-doer.
[28] In the
present case, the assessing judge’s reasoning for the decision to award
exemplary damages to the respondents was
expressed as follows:
awards to be made for general and aggravated damages will be appropriate for the
amount of time the plaintiffs were subject to
mistreatment constituting battery
and its associated distress, physical and psychological. The conditions which
gave rise to this
unlawful use of force perpetrated on youths in a Detention
Centre for whose safety and wellbeing the defendant was responsible for
] must never be allowed to happen again. I accept the difficulties
the Youth Justice Officers experienced, however the defendant must
responsibility for putting them in that position or creating the conditions
where they thought they had no option but to resort
to unlawful unreasonable and
excessive force. The mode of force used should not have been in the range of
options available but it
is the Northern Territory as the defendant who bears
that responsibility. Young people in custody must be protected from exposure
such danger. This is fundamental. The Court must demonstrate its disapproval of
the Northern Territory allowing this to take place,
noting the Northern
Territory accepts vicarious responsibility for the acts of the officers. The
plaintiffs have made good the propositions
set out at [11] above with respect to
the claim for exemplary damages.
In awarding exemplary damages I have regard to the fact the plaintiffs for
the most part were bystanders. They were not the reason
the CS gas was deployed.
As youths under 18 and under the care of the defendants, the Northern Territory
was responsible for their
safety and welfare. Senior officers working in a youth
custodial situation should never have been placed in a situation where they
thought it was lawful to use a weapon when it was not. The unlawfulness goes
further than mere negligence. It is a contravention
of an offence provision of
Weapons Control Act
. The deployment of the CS gas was deliberate. Its
purpose was to incapacitate Jack Roper but the plaintiffs were directly exposed
to it. They were treated as though they were the troublemakers. The trouble
caused by two of the plaintiffs was earlier than the
deployment of the gas and
not at the level of Jack Roper’s conduct. At the time of the deployment
the plaintiffs were in their
cells. As above the excerpts from the footage give
some insight into the callous way the plaintiffs were treated both during and
after the exposure. The incident as a whole shows the plaintiffs were treated in
a manner which recklessly disregarded their rights
and interests.
While some acknowledgement of wrongdoing or an apology by the defendant may
have lessened the need for a punitive approach to damages,
after such a lengthy
time since the critical incident it is not such a significant factor. I accept,
as reminded by counsel for the
defendant that the defendant participated in and
and Detention of Children and that is in its favour. Further, through
observation of the work of the Court it is clear there have
improvements in terms of programme availability in the Detention Centre and some
legislative change. There has been implementation
of a number of the
recommendations of the Royal Commission and Board of Inquiry which took place
after this incident, but I am principally
having regard to the events of 2014.
This must never be allowed to happen again.
On behalf of the plaintiffs, it is argued their Indigenous status is
relevant. The Northern Territory disagrees. The fact the plaintiffs
Aboriginal is a factor. Unlawful actions by any arm of law enforcement,
including Correctional Services, towards Aboriginal people
adds to alienation
and disengagement from the broader community for complex reasons which for many,
but not all Aboriginal people,
continue to resonate. It lessens trust between
citizens and law enforcement authorities and lessens social cohesion in the
[29] There was
no doubt that the officers in question considered the deployment of CS gas was
lawful at the time, and that it was
necessary in the circumstances which then
presented. There was in their conduct no malice or conscious wrongdoing in
contumelious
disregard of the respondents’ rights. The gravamen of the
assessing judge’s award of exemplary damages was that there
had been an
unlawful use of force, and although the officers in question were operating in
very difficult (and, in fact, very dangerous)
circumstances, the lawfulness of
using CS gas had not been “seriously reviewed at an institutional
level” and the appellant
should never have allowed officers working in a
youth custodial situation to have been placed in a situation where they thought
was lawful to use the CS gas when it was not. The case put by the respondents
both before the primary judge and before the assessing
judge was that the
appellant’s liability was founded solely on vicarious liability, but the
award of exemplary damages was
made on the basis that the appellant bore a
primary and direct liability. For the reasons described below, this was not a
case either
pleaded by the respondents or which the appellant was required to
[30] In addition
to the question of pleadings, in this appellate review of the assessing
judge’s reasons and determination it
must be borne in mind that the
determination can only have been made on the basis of the evidence which was
before the primary judge
and consistently with the findings of fact made by the
primary judge on that evidence to the extent they remained undisturbed following
appeal. Accordingly, in order to address the appellant’s contention that
exemplary damages should not have been awarded to
the respondents, it is
necessary to consider the pleadings of the respondents in the proceedings and
the findings of fact made by
the primary judge.
Statements of Claim filed on behalf of each respondent pleaded the claim for
exemplary damages arising from the use of CS
gas in similar form. Each
respondent pleaded that the administration of CS gas was grossly excessive and
high-handed; made in a confined
space; unnecessary in the circumstances;
disproportionate to any risk which presented; and unwarranted in the
circumstances when
dealing with juveniles. The case pleaded by the respondents
focussed on the use of the CS gas in the circumstances that then existed,
not on any alleged inadequacy on the part of the appellant in training the staff
of the Centre, or others, about the lawful availability
of CS gas as a measure
for dealing with detainee violence.
[32] Consistent
with those pleadings, an examination of counsel for the respondents’
opening address to the primary judge does
not reveal any claim for either
general, aggravated or exemplary damages based on an allegation that the
appellant had failed to
train its staff properly or otherwise to review the
lawfulness of using CS gas at an institutional level. Similarly, the
respondents’
written outline of closing submissions focused on the
lawfulness of the use of CS gas within the Centre and whether it was reasonable
and necessary to use CS gas in the circumstances that existed on 21 August 2014.
The importance to the present appeal of the way
in which the case was pleaded
and run by the respondents at trial will become apparent.
[33] The primary
judge made the following findings of fact regarding the events of the night of
21 August 2014 and, in particular,
the decision to employ CS gas and its
ultimate use:
(a) On the evening of 21 August 2014, the BMU was occupied by six detainees. The
first cell was vacant, Webster and O’Shea
were in the second, Roper was in
the third cell and Austral and Binsaris were in the fourth cell. The fifth cell
housed another detainee
who was not involved in the proceedings before the
primary judge.
(b) At some time on 21 August 2014, Roper, Austral and Binsaris covered the CCTV
cameras in their cells with toilet paper. One or
more of them yelled out to
other detainees to do the same. O’Shea and Webster did not follow their
example. Later, when given
their meals in the cell, Austral and Binsaris said
they were not going to give the dinner plates back. The significance of this was
that there was evidence that knives could be made from broken dinner plates.
(c) One of the detainees said words to the effect of, “Fuck ‘em.
Let’s just run amok.” All of the detainees
except O’Shea and
Webster started kicking the doors of their cells and yelling out things like,
“Fuck you. You are fucking
us around.” The detainees broke their
cell lights and removed the metal brackets for use as improvised weapons. The
respondents
Austral and Binsaris smashed a hole about the size of a soccer ball
in the metal mesh on their cell door. They used the metal bracket
broken light to chip bits of render from the wall and throw them at staff
entering the BMU.
(d) Just after 5 pm, Shift Supervisor Hansen telephoned Assistant General
) Sizeland and told him that the detainees in the BMU were
misbehaving and throwing rocks or pieces of concrete at staff. AGM Sizeland
instructed Shift Supervisor Hansen to closely monitor the situation and give the
detainees time to calm down.
(e) Roper smashed a hole in the metal mesh on his cell door, put his hand
through the hole and opened the door. This allowed him
access to the exercise
yard, which was a relatively narrow space outside the cells.
(f) Once outside his cell, Roper began yelling, running around and using the
metal bracket from his cell light to smash various items.
He smashed the window
between the BMU and the admissions unit, climbed through it and smashed a
computer in the admissions unit.
He then took a fire extinguisher and
walkie-talkie from the admissions unit back into the BMU. He then broke the
window in the locked
door leading into the basketball court and the window
between the BMU and the storeroom. In fact, he broke all of the windows to
he had access. He also used the fire extinguisher in an attempt to break the
locks on the doors leading out of the BMU.
(g) At about 7:45 pm, AGM Sizeland received a further telephone call, this
time from Superintendent Caldwell, who told him that the
detainees in the BMU
were becoming increasingly aggressive and violent towards Centre staff. AGM
Sizeland then travelled to the Centre,
stopping on the way to pick up two Youth
Justice Officers who regularly worked in the BMU and had a good working
relationship with
the detainees in question, and who AGM Sizeland considered
were best placed to negotiate with them.
(h) When AGM Sizeland and the two Youth Justice Officers arrived at the Centre,
they were informed that Roper had escaped from his
cell. AGM Sizeland attempted
to look into the BMU but that attempt was abandoned when it became apparent that
Roper’s mental
state and actions made it too dangerous. As soon as Roper
saw AGM Sizeland, he said, “I’ll fucken stab you, you white
cunt.” AGM Sizeland formed the view that his presence was aggravating
Roper and withdrew.
(i) The cameras in the BMU were either covered or partly covered, making it
difficult for AGM Sizeland to assess from the outside
what was happening in the
BMU. From what AGM Sizeland could see, it appeared that some of the other
detainees were also attempting
to break out of their cells. AGM Sizeland could
also see that there was a lot of glass on the floor near the entry door to the
which presented a hazard to both staff and detainees.
(j) The Youth Justice Officers who had accompanied AGM Sizeland to the Centre
attempted at his direction to speak with Roper and
calm him down, but with no
success. Roper continued to yell abuse, throw objects around the BMU and hit
doors with a fire extinguisher.
One of the Youth Justice Officers asked Roper to
allow him to go into the BMU to pick up the glass from the floor, but Roper
by throwing things at the door, making entry by the Youth Justice
Officer impossible.
(k) AGM Sizeland directed the Youth Justice Officers to each go to potential
exit points from the BMU in order to contain Roper and
prevent him from escaping
from the BMU. That was to minimise Roper’s access to objects that could be
used as improvised weapons
and to minimise the safety risk to Roper himself. At
some point, Roper put some bedding over the broken glass in the window between
the BMU and the storeroom and tried to climb through. One of the Youth Justice
Officers in the storeroom used what appeared to be
a broom to push Roper
(l) Superintendent Caldwell notified Commissioner Middlebrook, who was the
Commissioner of Corrections at that time, of the events
that had taken place at
the Centre. Commissioner Middlebrook left the meeting he was attending and went
to the Centre. Before doing
so, he made a telephone call to Grant Ballantine,
the Acting General Manager of the Berrimah Correctional Centre
), which was an adult prison, and asked him to mobilise members
of the Immediate Action Team (
) and a dog handler with a
general-purpose dog.
(m) Commissioner Middlebrook asked for the Corrections staff to be deployed
because he was aware that the same five detainees had
escaped from the Centre
three weeks previously. Following their subsequent capture, the five detainees
had made it clear to staff
at the Centre that they considered the fence to the
Centre presented no real barrier and that they would attempt to escape again
given opportunity. Commissioner Middlebrook’s intention was to put the dog
on the fence line to prevent any attempted escape.
(n) The IAT members from Berrimah arrived at the Centre at about 8:30 pm.
They were equipped with masks, helmets, protective vests,
shields and batons.
Their equipment bags also contained aerosol canisters of CS gas. At the
direction of AGM Sizeland, members of
the IAT attempted to remove broken glass
from the floor in a corridor next to the BMU. Two IAT officers held their
shields up to
the broken windows to stop projectiles thrown by Roper from coming
through. As the IAT officers were trying to remove the glass,
Roper directed the
fire extinguisher nozzle through the broken window and discharged the dry powder
extinguisher at the IAT officers,
impeding their vision and causing at least one
of them some difficulty in breathing.
(o) When Commissioner Middlebrook arrived at the Centre he could hear the
detainees in the maximum-security section of the Centre
kicking and banging on
the doors and yelling out. He formed the view that the incident with Roper was
inciting a number of the other
detainees who were housed in the maximum-security
block. He was concerned that those detainees might escape from their cells as
Centre was built to domestic rather than prison standards. In addition,
Commissioner Middlebrook was concerned about the prospect
of a fire or other
large-scale damage to the Centre. That concern was based upon the fact that some
of the detainees involved had
in a previous incident pulled the central
air-conditioning cassettes from the ceiling and entered the roof space. There
was no alternative
housing for detainees if the Centre was rendered inoperable.
For those reasons, Commissioner Middlebrook formed the opinion that
bring the situation under control quickly.
(p) Commissioner Middlebrook was briefed on Roper’s conduct and the events
that had occurred. AGM Sizeland told Commissioner
Middlebrook that some of the
detainees in the other cells in the BMU had damaged light fittings and light
switches. That gave rise
to a concern that the electrical system would fail and
staff would have to deal with the situation in the dark. At some point before
the CS gas was deployed, the fire alarm went off and had to be deactivated.
(q) Commissioner Middlebrook was told that Youth Justice Officers had tried to
negotiate with Roper but he responded by throwing
objects at them. One of the
Youth Justice Officers had received a “nasty cut” to his shoulder as
a result. Commissioner
Middlebrook then observed some of the Youth Justice
Officers again trying to communicate with Roper, who swung a metal object and
threw objects at the Youth Justice Officers in response. Commissioner
Middlebrook also observed the Youth Justice Officers attempting
to open the door
to the BMU to clear debris, but being prevented from doing so on each occasion
by Roper throwing more objects.
(r) Commissioner Middlebrook suggested taking the general-purpose dog into the
BMU through the door from the basketball court to
force Roper to retreat and
give IAT members an opportunity to enter the BMU. This plan could not be put
into effect because Roper
had damaged the lock on the door from the basketball
court with the fire extinguisher and the door could no longer be opened.
Commissioner
Middlebrook formed the opinion that IAT members could not safely
enter the BMU to subdue Roper unless he was first distracted. To
attempt entry
otherwise would present a risk of serious injury to both staff and Roper.
(s) When it became clear the dog could not be deployed, AGM Sizeland suggested
that they consider the use of CS gas. Commissioner
Middlebrook confirmed that
the IAT members had CS gas in aerosol form which, in combination with their
training, would enable deployment
of only the amount of gas necessary.
Commissioner Middlebrook concluded that talking to Roper was not going to cause
him to desist
from his conduct. Accordingly, Commissioner Middlebrook authorised
the IAT members to deploy CS gas within the BMU.
(t) AGM Sizeland had been exposed to CS gas operationally and in training many
times and he understood that it did not have long-term
effects. He believed that
the temporary discomfort to the BMU occupants caused by exposure to CS gas was
preferable to the risk of
serious and potentially permanent injury to Roper
and/or staff if other action were taken. After the use of CS gas had been
AGM Sizeland made arrangements for the occupants of the BMU to be
decontaminated with water in an open area adjacent to the BMU.
He also organised
staff into teams to go into the BMU to remove detainees as soon as Roper had
been subdued.
(u) AGM Sizeland called out to Roper, “Get on the ground and surrender or
gas will be deployed.” One of the IAT members
“proclamation” warning Roper that if he did not immediately stop his
actions “chemical agents and physical
control will be used.” Roper
did not comply. A member of the BMU then directed three short bursts of CS gas,
each of less than
one second in duration, into the BMU through a broken window.
This did not result in Roper becoming compliant. After a short wait,
burst of two seconds’ duration was deployed into the BMU.
(v) After about one minute, Roper could still be heard yelling abuse and hitting
the wall with objects. A further six “extremely
short” bursts of
gas were then directed into the BMU. Based on his training, the operator
considered this to be an appropriate
volume for the space into which it was
being deployed. This finally caused Roper to surrender. As soon as Roper was
subdued, the
cells in the BMU were unlocked and the respondents were taken onto
the adjacent basketball court and decontaminated. The respondents
were removed
from their cells as quickly as possible consistent with maintaining security.
appellant submitted to the primary judge that the use of CS gas had been lawful,
in the sense that the use of CS gas was
an option lawfully available to be
utilised within the Centre to maintain order where circumstances warranted its
use. There was
never any dispute that the use of force against detainees was
permitted in order to maintain discipline at a detention centre. There
relevantly, two issues that arose in the trial relating to the use of CS gas on
21 August 2014. The first was whether the use
of CS gas was a type of force
permitted by law. The second was, if the use of CS gas was lawful in that sense,
whether the use of
CS gas was reasonably necessary in the circumstances that
existed at the Centre on 21 August 2014. The second issue arose because
material time s 153(1) of the
Youth Justice Act 2003
(1) The superintendent of a detention centre must maintain discipline at the
detention centre.
(2) For subsection (1), the superintendent may use the force that is
reasonably necessary in the circumstances.
respondents’ understanding that these issues were discrete and to be
addressed separately in the course of the trial
is demonstrated by the written
submissions filed on their behalf in the trial. The respondents submitted:
law of battery protects against
unpermitted
Accordingly,
an act will not constitute a battery, as that term is used in the law of tort,
if there is authority at law to do that
act. The onus of proof lies with the
[appellant] to establish that its actions were authorised by law.
NT contends that it had authority to use the CS gas, and moreover that its use
was reasonable and necessary in the circumstances.
question of authority is a threshold issue for the NT in order to make out its
defence. If there was no authority to use the CS
gas, its use constituted a
battery. However, if the NT does satisfy the Court that it had general authority
to use CS Gas, the next
question arises – was the use in
circumstances
(Emphasis as per
[36] Consistent
with that approach, the respondents’ written submissions addressed
separately the authority at law to use CS
gas within the Centre and, on the
assumption that such authority existed, whether the use of the CS gas on 21
August 2014 was reasonable
and necessary.
[37] As already
described, the primary judge held that the use of CS gas was use of a type of
force permitted by law. That decision
was upheld on appeal by this Court. On
appeal to the High Court, four of the five members of the Court held that
although the use
of CS gas was a type of force that was permitted or authorised
in an adult prison, it was not permitted or authorised within the
Centre. The
decision of the High Court conclusively determined the first issue which was
before the primary judge, meaning that the
use of CS gas constituted an
actionable wrong in the form of battery committed against the respondents for
which the appellant was
vicariously liable. As such, the respondents were
entitled to compensatory damages. The mere fact that the use of CS gas was
however, did not justify an award of exemplary damages. As the
plurality of the High Court said in the passage from
extracted above, something more must be demonstrated.
decision of the majority of the High Court in the present claims was based upon
the proper interpretation of provisions of
Weapons Control Act
Prisons (Correctional Services) Act
(NT) (subsequently repealed) and the
Youth Justice Act
. It is unnecessary to set out the reasoning of the
majority of the High Court for these purposes. It is sufficient to observe that
it cannot be suggested that the interpretation of the relevant legislation which
was adopted by the primary judge, and subsequently
by the Court of Appeal, in
coming to the albeit erroneous conclusion that the use of CS gas was use of
force of a type permitted
by law was an outlandish or patently untenable
interpretation of the relevant legislation. The primary judge, three judges of
Court of Appeal and one Justice of the High Court all interpreted the
relevant legislation as permitting the use of CS gas.
[39] It was
suggested to Commissioner Middlebrook in cross-examination at trial that he knew
as at 21 August 2014 that use of CS gas
was only lawful in adult prisons, but he
denied that suggestion. There was no evidence casting doubt upon that denial.
the respondents’ written submissions provided to the primary
judge concerning their claim for exemplary damages, the matters
respondents submitted were relevant to the primary judge making a
“substantial” award of exemplary damages
in their favour did not
include any suggestion that Commissioner Middlebrook, or any other person
involved in the decision to use
CS gas on 21 August 2014, was knowingly acting
contrary to law. It may also be noted that there was no suggestion in the
respondents’
submissions at trial that any part of their claim for
exemplary damages was based upon an allegation of inadequate training by the
appellant of its employees regarding when the use of CS gas would be unlawful or
of some institutional failure to conduct a review
of the lawfulness of using CS
gas in youth detention centres. The position adopted by the respondents at trial
in that respect carried
through to the assessment of damages following remittal.
The respondent’s submissions before the assessing judge did not address
any issue of systemic failure by the appellant as a basis for the award of
exemplary damages.
[40] Turning
then to the second issue regarding the use of CS gas, which was the reasonable
necessity of its use, the primary judge
found that it was both reasonable and
necessary in the circumstances that existed in the Centre on 21 August 2014 for
the appellant
to deploy CS gas. Of course, the primary judge addressed this
issue in the light of the threshold determination that it was a type
that could lawfully be used in the Centre. As already seen, the determination of
that second issue was necessitated by the
qualifying requirement of reasonable
necessity on any use of force in a detention centre imposed by s 153(2) of
Youth Justice Act
addressing that issue, the primary judge observed that there was no evidence
that CS gas had a different or more harmful effect
upon young people of the ages
of the respondents than on adults. As such, the fact that the respondents were
minors did not, of itself,
render the use of CS gas unreasonable. The primary
judge considered and rejected the respondents’ submissions that
alternative
responses other than the use of CS gas remained and were available
to the appellant in dealing with the situation that existed at
the Centre on 21
August 2014. In determining that the respondents’ claims based on the use
of CS gas failed, the primary judge
I am satisfied that at the
time the CS gas was discharged into the BMU at Don Dale on 21 August 2014:
(a) an emergency situation existed;
(b) the prison officers who attended, including PO Flavell who discharged the
gas, were responding to a request for assistance from
the superintendent of the
corrections centre within the meaning of
Youth Justice Act
(c) those prison officers, including PO Flavell, were prescribed persons within
the meaning of the
Weapons Control Act
and were acting within the course
of their duties as prison officers;
(d) Commissioner Middlebrook authorised the use of the CS gas;
(e) the use of the CS gas was reasonable and necessary, there being no other
option reasonably available involving less force and
less risk to the safety of
detainees and staff.
[42] On appeal
to this Court from the decision of the primary judge, the appellants (the
respondents in the present proceedings) stated
in their written
submissions:
These proceedings involved claims of battery by four
young people detained at Don Dale in 2014. Most of the claims, but not all,
from the events at Don Dale on 21 August 2014 during which a decision was
made to deploy CS gas (tear gas) into the Behavioural Management
Unit (BMU).
Much of the trial concerned whether the use of the CS gas was authorised by
law, and if so, whether its use was reasonable or necessary.
By their appeals,
the appellants do not challenge the primary judge’s conclusion on the
latter issue
. Rather, the appeals (by grounds 1-4) concern whether the use
of CS gas was authorised.
(Emphasis added)
[43] It is clear
that in the appeal from the decision of the primary judge to this Court, the
respondents accepted that if the use
of CS gas was use of a type of force
authorised by law to be employed in the Centre, its use in the circumstances
that existed on
21 August 2014 was reasonably necessary. In other words, they
accepted that the use in those circumstances did not constitute the
level of force that was not reasonably necessary. Unsurprisingly therefore, the
appeal from this Court to the High Court
was confined to the issue of whether
the use of CS gas in the Centre constituted the use of a type of force
authorised by law. To
the limited extent that the issue of the reasonable
necessity to deploy CS gas was addressed by the High Court, Gageler J (as his
Honour then was), in a judgment in which he dissented on the issue of the
lawfulness of the use of CS gas in the Centre, said (footnotes
The Northern Territory, in my opinion, is also correct in
its contention that the findings of the primary judge establish that the
deployment of the CS gas was reasonably necessary to restrain conduct by Jake
Roper which constituted a breach of the peace. In her
careful and comprehensive
reasons for judgment, her Honour found that the CS gas “was not used
the detainees in their cells” but “for the purpose of
temporarily incapacitating Jake Roper so that he could be taken
back in the safe
custody ... in a way that avoided the risk of serious ... injury to Jake Roper
and/or the prison officers”.
She agreed with the contemporaneously formed
opinions of the Director and of the prison officers who comprised the Immediate
Team that “use of the CS gas was the least hazardous option
available, constituted the least degree of force which could be
used in the
circumstances, and carried the least risk of serious injury to Jake Roper and to
staff”. The effect of the deployment
of the CS gas on the other detainees
was not ignored in that calculus but was, rather, reasonably assessed by the
Director and the
members of the Immediate Action Team to be outweighed by the
risks of serious injury to Jake Roper and to staff. “Despite the
the inevitable consequence of using the gas was that detainees who were
restrained in their cells would also be exposed
to the gas”, her Honour
found, “it was both reasonable and necessary in the circumstances to use
the gas to temporarily
incapacitate Jake Roper and so bring the crisis to a
importance of the finding by the primary judge that the use of the CS gas was
not a use of force in excess of that called
for by the situation is clear. That
finding was made while accepting that the respondents (and Roper) were minors.
It follows that,
in the present case, the “something more” which the
plurality in
said needs to be found in order to justify an award of
exemplary damages cannot be found in any submission that the deployment of
gas was unnecessary or excessive in order to meet the threat presented by the
conduct of Roper.
[45] In the
present appeal, the respondents submitted that the findings made by the primary
judge on this issue did not bind the assessing
judge for the purpose of awarding
exemplary damages. They submitted that the primary judge had never made the
findings for the purpose
of awarding exemplary damages for the deployment of the
CS gas. That is undoubtedly true, for the simple reason that the primary
held that the deployment of CS gas was lawful; but this submission is not to the
point. Even if the use of CS gas within the
Centre had been permitted by statute
at the time, in order to avoid liability to the respondents in tort for battery
for compensatory,
aggravated and/or exemplary damages, the appellant had to
prove that its actions fell within the limitations fixed by s 153(2) of
Youth Justice Act
; that is, that they were reasonably necessary in the
circumstances.
[46] The finding
made by the primary judge that deployment of CS gas was reasonable and necessary
was not linked to the finding that
the use of CS gas was not prohibited by
statute. It was a separate finding relevant to another issue, being whether the
use of that
level of force was unreasonable or unnecessary. It is not correct to
say, as the respondents submitted, that the primary judge assessed
reasonableness of the appellant’s conduct in deploying CS gas through the
lens of lawfulness. The primary judge considered
each issue separately and
found, albeit erroneously, that the use of CS gas in the Centre was not
prohibited by statute. The primary
judge then quite separately went on to find
that the level of force used was both necessary and not unreasonable in the
circumstances.
This second finding was conceded by the respondents in their
appeal to this Court from the decision of the primary judge and that
finding has
not been successfully challenged or otherwise set aside.
abstract sense it may be correct to say that the use of CS gas could never have
been reasonably necessary as its use was
prohibited by statute, but such an
approach conflates the lawfulness of the type of force used and the lawfulness
of the level of
force used. The unlawfulness of the use of the CS gas entitles
the respondents to compensatory damages but does not, of itself, justify
award of exemplary damages. That is because it is possible to say in all cases
where a battery has been committed that the plaintiff
should not have been
exposed to the wrongful act. That is what entitles the plaintiff to compensatory
damages, but it does not necessarily,
and will rarely, found an award of
exemplary damages.
[48] The orders
made by the High Court in upholding the appeal by each respondent were that the
order of the primary judge entering
judgment for the present appellant on the
claim for battery arising out of the use of CS gas on 21 August 2014 be set
aside, judgment
for the respondent be substituted; and that the matter be
remitted to another judge of the Supreme Court “for assessment of
damages”. As the terms of those orders demonstrate, this was not a case in
which allowing the appeals resulted in the matter
being remitted for a new
trial. The remittal in the present case was limited to an assessment of damages
on the respondents’
claims regarding the use of CS gas. That assessment
could only be a continuation of the proceedings conducted before the primary
judge. The relevant issues and principles which govern the scope of a
court’s task on remittal were set out in some detail
by Jackson J in
Harvard Nominees Pty Ltd v Tiller (No 4)
, in which his Honour stated:
The obvious and important qualification is that the remitter is to
be conducted in light of the decision of the Full Court in which
the remitter is
ordered. That has at least three implications. The first is that the court on
remitter must act consistently with
the Appeal Judgment. That includes not only
the ultimate orders made, which may give express direction to the court on
but also the reasons for decision. The authorities for this basal
proposition tend to be in the context of
Judiciary Act
(Cth), which imposes on courts to which the High Court remits a cause
an express obligation to execute the judgment of the High Court
in the same
manner as if it were their own judgment: see the authorities collected by
Pritchard J in
Investments (WA) Pty Ltd v City of Swan
[2012] WASC 278
. The power to remit under s 28(1)(c) of the
Federal Court Act
accompanied by any similar express requirement, although the different power
under s 28(1)(g) is: see s 28(2). But none of
the parties here
suggested that this made any difference; where an appellate court, higher in the
hierarchy that a primary court,
determines a matter in a certain way, it must
follow that the primary court cannot depart from that determination on
The second implication is that where the appellate court has disturbed
findings of the primary court, and therefore potentially reopened
issues that
the primary court had resolved, it will be open to the primary court to
determine those issues afresh, once again provided
that it does so in accordance
with the judgment of the appellate court. This will of course include issues
that are expressly within
the scope of the order of remittal. No application to
reopen for the purpose of determining those issues will be necessary. In
to those issues, the court on remitter may reach a conclusion different
to the one it reached the first time. It may of course be
required to do so
because of the findings of the appellate court.
The third implication is in part a corollary of the second, and arises from
the character of the remitter hearing as a continuation
of the previous trial.
It is that the primary court, on remitter, cannot go outside the scope of what
is remitted, or reconsider
any of its previous findings that have not been
disturbed by the appellate court, unless it determines in accordance with
principles that it is in the interests of the administration of justice
to give leave to reopen.
Once again, the authority for the confining effect of the scope of the
remitter is mostly based on
Judiciary Act
context of High Court appeals: see
at [27]. But there is no
reason to think that remitters under s 28(1)(c) of the Federal Court
Act are any different. It is elementary
that if the Full Court has remitted
the matter to the primary court to determine specified matters, it is those
matters and those
matters alone that the primary court has authority to
determine. And it follows from the fact that the remitter is a continuation
the previous trial that, subject to the effect of the appellate court's
judgment, and to any application to reopen in the interests
of justice, the
court will not depart from the findings it has already made.
Consistent with this, in
Re The Spanish Club Ltd
[2015] NSWSC 661
Spanish Club 1
), Black J reached the following
conclusions:
The effect of the authorities seems to me to be that, unless an application
to reopen my judgment is successful, when made more than
two years after that
judgment was given and after an appeal from it has been determined, it is not
open to me, having reached factual
and legal findings in a final judgment in the
proceeding, to the extent those findings have not been upheld on appeal, now to
different or contrary factual and legal findings as to the same issues in
the same proceeding. Still less as it is open to me, as
a trial judge, to reach
findings contrary to those which the Court of Appeal has reached in the same
matter, albeit the matter had
a different proceeding number in the Court of
Appeal. Mr Walker accepted as much in oral submissions.
Mr Walker fairly accepted in oral submissions that, subject to appeal, the
determination of a matter in a proceeding is binding for
the purposes of that
proceeding. ...
It is true that his Honour reached these conclusions after considering
arguments based on
res judicata
and issue estoppel, but it seems to me,
with respect, that the same conclusion can be reached by the different route I
have outlined.
respectfully adopt what was said by Jackson J in that passage as a correct
statement of the governing principles when a matter
is remitted to a trial court
following an appeal. The assessing judge was aware that issues of fact
determined by the primary judge
had not been subsequently challenged and
considered how the decision of the High Court on appeal and the subsequent
remittal of the
matter to the Supreme Court constituted by a different judge
affected the exercise of fact finding on the assessment of damages.
regard, the assessing judge said (footnotes omitted):
Although the
facts found by the primary Judge are not challenged and are relied on here,
there are additional considerations relevant
to fact finding in the sense that
there is now a significant question about how the unlawfulness of the use of the
CS gas should
affect the assessment of damages. To that extent, some of the
relevant issues which fall for consideration here, were not part of
reasoning of the primary Judge because they were not required to be.
Many of the claims before the primary Judge were not related to the matter
now under consideration. As pointed out by counsel for
the defendant, some of
the other claims are closely related to the deployment of the CS gas. An example
is the claim at [23] of Leroy
O’Shea’s Second Further Amended
Statement of Claim which includes a sequence of allegations ‘marshalling
in riot uniforms and equipment, and bringing in attack dogs as well as
administering CS gas intentionally or recklessly’. Those
parts of the
claim which failed before the primary Judge, save for the use of CS gas remain
undisturbed. So much is clear, however
it is appreciated caution is required.
The defendant also pointed out the findings about why the CS gas was used and
that those findings
remain intact including why it was regarded the safest
option available. While that may be so, it seems on remittal that the option
the CS gas, how or why it was considered and then used by the officers informs
the findings. While respecting the primary Judge’s
findings, the
assessment here must be undertaken on the understanding that the
‘option’ of the use of CS gas was unlawful.
The findings of the
primary Judge must now be understood in that context.
That the High Court found the use of CS Gas to be unlawful in a youth
detention context must inform the award of damages in a substantial
would be no point in remitting the matter for assessment of damages before
another Judge if this was simply a technical
matter. This was not an adult
facility. This was a facility to detain children and youths, albeit in an
institution which on the
evidence before the primary Judge was “really
beyond its life fit for purpose”. That being the case, notwithstanding
some of the plaintiffs were difficult and hard to control youths, as might be
expected in a youth detention centre, the deployment
of an unlawful weapon which
affected other youths who were in their cells must have some impact on the award
of damages.
It is the case as the respondent submitted, the trial Court and the Court of
Appeal ruled that the use of the CS gas was not in breach
Control Act
. While in those circumstances lack of knowledge of the
unlawfulness of the use of the CS gas mitigates the position of the officers
involved to some degree the same benevolence should not be extended to the
Northern Territory. A review of the material before the
primary Judge does not
indicate that the lawfulness or otherwise of the CS gas had ever been seriously
reviewed at an institutional
level or that the individuals concerned had turned
their mind to the issue. This includes senior officers. There was no indication
that advice about the lawfulness or otherwise of such a weapon was ever sought
by any relevant Department, the Detention Centre itself
or any individual at a
time before the occurrence of any critical event such as the one which developed
here. There is no evidence
that the Youth Justice Officers, including senior
officers knew they had positive lawful authority to use the CS gas in a youth
It was pointed out in submissions that neither Mr Sizeland, nor Mr
Middlebrook, according to their evidence, turned their minds to
the question of
lawfulness. Mr Sizeland recommended to Mr Middlebrook that the CS gas be used
but that “The training did not
deal with the use of CS gas on young people
in youth detention”. He was not aware that the CS gas fogger was a
prohibited weapon
or that resources were available with reference to use of CS
gas in youth detention centres. While Mr Sizeland denied that he knew
authorised, there was no evidence he or Mr Middlebrook turned their mind to the
question of the lawfulness of the use
of the CS gas fogger. Needless to say,
senior officers should know, or should find out whether the use of particular
weapons are
lawful or not in the setting concerned, in particular of a youth
detention centre.
necessary for these purposes to address a number of the statements made by the
assessing judge in the above extract. First,
it is undoubtedly correct that the
findings of the primary judge regarding the reason for the deployment of the CS
gas remained unaffected
by the appeals from the primary judge to this Court and
then from this Court to the High Court. It is difficult to know what the
assessing judge meant in saying that the finding of the High Court that use of
CS gas was not permitted within the Centre “must
inform the award of
damages in a substantial way.” If the assessing judge intended to say that
the ruling of the High Court
meant that the respondents were entitled to damages
according to law for exposure to the CS gas, then there is nothing objectionable
or remarkable about that statement. If, however, the assessing judge meant to
convey that the High Court’s ruling on the issue
on appeal, and subsequent
remittal of the proceedings to the Supreme Court, was a relevant circumstance in
determining whether exemplary
damages should be awarded, and any assessment of
the quantum of those damages, then we must respectfully disagree. The
of the High Court’s decision was that the use of the CS
fogger within the Centre was not authorised by any exception or exemption
Weapons Control Act
, and as such its use on 21 August 2014 was
unlawful. The ruling of the High Court said nothing which was relevant to
determining
whether circumstances existed to justify an award of exemplary
[51] It was also
incorrect, with respect, to state that the respondents had submitted that
“neither Mr Sizeland, nor Mr Middlebrook,
according to their
, turned their minds to the question of lawfulness” of the use
of CS gas within the Centre. What the respondents actually submitted
assessing judge in relation to this issue was:
(a) “[W]e say ...that it was clear that CS gas was not authorised to use
in a detention centre. But we’ll also say that
to the extent there was any
uncertainty about that on the part of, for example, Commissioner Middlebrook,
that situation should never
have been allowed to occur. It should never have
been possible that senior people did not know what their own laws said about the
use of CS gas.”
(b) “Now we say that there should never have been any room for that kind
of misapprehension (as to the lawfulness of the use
of CS gas within the
Centre). It should not have been understood to be an option open to them to use
CS gas...But to the extent there
was uncertainty we say that the policies and
guidelines with respect to youth detention should have made it clear, you
have room for doubt about matters of this kind...”
[52] We have
been unable to identify any submission by the respondents to either the primary
judge or to the assessing judge to the
effect that either Commissioner
Middlebrook or Mr Sizeland gave evidence that he had failed to turn his mind to
the lawfulness of
the use of CS gas within the Centre. There was only a
hypothesis that no thought had been given to the issue of lawfulness.
Accordingly,
the assessing judge’s description of the respondents’
submission on that issue was incorrect.
[53] It is also
instructive in this context to examine what evidence there was in relation to
the states of mind of those involved
in approving the use of CS gas on 21 August
2014. The primary judge did not make any finding on the issue of the belief of
involved in the use of the CS gas as to the lawfulness of their actions.
It was unnecessary to do so because the primary judge found
that its use was
lawful. The issue did not arise on the hearing of the appeal from the primary
judge to this Court or on the appeal
from this Court to the High Court.
evidence of AGM Sizeland at trial concerning his understanding of the position
regarding the use of CS gas within the Centre
on 21 August 2014 was as
MS FOLEY: In August 2014 when you were deputy
superintendent were you aware that an article used to deploy CS Gas was a
weapon for the purposes of the
Weapons Control Act
MS FOLEY: You say that even though in 2013 you were the security chief of the
[Darwin Correctional Centre]? --- Yes.
MS FOLEY: And that you were the first IAT commander and had a role in
emergency response? --- Yes.
MS FOLEY: So you weren’t aware that in August 2014 prison officers had
an exemption under the
Weapons Control Act
to be able to carry prohibited
weapons? --- I knew we had exemptions. I wasn’t clearly present with the
Act you’re referring
MS FOLEY: I suggest to you that in August 2014 you knew that CS Gas was not
authorised for use in a youth detention Centre at all
under any circumstances?
--- No that’s not
tolerably clear from that evidence that AGM Sizeland believed there were
exemptions in place which permitted the use of
CS gas in a youth detention
centre. The fact that he may not have been aware of the actual provisions of the
Weapons Control Act
is not to the point in the present case. If a reading
of the provisions of the
Weapons Control Act
would have made it
abundantly clear to a person in the position of AGM Sizeland that the use of CS
gas was unlawful in the Centre
under any circumstances, then an unfamiliarity
with the terms of the governing legislation may have been relevant. However, as
been demonstrated by the divergence of judicial opinion at various stages of
these proceedings, the issue was not so clear.
evidence of Commissioner Middlebrook at trial on this issue was as
MS FOLEY: You were aware in August 2014 weren’t you
that an article used to deploy CS gas was a prohibited weapon for the purposes
Weapons Control Act
weren’t you? --- Not for correctional
offices in a correctional setting.
MS FOLEY: I’m not asking about the exemptions. I am asking as a general
proposition were you aware that an article used to deploy
CS gas was a
prohibited weapon?
MR McLURE: I object.
THE WITNESS: It would be to use it outside a correctional centre.
MS FOLEY: So you’re aware, from what you’re saying, there was an
exemption under the
Weapons Control Act
for prison officers in
correctional centres? --- Yes. Yeah, correctional centre and the juvenile
detention centre is a correctional
MS FOLEY: You were aware though that Youth Justice Officers didn’t have
such an exemption? --- The youth officers didn’t
use the chemical. The
prison officers used the
[57] Commissioner
Middlebrook subsequently denied that he knew on 21 August 2014 that the use
of CS gas was only authorised in adult
custodial centres.
[58] A fair
reading of the evidence of AGM Sizeland and Commissioner Middlebrook leads to
the conclusion that to the extent they did
not turn their minds to the use of CS
gas in the Centre on 21 August 2014 this was because they already had a belief
that its use
was authorised. This is very different to a reckless state of mind
constituted by an understanding that it may not be authorised
but using it
anyway, or an attitude of not caring one way or the other whether its use was
authorised.
[59] The basis
for and significance of the assessing judge’s finding that AGM Sizeland
was unaware “that resources were
available with reference to use of CS gas
in youth detention
is unclear,
particularly in the light of the finding by the primary judge that there was no
evidence that CS gas had a different
or more harmful effect upon young people of
the ages of the respondents than on adults. That finding by the primary judge
also disposes
of any submission that the fact that the respondents were youths
by itself justifies an award of exemplary damages. While it is no
doubt correct
to say that senior officers working in a youth detention centre should know what
used in that setting, that is not to say
that an honest mistake on their part will necessarily ground an award of
exemplary damages.
[60] In the
light of the findings made by the primary judge that the level of force used was
not disproportionate to the threat presented
by the conduct of Roper, it was not
open to the assessing judge to find that the actions of the appellant towards
Roper constituted
“unreasonable or excessive force” other than in
the general sense that the use of CS gas within the Centre was prohibited
statute. An assessment of the relevant evidence leads to the conclusion that
those responsible for the decision to deploy CS gas
on 21 August 2014 honestly,
and not unreasonably, believed that its use in the Centre by Corrections
Officers was lawful.
relevant evidence, in conjunction with the primary judge’s finding that
there was no other option reasonably available
involving less force and less
risk to the safety of detainees and
also leads to the
conclusion that those responsible for the decision also held the reasonable
belief that it was necessary to bring
the situation with Roper in the BMU to a
quick conclusion and that the use of CS gas was the safest method of dealing
with the situation.
The regrettable fact that the safest method of dealing with
the situation was contrary to the provisions of the
Weapons Control Act
did not bespeak malice or conscious wrongdoing in contumelious disregard of the
respondents’ rights. In fact, conduct which,
although unlawful, is done
reasonably and in good faith is the “antithesis of conduct which should be
punished by an award
of exemplary
respondents submitted that it would be unrealistic to consider the
appropriateness of the award for exemplary damages confined
only to the
deployment of CS gas, and that the episode must be viewed
“holistically”, including post-exposure conduct
such as handcuffing
the respondents and the method of decontamination employed. Although it can be
accepted that other conduct may
be taken into account in awarding exemplary
damages, an award of that type can only be made to punish the tortious conduct.
The decision
Lamb v Cotogno
does not stand for any broader
proposition
Although the award of exemplary damages in that matter took
into account that the defendant had left the plaintiff by the roadside
tortious act of causing injury by the use of a motor vehicle, that act formed
part of the compensable wrong. Having caused
the plaintiff’s injuries
through a tortious act, the defendant was under a duty to take reasonable steps
to alleviate the effect
of his wrongdoing. The defendant’s cruel and
reckless disregard for the welfare of the plaintiff, and the indifference to his
plight, meant that the tort was committed in circumstances amounting to insult
to the plaintiff.
[63] Some care
must be taken in accepting the respondents’ submission that the conduct
properly taken into consideration in
assessing whether exemplary damages should
be awarded is not confined to conduct surrounding the commission of the tort.
That submission
was made with reference to the decision of the New South Wales
Court of Appeal in
The relevant
passage in that decision referred as authority to the earlier decision in
Channel Seven Sydney Pty Ltd v Mahommed
. The uncontroversial principle
expressed in that case is that in defamation proceedings a claim for exemplary
damages may be made
with reference to the defendant’s subsequent conduct
and statements, including in relation to the issue of
[64] Although
the consideration of conduct taking place following the commission of the tort
is not restricted to defamation cases,
the conduct in question must be directly
related to the effect of the tortious conduct, rather than to some different
wrong. In the matter of
White & Ors v South Australia
police officers who committed the torts of assault, wrongful arrest and false
imprisonment knew the conditions in which the
plaintiffs were imprisoned were
degrading and had thereby engaged in conscious wrongdoing in contumelious
disregard of the plaintiff’s
rights. The State was vicariously liable for
that conduct. Subsequent statements by the Deputy Premier and Police Minister
to acknowledge the manner in which the police officers had dealt with
the plaintiffs, and none of the police officers had been held
accountable
despite adverse findings by the Police Complaints
To the extent the
award of exemplary damages was made on that basis, it reflected the duty on the
State to take reasonable steps
to alleviate the effect of the police wrongdoing
for which it was vicariously liable. Neither the reasons nor the result in that
case advance the proposition that exemplary damages may be awarded for a
purported tortious liability which has not been pleaded
and established at
In making the assessment, the primary focus must be
on the conduct for which the defendant is held liable and the state of mind of
the tortfeasor.
[65] Accepting
that other conduct may be taken into account for the limited purposes described
above in awarding exemplary damages,
the difficulty for the respondents is that
much of this submission runs contrary to findings of fact made by the primary
judge which
have not been challenged on appeal or overturned. In addition, a
fair assessment of the evidence does not support the proposition
unnecessary force was employed by the officers of the appellant or that the
respondents were subjected to humiliating conduct
after their exposure to the
[66] In order to
understand why handcuffing the respondents was reasonable in the circumstances,
it is necessary to briefly consider
the backgrounds of the respondents. The
primary judge provided a brief background for each of the respondents and Roper,
to the respondents by their initials, in the following terms
(footnotes omitted):
On 21 August 2014, EA had just turned 16. He spent his 16th birthday in
a cell in the Behaviour Management Unit (“BMU”)
at Don Dale in which
he was locked for 23 hours a day. He shared that cell with another of the
plaintiffs, JB. (All of the plaintiffs
were held in the BMU in the same
conditions.)
Video footage of EA taken at the Berrimah Correctional Centre at Berrimah
(“Berrimah”) on 25 August 2014 shows that in
August 2014 EA was
By this date EA had an extensive criminal history starting from when he was
11 years old. He had been found guilty of one charge of
assaulting a female and
one charge of property damage. He had also been found guilty of numerous
offences of dishonesty: four charges
of unlawful use of a motor vehicle, two
charges of unlawful possession of property, six charges of trespass, seven
charges of aggravated
unlawful entry, and 14 charges of stealing. Up to that
time he had also been dealt with five times for breaches of bail and four
for failure to comply with Youth Court orders. In addition, before 21 August
2014 he had committed one further offence of property
damage, one of being armed
with an offensive weapon, two offences of escaping from lawful
custody/detention, four trespasses, five
more aggravated unlawful entries, six
more thefts, three offences of unlawful use of a motor vehicle and two of
receiving stolen
property. However, he was dealt with for those matters after 21
August. The offences of being armed with an offensive weapon, escape
custody, trespass on enclosed premises, escape from lawful detention, stealing
and aggravated unlawful entry were all committed
during an escape from Don Dale
on 2 August 2014 with the other plaintiffs or while he was at large following
that escape.
EA’s behaviour during his detention in Don Dale can only be regarded as
extremely problematical. In the period of approximately
six months before the
incident on 21 August 2014, he had committed five assaults against staff or
other detainees (pushing, punching,
kicking/stomping on someone’s head,
throwing a chair and a wheelie bin, in two separate incidents, in each of which
object hit the victim); one act of property damage (smashing up
lights) and six incidents in which he threatened to assault staff
detainees (including threats to “smash” others, kick their heads in
or hurt them). Three of the threats were
accompanied by actual violence, others
by aggressive posturing. He was also involved in one escape attempt and one
successful escape
along with the other plaintiffs and Jake Roper.
JB too was a fit looking, well-built young man. On 21 August 2014, he was 15
years old and by that time he too had a lengthy criminal
history. He had been
found guilty of recklessly endangering serious harm, possessing or carrying a
controlled weapon, and 10 charges
of unlawful damage to property, as well as
disorderly behaviour, resisting police and possession of cannabis. He too had
guilty of numerous offences of dishonesty: two charges of receiving
or unlawfully possessing property, seven charges of unlawful
use of a motor
vehicle, 17 charges of aggravated unlawful entry (and three of trespass) and 17
charges of stealing; as well as nine
charges of property damage, eight breaches
of bail and six failures to comply with Youth Court orders. Importantly for
present purposes,
by this time he had also been found guilty on two occasions of
escaping from lawful custody or detention. In addition, before 21
August 2014 he
had committed further offences of unlawful use of a motor vehicle, trespass,
being armed with an offensive weapon,
a further offence of escaping from lawful
custody and a further offence of escaping from lawful detention. However, he was
with for these offences after 21 August 2014. The offences of escaping
from lawful detention, trespass and being armed with an offensive
weapon were
committed during the escape on 2 August, or while he was at large following that
While in detention at Don Dale before 21 August 2014, JB was involved in a
series of planned, attempted, and actual escapes.
(a) On 24 March 2013, JB and 10 others broke out onto the roof of the facility
in an attempt to escape, and during the attempt they
caused damage to the
(b) On 8 August 2013, another detainee reported that JB and others were
planning an escape. Four days later, on 12 August 2013,
JB got out onto the roof
again in another attempt to escape and again property was damaged in the
(c) Police reported to Don Dale that while JB and the others were in police
custody following the attempt on 12 August 2013, there
had been a scuffle in the
cells with police officers and JB and the others were overheard making plans to
again escape from custody.
(d) On 17 February 2014, when he was appearing in the Court of Summary
in the dock and ran
out of the courtroom and then out onto the street.
(e) On 13 March 2014 a Youth Justice Officer (“YJO”) overheard JB
and another detainee discussing escaping by attacking
a staff member and taking
(f) On 30 May 2014 JB damaged the door of an escort vehicle in what was
construed as an escape attempt.
(g) On 2 August 2014, all of the plaintiffs (JB, EA, LO and KW) along with Jake
Roper, successfully escaped from Don Dale.
On 21 August 2014, LO was 17½. Up until 2 August 2014, he had no history
of violent offending but had been found guilty of numerous
offences of
dishonesty: 11 charges of stealing, six of aggravated unlawful entry, two of
receiving stolen property, three of property
damage, one of trespass and one of
unlawful use of a motor vehicle. He also had six breaches of bail, two breaches
of Youth Court
Orders and one breach of a suspended sentence. In addition he had
committed a number of offences – breach of bail, escape from
custody, being armed with an offensive weapon, trespass and unlawful use of a
motor vehicle - for which he was dealt with
after 21 August. All of these,
except the breach of bail, arose out of the 2 August escape and its
Before the escape which led to the detainees being placed in the BMU, LO had
one recorded incident of non-compliance and abuse of
staff and two of
non-compliance and abuse of staff in which he also threatened staff, but no
incidents of actual violence.
On 21 August 2014, KW was 15 years old (due to turn 16 in early November). He
too had no history of violent offending but by 21 August
2014 he had been found
guilty of very many offences of dishonesty: 18 charges of unlawful use of a
motor vehicle, 20 charges of stealing,
12 of aggravated unlawful entry, three of
trespass and three of property damage. He also had three breaches of bail and
six failures
to comply with Youth Court orders. He had also committed a number
of offences before 21 August which were dealt with after that date.
included one charge of escaping lawful detention, one of trespass and one of
being armed with an offensive weapon arising out
of the escape on 2 August and
one charge of stealing, two of aggravated unlawful entry and two of unlawful use
of a motor vehicle
committed while he was at large.
There is no evidence that KW was involved in any incidents of violence,
threats, abuse or non-compliance at Don Dale before taking
part in the
successful escape with Jake Roper and the other plaintiffs on 2 August 2014.
For the sake of completeness, mention should be made of the behaviour in Don
Dale of the other escapee, Jake Roper, whose behaviour
on 21 August 2014 led to
the events which are complained of by the plaintiffs in this proceeding. About
two weeks before the escape,
Jake Roper king hit another detainee and kicked him
forcefully in the head while he was lying on the ground. The other detainee was
sent to hospital.
[67] The primary
judge determined that it was “reasonable and necessary” to handcuff
the respondents based upon their
histories. That finding was not challenged or
overturned on appeal. It was not open to the assessing judge to make a different
In any event, the finding by the primary judge in that respect was
correct having regard to the evidence. In addition, the primary
judge, having
viewed the video recording of the respondents being decontaminated, rejected an
allegation that the guards were rough
with the respondents and
The video footage does not support this allegation. It shows
the detainees, handcuffed behind their backs, lying face down being hosed
The corrections officers were talking to them in a calm but firm manner and from
what I could see hosing them down with a hand
placed on the detainee’s
shoulder. The video shows Jake Roper complaining that he couldn’t breathe
properly, not because
of the gas, but because of the water flowing over his
face. The guard then desists and is directed by someone in the background to
direct the water onto the detainee’s head in a different position - which
he does. The hose is held in that more appropriate
position by the officers
hosing down the other detainees. At another time the video shows a guard
checking and adjusting the handcuffs
on one of the
[68] There was
evidence that O’Shea and Austral both suffered from asthma, which would
have been revealed if their medical records
had been examined before a decision
was made to deploy the gas. There was, as the primary judge stated, no evidence
that anyone involved
in making the decision to use CS gas on 21 August 2014 was
aware of the fact that those respondents had a history of asthma. Indeed,
Sizeland stated that he knew each of the respondents “fairly well”
and he was unaware that they had a history of
asthma. The primary judge
determined that given the urgency of the situation it would have been
unreasonable to expect those responsible
for the decision to use the gas to have
The fact that O’Shea and Austral had histories of asthma could
not, in the circumstances, justify an award of exemplary damages.
submissions before the assessing judge, the respondents placed emphasis on the
fact that they were juveniles at the time that
these events occurred. As can be
seen from the from the reasons of the assessing judge which are extracted above,
that submission
was accepted and instrumental in the determination to award
exemplary damages. While the use of CS gas was unlawful in a youth detention
centre, it was lawful in an adult correctional facility. Interestingly, and
tangentially, there were circumstances in which juveniles
could be held, at
least temporarily, in adult correctional
facilities.
Accordingly, if the
respondents had been held in an adult correctional facility and exposed to CS
gas lawfully used in that facility
they would not have been entitled to any form
of damages for that exposure. This illustrates that there was no blanket
prohibition
on the use of CS gas in circumstances where it could affect persons
under the age of 18.
evidence at trial also sustained a finding that those responsible for the
decision to deploy CS gas in the Centre on 21 August
2014 took care to ensure
that only the minimum amount of the gas necessary to subdue Roper was used.
Those findings included that
Commissioner Middlebrook was aware that CS gas
could be deployed using different methods, some of which involved less precise
of the substance than others. Commissioner Middlebrook was informed
that the prison officers had the gas in aerosol form so he was
satisfied that
this would enable the operators to use a limited amount of gas and to target its
use. It is also clear that the officer
who deployed the CS gas took care to
ensure that only the minimum amount of gas necessary was used. There was a
graduated approach
adopted by the officer who deployed the gas. As described
above, there were initially three short bursts of less than one second
duration. After a short wait, during which Roper was not subdued, there was a
further burst of two seconds’ duration. This
also did not subdue Roper and
after a further minute the final six “extremely short” bursts were
deployed. The manner
in which the gas was deployed was the minimum required to
bring Roper under control and was targeted directly at Roper. The manner
which the gas was deployed does not justify awards of exemplary damages.
[71] It was,
with respect, incorrect on the part of the assessing judge to say that the
respondents “were treated as though
they were the troublemakers” in
relation to the deployment of the CS gas. That may well have seemed to the
respondents to be
the case, because they were also affected. But in assessing
whether any obloquy is justified by way of exemplary damages, it is important
bear in mind that the deployment of the gas was directed towards Roper and not
the respondents.
This was not a
case in which custodial officers, to use a general description, used force which
they knew was unlawful and excessive
directed towards prisoners for no
evidence did not reveal “conscious wrongdoing in contumelious
disregard” of the respondents’ rights on
the part of the officers of
the appellant. It may be accepted that there are some circumstances in which an
award of exemplary damages
will be appropriate even if the officer was not
“conscious” of his or her
wrongdoing.
The reasons in
Lamb v Cotogno
allow that “conscious
wrongdoing” is a usual but not essential condition to the award of
exemplary damages. Although
the state of mind of the individual actor will
always be relevant, exemplary damages may also be awarded “where the
has acted in a high-handed fashion or with malice”,
in the absence of a specific consciousness of
wrongdoing.
That is also
reflected in what Hodgson JA said in the passage from
been extracted above, to the effect that
conduct may
be high-handed, outrageous and show contempt for the rights of others even if it
is not malicious or even conscious wrongdoing.
allowing for the breadth of the relevant test, the evidence in this case did not
reveal high-handed or outrageous conduct
showing contempt for the rights of the
respondents. The youth justice officers and correctional officers present at the
21 August 2014 were placed in an emergency situation by the actions of
Roper. They dealt with the situation in a manner which they
believed to be
lawful, but regrettably was not. They adopted the means of dealing with the
situation which was the safest available
in the circumstances. There was no
evidence that CS gas was more harmful to juveniles of the ages of the
respondents than to adults.
The gas was deployed in a controlled and graduated
manner to ensure that only the minimum amount of gas necessary was used. Once
Roper was subdued, the respondents were removed from their cells and
decontaminated.
[74] It must be
concluded, therefore, that the assessing judge purported to make multiple
findings of fact which were either directly
or indirectly inconsistent with
findings made by the primary judge and which had not been set aside. The
decision of the High Court
that the use of CS gas was unlawful in the Centre at
that time did not entitle the assessing judge to disregard those facts found
the primary judge to which reference has been made in the foregoing discussion.
Even were that not so, a real review of the proceedings
before the Court below,
as is required in an appeal of this nature, leads necessarily to the conclusion
that the conduct and states
of mind of the individual officers in these
circumstances did not justify making an award of exemplary damages in these
addition, the basis upon which the assessing judge awarded exemplary damages
differed from that upon which those damages were
sought by the respondents. The
case pleaded by the respondents was that the appellant was vicariously liable
for the wrongful actions
of its employees in the events that occurred on 21
August 2014, including their use of CS gas on that day. No case of direct
on the part of the appellant was ever pleaded or addressed at the
The determination by the
assessing judge that exemplary damages were appropriate based on a suggested
failure on the part of the
appellant to properly train its employees, or to
conduct some unspecified form of institutional review of the use of CS gas, was
a determination of direct wrongdoing by the appellant, and constituted a finding
of primary rather than vicarious liability on its
part. That was not a basis on
which it was open to the assessing judge to make an award of exemplary damages.
If an award of exemplary
damages was unavailable by reference to the conduct and
states of mind of the individual officers, it was not open to make the appellant
vicariously liable to pay exemplary
[76] There is
considerable force to the appellant’s submission that if a case of direct
liability on the part of the appellant
had been run by the respondents alleging
failures to train employees properly, to review the lawfulness of the use of CS
related issues, this would have opened up a wide range of potential
evidence, including legal and policy advice provided within the
agencies of the appellant relating to the use of CS gas in juvenile detention
centres. As a matter of pleadings and procedural
fairness, it was not open to
the assessing judge to award exemplary damages on a direct liability basis as
opposed to a vicarious
liability basis.
[77] For these
reasons, the appeals are allowed on this ground.
exemplary damages manifestly excessive
[78] Given the
finding that the awards of exemplary damages were made in error and will be set
aside, it is unnecessary to consider
whether the awards of exemplary damages
were manifestly excessive. This is also one of the exceptions to the general
requirement
expressed in
Kuru v State of New South Wales
intermediate court of appeal deal with all grounds of
That is because the
finding that circumstances did not exist to warrant an award of exemplary
damages precludes any contingent assessment
of whether the quantum of exemplary
damages awarded was manifestly excessive. The same considerations which govern
whether the circumstances
existed to warrant an award of exemplary damages will
also be decisive in the determination of the appropriate quantum of those
[79] Even were
this Court to assume that the appellant failed in some duty to conduct an
institutional review of the use of CS gas
in youth detention centres, or to
implement a proper training regime in that respect, in the circumstances of this
case those findings
would not sustain an award of exemplary damages in any
amount. Similarly, even if this Court were to accept for the purpose of the
exercise that the treatment of the respondents in the aftermath was in some way
callous, in the assessment of exemplary damages the
primary focus must be on the
states of mind of the custodial officers. The level of exemplary damages awarded
can only be commensurate
with the extent to which the conduct was high-handed,
outrageous, contemptuous of the respondent’s rights, malicious and/or
consciously unlawful, which in our assessment it was not for the reasons we have
[80] The one
observation we would make in relation to this ground of appeal is that the
assessing judge awarded $200,000 to each plaintiff
by way of exemplary damages
without any consideration of the total amount of exemplary damages required to
mark the disapproval of
the appellant’s conduct. As Hutley JA observed in
Pollack v Volpato
Whereas compensatory damages have to be
approached by looking at the situation of the plaintiff in consequence of the
wrongful act
to which he has been subjected, punitive damages have to be looked
at from the side of the defendant. If he is to be punished, it
is his proper
punishment which provides the basis for the assessment of
[81] In this
case, the assessing judge did not conduct any examination from the side of the
appellant to determine what total amount
of exemplary damages constituted a
proper punishment, or the extent to which the quantum of exemplary damages
required modification
to take into account their unavailability in respect of
any personal injury. As the appellant has submitted, since the “focus
on the conduct of the
rather than the
perspective of the plaintiff, it is the total award of $800,000 which is
relevant to the assessment of manifest excess.
Without any exposition of how the
conduct of the appellant and its officers warranted a total award in that
amount, it has the appearance
that the appellant has been punished four times
for what is substantially the same conduct. That appearance is reinforced by the
fact that the total award of exemplary damages falls well above the outer limits
of such awards in the comparative cases referred
to at Annexure A of the
Appellant’s Outline of Submissions dated 16 October 2023, including
cases involving serious acts of
gratuitous and brutal violence by law
enforcement officers for which the State is vicariously
Whether error in declining to allow interest on general
appellant conceded that the respondents’ cross-appeals on this issue
should succeed if the appellant was successful
on its appeals in relation to the
awards of exemplary damages. The appellant’s reasoning in that respect may
be summarised
briefly as follows.
[83] Subject to
exceptions not presently relevant,
Supreme Court Act 1979
(NT) confers a broad discretion on the court to award interest up to
judgment in the following terms:
In any proceeding in respect of a
cause of action that arises after the commencement of this Act the Court may
order that there shall
be included in the sum for which judgment is given
interest at such rate as it thinks fit on the whole or any part of that sum for
the whole or any part of the period between the date when the cause of action
arose and the date of the judgment.
discretionary standard set out in
House v The King
, rather than the
correctness standard, applies in determining whether the assessing judge erred
in declining to allow interest on
general damages. In the exercise of that
discretion, the assessing judge did not err by taking into account the awards of
damages which had been made. Unlike general damages, exemplary damages
are not compensatory. Because of the very substantial award
of exemplary damages
made by the assessing judge, it was within the judicial discretion to decline to
award interest because to do
so was unnecessary “[to restore] a plaintiff
to the position in which he or she would have been but for the defendant’s
negligence”.
assessing judge’s determination was not to fix the awards of general
damages to the value of money at the time of
It was to recognise
that the respondents were adequately compensated for being kept out of their
money in the interim period by the
awards of exemplary damages which were made.
However, if the awards of exemplary damages are set aside, the basis for the
to decline to award interest is removed and the respondents are
entitled to an award of interest on general damages at four percent
period between when the cause of action arose in the date of the judgment.
appellant’s reasoning in that respect should be accepted. The appellant
has been successful on its appeals in relation
to the awards of exemplary
damages and, accordingly, the respondents’ cross-appeals from the decision
of the assessing judge
not to award interest on general damages are allowed.
Whether error in not awarding aggravated damages to JB
[87] As adverted
to in the consideration of the previous ground of cross-appeal, aggravated
damages differ from exemplary damages.
The purpose of an award of exemplary
damages is to punish the wrongdoer and such damages are not awarded to
compensate the wronged
individual. In
Uren v John Fairfax & Sons Pty
, Windeyer J described the difference in the following
[A]ggravated damages are given to compensate the plaintiff
when the harm done to him by a wrongful act was aggravated by the manner
which the act was done: exemplary damages, on the other hand, are intended to
punish the defendant, and presumably to serve one
or more of the objects of
punishment-moral retribution or
deterrence.
Carson v John Fairfax & Sons Ltd
, a majority of the High Court
For the moment, it suffices to say that aggravated damages,
awarded to reflect conduct by the defendant which aggravates the injury
increases the harm done to the appellant, are compensatory in nature
[89] The focus
in determining whether to make an award of aggravated damages is on the effect
of the wrongdoer’s conduct on
the injury or harm done to the wronged
individual. It is a private focus based on the injury or harm actually
occasioned to the individual
by the wrongful conduct. This is to be contrasted
with the focus of exemplary damages, which is on the conduct itself and the
need to punish the wrongdoer for the conduct and to deter such conduct
in the future. This is a public focus based on the public
interest. It follows
from these observations that an award of aggravated damages is not justified by
the wrongdoing alone. To justify
an award of aggravated damages it must be
demonstrated that there was conduct by the wrongdoer which “aggravated the
and increased the harm” done to the wronged person.
assessing judge addressed the awarding of aggravated damages as
I have regard to the fact the plaintiffs were not the
targets of the CS gas. They were all in their cells. They could have been, but
were not told what was about to happen. One of the plaintiffs gave evidence
there was an intercom. In any event they had no reassurance
that this would be a
brief dose of the gas, that they would be safe and would be taken out of the
cells. There is a sense of grievance
expressed as to why they were treated
roughly, handcuffed from behind, placed on the basketball court on their
stomachs and hosed.
It was in order to decontaminate and contain them but it was
a rough process. Given what they had endured, they deserved to be treated
more care than the callousness evident on the available footage. The plaintiffs
look uncomfortable on the footage. They had
not behaved like Jake Roper. Leroy
O’Shea and Ethan Austral were asthmatic. They deserved more care after
what had occurred
but were not seen by a nurse until 10:00pm and then only
briefly. The post exposure treatment extended the distress felt. The manner
for decontamination was humiliating.
There were however, fortunately no lasting effects. No further health
concerns appear to have been reported to the nurse. The defendant
points out the
plaintiffs do not appear to be distressed when they are handcuffed on the ground
and notes at times they are laughing.
They were laughing at times when they
could see each other’s faces, however that reaction could be for many
reasons. It can
readily be inferred that there would be a sense of relief after
experiencing the sensation of not feeling as though they could breathe
were in their cells. The three plaintiffs who gave evidence about that part of
the episode should receive some form of
aggravated damages for the rather
callous treatment after the exposure to the gas and the extended physical and
psychological consequences.
The use of force in the form of the CS gas was
contrary to the
Justice Act
and the obligations on Youth Justice Officers to keep detainees
safe. This is all in the broader context of an unlawful use of force.
is no evidence from Josiah Binsaris, I am unable to make an assessment under
this head of compensatory damages.
I will award $20,000 each of the plaintiffs, Keiran Webster and Leroy
O’Shea as aggravated damages. I will award Ethan Austral
[91] The reasons
given by the assessing judge for awarding aggravated damages to the respondents
Webster, O’Shea and Austral
were, in summary:
(a) they were not informed about the proposed use of CS gas and had no assurance
that their exposure to the gas would be brief;
(b) they were aggrieved at being treated roughly after they were removed from
their cells after Roper was subdued;
(c) O’Shea and Austral were asthmatic and “deserved more
care”, but were not seen by a nurse until 10 pm; and
(d) the manner used for decontamination was “humiliating”.
[92] It may be
presumed that the reason for the assessing judge making higher awards of
aggravated damages to Webster and O’Shea
was that they had histories of
suffering from asthma and Austral did not. There was no evidence that Binsaris
had a history of asthma,
so that circumstance identified by the assessing judge
is irrelevant for these purposes.
[93] The issue
to be determined on this ground of cross-appeal is whether the assessing judge
erred in declining to award aggravated
damages to Binsaris on the basis that he
had not given evidence. The appeal on this ground attracts the correctness
standard. The
decision not to award aggravated damages was not discretionary but
was part of an evaluative process that permits of only one correct
the application of that standard, the question is whether the assessing judge
was able to draw inferences from the evidence
which would justify a finding that
the conduct of the appellant’s officers actually and subjectively offended
the respondent
Binsaris’s dignity or outraged
his feelings.
[94] They are
not matters which may be inferred simply on the basis that he had no warning
that the CS gas was going to be deployed
and no assurance that his exposure
would be brief. It is not enough that the court considers the conduct deserves
condemnation. There
must be evidence of injury to the plaintiff’s feelings
caused by the insult or humiliation of the
That distinction is
encapsulated in the saying that aggravated damages are payable where the
defendant’s conduct shocks the
plaintiff, while exemplary damages are
payable where the defendant’s conduct shocks the court.
position of Binsaris in this respect may be contrasted with the position of the
other respondents. There was a complete dearth
of evidence from Binsaris at
trial, and therefore before the assessing judge. There was no direct evidence
upon which the assessing
judge could base any findings about the additional
subjective effects of the conduct of the appellant’s officers upon
The cross-appellant’s specific complaint is that in view of the
objective circumstances and the evidence given by the other
plaintiffs, the
assessing judge should have drawn the same inference in respect of the
cross-appellant as she did in respect of the
other plaintiffs about the
existence of circumstances of aggravation and awarded aggravated damages
accordingly. The two difficulties
with that complaint are that aggravated
damages are not concerned with “objective circumstances”, and the
assessing judge’s
findings in relation to the other respondents were based
on their direct evidence as to their feelings rather than inferential in
evidence was contained in affidavits made by each of the other respondents which
were read into evidence at trial and included
statements, for example, about the
subjective and differing effects that the teargas had on each of them. The
evidence from O’Shea
included the following passages:
teargas affected me badly and from the way I saw [Webster] acting, it seemed to
affect him badly as well. My throat was burning,
I was choking, my eyes were
stinging and my nose was running. [Webster] looked like he was throwing up. I
had asthma and a heart-attack
condition. The guards knew I had asthma because
they provided me with Ventolin in the past. I found it really hard to
After they sprayed the teargas, I felt complete fear. I thought I was going
to die. The worst thing was not knowing how long it was
going to last and how
long we were going to have to sit in there and burn.
[Webster] and I were treated the same as, or worse, than the other detainees
even though we were not involved. I feel that I was treated
the worst because I
was the oldest. This felt very unfair because I was not involved in what
evidence from Webster included the following passages:
when the guards threw something into the BMU and it felt like it exploded. I
thought it was a bomb but I now know it
was tear gas. I heard everyone react.
[O’Shea] and I jumped down on the floor, ran towards the back of our cell
and put the
sheet and mattress over us.
I was affected immediately. I couldn’t breathe properly. It felt like
an anxiety attack. I couldn’t open my eyes because
it hurt too much. I got
an instant headache as soon as I got a whiff of it. I never had a headache like
that before. It was extremely
It was so hard to breathe that [O’Shea] and I thought we were going to
die. At first we were kind of joking about dying and
then we started to
seriously believe it because it was just so hard to breathe. I thought that I
was eventually going to stop breathing.
We started shaking each other’s
hands and saying our
evidence from Austral included the following passages:
Then all the
guards were standing at the door near the admissions area and they sprayed the
hall with gas.
The guards did not give a warning before they sprayed the gas.
They could have spoken to us through the intercom or they could have yelled
at us through the admin or basketball area. We would have
heard that.
The spray made me feel sick. I felt pain on my face and it was hurting my
eyes. I had my shirt over my mouth so it didn’t get
in my mouth because it
tasted yuck.
allowing for the fact that the respondents could not claim aggravated damages
for physical consequences amounting to personal
that evidence also dealt
with psychological consequences such as fear of impending death, feelings of
unfair treatment and grievance
was able to infer that the respondent Binsaris would have suffered
physical consequences” to the other respondents, and
awarded general damages accordingly, but was unable to draw any inference
relation to psychological
consequences.
That is because
evidence of psychological impact is inherently subjective in the sense that it
depends upon the person’s perception
of the event. The only evidence of
the respondent Binsaris’s subjective experience was what could be seen on
the video recording
which showed him and the other respondents laughing and in
good spirits. Even if one accepts the assessing judge’s attribution
their reaction to relief, it certainly does not sustain an inference that
Binsaris was suffering some form of psychological insult
or humiliation. The
failure on the part of Binsaris to give evidence was unexplained and the only
inference properly open was that
any evidence he may have given in this respect
would not have assisted his cause.
[100] Generally
speaking, it will be necessary for the plaintiff himself or herself to give
evidence of his or her subjective experience
in order to attract an award of
aggravated damages. In some circumstances the testimony of other witnesses and
documentary evidence
may tend to prove the plaintiff’s subjective
experience even in the absence of direct evidence from the plaintiff. The
part of the decision in
Amalgamated Television Services Pty Ltd v
may be explained by the fact that there was evidence of the
plaintiff’s subjective loss adduced from other
Evidence of that nature
may include such things as an account from a spouse or treating medical
practitioner of distress displayed
by the plaintiff when describing the event in
[101] In the
absence of any evidence of this nature in support of the claim for aggravated
damages by Binsaris, the assessing judge
was correct to conclude that “as
there is no evidence from [Binsaris] I am unable to make an assessment under
this head of
compensatory damages”. It follows that this ground of
cross-appeal must be dismissed.
[102] We make
the following orders in the matters involving Austral, O’Shea and
appellant’s appeal dated 11 September 2023 is allowed.
award of exemplary damages in order 1 of the orders made by on 1 September 2023
is set aside.
respondent’s cross-appeal dated 26 September 2023 is allowed.
3 of the orders made on 1 September 2023 is set aside and in its place it is
ordered that pursuant to
Supreme Court Act
respondent be awarded interest at the rate of 4% per annum for the period from
21 August 2014 to the date of judgement on 1
September 2023.
[103] We make
the following orders in the matter involving Binsaris:
appellant’s appeal dated 11 September 2023 is allowed.
award of exemplary damages in order 1 of the orders made on 1 September 2023 is
2 of the respondent’s cross-appeal dated 26 September 2023 is
3 of the orders made 1 September 2023 is set aside and in its place it is
ordered that pursuant to
Supreme Court Act
respondent be awarded interest at the rate of 4% per annum for the period from
21 August 2014 to the date of judgement on 1
September 2023.
1 of the respondent’s cross-appeal dated 26 September 2023 is dismissed.
[104] If costs
cannot be agreed, the parties are to file and serve submissions as to the
appropriate costs orders on these appeals
and cross-appeals, limited to four A4
pages, within 14 days of publication of these
______________________________
LO & Ors v Northern
Territory of Australia
[2017] NTSC 22
(2017) 317 FLR 324.
JB & Ors v Northern
Territory of Australia
[2019] NTCA 1.
Binsaris & Ors v Northern
Territory of Australia
[2020] HCA 22
(2020) 270 CLR 549.
Binsaris & Ors v Northern
Territory of Australia
[2023] NTSC 79.
Binsaris & Ors v Northern
Territory of Australia
[2023] NTSC 79
, [35], [48], [67], [71],
Binsaris & Ors v Northern
Territory of Australia
[2023] NTSC 79
Sweeney v Fitzhardinge
[1906] HCA 73
(1906) 4 CLR 716
Grierson v The King
[1938] HCA 45
(1938) 60 CLR 431
Gipp v The Queen
(1998) 194 CLR 106 at 145-146;
Byrnes v The Queen
[1999] HCA 38
(1999) 199 CLR 1
Lacey v Attorney-General
[2011] HCA 10
(2011) 242 CLR 573
, with footnotes omitted.
Supreme Court Act
Supreme Court Act
s 55(1)(b).
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
Minister for Immigration and Border
Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
264 CLR 541
Minister for Immigration and
Border Protection v SZVFW
(supra) at [35]-[50].
House v The King
55 CLR 499.
Warren v Coombes
[1979] HCA 9
142 CLR 531.
House v The King
at 504-505.
Warren v Coombes
at 552. See also
Chief Executive Officer Department of Health v KMD &
[2024] NTCCA 8
, and the approval of that formulation by the
High Court in
KMD v CEO (Department of Health NT)
[2025] HCA 4
(supra) at [49].
See also Kifel CJ at [18], Nettle and Gordon JJ at [85]-[87]. Subsequently
[2018] HCA 40
[2021] ACTCA 28
GLJ v Trustees of the Roman
Catholic Church for the Diocese of Lismore
[2023] HCA 32
(2023) 97 ALJR 857
Gray v Motor Accident
(1998) 196 CLR 1
[1998] HCA 70.
Gray v Motor Accident
(supra) at [12], [14]-[15].
Lamb v Cotogno
[1987] HCA 47
State of New South Wales v
[2003] NSWCA 208
(2003) 57 NSWLR 496
Binsaris & Ors v
Northern Territory of Australia
[2023] NTSC 79
LO & Ors v Northern
Territory of Australia
[2017] NTSC 22
(2017) 317 FLR 324
LO & Ors v Northern
Territory of Australia
[2017] NTSC 22
(2017) 317 FLR 324
Binsaris & Ors v
Northern Territory of Australia
[2020] HCA 22
(2020) 270 CLR 549
. Justice Gageler
ultimately found that although the deployment of CS gas was both authorised
under statute and reasonably necessary
to restrain a breach of the peace by Jake
Roper, the attendant common law immunity did not provide a defence to a claim in
by the other detainees who were exposed to the CS gas as bystanders who
suffered collateral harm by reason of the necessitous use
Harvard Nominees Pty Ltd v
Tiller (No 4)
[2022] FCA 105
. The decision of Jackson J on
these particular issues was upheld on appeal in
Harvard Nominees Pty Ltd v
[2022] FCAFC 179.
Binsaris & Ors v
Northern Territory of Australia
[2023] NTSC 79
Appeal Book (
Binsaris & Ors v
Northern Territory of Australia
[2023] NTSC 79
See the findings in
Ors v Northern Territory of Australia
[2017] NTSC 22
(2017) 317 FLR 324
Victoria v Horvath
[2002] VSCA 177
(2002) 6 VR 326
Lamb v Cotogno
[1987] HCA 47
Cheng v Farjudi
93 NSWLR 95
[2016] NSWCA 316
Channel Seven Sydney Pty Ltd
[2010] NSWCA 335
(2010) 278 ALR 232
. The reasons in
that case also address the principle that compensatory damages may be awarded to
provide solace for injury and hurt
caused or occurring after publication, but
that has nothing to say about exemplary damages.
White & Ors v South
[2010] SASC 95
(2010) 106 SASR 521
. It is a matter of some
interest in the current context that one of the plaintiffs was an 11-year-old
Aboriginal child who was indirectly
sprayed with capsicum spray by police during
the course of their unlawful arrest of the adult protesters. Although the child
compensatory damages, no award of exemplary damages was made in
relation to that battery.
The decision in
Hartley Poynton Limited
[2002] VSC 113
also does not advance
that proposition. In that matter the defendant stockbroking firm was found to be
vicariously liable for the
negligence and false and misleading conduct of its
brokers. The basis for the award of exemplary damages was that the conduct of
the brokers constituted a conscious and contumelious disregard for the rights of
the plaintiff by ignoring its public promises and
ignoring the plaintiff's
rights and interests. It was a matter of context only that this disregard
occurred in an environment in
which misconduct of that nature was facilitated,
and that other clients were treated in a similar fashion as a result.
New South Wales v
[2005] NSWCA 445
(2005) 65 NSWLR 168
LO & Ors v Northern
Territory of Australia
[2017] NTSC 22
(2017) 317 FLR 324
LO & Ors v Northern
Territory of Australia
[2017] NTSC 22
(2017) 317 FLR 324
Youth Justice Act
s 154 as at 21 August 2014.
See the finding in
Ors v Northern Territory of Australia
[2017] NTSC 22
(2017) 317 FLR 324
New South Wales v
[2005] NSWCA 445
(2005) 65 NSWLR 168
Fontin v Katapodis
[1962] HCA 63
(1962) 108 CLR 177
at 187. See also
Uren v John Fairfax & Sons Pty
[1966] HCA 40
(1966) 117 CLR 118
at 120, in which Taylor J referred to the relevant
test as conduct that had been "high-handed, insolent, vindictive or malicious
had in some other way exhibited a contumelious disregard of the plaintiff's
There was also no pleading, submission
or evidence to the effect that the appellant had a relevant non-delegable duty
procure the careful performance of work by the prison officers and
youth justice officers in its employ, and that an award of exemplary
could be made on the basis of a breach of that duty. The factual inquiry for a
non-delegable duty in the circumstances would
have been quite different from the
inquiries pursued at trial: see, for example,
Bird v DP (a pseudonym)
(2024) 98 ALJR 1349
[2024] HCA 41
. In the absence of any pleading
or evidence relevant to the imposition and scope of a non-delegable duty of
care, it cannot be said
that any such duty extended to ensuring that CS gas was
not used in the Centre or, more broadly, to ensuring that the respondents
somehow protected from that particular form of battery. It also cannot be said
that any breach of a hypothetical non-delegable
duty in the circumstances of
this case would properly attract an award of exemplary damages. That is
particularly so having regard
to the belief that its use was lawful and to the
divergence of judicial opinion on the issue already described.
Victoria v Horvath
[2002] VSCA 177
(2002) 6 VR 326
. This is very different
to the situation in which exemplary damages are available by reference to the
conduct of the individual officers,
and the State is held vicariously liable for
exemplary damages in reflection of its responsibility for the oversight,
training and
discipline of its officers: see, for example,
New South Wales v
[2006] HCA 57
(2006) 229 CLR 638
Kuru v State of New South
(2008) 236 CLR 1
[2008] HCA 26
Pollack v Volpato
1 NSWLR 653
New South Wales v Ibbett
[2006] HCA 57
(2006) 229 CLR 638
, approving the observations of Spigelman CJ in
South Wales v Ibbett
[2005] NSWCA 445
(2005) 65 NSWLR 168.
Haines v Bendall
[1991] HCA 15
MBP (SA) v Gogic
(1991) 171 CLR 657 at 663.
Uren v John Fairfax &
Sons Pty Ltd
[1966] HCA 40
(1966) 117 CLR 118
Carson v John Fairfax &
[1993] HCA 31
(1993) 178 CLR 44
Binsaris & Ors v
Northern Territory of Australia
[2023] NTSC 79
Lamb v Cotogno
[1987] HCA 47
Lackersteen v Jones
(1988) NTSC 60
(1988) 92 FLR 6
Binsaris & Ors v
Northern Territory of Australia
[2023] NTSC 79
Binsaris & Ors v
Northern Territory of Australia
[2023] NTSC 79
Binsaris & Ors v
Northern Territory of Australia
[2023] NTSC 79
Personal Injury (Liabilities
and Damages) Act 2003
(NT), s 19.
Binsaris & Ors v
Northern Territory of Australia
[2023] NTSC 79
Amalgamated Television
Services Pty Ltd v Marsden
[2002] NSWCA 419
, [1362], [1469].
See, for example,
[1989] 2 Qd R 412.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (489 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter