URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTCCA/2024/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:18:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The King v CH [2024] NTCCA 10 (8 November 2024)
The King v CH
[2024] NTCCA 10
PARTIES: THE KING
TITLE OF COURT: COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: CA 7 of 2023 (22127604)
DELIVERED: 8 November 2024
HEARING DATE: 14 November 2023
JUDGMENT OF: Grant CJ, Barr & Huntingford JJ
CATCHWORDS:
CRIME – Appeals – Appeal against sentence – By Crown
against inadequacy
Whether appeal incompetent – Statutory framework does not preclude
appeal against ‘total effective sentence’ –
particulars of sentences challenged in notice of appeal – Aggravated
unlawful entry and rape involving youth offender
and child victim –
Whether sentence manifestly inadequate – Whether failure to take into
account particular aspects of
respondent’s criminal history –
Whether failure to take into account relevant circumstances of offending –
manifestly inadequate – Appeal allowed and respondent
resentenced.
Criminal Code 1983
(NT) s 192, s 213, s 414
Supreme Court Rules 1987
(NT) r 82.05
Carroll v The Queen
[2011] NTCCA 6
(2011) 29 NTLR 106
Craft v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 66
DPP v Jones
(2013) 40VR 267,
DPP v Kazarisis
(2010) 31 VR 636
DPP v Keller (a pseudonym)
[2021] VSCA 334
v The Queen
[1994] HCA 49
(1994) 181 CLR 295
Forrest v The Queen
[2017] NTCCA 5
(2017) 267 A Crim
Gilligan v The Queen
[2007] NTCCA 8
Griffiths v The Queen
(1977) 137 CLR 293,
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[2023] NSWCCA 116
Ludeman v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 333
(2010) 31 VR 606
Markarian v
(2005) 228 CLR 357,
Nguyen v The Queen
(2006) 261 A Crim R
Noakes v The Queen
[2015] NTCCA 7
[2006] NSWCCA 304
R v Pham & Ly
(1991) 55 A Crim R 128
R v Tennyson
[2023] NSWCCA 219
R & P Boland Nominees Pty
Ltd v Hobbs
[2013] VSCA 66
Stanley v Director of Public Prosecutions
[2023] HCA 3
(2023) 97 ALJR 107
The King v Benning
[2022] NTCCA 15
Queen v Gurruwiwi
[2019] NTCCA 23
The Queen v Kahu-Leedie
The Queen v Mossman
(2017) 40 NTLR 144
The Queen v
(2014) 34 NTLR 154
The Queen v Roe
[2017] NTCCA 7
(2017) 40 NTLR 187
[2023] NSWCCA 185
[2018] NSWCCA 52
, referred to.
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: V Engel SC with D Jones
Respondent: J Murphy with E Henke
Appellant: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Respondent: North Australian Aboriginal Justice Agency
Judgment category classification: B
Number of pages: 49
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
The King v CH
[2024] NTCCA 10
CA 7 of 2023 (22127604)
CORAM: GRANT CJ, BARR & HUNTINGFORD JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 8 November 2024)
[1] On 19 June
2023, the respondent was sentenced for one count of aggravated unlawful entry of
a dwelling contrary to s 213(1), (4)
and (5) of the
Criminal Code
(NT) (Count 1), and one count of sexual intercourse without consent
contrary to s 192(3) of the
Criminal Code
(Count 2). This is an
appeal against that sentence.
[2] The maximum
penalty applicable to the offence in Count 1 was imprisonment for 20 years, and
that applicable to the offence in
Count 2 was life imprisonment. After a
discount of 25 percent was allowed in recognition of the respondent’s
pleas of guilty,
he was sentenced to 15 months’ imprisonment on Count 1
and three years’ imprisonment on Count 2. The sentence imposed
of Count 1 was ordered to be served cumulatively as to six months on the
sentence imposed in respect of Count 2, such
that the total sentence imposed was
imprisonment for three years and six months. A non-parole period of 22 months
was fixed. The
accumulated sentences and the non-parole period were backdated to
commence on 9 September 2021 to take into account time served prior
sentencing.
non-parole period expired on 8 July 2023. The respondent was granted parole
shortly after the hearing of this appeal and has
been on conditional liberty
since 27 December 2023, which was the day before his 18
As a consequence of the grant of parole, he has not to this point in time spent
any period in adult prison.
Grounds of appeal
[4] The Crown
has appealed against the sentences imposed on the following grounds:
(a) the learned sentencing judge erred in imposing an overall sentence that was
manifestly inadequate, in terms of the individual
sentences imposed, the total
sentence and the non-parole period;
(b) the learned sentencing judge erred in failing to take into account
particular aspects of the respondent’s criminal history
relevant to the sentencing exercise; and
(c) the learned sentencing judge erred in failing to take into account relevant
circumstances of the offending.
[5] The Crown
seeks orders that this Court quash the sentences imposed by the sentencing judge
and impose such sentence as this Court
considers warranted in law and which
should have been passed at first instance.
The competency of the
respondent has raised a preliminary issue in relation to the competency of the
appeal. In reliance on a number of Victorian
authorities, the respondent asserts
that in order to exercise the right of appeal an appellant must commence
proceedings in respect
of an identified sentence. The respondent submits that
the appellant has failed to identify the sentence (or sentences) that are
subject to challenge, and has instead purported to be brought in respect of the
‘total effective sentence’, with the
consequence that the appeal is
incompetent.
Ludeman v The Queen
court was concerned with applications by three offenders for leave to appeal
against total effective sentences which had been
derived by the fixing of
individual sentences for two different offences with an order for cumulation.
The statutory context involved
a requirement for leave to appeal imposed by
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) in the following
A person sentenced for an offence by an originating court may
appeal to the Court of Appeal against the sentence imposed if the Court
Appeal gives the person leave to appeal.
Section 280
Criminal Procedure Act
then provided that an application for leave
to appeal under
may be refused in relation to any ground of appeal if
there is no reasonable prospect that the Court of Appeal would impose a less
severe sentence. The term ‘sentence’ was defined by reference to
orders made under
Sentencing Act 1991
none of which comprehended the ‘total effective sentence’ or
‘head sentence’. The court concluded that
this statutory structure
strongly contraindicated the term ‘sentence’ being read to include a
‘total effective
sentence’. Accordingly, the court found that the
term ‘sentence’ in
Criminal Procedure
extended to each individual sentence imposed and any consequential
orders for cumulation or concurrency, together with any non-parole
period fixed,
but not what is commonly referred to as the ‘total effective
consequence of the particular statutory framework under consideration was that
in an application for leave to appeal against
sentence in a matter involving
multiple offences, leave should only be granted in respect of any individual
sentence which is arguably
erroneous, together with any consequential order for
cumulation or concurrency and any non-parole
That conclusion was drawn
on the basis that the
Criminal Procedure Act
effectively required that
any complaint about totality should be framed by reference to the individual
sentences and any order for
cumulation sought to be impugned. That was to afford
any proposed ground of appeal a sufficient degree of specificity to better
the judge to determine whether there was any reasonable prospect that a
less severe sentence would be imposed, and thus whether leave
practical implication of the distinction drawn in that case was that because as
a matter of construction ‘the sentence’
did not extend to include
the total effective sentence, the Court of Appeal was precluded from refusing
leave to appeal even if it
was of the view that no less severe total effective
sentence would be imposed on appeal, notwithstanding that error was demonstrated
in an individual sentence.
Section 280
Criminal Procedure Act
subsequently amended to provide that the Court of Appeal may refuse an
application for leave to appeal under
in relation to any ground of
appeal if there is no reasonable prospect that the Court of Appeal would impose
a less severe sentence
or reduce the ‘total effective
decision in
Ludeman v The Queen
was followed by
which concerned a Crown
appeal on the ground of manifest inadequacy against a total effective sentence
imposed across 16 counts of
sexual offending. Counsel for the offender sought to
raise the same preliminary point raised by the respondent in the present case
concerning the competence of the appeal. The contention was that an appeal could
only be made in relation to the individual sentences
passed on each charge such
that an appeal against the total effective sentence and orders for cumulation
and concurrency was incompetent.
The statutory context involved a Crown appeal
by right conferred by
Criminal Procedure Act
‘against a sentence imposed by an originating court ... if the DPP
considers that there is an error in the sentence imposed
and that a different
sentence should be imposed’.
majority dismissed that objection to competency, allowed the appeal and
resentenced the offender. In so doing, the court
observed that although the term
‘total effective sentence’ remained conspicuously absent from
Sentencing Act
, the term had always been used as a
convenient description of the product of the individual sentences and orders for
cumulation which
a sentencing judge was by law authorised to
Although following the
amendment to
Criminal Procedure Act
‘sentence’ arguably included the ‘total effective
sentence’, regardless of whether it did or not,
an appeal against what was
described as the ‘total effective sentence’ would not be incompetent
so long as the individual
sentences the subject of appeal were particularised.
established practice was necessary in order to identify which sentences were
sought to be impugned, and in order for the
appellate court to understand
whether it was error in the imposition of the individual sentences or the orders
for cumulation or
both which were the subject of the appeal against the
‘total effective
In that particular
case, the grounds of appeal were adequately particularised so as to make it
clear that it was only the orders
for cumulation which were challenged as
producing a manifestly inadequate total
[14] Those cases
were followed by the decision in
DPP v Keller (a
which also involved
a Crown appeal pursuant to
Criminal Procedure Act
the ground of manifest inadequacy. The respondent challenged the competency of
the appeal on the basis that the notice failed
to identify the particulars
sentence or sentences which were the subject of the appeal. The sentencing
disposition under challenge
in this case contained three separate sentences in
respect of two individual counts and two counts which were dealt with by way of
aggregate sentence. The notice of appeal made reference only to ‘the
sentence’, and entirely failed to make any reference
to the individual
sentences or the orders for cumulation. For that reason, the formulation of the
notice of appeal was held by the
court to constitute a significant departure
from the procedure prescribed by the relevant provisions of the
Procedure Act
for the filing of a notice of appeal by the Crown against
sentence. It followed that the notice of appeal was invalid and the appeal
incompetent.
[15] Turning
then to the present case and statutory context, s 414(1)(c) of the
Criminal Code
confers the relevant right of and power on appeal in the
following terms:
A Crown Law Officer may appeal to the Court ...
against any sentence with respect to an indictable offence ... and the Court
in its discretion ... vary the sentence and impose such sentence ... as the
court thinks proper.
important to read that provision with reference to the definition of
‘sentence’ appearing in s 406 of the
Criminal Code
provides that for the purpose of the relevant
includes any order made by the
court of trial on a finding of guilt with reference to the person found guilty
or his property.
[17] Unlike the
Criminal Procedure Act
, the term ‘sentence’ is not
defined by reference to limited or specific forms of order. In the Northern
Territory provision
there is no textual contraindication to reading the term
‘sentence’ to include a ‘total effective sentence’
‘head sentence’. Moreover, subrule 82.05(2)(e) of the
Supreme Court Rules 1987
(NT) expressly contemplates that an appeal under
s 414(1) of the
Criminal Code
may be brought from the whole or part
only of the decision. Even were that not so, the Notice of Appeal in the present
case includes
the following relevant particulars:
(a) ‘The appellant appeals against the whole of the sentence imposed ...
whereby the respondent was convicted of’ aggravated
unlawful entry of a
dwelling and sexual intercourse without consent.
(b) ‘The respondent was sentenced to a total effective period of detention
of 3 years and 6 months, with a non-parole period
of 22 months.’
(c) ‘The learned sentencing judge erred in imposing an overall sentence
that was manifestly inadequate, in terms of the individual
sentences imposed,
the total sentence and the non-parole period.’
(d) ‘That the Court quash the sentences and substitute such sentences
which in the opinion of the Court are warranted in law
and should have been
respondent’s contention in relation to the incompetence of the appeal is
entirely without merit. First, s 414(1)(c)
Criminal Code
permits an appeal ‘against any sentence with respect to an indictable
offence’ whether in respect of the whole or part
only of the sentence, and
there is no requirement by either express words or necessary implication that an
appeal be framed by reference
to individual sentences where the sentencing
exercise covers multiple counts. Second, and even were that not so, the notice
particularises that the challenge is brought in respect of each
individual sentence, the total sentence after cumulation and the
The objective circumstances of the offending
[19] The facts
of the offending are set out in the sentencing remarks of the sentencing judge
as follows:
evening of Wednesday 8 September 2021 the victim, AD, then aged 8 years and 8
months, was at home with her mother, HB, and
her younger sister, SD, then aged 5
years at their home [redacted] in Woodroffe. The house is a ground floor single
level three-bedroom
house. The victim's bedroom is closest to both the front and
back doors. Both the victim and her younger sister went to bed at about
with the victim going to sleep in her own room, while the younger sister went to
sleep in her mother's room. HB went to
bed at about 1:30 am on 9 September 2021,
placing her mobile phone on the left of where she slept on the bed next to her
She left her bedroom door open and the laundry light on before falling
asleep. HB routinely left her bedroom door open, as the victim
would sometimes
come in during the night to sleep with her.
At about 3 am on 9 September 2021 you unlawfully entered the victim's home by
unlocking the rear security door leading into the laundry.
You were aged 15
years and 8 months at the time. You lived on the same street as the victim and
her family but you were unknown to
Once inside, you entered the room of HB, where she and her youngest daughter
were sleeping. You began to search the room before locating
HB’s mobile
phone next to her pillow. You left the room with the phone, closing the bedroom
door behind you. HB and her youngest
daughter remained asleep.
You proceeded to the victim's bedroom, where she was sleeping alone. The
victim woke to you in the doorway of her bedroom, noticing
the shadow. Believing
it to be her mother, she tried to go back to sleep. You put your mobile phone
and HB’s mobile phone on
the floor next to the victim's bed before
removing your pants, placing them on the floor and climbing into the victim's
victim initially woke to you by her bedside, noticing a figure wearing
a baseball cap and standing over her head. She again believed
that this was her
mother, although she did think that this was a bit strange, and closed her eyes
Once inside of the victim's bed, you rolled the victim onto her back and
removed her shorts and underpants before placing them onto
the floor next to the
bed. You then pulled the victim's legs apart, holding them wide before you
started rubbing your penis on her
vagina and anus. You then engaged in
cunnilingus and penile-vaginal intercourse, as well as penile-anal intercourse
with the victim.
The victim eventually kicked out at you, striking you in the
jaw. She saw what appeared to be blood on your teeth and mouth, a drop
appeared to be blood fell on her leg. She wiped the blood off her leg with her
shirt and then got off the bed completely.
You jumped off the bed before grabbing your shorts from the floor. The victim
called out to her mother. She then turned the bedroom
light on and saw you
covering your genitals with your clothes. The victim said to you, “You
gotta not do that again to me.
That's inappropriate.” You ran out the rear
door and the victim went in to alert her mother. The victim attempted to put her
shorts back on, and she told her mother that it was an emergency and explained
what you had done. HB called the police and located
your mobile phone, together
with her mobile phone on the floor of the victim's bedroom.
Police later spoke to you, and you lied to them, telling them that you had
lost your phone approximately two days earlier. An examination
of the phone
showed that your then-girlfriend had spoken to you on that phone at 2:21 am on
the morning of the offending. It is abundantly
clear that you were in possession
of the phone shortly before these offences occurred. You telephoned your
then-girlfriend using
your mother's phone at about 3:15 am on the morning of the
offending, telling her in a recorded message that you had lost your own
Forensic analysis of the underpants of the victim revealed a match to you.
Your DNA was located on the inside crotch, inside right
side of the waistband
and inside left side of the waistband of the complainant's underpants. You were
arrested on 9 September 2021
and declined to participate in a record of
sentencing judge found that the offending conduct had a deleterious effects on
both the victim and her mother. The victim
was frightened and nauseous
throughout the incident and in its aftermath. The family moved from their home
because of the incident.
At the time of sentencing, the victim remained scared
to sleep by herself and slept in the same room as her mother. The victim had
become socially withdrawn, was reluctant to attend school and felt frightened
when in the presence of boys.
The subjective circumstances of the
sentencing remarks deal at some length with the respondent’s personal
circumstances, including his medical history
and various psychological
assessments. The respondent had an upbringing which was characterised by
dysfunction and disadvantage.
He was one of four children and was the subject of
many child protection notifications commencing from when he was five years of
age. Those notifications related to such matters as exposure to domestic
violence, physical abuse by his parents, exposure to his
parents' substance
abuse, neglect, personal substance abuse and exploitation by his family to sell
drugs on their behalf from an
A number of those reports
were substantiated, and as a consequence the respondent was removed from his
parents and placed into care
for two periods in 2011/2012 and 2015/16. During
those periods the respondent frequently absconded from his foster care
placements.
The sentencing judge also noted that the respondent had not engaged
well with education and had a poor attendance record prior to
his incarceration
for the subject offending.
[22] So far as
the respondent’s medical history is concerned, he was diagnosed at the age
of 11 with Conduct Disorder and Oppositional
Defiance Disorder. He was diagnosed
at the age of 12 with Foetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder, with significant
impairments in areas
of language, executive function and brain structure. As a
consequence of those conditions, the respondent experienced communication
difficulties in childhood which were described by a speech pathologist as
‘severely unintelligible speech, some delay in receptive
language skills
and significantly delayed expressive language and phonological awareness
skills’. The severity of that condition
was such as to impact adversely on
the respondent’s ability to interact with others and to cope with a
classroom environment.
In 2022, the respondent was assessed as having a moderate
to severe impairment in his receptive, expressive and social language
[23] During the
course of the sentencing proceedings, the court at first instance received a
neuropsychological assessment report
in relation to the respondent. During the
course of the assessment which formed the basis of that report, the respondent
to have no memory of the offending conduct and attributed his lack of
memory to intoxication by alcohol and cannabis. The sentencing
judge gave these
assertions little weight, as there was no evidence supporting the proposition
that the respondent was significantly
affected by alcohol or cannabis at the
time of the offences.
sentencing judge noted that although the respondent had reported that he
‘felt bad about the offences’, the neuropsychologist
was of the view
that the respondents ‘feelings of remorse were limited, superficial and
inwardly focused’, which was
likely to be ‘a reflection of [the
respondent’s] limited insight and low cognitive functioning’. The
judge accepted that as a result of the respondent’s
intellectual deficits he was probably incapable of fully feeling and expressing
remorse for his actions.
sentencing judge noted the neuropsychologist’s findings and opinion that
the respondent's Foetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder
significantly impaired his
ability to engage in effective information processing, reasoning and judgement.
The respondent was also
less able to think through his decision-making processes
and engage in self-regulation, and had an impaired ability to think in abstract
terms and consider the consequences of his actions. The respondent also had a
limited social intelligence, making it difficult for
him to understand the
intentions, emotions, feelings and motivations of others, and leaving him
vulnerable to social exploitation
and limiting his understanding of ethical and
moral issues related to his offending
behaviours.
sentencing judge accepted that the respondent’s history of emotional and
behavioral dysregulation since childhood had
led to unstable attachments and
connections with antisocial peers. The exposure to violence and substance abuse
had normalized the
respondent’s offending behaviours in his own
conception, and desensitized him to the antisocial nature of his
Those matters went some
way to explaining the respondent’s criminal history, which included
previous findings of guilt for
offences of dishonesty, possession of a
trafficable quantity of dangerous drugs and failing to comply with court orders.
notwithstanding, that history was found by the sentencing judge to
disentitle the respondent to any leniency in sentencing for the
[27] When taken
together with the subject offending, that history also operated to elevate the
importance of community protection
in the sentencing exercise. The sentencing
judge balanced that purpose of community protection against the mitigating
effect of the
respondent’s disadvantaged and dysfunctional circumstances
in the following
There can be
no doubt that your history of exposure to neglect, violence and substance abuse,
as well as the instability which characterised
your developmental years,
significantly reduces your moral culpability for the present offences. In
addition, your [Foetal Alcohol
Spectrum Disorder] also reduces your moral
culpability. These factors warrant the reduction of general deterrence as a
consideration and also warrant the moderation of specific deterrence.
On the other hand, your current disabilities and deficits mean
that you present
as a significant risk to the community, and you are likely to continue to be a
risk to the community into the foreseeable
future. It is yet to be demonstrated
that you are willing to accept the necessary changes to your life, spoken of by
[the neuropsychologist],
particularly outside the custodial environment.
[28] In striking
the appropriate balance, the sentencing judge determined that the
respondent’s prospects of rehabilitation
and transition back into the
community were better facilitated in a custodial setting and by the imposition
of a non-parole period.
For that reason, the sentencing judge concluded that
although it ‘would be undesirable for [the respondent] to have to serve
period in an adult prison ... it is equally undesirable that [the respondent] be
released without the appropriate measures being
put in place to ensure the
safety of the community’.
That observation reflected the fact that the term of the head sentence fixed
extended beyond the respondent’s 18
Principles relating to Crown appeals
principles which govern Crown appeals against sentence are well established.
Such appeals should be brought only to establish
some matter of principle and to
afford the Court of Criminal Appeal an opportunity to lay down principles for
the guidance of courts
in sentencing
The reference to a
‘matter of principle’ must be understood as encompassing what is
necessary to avoid the kind of manifest
inadequacy or inconsistency in
sentencing standards which constitutes an error in point of
[30] A Crown
appeal against sentence is governed by the principles enunciated in
In the event that
some error has been made in the exercise of the discretion, such as acting on a
wrong principle, taking irrelevant
matters into account, acting on a mistaken
understanding of the facts or failing to take into account some material
consideration,
the appellate court may exercise its own discretion in
substitution. In circumstances where no specific error is evident, but the
sentence imposed is unreasonable or plainly unjust, the appellate court may
infer that the sentencing discretion has miscarried even
in the absence of
discernible error. However, in such a case it must be shown that the sentence
was clearly and obviously, and not
just arguably, inadequate. It must be shown
that the sentence is so disproportionate to the seriousness of the offending as
to demonstrate
[31] Even where
manifest inadequacy is found, the appellate court retains a residual discretion
as to whether the appeal should be
allowed and the respondent resentenced. In
the exercise of the residual discretion the Court must not take into account any
of double jeopardy in making the decision whether to allow the appeal or
impose another sentence.
Failure to take into account relevant considerations
convenient to deal first with the second and third grounds of appeal, which are
that the sentencing judge failed to take
into account particular aspects of the
respondent’s criminal history which were relevant to the sentencing
exercise; and that
the sentencing judge erred in failing to take into account
relevant circumstances of the offending.
sentencing judge’s reference to the respondent’s criminal history
was in the following
criminal history which disentitles you to any leniency in sentencing for the
present offences. You are recorded for offences
of dishonesty, possession of a
trafficable quantity of dangerous drugs and failing to comply with court
[34] In its full
scope, the respondent’s prior criminal
included findings of
guilt for 22 counts of stealing, 20 counts of property damage, 20 counts of
aggravated unlawful entry, five
counts of breach of bail, three counts of
trespassing on prescribed or enclosed premises, aggravated assault, assaulting a
officer, receiving stolen property, unlawfully possessing property and
possessing less than a trafficable quantity of cannabis. Those
offences had been
committed with obvious repetition and regularity over a three-year period
between June 2018 and May 2021, and almost
all were committed while the
respondent was on various forms of orders suspending sentence and notionally
subject to supervision.
appellant asserts that no reference was made in the sentencing remarks to the
respondent’s appalling history of prior
offending for aggravated unlawful
entries in circumstances where he stood to be sentenced for yet another
aggravated unlawful entry
which was attended by a serious escalation in this
criminal conduct. The Crown had made sentencing submissions in relation to the
risk presented by the respondent’s entirely unregulated course of
offending, and the appellant submits that those submissions
were ignored and
that the risk of recidivism was not properly taken into account in the
sentencing exercise, thereby constituting
the appellant’s submission, the emphasis given to rehabilitation rather
than general deterrence and retribution when sentencing
young offenders should
necessarily be moderated where, as in this case, the offender has conducted him
or herself in the way an adult
might and has committed a crime of violence and
considerable gravity.
at CL observed in
that courts must refrain from sending young persons to prison, unless that
course is necessary, but the gravity of the
crime and the fact that it is a
crime of violence frequently committed by persons even in their teens must be
kept steadfastly in
mind otherwise the protective aspect of the criminal
court’s function will cease to operate. In short, deterrence and
retribution
do not cease to be significant merely because persons in their late
teens are the persons committing grave crimes, particularly crimes
physical violence to persons in their own homes. ... [N]otwithstanding the
enlightened approach that is now made to sentencing
compared to earlier days,
the concept of punishment ie coercive action is fundamental to correctional
treatment in our society.
[37] In the
appellant’s submission, the respondent’s previous history of
aggravated unlawful entries, when taken together
with the subject offending,
necessitated a sentence which gave primacy to the sentencing purposes of
punishment, deterrence and community
protection, and which recognized that his
rehabilitation was not the paramount sentencing purpose. Although the appellant
and conceded that rehabilitation remained an important consideration
in the sentencing exercise, it submitted that the failure to
make meaningful
reference to the respondent’s criminal history in the sentencing remarks,
when taken together with the leniency
of the sentence that was imposed,
indicates a failure to take that criminal history into account.
[38] In the
ground asserting that the sentencing judge failed to take into account relevant
circumstances of the offending, the appellant
draws attention to the brief
assessment of the seriousness of the offence set out at the end of the
sentencing remarks, and to what
is said to be the sentencing judge’s
partial recitation of the agreed
The sentencing
judge’s summary of the facts of the offending has already been extracted
above. In terms of the assessment of
seriousness, the sentencing judge said
The present
offences call for significant periods of imprisonment. In particular, the
offence of sexual intercourse without consent
was a particularly serious offence
of that type.
The seriousness of the present offences justifies the imposition of
convictions.
[39] Those parts
of the Agreed Facts which the respondent says were excluded from consideration,
or at least excluded from the recitation
of facts in the sentencing remarks,
were as follows:
[respondent] then pulled the victim’s legs apart, holding them out wide
before he started rubbing his penis on her vagina
and anus which made her feel
The [respondent] manoeuvred the victim’s body and she felt like
something was going in, and like he was licking her. He licked
her on both the
outside and inside of her vagina. It felt “unappropriate (sic)” and
“weird” to the victim.
The [respondent] then inserted his penis into the victim’s vagina and
after a little while she attempted to roll onto her side,
away from him. The
victim felt the [respondent’s] penis go “deep” inside her
vagina. She described it as him putting
his doodle into her “wee wee
part”, and that it felt “really weird” in her vagina when the
[respondent] would
insert his penis inside it.
The [respondent] then rolled the victim over so that she was lying face down
on her bed. He lifted her bottom in the air so he was
able to insert his penis
into her anus. The [respondent] moved his penis in and out of the victim’s
anus, which felt to the
victim like a “wiggly” motion in and out,
and that he was in the “middle” of her bum. Each time the victim
would try to roll away from the [respondent] to resist, he would roll her body
back onto the bed, keep her on the bed and continue
to insert his penis into her
anus. The victim did not like what the [respondent] was doing to her and she
felt weird and gross.
sequence of events described in the Agreed Facts, which the appellant says were
integral to the nature and seriousness of
the sexual offending, were summarised
in the sentencing remarks in the following
engaged in cunnilingus and penile-vaginal intercourse, as well as penile-anal
intercourse with the victim.
appellant says that describing the offending conduct in such reductive terms
made it unclear if the sentencing judge took
into account highly relevant
features of the offending, such as the immediate impact on the victim, her
active resistance, the respondent’s
continued persistence and other
aggravating factors which properly affected the court’s assessment of the
objective seriousness
of the offending. In the appellant’s submission, the
sentencing judge was obliged to identify all the factors which were relevant
the sentence, discuss their significance and make a value judgement as to the
appropriate sentence given all the factors of the
The sentencing remarks
which record that process should possess the transparency that would allow the
parties, the general community
and an appellate court to understand how it was
that the sentencing judge arrived at the final
[42] In the
assessment of these contentions there is a necessary distinction to be drawn
between a failure to take a relevant consideration
into account and a complaint
that certain matters were underplayed or accorded insufficient weight in the
sentencing calculus. By
way of example, the appellant’s contention in
relation to the relevant circumstances of the offending requires the appellate
court to draw an inference that the facts and circumstances described in the
three paragraphs from the Agreed Facts which are extracted
above were not taken
into account. One competing inference is that the Agreed Facts had been received
into evidence, the content
of those paragraphs clearly formed the objective
circumstances of the offending for sentencing purposes, and the sentencing judge
approached the delivery of the sentencing remarks with a degree of
circumspection given the graphic nature of the conduct described
paragraphs.
is well-established that the mere failure to mention a specific matter in
sentencing reasons does not of itself imply that it has
been overlooked or
disregarded in error.
because sentencing remarks must be given with dispatch and as briefly as
possible, with the dual consequence that they are
often not as robustly
structured or precise as written reasons and are not to be parsed and analysed
with undue rigour.
A sentencing
judge is not obliged to advert specifically to every matter considered in
composing a sentence, and matters which are
obvious may not need to be
Facts which have been
agreed between the parties may, depending upon the circumstances, fall into that
latter category. In the present
case, it may be that the sentencing judge did
not review the objective circumstances of the offending or the
respondent’s criminal
history in detail because those matters were
uncontroversial in the sense that the respondent had pleaded guilty to the
on the basis of those facts and accepting the accuracy of the criminal
history disclosed in the Information for Courts.
[44] It may be
accepted that a bare recitation of the facts constituting the offences and a
reference to the objective features of
the offending does not satisfy the
requirements of sentencing. While it is not necessary to undertake a
mathematical or prescriptive
approach to sentencing, a sentencing judge must
make an assessment of the objective gravity of the offences. One of the reasons
that requirement is to ensure that the offender is adequately punished for
the offence.
However, in
undertaking that task it is unnecessary for a sentencing judge to attach a
specific label to the objective seriousness
of the offence in terms of where it
might sit on a range of the
Although brief, the
sentencing judge’s finding that this was a particularly serious offence of
sexual intercourse without consent,
and that the seriousness of the offending
required the imposition of convictions, was sufficient to satisfy that
requirement. There
was no particular dispute between the parties concerning the
objective seriousness of the offending which required
[45] Although
the sentencing judge’s reference to ‘past dishonesty
offending’ was a very short hand description
of the offender’s
history of aggravated unlawful entry and stealing, it is difficult to conclude
on that basis alone that the
sentencing judge failed to take into account the
scope and extent of that offending. To the contrary, the finding that the
respondent’s
prior criminal history ‘disentitled [him] to any
leniency in sentencing’, in the context of a sentencing exercise involving
a 15 year-old offender, suggests that the sentencing judge was well aware of
both the extent of the offending and its consequences.
For that reason, the
appellant’s complaint in that respect can only be that the sentencing
judge did not attribute sufficient
weight to that prior criminal history, or
that its significance was obscured by the attribution of inordinate weight to
the respondent’s
subjective personal circumstances.
of these grounds of appeal resolve to the contention that the sentencing judge
failed to give sufficient weight to a number
of matters (and perhaps gave
excessive weight to others). As this Court has previously observed, any
contention that the sentencing
court has accorded inadequate or excessive weight
to a factor is properly viewed as a particular of the assertion of manifest
(or excess as the case may
Beyond any inferences which
might be drawn from the ultimate determination of whether the sentence was
either within or without the
available range, it is neither possible nor
necessary for an appeal court to reach any particular conclusion concerning the
of weight to a factor.
Manifest inadequacy
[47] For those
reasons, the operative ground of appeal is that the sentence was manifestly
inadequate in terms of the individual sentences
imposed, the total sentence and
the non-parole period. The appellant’s contentions in that respect are
largely encompassed
in the preceding discussion concerning the subsidiary
grounds of appeal. The central contention is that both sentences and the
period fixed were manifestly inadequate having regard to:
(a) the respondent’s criminal history and risk of recidivism;
(b) the aggravating circumstances of the offending in count 1;
(c) the number of victims present in the dwelling house and affected by the
offending in count 1;
(d) the prevalence of that category of offending involving aggravated unlawful
entry to dwellings at night-time, into which the offending
in count 1 fell;
(e) the circumstances of the offending in count 2, and in particular the nature
of the intercourse described in the Agreed Facts;
(f) the fact that the victim of the offending in count 2 was a child and
especially vulnerable;
(g) the offending in count 2 involved a degree of deprivation of liberty;
(h) the impact of the offending conduct in count 2 on the victim, her mother and
her sister;
(i) the risk of disease to which the offending conduct in count 2 gave rise;
(j) the fact that the offending was committed by the respondent while he was on
conditional liberty.
appellant submits that having regard to those features of the offending, the
protective function of the sentencing court
required denunciation, general
deterrence and retribution to be given greater effect, even in light of the
respondent’s youth,
straitened circumstances and psychological profile.
The seriousness of the crimes and their impact on the victims was such as to
take precedence over those mitigating factors.
sentence imposed for the charge of sexual intercourse without consent was
imprisonment for three years, which indicated a
starting point of imprisonment
for four years before the application of the discount for the plea of guilty.
The sentence imposed
for the charge of aggravated unlawful entry was
imprisonment for 15 months, which indicated a starting point of imprisonment for
20 months before discount. The total effective sentence of imprisonment for
three years and six months was derived by an order for
the accumulation of six
months between the individual sentences.
addressing that order for accumulation, the appellant contends that the
different elements and motivations underlying each offence
rendered them quite
separate, which should have been reflected in a greater degree of accumulation
between the sentences imposed
for the individual offences. That submission was
made with particular reference to the decision of this Court in
, in which the court held that although the offences were committed
during the course of what might be described as a single episode
of offending,
an armed home invasion at night with the intent to steal should not have been
made wholly concurrent with the sentences
for sexual offending, which were
separate and differently
against those considerations, the respondent draws attention to the threshold
the appellant must reach in order to establish
manifest inadequacy. In
particular, the benchmark for manifest inadequacy is a ‘stringent one,
difficult to make good’
and an appellate court will ‘be astute to
enforce the stringency of these
That is because of
the need to preserve the broad discretion of sentencing judges in recognition of
the difficulty of having to balance
‘incommensurable factors bearing on
the exercise of the sentencing discretion, [with] those factors ... pulling in
conflicting and contradictory
directions’.
The ultimate
contention made by the respondent is that neither the sentences, the manner in
which they were accumulated or the non-parole
period were wholly outside the
sentencing range having regard to the respondent’s youth, childhood
deprivation, psychological
and cognitive deficits attracting the
principle, pleas of guilty, remorse and efforts at rehabilitation while in
survey of the comparative sentences for the offence of rape was conducted by
this Court in the matter of
That survey
suggested a starting point of nine years' imprisonment before any discount for a
guilty plea is within the range of
sentences imposed for offences against
s 192(3) of the
Criminal Code
in circumstances where the assault is
accompanied by violence and degradation beyond the minimum which might be
expected in the commission
of that offence. Approximately a decade after that
review, in 2017, this Court conducted a further review of comparative sentences
for rape in the matter of
consideration of average sentences for an offence obviously has limited utility,
that review disclosed that since the
survey had been conducted in
in 2007, the average head sentence imposed for an offence
against s 192(3) of the
Criminal Code
involving an adult offender
and an adult victim, after excluding the most serious of cases, had been
six years and five months. That
average is broadly consistent with the
observation made in the 2014 case of
to the effect
that most of the comparative sentences referred to the court on that occasion
involved a starting point of six years
or higher for the offence of
reviews were all directed to cases involving adult victims. Depending on the
circumstances, different considerations will almost
invariably arise in a matter
involving a child victim and the sentencing range is quite different. As this
Court said in
cases involving child victims of sexual intercourse without consent this Court
has observed that the starting point will generally
be somewhere between 12 and
was a reference to the earlier decision of
, in which the
plurality stated (citations
, the Court accepted that decisions of this Court in
R v Inkamala
provide empirical
standards of comparison for very serious examples of digital/vaginal sexual
intercourse with a child without consent
and provided a valid indication of the
prevailing range of sentences for comparative conduct. To those decisions might
Melpi v The Queen
. These cases demonstrate that, although there
is no fixed range or tariff, this Court has set a standard for this kind of
where the starting point at first instance is usually somewhere
between 12 years and 16 years.
this Court observed in the later case of
, that 12 to 16 year
range is derived from cases which involved the egregious sexual abuse of infants
and young children by adult
offenders usually involving serious
Even allowing for that
qualification, the sentences for rape involving child victims must properly take
into account the age and
vulnerability of the victim, are not properly framed by
reference to the sentencing standard for adult victims, and must sufficiently
reflect the sentencing objectives of punishment, denunciation and general
deterrence.
[56] What is
ultimately disclosed in those reviews is that there is no fixed sentencing range
for the offence of sexual intercourse
without consent. It is an offence which is
very fact‑sensitive in terms of both the objective seriousness of the
and the subjective circumstances of the offender. Although the
sentence imposed in this case fell below the average and usual dispositions
adult offenders identified in those reviews, the determination of inadequacy or
excess will always turn on the circumstances
of the individual case. This
particular sentencing exercise was complicated by the fact that it involved a
youth offender of diminished
responsibility and a child victim. In fact, cases
with these particular features are relatively rare and always very
fact-sensitive.
As a result, the outcomes will vary widely and no case will be
on all fours with another. So much is apparent from a cursory review
of the more
recent comparative sentences.
[57] In the 2023
, the offender was 15 years of age. The offence was constituted
by him performing penile-vaginal intercourse on his female cousin,
similar age, in a home which they shared. There was no active resistance or
protest by the victim and no application of
force. The offender had no prior
criminal history and the sentencing court accepted that he was genuinely
remorseful. The sentencing
court adopted a starting point of detention for three
years which was reduced by six months to take account of the plea of
[58] In the 2022
, the offender was sentenced to imprisonment for four years
each for two offences of performing penile-anal intercourse on a female
without her consent. At the time of the offending the victim was seven or eight
years of age and the offender was 14 or
15 years of age. The charges were
brought almost 25 years after the incidents took place, and the offender was
found guilty following
a trial by jury. In the interim period, the offender had
substantially rehabilitated himself and had an otherwise unblemished record.
sentences were ordered to be served concurrently, but in circumstances where the
two offences were relatively indistinguishable
in both time and circumstance and
in the context of a sentencing exercise in which the offender stood to be
sentenced for six offences
against the same victim.
[59] In the 2021
, the offender was 17 years of age and the victim was the
four-year-old female child of family friends. The offender attempted to
penile-vaginal intercourse, and then penile-anal intercourse, with the victim
but was unable to do so. He then placed his penis
in her mouth. The offender was
charged with the one count of sexual intercourse without consent. After allowing
a reduction of 25
percent for the offender’s plea of guilty, he was
sentenced to imprisonment for four years.
[60] In the 2020
, the offender was 15 years of age with a diagnosis of Foetal
Alcohol Syndrome Disorder. He had a limited criminal history, but at
the time of
the offending he was on a bond which had been ordered by the Youth Justice Court
for previous offences of unlawful entry,
stealing and property damage. The
victim was a 38-year-old female. The offender unlawfully entered the
victim’s home at night
time. The offender then overpowered the victim and
forced her to perform fellatio on him. He pleaded guilty to both charges and was
sentenced to five years’ detention for the sexual intercourse without
consent and three years’ detention for the unlawful
entry. Those sentences
were accumulated so that the total period of detention was six years. A
non-parole period of three years was
[61] In the 2019
, the offender was 15 years of age and the victim was a 13 year
old female who was unknown to him. The offender intercepted the victim
was walking alone along a concrete footpath, and by a combination of
psychological duress and threats of violence took
her to an isolated location
and performed rough penile-vaginal sexual intercourse on her without her
consent. The sentencing judge
imposed a sentence of four years and six
month’s imprisonment after a reduction of 25 percent to take account of
the offender’s
guilty plea.
[62] In the 2018
, the offender was 17 years of age and the victim was a
35-year-old female who was unknown to him. The offender intercepted the victim
while she was walking in an isolated location and had penile vaginal intercourse
with her without her consent while a number of co-offenders
restrained her. He
had a criminal history which involved one incident of indecently assaulting a
52-year-old woman and another incident
of indecently assaulting three female
children in a pool when he was only 12 years of age. He was sentenced to
imprisonment for six
years with a non-parole period of four years.
[63] In the 2017
, the offender was 16 years old and the victim was a
32-year-old female. The offence occurred on a remote community where the victim
was working as a nurse. In the early hours of the morning, the offender
unlawfully entered the victim’s house and forcibly
had penile-vaginal
intercourse without her consent. He was sentenced to imprisonment for six years
for the rape and to imprisonment
for nine months for the unlawful entry. Those
sentences were ordered to be served wholly concurrently and a non-parole period
three years was fixed. A rape involving similar circumstances in the 2015
also attracted a sentence of imprisonment for six years after
discount, where it was accepted that the offender suffered from cognitive
[64] In the 2014
, the offender was 17 years of age and the victim was his
eight-year-old female cousin. The offender took the child into the laundry
of a unit, removed her clothes and pushed his erect penis hard against her anus
penetrating her to a small degree. This caused
the victim pain and the offender
desisted. The offender was sentenced to imprisonment for a period of six years
and four months after
discount and a non-parole period of four years and six
months was fixed.
[65] In the 2015
, the offender was 17 years of age and the victim was a
16 year old female. The offender and the victim were unknown to each other.
victim was sleeping in a tent set up in the front yard of her sister’s
hours of the morning while the
victim was asleep, removed her underwear and engaged in a non-consensual act of
penile-vaginal intercourse.
The offender had no relevant criminal history,
pleaded guilty and was sentenced to imprisonment for five years and six months
discount with a non-parole period of three years.
[66] In the 2009
, the offender was 16 years of age and the victim was his
12-year-old female cousin. The offender plied the victim with alcohol and
had penile-vaginal intercourse with her without her consent. The offender had no
prior criminal history and reasonable prospects
of rehabilitation. He pleaded
guilty to the alternative charge of indecently dealing with a child, but was
found guilty of rape at
trial. He was sentenced to imprisonment for four years
with a non-parole period of two years.
[67] In the 2007
, the offender was 15 years of age and the victim was a
five-year-old boy who was a family friend. The offender took the victim into
bedroom of the house in which they were staying and had forcible penile-anal
intercourse with him. The offender had no prior criminal
history, pleaded guilty
and demonstrated remorse. He was sentenced to imprisonment for four years and
six months after discount.
[68] The earlier
sentences imposed on juveniles for offending with similar features disclose a
similar variety in circumstance and
result. There is nothing which would sustain
a firm conclusion that the sentencing standard for offences with these general
might be said to have increased or decreased over time. In fact, it
might even be said that there is no discernible sentencing standard
as such for
juvenile offenders in these types of circumstances. There is certainly no
tariff. However, it is the case that the impacts
of these types of crimes are
now better recognised and understood in modern times than they were in the past,
and particularly the
long-term effects upon victims who were children at the
time of the offending.
[69] In the 2002
, the offender was 16 years of age at the time he had
penile-vaginal intercourse without the 16 year old victim’s consent.
was sentenced almost four years after the offence was committed. He was dealt
with under the
Sentencing Act
because the offence of rape was considered
to be too serious to be dealt with under the
Juvenile Justice Act
was sentenced to imprisonment for four years after discount for his guilty plea.
That sentence was suspended after he had served
15 months. The Court made a
point of observing that if the offender had been an adult at the time of
committing the offence the
starting point would have been imprisonment for eight
[70] In the 2000
, the offender was aged 16 when he committed two offences
of sexual intercourse without consent after breaking into the victim’s
from a physical incapacity, and then digitally penetrated
the victim’s
vagina. He was sentenced to imprisonment for eight years for each rape. Those
sentences were ordered to be served
concurrently and subject to a non-parole
[71] In the 1999
, the 17-year-old offender committed sexual intercourse
without consent in company with a co-offender. The sexual intercourse involved
digital penetration and the infliction of violence. The offender was sentenced
to imprisonment for five years which was suspended
after he had served three
years and six months.
[72] In the 1998
, the 14 year old male offender with no prior criminal
history was sentenced to imprisonment for three years for performing oral sex
the 10-year-old male victim. Together with the sentences imposed for a number
of other less serious indecent dealing offences
involving different victims, the
total sentence was five years’ imprisonment which was suspended after the
offender had served
six months. Given the nature of the offending, the matter
was dealt with under the
Sentencing Act
rather than the
Justice Act
[73] In the 1998
, the two male offenders were 14 years of age and the two
male victims were aged 10 and 11 respectively. The offenders had penile-anal
sexual intercourse with the victims without their consent. They were both
released on two year good behaviour bonds, but both had
served periods in
detention referable to the offending prior to the imposition of those bonds.
Those sentences were imposed following
a long course of community meetings and
cultural engagement between the offenders’ families and the victims’
culminating in the payment of monies in the form of compensation by
the offenders’ families to the victims’ families.
The sentences were
not imposed until two years after the offending took place, and were imposed
having regard to those dealings.
[74] In the 1997
, a 17-year-old offender was sentenced to imprisonment
for four years for the penile-vaginal rape of an adult victim. That sentence
was said by the sentencing judge to be considerably less than would ordinarily
be imposed for rape having regard to the offender’s
disadvantaged background.
[75] Of course,
none of these sentences gives rise to any form of binding precedent. This matter
falls to be decided on its own particular
facts and circumstances having regard
to whatever standard may be derived from broadly comparative sentences and the
generally accepted
sentencing principles in matters of this type. That is, as
already stated, the sentence must properly take into account the age and
vulnerability of the victim and must sufficiently reflect the sentencing
objectives of punishment, denunciation and general deterrence.
At the same time,
a balanced approach must be taken to the imposition of a sanction on a youth,
which takes into account both the
needs of the youth, the rights of any victim
of the youth’s offences and the interests of the community.
[76] There is no
doubt that the respondent’s neurocognitive deficits impacted upon his
ability to exercise appropriate judgment
and to make rational choices, and that
they contributed causally to the commission of the offences to a significant
degree. Consequently,
they mitigated the respondent’s moral culpability
for the offending, reduced the weight attributable to general deterrence
moderated the weight attributable to specific deterrence. In addition, the
respondent comes from a disadvantaged and dysfunctional
environment in which he
was exposed to traumatic events. However, given the egregious nature of this
offending – particularly
the sexual intercourse without consent –
and the need to protect the community from such offending, the total sentence
on the respondent was manifestly inadequate even after full and
appropriate weight is given to the matters in mitigation of sentence.
aggravated unlawful entry was effectively a home invasion that occurred at night
while the dwelling was occupied by a woman
and her two young children. The
offending was clearly premeditated in the sense that the respondent set out on
the night in question
with the intention of unlawfully entering a dwelling house
with the intention of stealing from it. The offending falls into the second
serious category of aggravated unlawful entry attracting a maximum penalty of
imprisonment for 20 years. The respondent had
a history of at least 20 proven
offences of aggravated unlawful entry in similar circumstances over the previous
three years, and
had not moderated his behaviours in response to previous
sentences and the repeated exercise of leniency. He well knew the consequences
of his conduct for both his victims and himself, and he was at the time of this
offending enjoying the privilege of conditional liberty
for earlier proven
offending of the same type.
[78] Once the
respondent had entered at the dwelling house with nefarious intent, he then
raped a very young child victim who was
especially vulnerable and entitled to
feel safe in her own home. The rape was persistent and involved three separate
categories of
penetration, all of which were highly invasive and committed with
flagrant disregard for the victim’s tender age, vulnerability
and right to
personal autonomy. As already stated, the rape involved a degree of deprivation
of the victim’s liberty. The psychological
consequences for the principal
victim and her mother have been significant and long-standing.
[79] Having
regard to these features, the individual sentences imposed for both offences
were so disproportionate to the objective
seriousness of the offending as to
demonstrate error in a point of principle and shock the public conscience. That
is no idle figure
of speech in this case. The public would doubtless and rightly
be shocked that an offender who has broken into a home in the early
hours of the
morning and then vaginally, anally and orally raped an eight-year-old girl in
that home has received a sentence of three
years’ detention for that rape,
even making proper allowance for his subjective circumstances. As already noted,
that represented
a starting point of imprisonment for four years with a discount
of 25 percent for the respondent’s plea of guilty and what
the sentencing
judge accepted to be his genuine remorse. Although there is no fixed reduction
for a guilty plea, the 25 percent allowed
equates with the full discount
ordinarily afforded in this jurisdiction for a plea attended by genuine remorse
and resipiscence.
[80] Having
regard to the survey of sentences conducted above, the appropriate starting
point for this particular rape having regard
to its circumstance and various
incidents is imprisonment for six years. There is also an argument that the
respondent should not
receive the full 25 percent discount from that starting
point having regard to the clear evidence that his ‘feelings of remorse
were limited, superficial and inwardly
Although the
Crown has not made specific reference to the extent of the reduction, the
challenge is implicitly comprehended by the
complaint that the overall sentence
was manifestly inadequate, including in terms of the individual sentences
imposed. In any event,
once it has been determined that the sentence imposed was
manifestly inadequate, the appropriate reduction to be allowed falls within
appellate discretion. Despite our reservations in that respect, we would not
depart from the rate of discount adopted by the
sentencing judge having regard
to the respondent’s reduced psychological capacity to feel genuine
remorse. Accordingly, the
sentence properly imposed for the offence of sexual
intercourse without consent is imprisonment for four years and six months.
sentence imposed for the charge of aggravated unlawful entry was imprisonment
for 15 months, which represented a starting
point of imprisonment for 20 months
before discount. This was a particularly serious form of unlawful entry because
the respondent
did so with the intention to commit an indictable offence by way
of stealing, the building was a dwelling house and the entry was
committed at
night-time when householders might be expected to be at their most vulnerable.
It is for those reasons that an offence
with that complex of aggravating
circumstances attracted a maximum penalty of imprisonment for 20 years. The
seriousness of that
offence in the general sense was compounded by the fact that
the respondent’s criminal history already included 22 previous
findings of
guilt for stealing and 20 previous findings of guilt for aggravated unlawful
entry. Having regard to those circumstances,
the appropriate starting point for
this particular aggravated unlawful entry was imprisonment for two years and
eight months, which
reduces to imprisonment for two years with the application
of the discount for the respondent’s guilty plea.
degree to which individual sentences are made concurrent is part of the
sentencing discretion, and reasonable minds may differ
as to the appropriate
degree of accumulation. There will often be no clearly correct answer. What is
necessarily required in every
case is a sound discretionary judgment as to what
extent there should be accumulation or
concurrency.
In this particular
case, the appellant is correct to say that the offences were separate and
differently motivated such that no significant
degree of concurrency was
warranted. The appropriate degree of accumulation in this case is governed by
totality considerations.
Having regard to the periods of imprisonment fixed by
the sentencing judge, the operation of that principle did not warrant the extent
of concurrency which was allowed. However, given the increase in the sentences
which we will be ordering, the total head sentence
will be increased to the
point where no greater degree of accumulation is warranted.
is no ground for the exercise of the residual discretion to dismiss the appeal
in this case. It is important that inadequate
sentences are not permitted to
stand that may undermine confidence in the administration of
unless there is some
compelling reason to do so arising from such matters as delay, parity, the
totality principle, rehabilitation
and fault on the part of the Crown. There is
no such reason in the present case. It is not express in the sentencing remarks
whether the sentencing judge proceeded under the
Sentencing Act
Youth Justice Act
. It would appear to have been under the
Justice Act
, at least in relation to the fixing of a non-parole period,
because the length of non-parole period would not otherwise have satisfied
mandatory minimum for the sexual offence. Even so, the non-parole period of 22
months was sufficient to serve the purposes of
punishment, deterrence and
community protection. It should not be disturbed.
[84] As stated
at the outset, the respondent was granted parole on 27 December 2023. A
resentence involving a longer head sentence
will not necessarily require his
further imprisonment. Any further period of actual imprisonment will only ensue
in the event that
the respondent breaches the conditions of his parole, which is
the position the respondent already faces. The fact that he may be
under a longer head sentence to be of good behaviour for a longer period in
order to avoid any revocation of his parole
should not be seen as a burden, and
does not warrant the exercise of the residual
discretion.
following orders are made.
appeal is allowed.
sentence imposed on 19 June 2023 is set aside.
Count 2, the offence of sexual intercourse without consent, the offender is
convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for four years
and six months which is
backdated to 9 September 2021.
Count 1, the offence of aggravated unlawful entry, the offender is convicted and
sentenced to imprisonment for two years, six months
of which is to be served
cumulatively on the first sentence.
total period of imprisonment is five years, commencing on 9 September
non-parole period of 22 months is fixed, also commencing on 9 September
____________________________
Ludeman v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 333
Ludeman v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 333
Ludeman v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 333
DPP v Jones
[2013] VSCA 330
(2013) 40 VR
DPP v Jones
[2013] VSCA 330
(2013) 40 VR
DPP v Jones
[2013] VSCA 330
(2013) 40 VR
DPP v Jones
[2013] VSCA 330
(2013) 40 VR
DPP v Keller (a pseudonym)
[2021] VSCA 334.
DPP v Keller (a pseudonym)
[2021] VSCA 334
Appeal Book ('AB') 687.
The Queen v Mossman
(2017) 40 NTLR 144
The Queen v Roe
[2017] NTCCA 7
(2017) 40 NTLR
Griffiths v The Queen
(1977) 137 CLR 293 at 310.
Everett v The Queen
[1994] HCA 49
(1994) 181 CLR 295
House v The King
55 CLR 499.
The Queen v Kahu-Leedie
[2022] NTCCA 4
Criminal Code
AB 242-260.
Appellant's submissions at
[2023] NSWCCA 185
v Pham & Ly
(1991) 55 A Crim R 128
Appellant's
submissions at [21]-[22].
Appellant's submissions [27];
AB 239, 688.
Markarian v The Queen
(2005) 228 CLR 357 at [51]; R v Walker
[2023] NSWCCA 219
[2006] NSWCCA 304
v The Queen
(2006) 261 A Crim R 1.
v Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
[2023] HCA 3
(2023) 97 ALJR 107
& P Boland Nominees Pty Ltd v Hobbs
[2013] VSCA 66
[2018] NSWCCA 52
and the cases cited there.
[2023] NSWCCA
and the cases cited there;
[2023] NSWCCA 219
[2023] NSWCCA
Noakes v The Queen
[2015] NTCCA 7
citing Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) (Vic) v
Terrick; DPP v Marks: DPP v Stewart
[2009] VSCA 220
; 24 VR 457 at
King v Benning
[2022] NTCCA 15
v Kazarisis
(2010) 31 VR 636
at [127]-[128].
v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 66
v The Queen
[2007] NTCCA 8.
v The Queen
[2017] NTCCA 5
(2017) 267 A Crim R 494.
Queen v Nabegeyo
(2014) 34 NTLR 154.
v The Queen
[2017] NTCCA 5
(2017) 267 A Crim R 494
[2013] NTCCA 2
Queen v Gurruwiwi
[2019] NTCCA 23
v The Queen
[2011] NTCCA 6
29 NTLR 106
v The Queen
[1994] HCA 49
(1994) 181 CLR 295
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (401 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter