URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTSC/2025/61.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:22:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mardinga v Williams [2025] NTSC 61 (20 August 2025)
Mardinga v Williams
[2025] NTSC 61
PARTIES: MARDINGA, Douglas
WILLIAMS, Rhea Sabdao
TITLE OF COURT: SUPREME COURT OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
FILE NO: LCA 5 of 2025 (22426641)
DELIVERED: 20 August 2025
HEARING DATES: 19 August 2025
JUDGMENT OF: RILEY AJ
CATCHWORDS:
CRIME – Appeals – Appeal against conviction – Appellant
found guilty of aggravated unlawful assault by trial Judge
finding unreasonable and not supported by evidence – Complainant’s
in court evidence was appellant did
not assault her – Complainant sought
to retract statement made to police at hearing – Whether it was open to
trial Judge
to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt the accused was guilty
– Trial Judge’s accepting or rejecting parts of the
complainant’s
evidence was not illogical or erroneous – Appeal
Criminal Code 1983
(NT) s 188(1) and (2).
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
Libke v The Queen
[2007] HCA 30
Morluk v Firth
[2021] NTSC 77
Pell v The Queen
Warford v Firth
[2017] NTSC 75
, referred to.
D Mildren, “Redressing the Imbalance Against Aboriginals in the
Criminal Justice System”
(1997) 21 Criminal Law Journal 7.
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: P Boulten SC with D Thomas
Respondent: J Banwell
Solicitors:
Appellant: North Australian Aboriginal Justice Agency
Respondent: Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Judgment category classification: C
Judgment ID Number: Ril2501
Number of pages: 11
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
OF AUSTRALIA
Mardinga v Williams
[2025] NTSC 61
No. LCA 5 of 2025 (22426641)
DOUGLAS MARDINGA
RHEA SABDAO WILLIAMS
CORAM: RILEY AJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(Delivered 20 August 2025)
February 2025 the appellant was found guilty and convicted in the Local Court of
the offence of aggravated assault committed
upon his female partner, VC.
[2] This is an
appeal against that conviction upon the sole ground that the verdict was
unreasonable and/or unsupported by the evidence
in all of the circumstances. The
appellant submits that the finding of guilt was “unsafe and
unsatisfactory”.
[3] The function
to be undertaken by this Court in relation to such an appeal was described by
the High Court in
in the following
Where, notwithstanding that as a matter of law there is
evidence to sustain a verdict, a court of criminal appeal is asked to conclude
that the verdict is unsafe or unsatisfactory, the question which the court must
ask itself is whether it thinks that upon the whole
of the evidence it was open
to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty.
But in answering that
question the court must not disregard or discount either
the consideration that the jury is the body entrusted with the primary
responsibility
of determining guilt or innocence, or the consideration that the
jury has had the benefit of having seen and heard the witnesses.
contrary, the court must pay full regard to those considerations.
observations have equal application to the determination of an appeal on this
ground from a summary trial by judge alone.
The process involves the appeal
court making its own independent assessment of whether, notwithstanding that
there is evidence upon
which a jury might convict, nonetheless it would be
dangerous in all the circumstances to allow the verdict of guilty to stand. The
court will consider whether the tribunal of fact “
, as distinct
, have entertained a doubt about the appellant’s
[5] The case
against the appellant relied heavily upon the evidence of his partner, the
complainant, VC. The Crown case was that on
29 August 2024 Constable Robert Kerr
was conducting community patrols in Wadeye when he observed a female, later
identified as VC,
who waved down the marked police vehicle and complained that
she had been threatened by her partner, the appellant. The Constable
conveyed VC
to the local police station where she entered into a video recorded statement.
In that statement, which was taken on
oath, she said she had been walking to her
office to make a cup of tea and that she wanted to listen to her boss. However,
her partner,
the appellant, was talking to her and threatening her and making
her scared. He showed her some scissors and said “I can stab
you and kill
you”. She said she was scared and flagged down the police car and
immediately complained of the offending. She
described the scissors as being
silver and blue.
trial, in her evidence in chief, the complainant partially retracted what she
had said in her recorded statement provided
on the day of the alleged offending
and said that she did not tell the Police Officer the truth. In the
circumstances the Judge gave
the prosecutor leave to cross-examine the witness
pursuant to
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
(NT). In the course of further questioning the complainant said that the
“police forced me to tell the story”, she agreed
she did not want
the charges to go to court, or the appellant to be in trouble and she agreed
that she was “scared” to
tell her story in court.
cross-examination on behalf of the appellant the complainant agreed that she had
smoked “ganga” and that she
was still feeling the effects of doing
so when she spoke with police. She agreed that the appellant had a pair of
scissors which
he used to cut ganga but he did not have the scissors with him
when they argued and he did not threaten her with the scissors. She
agreed with
the propositions that she felt pressured by police to tell the story and that
what she told the police was a lie.
[8] Constable
Kerr gave evidence that when his vehicle was waved down the complainant looked
as if she “needed urgent help or
assistance”. She did not appear to
be affected by any substance. She said she was threatened with scissors and
police thereafter
took her to the police station to complete a statement in
accordance with her wishes. Police did not use an interpreter in conducting
interview. Constable Kerr said the complainant did not appear uncomfortable when
she made her statement and did not appear intoxicated
when he was dealing with
her. Police later dropped the complainant off at the local resource centre.
Constable Kerr subsequently
arrested the appellant who was found to be in
possession of a pair of scissors as described by the complainant. Constable Kerr
that he did not interview any potential witnesses.
[9] There was no
further evidence called by the prosecution and no evidence was called in the
defence case.
[10] In its
submissions in the Local Court the prosecution relied upon the evidence provided
by the complainant through the recorded
interview. Defence counsel,
unsurprisingly, argued that the competing versions of events should give rise to
a reasonable doubt.
His Honour in exchanges with defence counsel indicated that
he was struggling to believe that the complainant was telling the truth
court. Defence counsel submitted that even though his Honour “may have an
overwhelming suspicion – a grave suspicion”,
nevertheless it was not
possible to exclude the possibility that the complainant’s evidence in
court was a true version of
The reasons for
[11] His Honour
proceeded to deliver ex tempore reasons for decision. In considering those
reasons I have borne in mind the oft repeated
observation that the Local Court
is a very busy court and allowances must be made when considering what has
fallen from a local court
judge especially when reasons are provided shortly
after the completion of the evidence. Those are the circumstances that were
on this day. An appellate court will generally assume that the hearing
judge has considered all matters which are necessarily implicit
conclusions which she or he has
[12] Relevant
for present purposes the reasons for decision (which by agreement between the
parties I have taken from the appellant’s
submissions) contained the
To (inaudible) the evidence of (inaudible) in her
recorded statement came across as someone endeavouring to tell the truth. She
the questions put to her. The conduct of Robert Kerr, viewed with
(inaudible) what I saw, that there wasn’t any pressure put
on complainant.
He gave a quite articulate story about what she said occurred that she flagged
down the police.
She made the statement at the police station. She was asked if she wanted to
consent to the interview. She said, “yes”.
As I said, she was
articulate. She also was asked about whether she had smoked any ganga. She
talked about the night before, at the
night-time. If there was any lingering
effects of cannabis, it certainly didn’t appear to have any influence.
.... She was cross-examined and retracted her story and said that she’d
been pressured by police to give the story that she
had stated. I have to say, I
am obliged by law to assess her evidence very carefully, firstly, in the
recorded statement, but also
her evidence in court. And I analyse very
carefully. I am best placed to do that, having heard and observed her give
evidence today
retracting parts of her statement, I reject that as not being
Why she retracted is unknown ultimately. But I am reminded of the case of the
authority of
Morluk v Firth
, particularly paragraphs 39, 40 and 43 talk
situations.
And certainly, with regard to analysing her evidence today, I have
found that it didn’t have any ring of truth to it at all.
absolutely no evidence that there was any pressure by the police whatsoever.
She was the person, it seems an agreed fact, that she flagged the police
down. There seems to be no issue about that. There can be
some criticism of the
police and the fact that they didn’t follow up other potential witnesses.
But in the recorded statement
of the complainant, it didn’t appear that
she was aware who these four ladies were. And there doesn’t seem to be any
other evidence that there was an avert (sic) witness to the actual alleged
The accused was found 40 minutes later with a pair of scissors on his
possession. Again, there is a period of time between that where
he may have come
into possession. But he (inaudible), although it seemed to be (inaudible)
something that he had access to or carried.
There is only so much weight that I
can give that given the period of time where he could have come into possession
of the scissors
after. After carefully examining the evidence of the complainant
in the EIC statement to police. Satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
accused assaulted her by threatening her with a pair of scissors, saying
“one day I will stab and kill you”.
It is not a matter of preferring now the evidence she gave in recorded
statement. Upon analysing her evidence today I find that evidence
was truthful,
I reject the evidence that she says she was pressured by police to make a
statement. She gave evidence that she said
that she felt a bit dizzy and
she’s had lots of ganga. Again, a critical examination, of her recorded
statement she is really
coherent, any lingering effect of the ganga was
exceptionally minor. ... In my view, she wasn’t under the influence of
Kerr rejected that he put any pressure on her. She may have felt under
pressure, given that she is in a police station with two officers.
the one that flagged the police down. She made it clear that she was happy to
engage in the interview. And again, there
is no evidence that there was any
pressure from police whatsoever.
I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that there was an assault with a
reference by the Local Court Judge to the decision in
was to the observations
of the Chief Justice in a case involving some similarities with the present
case. In that case the Chief
Justice noted that, in a general sense, experience
shows that it is not unusual for victims of domestic violence to seek to
complaints. Reference was made to the observations of Southwood J in
Warford v Firth
Honour said:
The complainant was an honest witness who gave
truthful evidence. The inconsistencies in her evidence and the number of
that she made is perfectly consistent with the conflicting emotions a
person who is subject to domestic violence experiences. Those
emotions include
the attachment to the domestic partner which still persists, the desire not to
harm the domestic partner, fear of
the domestic partner and a feeling of blame
or fault for what has occurred.
[14] Further, as
the Chief Justice noted, it is not uncommon for a victim in proceedings
involving an assault in a domestic violence
context to recant her or his
complaint to police or evidence given in court which would inculpate an alleged
offender. It does not
follow that in those circumstances a reasonable doubt will
necessarily arise although that may be the finding. In determining whether
a doubt arises it is not resolved by a mechanical comparison of the competing
accounts given by the victim and concluding that
a reasonable doubt must arise
because of the inconsistency. The trial judge need not necessarily accept all
the evidence given by
the complainant and it is open to the trial judge to
reject those parts of her evidence in which she disavowed her earlier evidence
given, in this case, to Constable Kerr. It is necessary to consider the
reliability of the witness in relation to the differing accounts
and whether
there is a logical reason for rejecting certain evidence and accepting other
evidence of the witness.
The submissions of the appellant and
[15] In written
submissions it was put on behalf of the appellant that this Court should,
itself, view the recorded statement of the
complainant. Reference was made to
the observations of the High Court in
where it was said that it
may be appropriate to view such evidence “in the proper discharge of the
function of the appellate
court, to make its independent assessment of the
evidence, necessitating a viewing of the recording”. However the Court
to such cases as being “exceptional” and “where there
is something particular in the videorecording that is apt
to affect the
appellate court’s assessment of the evidence which can only be discerned
visually or by sound”. In my opinion,
in the present case, no such
exceptional circumstances arise. At the commencement of the hearing
Mr Boulten SC, on behalf of the
appellant, withdrew the application.
[16] In the
present case the appellant asserted that the complainant was either lying in
court or lying in her recorded statement.
It was suggested that in this matter
there was no corroborative evidence of the complainant as was found in
However, there was
supporting evidence of the original version of events by virtue of the
complainant waving down the police vehicle,
the demeanour of the complainant at
that time and the clear and forthright description of the assault made to police
shortly after
it was alleged to have occurred.
[17] In support
of the suggestion that a reasonable doubt must exist the appellant relied upon
the fact that there was no interpreter
available at the time of the recorded
statement whilst there was an interpreter present at the time of the complainant
evidence in court. The trial Judge dealt with that issue firstly by
observing, correctly, that he had to assess her evidence very
carefully and
noting that he did in fact do so and, further, that he was “best
placed” to do so as he observed her giving
evidence before him. His Honour
found that her recorded statement came across “as someone endeavouring to
tell the truth”,
that she was “coherent” and noted that
“she understood the questions put to her” and, further, that she was
“articulate”.
[18] It was
submitted that the recorded statement had all the hallmarks of a witness who
required an interpreter. With respect, that
submission is not supported by the
transcript of the conversation. Whilst the complainant was not familiar with an
expression such
as “solemnly” in my opinion it could not be said
that she did not understand the questions asked of her or that her answers
unable to be understood. As the respondent submitted some of her expressions and
syntax were unusual but that simply resulted
from English being her second
language. In her recorded interview she was asked nonleading questions and
provided a reasonably clear
version of events. The appellant pointed to the use
of the personal pronoun “she” when she was referring to her partner
but it was plain to whom she was referring, being the appellant. As is well
known, it is commonplace in the Northern Territory for
many Aboriginal witnesses
to use the personal pronouns “she” and “he”
interchangeably.
This does not
generally impact upon their understanding of the questions asked and the clarity
of the responses given. In my opinion
the trial Judge had a sound basis for his
conclusions. The absence of an interpreter at the time of the police interview
and does not, raise any doubt as to her evidence recorded at that time.
Her evidence was clear.
appellant also pointed to the evidence of the complainant given in court that
she had been under the influence of cannabis
while speaking to police. The trial
Judge dealt with that issue by conducting a careful examination of her recorded
statement and
noting that she was “clearly coherent” and “any
lingering effect of any ganga was exceptionally minor”. If
there was such
an effect it did not impact upon his Honour’s acceptance of her evidence.
His Honour’s conclusion was
supported by the evidence of Constable Kerr to
the effect that upon his observation she was unaffected by any substance.
appellant further submitted that it was unclear whether there was pressure upon
the complainant in the conversation she held
with police. His Honour concluded
otherwise based upon the evidence of Constable Kerr and upon his own
observations of the recorded
interview. Of course, it has not been suggested
that the complainant was pressured to give a particular version of events in her
recorded statement. What is not in dispute is that the complainant flagged down
the police and immediately thereafter complained
of threats having been made by
the appellant. Such conduct does not suggest that anything said by the
complainant was as a result
of police pressure. It was entirely consistent with
her initial complaint.
[21] There is
nothing in the submissions made on behalf of the appellant that leads to a
conclusion that the Local Court Judge must
have entertained a reasonable doubt
as to the appellant’s guilt. The appellant has not established that the
verdict was unsafe
and unsatisfactory. The appeal is
----------------------------------
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
Libke v The Queen
For example
[2021] NTSC 77
[2017] NTSC 91
[2017] NTSC 75
[2020] HCA 12
See also in
[2021] NTSC 77.
See the discussion in D Mildren,
“Redressing the Imbalance Against Aboriginals in the Criminal Justice
(1997) 21 Criminal Law Journal 7.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (142 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter