URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nt/NTRTCmr/2015/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:22:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cox -v- O'Donnell [2015] NTRTCmr 15 (30 April 2015)
REASONS FOR THE ORDER OF THE COMMISSIONER OF TENANCIES
INQUIRY - Wednesday, 15 April 2015
DAMIEN COX (‘tenant’)
JENNIFER O'DONNELL (‘landlord’)
RT1415-0482
is a determination of an application by the tenant dated 9 January 2015 in
respect of premises being 19 Pickford Street, Jingili
in the Northern Territory
of Australia (‘the premises’), seeking an order for:
(a) the return
of a security deposit under section 113 of the
Residential Tenancies Act
(NT) (‘the Act’); and
repayment of rent paid in advance under section 43 of the Act.
A Notice of Inquiry dated 4 March 2015 was posted to the parties.
Inquiry was conducted on Wednesday, 22 April 2015. The following appeared at
the Inquiry and made submissions:
Ms Jennifer
O’Donnell, the landlord; and
Mr Damien Cox,
the tenant.
note that Mr Cox attended by telephone. He was unable to attend in person
because he had thought the hearing was scheduled for 22
April 2015. Mr Cox
claimed that he had not received the e-mailed notification by the Tribunal
Manager regarding the new hearing date
which was sent to the parties on 1 April
Cox indicated that he was not fully prepared because he wanted to obtain some
further information. I suggested to Mr Cox that we
could proceed with the
hearing but on the basis that he would have the opportunity to make further
submissions and submit any relevant
documentation he wished to rely on after the
hearing (which would also be provided to the landlord). Mr Cox agreed with this
and advised he was comfortable with proceeding on that basis.
note at the conclusion of the hearing on 22 April 2015, I asked Mr Cox to
provide the following by 22 April 2015:
a copy of the
report from his employer’s pay master setting out deductions from his pay
into the landlord’s account;
comments or
submissions he would like to make regarding the text between him and the
landlord which were referred to at the hearing
by the landlord; and
comments or
submissions in relation to the accuracy of the ledger report submitted by the
24 April 2015 Mr Cox provided a letter from a Payroll Officer from the
Department of Corporate and Information Services dated 25
February 2015 setting
out deductions (by amount and date) from his pay into account BSB: 735 050
Account Number 624097 (the landlord’s
bank account). This document was
provided to the landlord and she was given 2 days in which to provide any
comments or submission
if she so desired. The landlord did not make any further
submission.
evidence before the Inquiry consisted of the following materials:
documents submitted by the tenant and kept under the tab called “Tenants
Docs” on the file RT 1415-0482;
documents submitted by the landlord and kept under the tab called
“Response” on the file RT1415-0482;
oral evidence of the landlord and the tenant.
Nature of the Tenant’s Occupancy of the Premises
dealing with the substantive dispute between the parties regarding the security
deposit, it was first necessary to determine
whether I had jurisdiction to hear
and determine the matter.
parties agreed that there was no written tenancy agreement. The landlord however
submitted that the tenant’s occupation
of the premises was not a tenancy
and more in the nature of a boarding or lodging arrangement.
Residential Tenancies Regulations
provides that the Act does not
apply to a tenancy agreement under which board or lodging is provided, except
such an agreement in
relation to a person who:
or lodges in a residence from week to week or for more than a week; and
one of 3 or more persons (other than the landlord, a member of the
landlord’s family or caretaker of the residence) who board
or lodges at
the residence.
Act does not define what a lodger or a lodging arrangement is. At Common Law, a
lodger has a legal right to occupy premises, not
a right to exclusive possession
and the landlord retains control of the premises. The position at Common Law is
set out in the case
of the High Court in
was held that in determining whether a lease as opposed to a licence is created
in an instrument, the decisive factor in
favour of a lease is whether the right
which the instrument confers is one to the exclusive possession of the premises
for a term.
Act however makes it clear that exclusive possession is not essential for there
to be a tenancy agreement. Section 4 provides,
a ‘tenancy agreement’
an agreement under which a person grants to another person for
valuable consideration a right (which may be, but need not be, an exclusive
right) to occupy the premises for the purposes of residency.
concerning the nature of sub-tenancy and lodging arrangements have been
considered by the Courts in other jurisdictions and
also relatively recently by
a Delegate of the Commissioner of Consumer Affairs in the matter of
that matter, the Delegate, noted that the key indicators to distinguish a
subtenancy from a board or lodging situation were:
possession of all or part of the premises;
payment of a
security deposit;
no services
provided by landlord such as meals, washing, ironing etc;
no house rules
as to matters such as time of ingress egress or that govern the conduct of
resident in the common areas and the area
of exclusive
possession.
note however, as referred to earlier, that exclusive possession is not a
definitive factor given the definition of ‘tenancy
agreement’ under
this matter both parties agreed that the premises in question is a four bedroom
split level house. The landlord resided in the
ground floor area and the various
tenants/lodgers resided in the 3 upstairs bedrooms. The parties agreed that,
excluding the landlord,
there were 4 people residing in the upstairs part of the
premises when the tenant occupied the premises.
tenant advised that he paid a security deposit, paid rent weekly and paid a
portion of the electricity costs. He also said there
were no formal house rules
other than internal arrangements between the occupants.
landlord said that she rents out rooms to lodgers and generally sources them by
advertising shared accommodation on the Gumtree
website. She said that a
security deposit has ever been a requirement, there is no fixed term of
occupancy and all that she requires
is 48 hours’ notice for termination of
the occupancy.
the basis of the evidence provided as well as the effect of Regulation 4 of
Residential Tenancies Regulations
I find that the occupancy
arrangement is in fact a periodic tenancy. As there was no written tenancy
agreement between the parties,
section 19(4) of the Act has the effect of
deeming the prescribed agreement set out in Schedule 2 of the
Residential
Tenancies Regulations
to be the agreement between the parties.
The Security Deposit Dispute and Claim for Overpaid Rent
tenant said that he had moved into the premises sometime in March 2014. He said
that he had paid an amount in cash, near the equivalent
of 1 weeks rent $225, to
the landlord as a security deposit. He did not receive a receipt from the
landlord for the security deposit
and did not receive receipts for rent paid to
the landlord. Furthermore he requested a copy of the rent ledger and this was
not provided
by the landlord.
tenant also claimed that the sum of $500 was overpaid to the landlord after he
vacated the premises on 11 January 2015 due to
an automatic payroll deduction.
The tenant claimed the landlord did not pay these moneys back to him.
note that the parties agreed that the tenant vacated the premises on 11 January
2015. The landlord however said that the tenant
had left some personal items
behind and collected them on 13 or 14 of January 2015.
landlord claimed that the tenant entered into possession of the premises on 26
April 2014. She referred to the rent ledger which
she provided as evidence. The
rent ledger indicated that the tenancy commenced on 26 April 2014. She also
provided a document being
a screen shot of an SMS text messages discussion
between her and the tenant from 25 April 2014 before the commencement of the
The landlord swore under oath that the this document was a true screen
shot of this SMS text discussion taken from her mobile phone.
SMS text messages on the landlord’s mobile phone reveal the following
exchange between the tenant and landlord on 25 April
Hi Jenny, You commented on my post looking for accommodation. Do you
have something available?”
Landlord: “
yes I do. $200 a week plus power
Sounds reasonable. May I view the room
Landlord: “
sure. I am home now and will be here all evening. 19
Pickford Street Jingili
Thank you. I’m in the city and I’ll come round
now if that’s OK
Landlord: “
see you soon.”
tenant did not make any submissions disputing the legitimacy or accuracy of this
evidence. Accordingly I agree with the landlord
that the tenancy commenced on 26
April 2014.
landlord said she had received $400 in cash from the tenant on 10 May 2014. I
note this cash amount as well as cash amounts of
$100 on 26 November 2014 and
$400 on 18 December 2014 are all specified in the ledger. The tenant did not
make any submissions disputing
the accuracy of the landlord’s rent ledger.
tenant provided a pay deduction report from his employer setting out itemised
rent deductions from his pay to the landlord. I
note that these perfectly match
with deposits listed in the bank account statement provided by the landlord. The
tenant’s pay
deduction report and the landlords bank account statement do
not however set out payments and receipts of the cash amounts referred
rent ledger.
The landlord’s submissions in relation to the tenant’s claim for a
security deposit were essentially that the tenant
misunderstood how the funds
she had received had been applied by her to the rent arrears. The landlord said
that when the tenant
moved into the premises he was unable to pay rent in
advance. After a week she questioned him about it and eventually received a
payment of $400. She submitted that these funds were not a security deposit and
in fact applied by the landlord to meet the
rental arrears for the period 26
April 2014 to 9 May 2014 (2 weeks occupancy). From this period onwards it
appears that rent has
been paid in arrears by the tenant.
onus or burden of proving an assertion rests on the party making the claim. The
tenant therefore bears the onus of satisfying
me on the balance of probabilities
that he paid a security deposit to the landlord and that the security deposit
was not returned
to him at the end of the tenancy. The tenant has been unable to
provide documentary, witness or any other persuasive evidence other
recollection of events, which I note did not appear to be accurate in relation
to the commencement date of the tenancy.
am not satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the tenant paid a security
deposit to the landlord. Accordingly this aspect
of the tenants application is
relation to the issue of overpaid rent, as I have accepted that the tenancy
commenced on 26 April 2014 a simple calculation from
the landlord’s rental
ledger reveals that the tenant paid a total of $7,500 during the tenancy.
calculation of rent based purely on occupancy of the premises from 26 April 2014
to 11 January 2014 comes to $7457.14 (noting that
the date the tenant vacated
did not fall immediately before a weekly rental payment day). The landlord
stated that she did not receive
48 hours’ notice of termination (as
required by her) from the tenant. According to her undated letter to the tenant
was attached to the tenant’s application to the Commissioner of
Tenancies), she stated, “
When you moved out you did not give 48
hours’ notice. I advised you on Sunday 11
January that painters were arriving in 1 week and you stated there and then that
you were moving out that day
94 of the Act provides that a tenant may terminate a periodic tenancy without
specifying a ground for termination by 14 days’
notice to the landlord in
accordance with section 101. The tenant did not provide the required notice, nor
did he comply with requirements
of section 101 of the Act.
may be argued that the landlord’s requirement for 48 hours’ notice
is a waiver of the 14 days’ notice requirement
set out in section 94 of
the Act. However, section 20(3) of the Act makes it clear that a purported
waiver of a right under this
Act is void. This then could potentially leave the
door open for a compensation claim under section 122 by the landlord. However,
section 122(3)(b) provides that, “
In determining whether to order the
payment of compensation to a party, the Commissioner must take into account each
of the following:
(c) in the case of a breach of a tenancy agreement or this Act
– whether the applicant has consented to the failure to comply
obligations in respect of which the claim is made
light of section 122(3)(b), I a doubt that a compensation application for lack
of notice regarding termination would be successful
given that she may have
consented to the breach of the Act by requiring only 48 hours’
so far as any overpayment of rent is concerned, I dismiss this aspect of the
application by the tenant.
I note that the tenant at the hearing and in his letter of demand to the
landlord (attached to his application to the Commissioner
of Tenancies) raised
some issues regarding the electricity costs charged to him by the landlord. I
have not dealt with this issue
because the applicant in his application applied
for the return of his security deposit and overpaid rent only, neither of which
relate to issues concerning the electricity charges he was required to pay by
the landlord.
The tenant’s application is dismissed in its entirety.
30 April 2015
Demetrios Laouris
Delegate of the Commissioner of Tenancies
[1959] HCA 45
(1959) 101 CLR
[2008] NTRTCmr 12
(19 February 2008)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (129 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter