URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBSD/2025/73.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:14:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Regulatory Reform Omnibus Bill 2025 - Initial Scrutiny [2025] AUSStaCSBSD 73 (29 October 2025)
Regulatory Reform Omnibus Bill 2025220
Reversal of the evidential burden of proof242
Regulatory Reform Omnibus
This omnibus bill seeks to amends various legislation with the aim of
supporting a single disclosure approach within government service
improving and maintaining access to government services, reducing regulatory
burden and improving government efficiency
and productivity.
Among these measures, the bill seeks to amend the
Healthcare Identifiers
National Health Act 1953
Health Insurance
to expand when Services Australia may share information for the
purposes of administering the Centrelink, Medicare and Child Support
and protecting the integrity of the Medicare program.
House of Representatives on 8 October 2025
Bill status
Before the House of Representatives
1.264 Item 153 of Schedule 2 seeks to repeal existing sections 135AA and
135AB of the
Health Act 1953
(NH Act) and instead replace these
with authorisations for the collection, use and disclosure of personal
information in proposed
sections 135ABA, 135ABB and 135ABC.
1.265 Section 135AA currently requires the Information
Commissioner
to make rules
relating to information that an agency holds about an individual that it or any
other agency obtained in connection
with a claim for payment of a benefit under
the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) or the Pharmaceutical Benefits Schedule
the supply of a pharmaceutical
Section 135AB deems that
a breach of these privacy rules constitutes ‘an act or practice involving
an interference with the
.’ Section 135AB(2) expressly clarifies that
an individual may complain to the Information Commissioner about an act or
that allegedly breaches the Privacy Rules and that may therefore
constitute an interference with their privacy.
1.266 Schedule 2, item 153, proposed sections 135ABA, 135ABB and 135ABC would
instead establish new authorisations for those performing
functions, duties or
powers under the National Health Law to collect, use and disclose information
relating to another person to
Commonwealth and non-Commonwealth recipients for
various specified purposes, including for the integrity or sustainability of a
1.267 Broadly, these amendments would positively authorise:
• the collection, use and disclosure of information held by an agency
in relation to a pharmaceutical benefits claim for stated
purposes, including
program integrity, sustainability and safety, research and analysis, policy
development and administration, and
where required or authorised by other
Australian laws.
authorisation applies only with respect to disclosures to ‘entrusted
public officials’
collection, use or disclosure of such information by them or those they have
shared it with.
• the sharing of information within and between Commonwealth
departments and agencies that administer Medicare programs (e.g.
the Department
of Health) and those with payment functions (e.g. Services Australia), including
for the purposes of protecting a
person from a risk arising in connection with
providing a benefit or service under a Medicare program; the administration of a
program; and the administration of child support assessment,
registration and collection laws;
• where an entrusted public official reasonably believes that using or
disclosing the information to an agency is necessary
for the enforcement of the
criminal law; the enforcement of a law imposing a pecuniary penalty; the
protection of the public revenue;
or an integrity purpose within the meaning of
Crimes Act 1914
1.268 Bills which enable the collection, use or disclosure of personal
information may trespass on an individual’s right to
contains provisions for the collection, use or disclose of personal information,
the committee expects the
explanatory memorandum to the bill to address why it
is appropriate for the bill to provide for the collection of personal
information;
and what safeguards are in place to protect the personal
information, and whether these are set out in law or in policy (including
whether the
1.269 In this instance, the explanatory memorandum provides the following
justifications:
• the Privacy Rules and section 135AA ‘are outdated, overly
prescriptive and no longer fit for
• the Information Commissioner being responsible for the Privacy Rules
presents an issue where ‘an external agency has
a significant level of
control over the department’s access to essential
• the Privacy Rules and section 135AA have created difficulties for the
department to access Medicare and Pharmaceutical Benefit
Scheme information for
compliance and other
• the Privacy Rules may increase the operative complexity of agencies
and departments, such as Machinery of Government
• the Privacy Rules are ‘no longer necessary when the Australian
in addition to
secrecy provisions and offences with health
legislation.’
1.270 The committee recognises that the proposed amendments seek to respond
to recommendations of the Independent Review of Medicare
Integrity and
Compliance (Philip Review), which emphasised the need to identify legislative
and privacy-related concerns that may
constrain a culture of information sharing
and risk mitigation across government agencies and
In this context, the
committee acknowledges the value of legislative reform in ensuring continuous
monitoring and detection of fraud
and non-compliance is facilitated by
legislative settings for appropriate information sharing. Further, it is noted
that Privacy
Rules may add to the operative complexity of agencies and
departments in certain circumstances, such as Machinery of Government changes.
1.271 By seeking to replace an independent mechanism for the application of
targeted privacy rules, the committee notes that the bill
may be perceived as
removing a safeguard against the unnecessary or inappropriate handling of highly
sensitive personal health information—specifically,
data that may reveal
an individual’s physical, mental and other health conditions or disability
through information about their
Medicare or Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
claims. The committee’s concern is heightened given the potential breadth
of personal
information to which these authorisations might
and the varied
recipients with whom it may be shared (including those outside of the
Commonwealth) for broadly defined
1.272 The committee notes that the NH Act has provided for the independent
making of Privacy Rules by the Information Commissioner
for over 30 years,
reflecting a considered and longstanding recognition of the importance of
safeguarding personal privacy in relation
to information derived from Medicare
or Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme payment
A recent independent
review of the National Health (Privacy) Rules 2018 undertaken in July 2021, on
behalf of the Office of the Australian
Information Commissioner (OAIC),
considered that the maintenance of discrete privacy rules in this context is
still warranted:
... claims information deserves ongoing protection over and above the
protections offered in the
... Claims information reveals
health information about individuals who generally do not have a choice about
when and how they interact
with the health system. Use of that information
– particularly secondary use – should therefore be strictly
controlled.
1.273 Further, the Information Commissioner has this year highlighted the
protective nature of existing section 135AA in the explanatory
accompanying the National Health (Privacy) Rules
in stating that:
The policy intent of section 135AA of the National
is to recognise
the sensitivity of health information and restrict the linkage of claims
information. Such linkages may reveal detailed
information about the health
status and history of the majority of Australians, beyond what is necessary for
the administration of
most government
...the Rules provide specific standards and safeguards for the way that
individuals’ claims information is to be handled by
agencies when stored
in computer databases. These standards are in addition to any requirements that
may be imposed by the Australian
contained in Schedule 1 to the
1.274 On the information presented in the explanatory memorandum, it is not
readily apparent to the committee whether the proposed
authorisations would be
subject to safeguards equivalent to those prescribed by the Information
Commissioner under the existing Privacy
Rules. As the Privacy Rules appear to
have been regularly updated in 2018, 2021 and in April 2025, the committee also
seeks to further
the basis on which the explanatory memorandum considers the
existing privacy rules to be prescriptive, outdated and no longer fit
purpose. Further detailed comparison of the specific safeguards that would be
omitted relative to those retained, and whether
each is enshrined in law or
policy, would assist the committee’s consideration of the potential for
any undue trespass on personal
rights to privacy as a result of the proposed
1.275 In light of these matters, the committee requests the
minister’s advice as to:
what safeguards are in place to protect personal information that
would be collected, used or disclosed under Schedule 2, item 153,
sections 135ABA, 135ABB and 135ABC of the bill; and
the extent to which the protection of privacy is reduced or
enhanced by the differences between those safeguards and the National
(Privacy) Rules 2025.
Reversal of the evidential burden of
1.276 Item 119 of Schedule 2 seeks to amend the existing secrecy offence in
subsections 135A(1) to (5) of the NH Act to reflect modern
drafting practices.
Proposed subsection 135A(1) would make it an offence for a person to use or
disclose information related to another
person obtained as part of their duties,
functions or exercise of powers under the NH Act. The offence carries a maximum
of 2 years imprisonment or 50 penalty units, or
1.277 Proposed subsection 135A(1A) provides an exception (offence-specific
defence) in circumstances where the relevant use or disclosure
is authorised or
exempted under a provision of the NH Act or else required or authorised under
another Australian law. The defendant
would bear an evidential burden in
relation to this defence.
1.278 At common law, it is ordinarily the duty of the prosecution to prove
all elements of an offence. This is an important aspect
of the right to be
presumed innocent until proven guilty. Provisions that reverse the burden of
proof and require a defendant to
disprove, or raise evidence to disprove, one or
more elements of an offence, interferes with this common law right.
1.279 While in this instance the defendant bears an evidential burden
(requiring the defendant to raise evidence about the matter),
rather than a
legal burden (requiring the defendant to positively prove the matter), the
committee expects any such reversal of the
evidential burden of proof to be
justified in explanatory materials.
1.280 In this instance, the explanatory memorandum states:
A note to the provision states that the defendant bears an evidential burden
in relation to this subsection in accordance with subsection 13.3(3)
the Criminal Code.
1.281 In this case, it is therefore not apparent whether the matters in
proposed subsection 135(1A) are matters
within the defendant's
knowledge, or that it would be significantly more difficult or costly for the
prosecution to establish the
matters than for the defendant to establish them.
The committee considers this justification for a provision which reverses the
of proof should explicitly address the relevant principles as set out in
Guide to Framing Commonwealth
1.282 As the explanatory materials do not address this issue, the
committee requests the minister's advice as to why it is proposed
offence-specific defences (which reverse the evidential burden of proof) in this
instance. The committee's consideration of
the appropriateness of a provision
which reverses the burden of proof is assisted if it explicitly addresses
relevant principles
as set out in the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth
This entry can be cited as:
Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills, Regulatory Reform Omnibus
Scrutiny Digest 6 of 2025
; [2025] AUSStaCSBSD 73.
Schedule 2, item 153,
proposed sections 135ABA, 135ABB and 135ABC. The committee draws senators’
attention to these provisions
pursuant to Senate standing order 24(1)(a)(i).
Australian Information Commissioner Act 2010
establishes the functions of
the Information Commissioner, including ‘the privacy functions’.
Section 135AA(3A) deems
the issuing of privacy rules under the
Health Act 1952
to be a privacy function for the purposes of the
Australian Information Commissioner Act 2010
These rules are currently
provided in the National Health (Privacy) Rules 2025.
Schedule 2, item 153,
proposed section 135ABA.
Schedule 2, item 115.
Schedule 2, item 153,
proposed section 135ABB.
Schedule 2, item 153,
proposed section 135ABC.
Schedule 1, Australian Privacy Principles 3.4; 3.6; 6.2(b); 8.2(c).
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
63. See also Dr Philip Pradeep,
Independent
Review of Medicare Integrity and Compliance
, Final Report (March 2023) p. 54
(Recommendation 3.5).
In relation to proposed
section 135ABA, see explanatory memorandum, p. 102.
In relation to proposed
section 135ABB, see explanatory memorandum, p. 106.
Health Legislation
(Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1991
, which came into effect on 27
June 1991 to empower the (then) Privacy Commissioner to issue guidelines, with a
breach being taken
to interfere with an individual’s privacy under the
Information Integrity
Solutions Partners,
of National Health (Privacy) Rules 2018
(July 2021) p. 1.
‘The policy intent
of section 135AA of the National Health Act is to recognise the sensitivity of
health information and restrict
the linkage of claims information. Such linkages
may reveal detailed information about the health status and history of the
of Australians, beyond what is necessary for the administration of most
government programs.’
National Health (Privacy)
Rules 2025, explanatory statement, p. 2.
National Health (Privacy)
Rules 2025, explanatory statement, p. 2.
Schedule 2, item 119,
proposed subsection 135A(1A). The committee draws senators’ attention to
these provisions pursuant to
Senate standing order 24(1)(a)(iii).
Schedule 2, item 119,
proposed subsection 135A(1).
Subsection 13.3(3) of the
Criminal Code
provides that a defendant who wishes to rely on any
exception, exemption, excuse, qualification or justification bears an evidential
burden in relation to that matter.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Attorney-General's
Department,
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences, Infringement Notices and Enforcement
, September 2011, pp 50–52.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (132 KB)
PDF format (137 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter