URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJCHR/2025/27.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:08:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1) 2025; Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 2025 - New and Ongoing Matters [2025] AUPJCHR 27 (27 August 2025)
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1) 2025
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 202573
ASIO compulsory questioning powers framework and adult questioning matters
Preliminary international human rights legal advice
Rights to privacy; liberty; freedom of movement; fair trial; freedom of expression; rights of persons with disability; children’s
Committee view
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1)
Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2)
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1)
seeks to amend the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act
to extend, by 18 months, Division 3 of Part III of the Act, which
provides for the compulsory questioning powers framework.
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2)
seeks to amend the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act
• make the compulsory questioning powers framework permanent;
• expand the scope of adult questioning warrants;
• amend the eligibility and termination provisions for prescribed
authorities;
• impose additional reporting requirements to ensure that the
Attorney-General is made aware of any relevant information regarding
the conduct
of questioning under a compulsory questioning warrant;
• require that post-charge questioning occur only before a prescribed
authority who is a retired judge; and
• amend the
Intelligence Services Act 2001
a further review of the compulsory questioning powers framework by the
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and
House of Representatives, 23 July 2025
Children's rights; fair trial; freedom of expression; freedom of movement;
liberty; privacy; rights of persons with disability
ASIO compulsory questioning powers framework and
adult questioning matters
1.1 The Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1)
2025 (ASIO Amendment No. 1 bill) seeks to amend section
34JF of the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
(ASIO Act) to
extend the repeal of Division 3 Part III from 7 September 2025 to 7 March
The effect of this would be
that the compulsory questioning powers framework is extended for an additional
1.2 The Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2)
2025 (ASIO Amendment No. 2 bill) seeks to repeal section
34JF of the ASIO Act,
with the effect that the compulsory questioning powers framework would become
1.3 ASIO’s compulsory questioning powers framework provides that the
Director‑General may apply to the Attorney-General
for a questioning
warrant in order to question a person about certain
Currently, for adults, a
warrant may be issued in relation to an ‘adult questioning
that is, matters
which relate to protecting Australia from
acts of foreign
interference
and politically
motivated violence
(which would
include acts of terrorism, as well as financing terrorism and offences relating
to control orders, preventative detention
orders and continuing detention
The ASIO Amendment No. 2
bill seeks to amend the definition of ‘adult questioning matter’ to
expand the matters in which
a warrant may be issued to include: espionage;
sabotage; politically motivated violence; promotion of communal violence;
on Australia’s defence system; acts of foreign interference; or
the protection of Australia’s territorial and border
integrity from
serious threats.
1.4 The Attorney-General may issue a warrant in relation to an adult where
they are satisfied that:
• the person is at least 18 years old;
• there are reasonable grounds for believing that a warrant will
substantially assist the collection of intelligence that is
important in
relation to an adult questioning matter;
• having regard to other methods (if any) of collecting the
intelligence that are likely to be as effective, it is reasonable
circumstances for the warrant to be issued;
• if the warrant is a post‑charge, or post‑confiscation
application, questioning warrant—it is necessary,
for the purposes of
collecting the intelligence, for the warrant to be issued even though the person
has been charged or the confiscation
proceeding has commenced, or that charge or
proceeding is imminent; and
• there is in force under section 34AF a written statement of
procedures to be followed in the exercise of authority under a
questioning
1.5 For children aged between 14 to 18 years of age, a warrant may be issued
in relation to matters that relate to the protection
of Australia from
politically motivated violence.
Different criteria apply in relation to the issuing of a minor questioning
1.6 On receiving notice of a questioning warrant, a subject may contact a
lawyer for legal advice about the warrant, subject to a
number of limitations,
including restrictions on the role of lawyers giving advice to subjects of a
questioning warrant.
questioning warrant may require the subject to appear at a particular time for
questioning, or to appear
immediately.
It may also
authorise that a subject be apprehended and searched in order to ensure that
they comply with the warrant.
subject may be questioned for up to 24 hours, or 40 hours where an interpreter
is being used.
Questioning
warrants may operate for up to 28
and subjects are prevented
from travelling outside Australia during the warrant period without written
permission from the Director‑General,
and may be required to surrender
their travel documents.
1.7 There are a range of offence provisions regarding a failure to answer
questions or the provision of false or misleading
information.
A person subject to
a warrant is not excused from providing information or producing a record or
thing on the basis that it may incriminate
Although anything said or
produced by them is not generally admissible in criminal proceedings against
them (which provides a 'use
immunity'), this immunity does not extend to
information derived from questioning materials (meaning there is no 'derivative
immunity').
1.8 A subject (including a minor) would be prohibited from disclosing
information related to a questioning warrant, including the
fact that the
warrant had itself been issued, as well as being prohibited from disclosing any
operational information associated
with the warrant for a period of two
Preliminary international human rights legal
Rights to privacy; liberty; freedom of movement;
fair trial; freedom of expression; rights of persons with disability;
1.9 The committee previously commented on the
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill 2020
which introduced the current
compulsory questioning powers framework in
The committee
considered that the compulsory questioning powers framework engaged a
significant number of human rights, including
the rights to privacy, liberty,
freedom of movement, protection of the family, fair trial, freedom of
expression, as well as the
rights of persons with disability and the rights of
1.10 In particular, by compelling a person to provide information, or produce
a thing or record; permitting the search of a person;
permitting a police
officer to enter premises in order to apprehend a person; and prohibiting a
subject from overseas travel in some
circumstances, these measures engage and
limit the right to privacy. The right to privacy prohibits arbitrary and
unlawful interferences
with an individual's privacy, family, correspondence or
This includes a
requirement that the state does not arbitrarily interfere with a person's
private and home life. A private life is
linked to notions of personal autonomy
and human dignity. It includes the idea that individuals should have an area of
development; a 'private sphere' free from government intervention and
excessive unsolicited intervention by others. Further, the
right to privacy also
includes the right to personal autonomy and physical integrity.
1.11 By providing for the physical apprehension of an individual in relation
to a questioning warrant, and effectively prohibiting
a person from leaving
until the questioning is complete, the measure engages and may limit the rights
to liberty and freedom of movement.
The right to liberty prohibits the arbitrary
and unlawful deprivation of
The notion of
'arbitrariness' includes elements of inappropriateness, injustice and lack of
predictability. Accordingly, any detention
must be lawful as well as reasonable,
necessary and proportionate in all of the circumstances. The right to freedom of
movement includes
the right to freely move within a
1.12 In limiting the ability of a person who is the subject of a warrant
(which may or may not have been issued) to leave Australia,
this measure engages
and limits the right to freedom of movement. For persons with family members
overseas, restricting their ability
to leave the country may also engage and
limit the right to protection of the family. The right to respect for the family
the state not to arbitrarily or unlawfully interfere in family life and
to adopt measures to protect the
An important element of
protection of the family is to ensure family members are not involuntarily
separated from one another.
1.13 Abrogating the privilege against self-incrimination, allowing
information derived from the questioning to be used against the
evidence, and allowing the information to be provided to the prosecution in
certain circumstances, engages and appears
to limit the right to a fair
The right to a fair
trial provides that in the determination of any criminal charge against a
person, that person shall be entitled
to certain minimum guarantees, including
that they must not be compelled to testify against
themselves.
Further, limiting
the role of lawyers giving advice to the subjects of a questioning warrant,
where a questioning warrant has been
issued post-charge (or questioning takes
place post-charge), engages and limits the right to a fair trial, which provides
person should be able to be represented by a lawyer of their
1.14 Additionally, the secrecy provisions under the framework, which limit
the capacity of persons to communicate with others that
they have been
apprehended and questioned in relation to a warrant, or to discuss the fact that
a warrant has been issued, engage
and limit the right to freedom of expression.
The right to freedom of expression includes the freedom to seek, receive and
information and ideas of all kinds, either orally, in writing or print,
or through any other media of an individual's
Further, it is not
clear that subjects who are particularly vulnerable would be able to seek
assistance in relation to the issue
of a warrant, or after the fact. While
children will be able to disclose to their parents, guardian or sibling that
they are the
subject of a warrant, there does not appear to be any provision for
other vulnerable persons, such as persons with cognitive impairment,
to contact an advocate or other specialist representative in relation to the
1.15 As the compulsory questioning warrant framework applies to children it
engages and may limit the same human rights noted above
in relation to adult
questioning warrants. Children have special rights under international human
rights law taking into account
their particular
vulnerabilities.
international human rights law and Australian criminal law recognise that
children have different levels of emotional, mental
and intellectual maturity
than adults, and so are less culpable for their
The detention of a
child, for example, should only be used as a measure of last resort, and for the
shortest appropriate period of
Further, every child
deprived of liberty has the right to maintain contact with their family, and
this should only be limited in
exceptional circumstances and in a manner which
is clearly described in law and is not left to the discretion of
authorities.
In addition,
Australia is required to ensure that, in all actions concerning children, the
best interests of the child shall be a
primary consideration. That is, a child's
best interests are not just one consideration to be taken into account among
other considerations.
1.16 These rights may be permissibly limited, but only where a limitation
seeks to achieve a legitimate objective, is rationally connected
objective, and is proportionate.
1.17 The committee previously considered that the measures relating to
ASIO’s compulsory questioning framework sought to achieve
the legitimate
objective of ensuring ASIO can gather information in relation to national
security and that the measures appear rationally
connected to that
The committee
considered that there were important safeguards in relation to a number of the
measures, including that guidelines
may be prepared by the Director-General of
Security and ASIO’s compliance with those guidelines are subject to the
independent
oversight of the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
(IGIS). However, the committee concluded that questions remained
as to whether
the safeguards were sufficient such that the measures would, in all instances,
constitute a proportionate limitation
on the various rights. The committee
considered that the proportionality of numerous measures might be assisted if
the bill were
amended to provide for additional matters, and made a number of
recommendations including that:
• the Director-General include information as to any vulnerabilities
particular to a proposed warrant subject in requesting
a warrant (including any
cognitive, intellectual or other developmental disability);
• the issuing authority must consider imposing any conditions on the
service and execution of the warrant with respect to any
such vulnerability;
• where a warrant subject seeks the permission of the Director-General
to leave Australia, the Director-General must consider
the person’s right
to protection of the family; and
• in relation to children’s rights, a minor may only be
questioned in the presence of both a lawyer and a minor’s
representative.
1.18 Subsequent legislation has implemented the recommendation that the
Director‑General include information as to any vulnerabilities
requesting a warrant, however other recommendations remain
unaddressed.
1.19 As the ASIO Amendment No.1 bill and the ASIO Amendment No.2 bill seek to
defer and ultimately remove sunsetting of the compulsory
questioning framework,
which in effect would make the framework permanent, and expand the scope of the
adult questioning matters,
the human rights concerns previously raised by the
committee with respect to the compulsory questioning framework remain relevant
and are likely exacerbated by these measures.
Legitimate objective and rational connection
1.20 Any limitation on a right must be shown to be aimed at achieving a
legitimate objective. A legitimate objective is one that is
necessary and
addresses an issue of public or social concern that is pressing and substantial
enough to warrant limiting the right.
Under international human rights law, it
must also be demonstrated that any limitation on a right has a rational
connection to the
objective sought to be achieved. The key question is whether
the relevant measures are likely to be effective in achieving the objective
being sought.
1.21 The statements of compatibility identify that the bills engage and limit
multiple human rights.
state that the general objective of the compulsory questioning powers framework
is to protect Australia’s national security
In relation to the
extension, and ultimate removal, of sunsetting of the compulsory questioning
powers framework, the explanatory
memorandum states that this will ‘ensure
the powers will not lapse in the
In relation to
the expansion of the definition of ‘adult questioning matter’, the
explanatory memorandum states that
the purpose of this measure is ‘to
extend the application of adult questioning warrants to additional heads of
security in
paragraph (a) and (aa) of the definition of
However, no
explanation is provided as to why it is considered necessary to align the
definition of ‘adult questioning matter’
with the definition of
‘security’ and why the current definition is insufficient.
1.22 Further, the statements of compatibility do not provide any information
as to the ongoing necessity of the compulsory questioning
powers framework. The
statement of compatibility accompanying the ASIO Amendment No.2 bill states that
‘ASIO’s use of
compulsory questioning powers over more than 20 years
has demonstrated that the powers have been used judiciously to obtain high-value
intelligence in circumstances where ASIO’s other powers may not be
appropriate’.
However, it
does not explain how often the questioning powers under this framework have been
used by ASIO, whether other less rights-restrictive
powers could have been used
instead and the impact the questioning powers has had on protecting
Australia’s national security.
It is also not clear whether there is a
heightened national security risk since these powers were first introduced.
1.23 While protecting national security interests is capable of constituting
a legitimate objective under international human rights
law, it is unclear from
the information provided in the explanatory materials whether the measures are
necessary, having regard to
the frequency with which the powers are used and the
sufficiency of the current law, or whether the measures seek to address an issue
of public or social concern that is pressing and substantial enough to warrant
limiting these rights. In turn, it is also unclear
whether there is a rational
connection between the measures and the objective sought to be achieved.
Proportionality
1.24 A key aspect of whether a limitation on a right can be justified is
whether the limitation is proportionate to the objective
being sought. In this
respect, it is necessary to consider a number of factors, including whether a
proposed limitation is sufficiently
circumscribed, whether it is accompanied by
sufficient safeguards and whether there is the possibility of oversight.
1.25 As to whether the measure relating to the definition of ‘adult
questioning matter’ is sufficiently circumscribed,
the additional matters
proposed to be added to the definition of ‘adult questioning matter’
cover a broad range of conduct
‘sabotage’,
‘promotion of communal
on Australia’s defence
protection of Australia’s territorial and border integrity from serious
The potential
breadth of conduct that may be captured under this new definition appears to be
extensive and the provision itself
is drafted in vague terms. For example, the
term ‘the protection of Australia’s territorial and border integrity
serious threats’ is not defined or explained in the explanatory
materials and does not appear to be defined in the ASIO Act
Criminal Code
. As such it is unclear what may be considered a ‘serious
threat’. Further, while the term ‘promotion of communal
violence’ is defined in the ASIO Act to mean activities that are directed
to promoting violence between different groups of
persons in the Australian
community so as to endanger the peace, order or good government of the
Commonwealth,
the scope of
expression that may be restricted by this offence risks being overly broad. In
the context of counter-terrorism measures
more generally, the UN Human Rights
Committee has stated:
Such offences as "encouragement of terrorism" and "extremist activity" as
well as offences of "praising", "glorifying", or "justifying"
terrorism, should
be clearly defined to ensure that they do not lead to unnecessary or
disproportionate interference with freedom
of expression. Excessive restrictions
on access to information must also be
1.26 As the definition of ‘adult questioning matter’ enlivens the
basis for the compulsory questioning powers to be used,
and given the extent of
interference with human rights that being subject to a compulsory questioning
warrant entails, including
such broad and undefined matters in the definition of
‘adult questioning matter’ raises questions as to whether the
is sufficiently circumscribed.
1.27 As to whether the measures more generally are accompanied by sufficient
safeguards, the compulsory questioning powers framework
is supported by a
statement of procedures to be followed in the exercise of a compulsory
questioning warrant.
includes a number of safeguards including specific protections where the subject
of a warrant has a known vulnerability such as
a disability. In particular, in
regard to the questioning and explanation of certain matters, consideration
needs to be had to a
subject’s particular vulnerabilities, and a person
must be apprehended, searched and questioned under conditions taking into
account any known
vulnerability.
It includes
further safeguards in relation to the health and welfare of subjects and the
environmental conditions for questioning,
for example that the place must have
adequate fresh air and
ventilation.
In addition, a
police officer conducting an ordinary search or a frisk search must, if
practicable, be of the same sex as the subject
and may only use the minimum
force reasonably necessary in the
circumstances.
requirements offer important safeguard value.
1.28 As to oversight, the statement of compatibility accompanying the ASIO
Amendment No.2 bill states that the bill would retain existing
safeguards,
oversight mechanisms and accountability measures that apply to the framework,
including oversight by the
It further notes
additional measures in ASIO Amendment No.2 bill, including extending the list of
persons who are not eligible for
appointment as a prescribed
which will operate
to ensure the independence and impartiality of prescribed
authorities,
and that the
Attorney-General is made aware of relevant information regarding conduct under a
1.29 Further, a person who is the subject of a compulsory questioning warrant
can contact the IGIS to make a complaint in relation
to ASIO or the
Commonwealth Ombudsman in relation to the Australian Federal
and the IGIS may be
present during questioning or apprehension of the
These may serve as
valuable safeguards as the IGIS has the capacity to review not just the legality
of ASIO’s conduct but also
its propriety and consistency with human
However, there may be
practical limitations in the IGIS’s capacity to comprehensively review
conduct associated with questioning
warrants. While the IGIS may be present
during questioning or apprehension of the subject, there is no requirement that
be the case.
the IGIS has previously advised that it will only have capacity to provide
oversight of ASIO’s compulsory questioning
framework if these powers
continue to be used only very rarely, otherwise their capacity will need to be
Further, if the IGIS
raises concerns about impropriety or illegality in relation to the questioning
of a subject of a questioning
warrant, the authorities must consider the
IGIS’s concerns and
suspend the questioning of the subject
until the IGIS’s concerns have been satisfactorily addressed. It is not
clear in practice
what factors, if any, the authorities would be required to
consider in exercising their discretion to address the IGIS’s concerns.
IGIS oversight may therefore have limited value as a safeguard in practice in
some instances.
1.30 Further, the removal of sunsetting by the ASIO Amendment No. 2 bill
removes a safeguard. Sunsetting provides the opportunity
for legislation to be
regularly reviewed, remain fit for purpose and be subject to a level of
parliamentary oversight. Given the
extraordinary nature of ASIO’s powers
under the compulsory questioning powers framework and extent of interference
rights, the removal of sunsetting weakens parliamentary oversight
over the measure.
Committee view
1.31 The committee notes that by expanding the Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation (ASIO) adult questioning matters and
extending and
ultimately making permanent the compulsory questioning powers framework, the
measures engage and limit multiple human
rights, including the rights to
liberty, freedom of movement, privacy, fair trial and freedom of expression, as
well as the rights
of the child and the rights of persons with disability.
1.32 The committee notes that it previously considered ASIO’s
compulsory questioning powers framework when the powers were first
introduced in
. At that time, the committee considered the framework engaged a
significant number of human rights and that, while there were important
safeguards in relation to a number of the measures, questions remained as to
whether the safeguards were sufficient such that the
measures would, in all
instances, constitute a proportionate limitation on various rights.
1.33 The committee notes that the human rights concerns previously raised in
relation to the compulsory questioning powers framework
remain relevant and are
likely exacerbated by the measures in these bills. The committee therefore
considers further information
is required to assess the compatibility of the
measures with these rights, and as such seeks the minister's advice in relation
(a) the necessity of extending the sunsetting of, and ultimately repealing,
section 34JF of the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act
(ASIO Act) and therefore making permanent the compulsory questioning
powers framework;
(b) how many warrants have been issued under the compulsory questioning
powers framework and, in such instances, were there other
rights-restrictive ASIO powers that could have been used instead;
(c) the impact of using the compulsory questioning powers on protecting
Australia’s national security;
(d) whether there is a heightened national security risk since the compulsory
questioning powers framework was first introduced;
(e) why it is considered necessary for additional matters to be added to the
definition of ‘adult questioning matters’,
and specifically why it
is considered necessary to align the proposed definition with the definition of
‘security’ in
the ASIO Act;
(f) what is meant by the term ‘the protection of Australia’s
territorial and border integrity from serious threats’
and why it is not
defined in the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No.
(g) given the extent of interference with human rights that being subject to
an adult questioning warrant entails, how the breadth
of matters proposed to be
included in ‘adult questioning matters’ is considered proportionate.
This entry can be cited as:
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights,
Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1) 2025
Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 2025
Report 4 of 2025
AUPJCHR 27.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1) 2025
, schedule 1, item 1.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 2025
, schedule 1, item 1.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
section 34B.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
section 34A.
Offences related to espionage
are set out at Part 5.2 of the
Criminal Code Act 1995
Offences relating to foreign
interference are set out in Division 92 of the
Criminal Code Act
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
Offences related to terrorism
are set out at Part 5.3 of the
Criminal Code Act 1995
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 2025
, schedule 1, item 3,
proposed section 34A.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
section 34BA.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
section 34BB.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
subsection 34BB(1):
the Attorney-General
may issue a warrant where satisfied that the person is at least 14 years old;
there are reasonable grounds for
believing that the person has likely engaged
in, is likely engaged in, or is likely to engage in activities prejudicial to
the protection
of Australia from politically motivated violence; there are
reasonable grounds for believing that the warrant will substantially
the collection of intelligence that is important in relation to a minor
questioning matter; and having regard to other
methods (if any) of collecting
the intelligence that are likely to be as effective, it is reasonable in all the
circumstances for
the warrant to be issued.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
section 34F:
for example, if the
prescribed authority is satisfied that an adult subject has had reasonable
opportunity to contact a lawyer, and
no lawyer is present during questioning,
they may prevent the subject from contacting a lawyer at all; a subject may be
from contacting an alternative lawyer; and a subject may be prevented
from contacting a particular lawyer on certain grounds. Further,
lawyer’s role during questioning is also restricted in that they cannot
intervene in questioning or request a break in questioning
except to request
clarification of an ambiguous question or provide advice on the subject and may
be removed from the place of questioning
if their conduct is considered unduly
disruptive.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
subsection 34BD(1).
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
subsection 34BE(2)
section 34CC.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
subsections 34DJ(5)
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
subsection 34BF(4).
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
sections 34GA
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
section 34GD.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
subsection 34GD(5).
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
subsection 34GD(6).
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
section 34GF.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(17 June 2020) pp. 32-68;
(18 August 2020) pp. 1-114.
The committee also raised
concerns with respect to the right to humane treatment in detention and the
prohibition against torture
or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment and
punishment. Since then, the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation
of Procedures) Instrument 2020 was registered and now replaced by the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation (Statement of
Procedures)
Instrument 2025, which includes safeguards that go towards providing for the
humane treatment of people subject to questioning
warrants. See, for example,
subsections 9(1)
which provide that the manner of
questioning must be humane and courteous, that people be offered breaks in
questioning after every
4 hours of continuous questioning for adults and
requirements for the health and welfare of people while in custody. If
questioning
were to occur in accordance with the statement of procedures, it
appears likely that the measures would not be incompatible with
the right to
humane treatment in detention and the prohibition against torture or cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment and punishment.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 17.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 9.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 12.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, articles 17 and 23; International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, article 10.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 14;
Convention on the Rights of the Child
article 40.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 14;
Convention on the Rights of the Child
article 40.
UN Human Rights Committee,
General Comment No. 32, Article 14: Right to equality before courts and
tribunals and right to fair trial
(2007) [37].
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 19(2).
UN Human Rights Committee,
General Comment No. 17: Article 24
(1989) [1].
UN General Assembly,
United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile
Justice (The Beijing Rules)
, UNGA Res. 40/33 (1985).
UN Committee on the Rights
of the Child,
General Comment No. 24 on children’s rights in the child
justice system
(2019) [85].
UN Committee on the Rights
of the Child,
General Comment No. 24 on children’s rights in the child
justice system
(2019) [94].
UN Committee on the Rights
of the Child,
General Comment No. 14 on the right of the child to have his or
her best interests taken as a primary consideration
(2013); see also
, UN Committee on the Rights of the Child Communication No. 3/2016
(2018) [11.8].
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(18 August 2020) p. 22.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(18 August 2020) pp. 23, 53-54 and 69.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation (Statement of Procedures) Instrument 2025, subsection
Specifically: the right to
freedom from torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
humane treatment in detention;
the freedom from arbitrary detention and arrest;
liberty and security of the person; freedom of movement; protection of the
fair trial; privacy; freedom of expression; freedom of association;
rights of the child and rights of persons with disability. See
Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1) 2025
, statement of
compatibility, pp. 7-8;
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment
Bill (No. 2) 2025
, statement of compatibility, p. 14.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1) 2025
, statement of
compatibility, p. 9;
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment
Bill (No. 2) 2025
, statement of compatibility, p. 16.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 2025
, explanatory memorandum,
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 2025
, explanatory memorandum,
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 2025
, statement of
compatibility, p. 14.
Criminal Code 1995
division 82.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
UN Human Rights Committee,
General Comment No. 34, Article 19: Freedoms of opinion and expression
(2011) [46].
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation (Statement of Procedures) Instrument 2025. The
committee previously commented on an
earlier version of this instrument, the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation (Statement of Procedures)
Instrument 2020,
noting that it addressed some of the specific concerns raised
by the committee in its consideration of the
Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation Amendment Act 2020
but that the compulsory questioning warrant
scheme raises numerous other complex human rights concerns, see Parliamentary
Joint Committee
on Human Rights,
(24 February 2021) pp. 51-53.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation (Statement of Procedures) Instrument 2025, subsections
9(9) and 13(7).
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation (Statement of Procedures) Instrument 2025, paragraph
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation (Statement of Procedures) Instrument 2025, subsection
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 2025
, statement of
compatibility, p. 14.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 2025
, proposed paragraphs
34AD(2)(h) to (p).
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 2025
, statement of
compatibility, p. 22.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 2025
, proposed paragraph
34HA(1)(aa).
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 2025
, statement of
compatibility, p. 20.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation (Statement of Procedures) Instrument 2025, subsection
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security Act 1986
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation (Statement of Procedures) Instrument 2025,
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security,
to the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security
into the Australia Security Intelligence Organisation Bill 2020, 3 July 2020, p.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (192 KB)
PDF format (138 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter