URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBSD/2025/71.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:14:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Freedom of Information Amendment Bill 2025 - Initial Scrutiny [2025] AUSStaCSBSD 71 (29 October 2025)
Freedom of Information Amendment Bill 2025160
Rationales for freedom of information
Undue trespass on personal rights and liberties
Adequacy of review rights177
Procedural fairness195
Broad delegation of administrative powers201
Availability of merits review
Charges/fees/levies in delegated legislation207
of Information Amendment Bill
This bill seeks to amend the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
the aim of modernising the operation of the Freedom of Information framework,
reducing inefficiencies, clarifying provisions
and exemptions, and responding to
abuse of process. The amendments include provision for the making of application
fees, modification
of existing exemptions relating to deliberative processes of
government, and the management of vexatious and frivolous requests.
would also provide a framework for handling FOI requests or applications made to
ministers who cease office before such
processes are decided.
Attorney-General
House of Representatives on 3 September 2025
Bill status
Before the House of Representatives
1.193 The Freedom of Information Amendment Bill 2025 seeks to amend the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(FOI Act) to introduce a variety of
reforms to the freedom of information framework. The key reforms in the bill
• amend the objects clause to recognmentise a countervailing public
interest to protect ‘essential private interests’
proper and effective operation of
government.’
• provide that an agency or minister may refuse to deal with a request
to access information if it is vexatious or frivolous,
or is likely to have the
effect of harassing or intimidating or causing harm to another
• provide that an agency or minister may refuse to process a request to
access information as a practical refusal reason if
the time taken to process
the request would be more than 40
• allow regulations to specify an application fee to make a request to
access information or apply for a review of an agency
or minister’s
• allow a document to be exempt where it has been prepared for the
substantial purpose of submission for consideration by the
• expand the factors against giving access where a document is
conditionally exempt for reasons of public interest because access
otherwise disclose a ‘deliberative process of
government.’
1.194 The bill is intended to ’modernise the framework, reduce system
inefficiencies, address abuses of process that can consume
a disproportionate
amount of agency resources and impact on the right of genuine applicants to
access information, and clarify the
operation of certain provisions and
exemptions within the FOI
1.195 Since the commencement of the FOI Act on 1 December 1982, there have
been a range of reforms made during 2009 and
In particular, the 2010
reforms were intended to ‘promote a pro-disclosure culture across
government and to build a stronger
foundation for more openness in
government.’
1.196 A formal review was conducted into the effectiveness of these reforms
and on 12 November 2013, the
Review of the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
and Australian Information Commissioner Act 2010
was tabled in the
Parliament. The Hawke Review made 40 recommendations with aims to
‘streamline FOI procedures, reduce complexity
and increase capacity to
manage FOI workload’ while ‘ensuring the right of access to
government information remains as
comprehensive as
Rationales for freedom of information
1.197 The freedom to seek and receive information is related to freedom of
expression, including freedom of political communication.
1.198 The committee notes that effective freedom of information (FOI)
legislation provides an important mechanism for individuals
information about government actions and decision-making. In reporting on its
inquiry into the Freedom of Information Bill
1978 on 6 November 1979, the Senate
Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs noted ‘three quite
specific justifications
for having effective freedom of information legislation
in Australia, each of which arises out of the principles upon which democratic
government claims to be
• individuals have the right to know the personal information held in
government records about them, including a right to inspect
these files and
correct inaccurate information within
• government becomes more accountable when it is open to public
scrutiny because ‘unless people are provided with sufficient
information,
accountability
disappears’;
• a community that is adequately informed and that has access to
information will increasingly participate in policy making
and democratic
1.199 Mindful of the significance of these rationales, the committee
considers that appropriate access to government information directly
the effective exercise of the implied freedom of political communication and
fundamental common law rights and freedoms,
notably freedom of
1.200 The committee further notes an additional rationale regarding the
important role of freedom of information regimes from a scrutiny
perspective.
Affordable, sufficient and timely access to information about the conduct of
government decision-making informs and
enables the exercise of merits and
judicial review rights by affected individuals. Indeed, the quality of such
merits and judicial
review processes may substantially depend upon the
information the individual has accessed, or may access, from agencies and
Undue trespass on personal rights and
Adequacy of review
1.201 Given the rationales discussed above, the committee is concerned that
various provisions in the bill may unduly trespass on
personal rights and
liberties that rely on access to government information without sufficient
justification. Additionally, an individual’s
ability to consider and
access merits and judicial review processes may be limited by several of the
amendments proposed in the bill.
Amending the objects of the FOI Act
1.202 Schedule 1, item 3, proposed subsection 3(2) seeks to amend the general
objects of the FOI Act to explicitly recognise the provision
of safeguards for
countervailing public interests, being ‘essential private interests’
and ‘the proper and effective
operation of government.’
1.203 The committee notes that objects clauses provide an aid to the
interpretation of legislation and can be influential in determining
preferred interpretation of a legislative
The explicit
inclusion of countervailing public interests within its general objects clause
may operate to diminish the FOI Act’s
pro-disclosure inclination and
instead justify non-disclosure of government information – an outcome that
is inconsistent with
the rationales that have historically underpinned the Act,
as outlined above.
1.204 The explanatory memorandum provides limited information as to the
necessity and appropriateness of re-clarifying the Parliament’s
regarding the FOI Act. It states:
The amendments in this Part would ensure the Act balances promoting
transparent government through providing access to information,
countervailing public interest in protecting essential private interests and the
proper functioning of government. This inclusion
in the objects of the Act is
intended to ensure that the Act is interpreted according to those terms,
recognising that the Act both
grants a right of access, and qualifies that
This item would repeal the existing subsection and substitute a new
subsection to clarify Parliament’s intention by these objects.
of paragraphs 3(2)(a) and (b) have been retained to support the underlying
rationale for the Act. The addition at the end
of the subsection is intended to
provide an explicit recognition of countervailing public interest in protection
of private and business
information as well as the proper administration of
government.
1.205 The committee accordingly considers that the bill’s explanatory
memorandum could better address why it is necessary and
appropriate to
acknowledge ‘essential private interests’ and ‘the proper and
effective operation of government’
in the FOI Act’s objects clause
(as opposed to its operative provisions). The committee’s scrutiny of the
also be assisted by further information about the expected effects of
this change and how these public interests may be balanced
with the existing
pro-disclosure objects in the FOI
Conditional exemption relating to deliberative processes of
1.206 Division 3 of Part IV of the FOI Act sets out a series of conditional
exemptions, which require an agency or minister to grant
access to the relevant
government information on request unless, in the circumstances and on balance,
providing that access would
be contrary to the public
1.207 Schedule 7, item 14, proposed subsection 11B(3A) seeks to introduce new
‘factors against giving access’ that would
weigh against disclosure
in the public interest of documents disclosing ‘deliberative processes of
government.’ ‘Deliberative
processes of government’ are
broadly defined in the FOI Act to relate to matters of opinion, advice or
recommendation that
are obtained, consulted or deliberated for the purpose of
the functions of an agency, minister or
Government.
1.208 The factors weighing against giving access to such documents would
require decision-makers to consider whether giving access
to the document would
or could reasonably be expected to:
• prejudice the frank or timely discussion of matters or exchange of
opinions between participants in deliberative processes
of government for the
purposes of consultation or deliberation in the course of, or for the purposes
of, those processes.
• prejudice the frank or timely provision of advice to or by an agency
or minister, or the consideration of that advice after
it is provided.
• prejudice the orderly and effective conduct of a government
decision-making process.
1.209 The explanatory memorandum states:
This is intended to provide greater legislative clarity around relevant
public interest considerations that weigh against disclosure
of deliberative
matter for the purposes of section 47C, so that decision makers are able to take
into account all relevant factors,
and attribute to those factors appropriate
weight in the circumstances.
In general terms, the exemption recognises that governments need to be able
to run internal operations effectively and have time to
consider advice and
options provided by the Public Service in the course of considering options or
making a decision.
The 2013 Hawke Review noted that the absence of a clear indication of harm
that the exception is designed to protect results in the
exemption being subject
to differing interpretations and difficult to apply. A number of other reviews
also note the importance of
a strong deliberative processes exemption for the
effective operation of Government (Shergold Review 2015, Thodey Review 2019 and
the APS Integrity Taskforce Report 2023). The proposed amendments seek to ensure
an appropriate balance in weighing the public interest
in favour of access, such
as Australians being informed of the processes of their government and its
agencies on the one hand, against
the public interest against access, such as
prejudice to the effective working of government and its agencies on the
1.210 The committee notes the broad and discretionary nature of the factors
included in proposed subsection 11B(3A), which are open
to interpretation. In
this manner, the explanatory memorandum contemplates various considerations that
may weigh against disclosure
of deliberative matter. These include the informal
or formal status of the information, any anticipated impacts of disclosure on
informal working relationships or how future, similar decisions may be made,
what stage a related policy development process is at
(e.g. early and
exploratory), and the impact of the release of deliberative material at the
1.211 In particular, in relation to ‘prejudice (to) the orderly and
effective conduct of a government decision-making process’
in proposed
paragraph 11B(3A)(c), the explanatory memorandum states:
Examples of prejudice may be that disclosure would interfere with or distract
decision-makers from the process in some way, or undermine
the decision
1.212 In doing so, this provision appears to substantially extend the already
wide ambit of the conditional exemption, thereby conferring
greater discretion
on decision-makers to withhold information sought by applicants. The committee
is accordingly concerned the approach
taken in the bill undermines the
pro-disclosure and accountability rationales underpinning the FOI Act, without
compelling or evidence-based
justification in the explanatory memorandum of why
it is necessary and appropriate to do so.
Dealing with applications when a minister ceases office
1.213 The bill seeks to establish a framework for managing FOI requests to
access information or applications to annotate or correct
personal records made
to a responsible minister that have not been decided when the minister later
ceases to hold their relevant
A minister is
understood to cease office when they leave office due to a general election,
they change portfolios after a reshuffle
of the ministry, or when they resign
from office.
1.214 Under the proposed new framework, an outgoing minister may –
where they reasonably believe they will cease to hold the
relevant office
– elect to transfer requests seeking access to information to another
minister or the responsible
Otherwise, FOI requests
that they have received are automatically forwarded to a relevant
Applications to
annotate or correct personal records made to a responsible minister, including
those made prior to the commencement
of these amendments, will be taken to have
lapsed on the minister ceasing
1.215 The explanatory memorandum indicates that the amendments:
... respond to the decision of the Full Court of the Federal Court in
Attorney-General (Cth) v Patrick
[2024] FCFAC 126 which presents complex
issues in respect of requests to ministers and the established convention that
deliberative
documents of a previous government are not provided to an incoming
government.
1.216 In the decision of
Attorney-General v
the Federal Court
held that the point when a document is ‘an official document of a
minister’ is determined at the time
the request to access the document is
made (and only at that time).
More importantly, the court recognised an implied duty on agencies and ministers
to not frustrate the right of the applicant to have
their request determined,
including on review or
1.217 The committee considers that the proposed approach to dealing with
applications when a minister ceases office may undermine
the pro-disclosure,
accountability and democratic participation rationales underpinning the FOI Act,
which are discussed above. In
this regard, the explanatory memorandum wholly
relies on the convention that deliberative documents of a previous government
not provided to an incoming government by way of justification. The
committee notes that the claimed convention alone does not provide
justification; rather, the committee expects the explanatory memorandum would
set out and evaluate the purpose and benefits
of the convention relative to the
rationales underpinning an effective FOI regime.
1.218 Further, the committee notes that this justification does not appear
to extend to situations in which a minister ceases office
due to their
resignation or a change in their ministerial responsibilities. It is therefore
unclear to the committee whether the
explanatory memorandum’s reliance on
this convention is sufficient with respect to the broader range of scenarios in
it may operate (e.g. reshuffles or resignation).
1.219 In light of the above, the committee requests the minister’s
detailed advice as to:
why the amendments in Schedule 1, item 3, which introduce the
legislative objects of ‘essential private interests’ and
proper and effective operation of government’ into the general objects
clause of the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
, are appropriate.
why the amendments in Schedule 7, item 14, which relate to
inserting ‘factors against giving access’ to documents that
disclose deliberative processes of government, are appropriate.
why the amendments in Schedule 8, items 1 to 3, which relate to a
framework for handling requests or applications made to a minister
who ceases to
hold office, are appropriate.
1.220 The committee’s scrutiny of the minister’s response
would be assisted if the response addressed the rationales for
information legislation set out above and whether any consideration has been
given to the impact of the provisions identified
above on an individual’s
ability to consider and participate in merits and judicial review
1.221 The bill seeks to introduce processes governing an agency or
minister’s discretion to refuse to deal with, or continue
dealing with, a
request for documents when satisfied that the request is frivolous, vexatious,
likely to cause harm to another person,
or is otherwise an abuse of
In such circumstances,
the agency or minister is required to notify the applicant as soon practicable,
subject to minor exceptions.
1.222 The notice must specify, as reasons for the decision, one or more
matters in proposed subsection
that is, that the
request is vexatious or frivolous; is harassing or intimidating; or is otherwise
an abuse of process. Proposed
subsection 15AD(5) would disapply section 26 of
the FOI Act, which obliges a decision-maker to provide written reasons for
including findings on material questions of fact, with respect to
refusals under the new section.
1.223 The explanatory memorandum states:
Subsection 15AD(5) provides that a notice under section 26 does not apply to
a decision to refuse to deal with, or continue to deal
with, the request. This
is because the particulars of a notice to refuse to deal with a request are
dealt with in subsection
1.224 Procedural fairness is a fundamental common law principle. Australian
courts have insisted that a right to a fair and unbiased
hearing will be implied
into statutory powers which are apt to affect individual interests and rights
unless the Parliament has excluded
this inference with plain words of necessary
intendment.
The courts have
justified this approach in part by the importance of procedural fairness to
ensure that relevant information is available
to decision-makers. However, these
principles are also recognised as acknowledging the human dignity of those who
are subject to
the law. The committee notes the right to a fair hearing includes
the right of a person to test any evidence upon which any allegations
1.225 The committee recognises that proposed subsection 15AD(3) contemplates
a notice to affected applicants, including details of
their right to seek review
by the Information Commissioner following a refusal decision. While this
indicates an intention to provide
access to review, it appears that this notice
would only need to specify the relevant ground for refusal. By contrast,
proposed section
15AD would not require that a notice include the findings on
material questions of fact, material supporting those findings, or the
reasons for finding that an applicant’s request was vexatious, frivolous,
harassing, intimidating, or otherwise an
abuse of process. The committee is
accordingly concerned that common law principles of procedural fairness may be
unduly restricted.
Further, the committee’s concern is heightened in
circumstances where the absence of a contemporaneous record of reasons may
an applicant’s ability to meaningfully assess whether to pursue external
review of a refusal decision.
1.226 Where a bill limits the right to procedural fairness, the committee
expects that the explanatory memorandum to the bill will
address the nature and
scope of the exclusion or limitation and why it is considered necessary and
appropriate to restrict a person’s
right to procedural fairness. In this
instance, the explanatory memorandum does not give meaningful consideration to
these matters,
nor does it provide justification of the narrower scope of
information that must be provided within notices under proposed section
relative to that required by existing section 26 of the FOI Act.
1.227 Accordingly, the committee requests the minister’s advice as
to why a notice of a refusal decision under proposed subsection
15AD(3) does not
require the minister or agency to state the findings on material questions of
fact, the material on which such findings
were based, and the reasons for the
refusal decision.
Broad delegation of administrative
1.228 The bill also seeks to amend
Information Commissioner Act 2010
, which authorises the Information
Commissioner to delegate any of their functions or powers to all members of
staff in the Office
of the Australian Information Commissioner.
Subsection 25(1)
provides a list of functions and powers that the Information Commissioner must
delegate to all members of staff.
1.229 Additionally,
subsection 25(2)
provides a list of functions that the
Information Commissioner may only delegate to Senior Executive Service (SES)
officers. Paragraph
25(2)(b) grants the Information Commissioner a discretion to
not investigate complaints about FOI requests received under section
FOI Act; this being one such function that may only be delegated to SES
1.230 The bill seeks to repeal paragraph
which would allow the
Information Commissioner to delegate to any member of staff their discretion to
not investigate FOI complaints,
in accordance with the chapeau of subsection
1.231 The committee has consistently drawn attention
to legislation that allows the delegation of administrative powers to a
large class of persons, with little or no specificity as to their
qualifications or attributes. Generally, the committee prefers
to see a limit
set either on the scope of powers that might be delegated, or on the categories
of people to whom those powers might
be delegated. The committee's preference is
that delegates be confined to the holders of nominated offices or to members of
Executive Service. Where broad delegations are provided for, the
committee considers that an explanation as to why these are considered
and any relevant safeguards that are in place, should be included in the
explanatory memorandum.
1.232 The explanatory memorandum states:
This amendment would support the OAIC’s management of its workload and
minimise the risk of a backlog of complaints made to
the OAIC building up over
time. This would support applicants receiving an outcome in relation to
complaints in a more timely manner.
It is expected that complex or significant complaints would still be handled
by the Information Commissioner or SES employees, and
that delegation below
those levels is intended to deal with straight-forward or low-complexity
matters. It is expected that regard
would also be given to the experience and
training of the employee. Where delegation below the SES-level occurs, it is
intended that
staff would have regard to the Information Commissioner’s
FOI Guidelines and the OAIC’s Freedom of information regulatory
policy (as updated), and any other relevant internal guidance
1.233 The committee acknowledges the importance of resolving administrative
complaints in a timely manner, and the need for administrative
efficiency to do
so. However, the committee has generally not accepted a desire for
administrative flexibility as a sufficient justification
for allowing a broad
delegation of administrative powers to officials at any level. In this regard,
the committee considers that
there is limited guidance on the face of the bill
or in the explanatory memorandum about relevant considerations that the
Information
Commissioner ought to consider before delegating such powers.
1.234 The committee considers that where a bill provides for the delegation
of a statutory power to officials below SES level, any
exercise of this
delegation must be attended by relevant safeguards. The committee acknowledges
the explanatory memorandum’s
intention that the complexity of a complaint
may influence the level of officer who will be delegated authority to a
The committee queries
whether the bill could be amended to provide high level guidance on this matter,
such as an express obligation
that the Information Commissioner consider
delegation only to officers with appropriate training, qualifications, skills
and experience.
1.235 The committee also acknowledges the intention for staff below the SES
Level to have regard to the Information Commissioner’s
information guidelines
the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner’s
information regulatory action
To the extent that
such guidelines and policies operate as safeguards where there is a broad
delegation beyond the SES level, the
committee queries whether such
considerations could be provided for as high level guidance in the bill.
1.236 In light of the above, the committee requests the minister’s
advice as to whether the bill may be amended to provide high-level
guidance as
requiring the Information Commissioner to be satisfied that
persons performing delegated functions and exercising delegated powers
training, qualifications, skills and experience appropriate to the function or
power delegated; and
the safeguards that are intended to apply to members of staff
below the SES level who are performing delegated functions and exercising
delegated powers.
Availability of merits review
Charges/fees/levies in delegated
legislation
1.237 Schedule 6, item 6, proposed subsection 93C(1) would provide the power
for regulations to make provision for the payment of
fees by an applicant who
requests to access a document or applies for an internal review or an external
review by the Information
Commissioner of a decision made by an agency or
1.238 Schedule 6, item 6, proposed subsection 93C(2) would further provide
that such regulations may specify the amount of, or method
for working out the
amount of, the fee; the circumstances when an applicant may be exempt from
paying the fee; and provide for remissions,
refund or waiver of the fees. The
regulations may not prescribe a fee for a request to the extent that the
applicant is seeking access
to a document containing personal information about
The committee notes that
proposed subsections 93C(1) and 93C(2) seek to enable delegated legislation to
prescribe a fee and the circumstances
surrounding the payment of that fee.
1.239 The committee has longstanding scrutiny concerns regarding provisions
which allow fees to be calculated within delegated legislation
where the bill
contains no cap on the maximum fee amount, or any information or guidance as to
how the fee will be calculated. The
committee expects that any proposal to
include fees within delegated legislation should be justified within the
explanatory materials
for the bill.
1.240 While the explanatory memorandum provides some guidance about the
matters that may be prescribed in relation to an application
fee, neither the
bill nor the explanatory memorandum provide satisfactory guidance as to how fee
amounts might be determined. Indeed,
such matters are expressly intended to be
left to any regulations that will be
1.241 The committee understands it may be possible to explicitly state on the
face of the bill that the amount of any prescribed fee
would be based on an
amount required for cost
or the maximum limit
on the fee that may be imposed It may also be possible for a bill to determine
the formula by which the fee
amount would be calculated or, in the case of
indexation, to include the method of calculating indexation on the face of the
1.242 Further, the committee notes the intention that a decision made in
relation to the waiver or remission of a fee for financial
hardship reasons
would not be subject to merits review. The explanatory memorandum states
This is justified on the basis that it is anticipated that the cost of merits
review would significantly outweigh the cost of fees
and therefore cannot be
justified on an economic
1.243 The committee expects that where merits review is to be excluded for an
administrative decision, the explanatory memorandum
should clearly justify the
characteristics of the relevant decision which justifies the omission of merits
review, by reference to
the Administrative Review Council guide,
decisions should be subject to merits
The committee
considers that the explanatory memorandum could be improved by further
justification in this regard.
1.244 The committee accordingly requests the minister’s detailed
advice as to:
whether the bill or explanatory memorandum could be amended to
include greater guidance about how the fee amount (and the method of
indexation,
if any) is to be calculated or determined; and
whether an addendum to the explanatory memorandum identifying the
characteristics of the decision to not waive or remit a fee for
hardship that make the decision unsuitable for merits review be tabled in the
Parliament. The committee’s consideration
of this issue would be assisted
if the response considers such characteristics by reference to the
Administrative Review Council’s
guidance document,
What decisions
should be subject to merits review?
This entry can be cited as:
Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills, Freedom of Information
Amendment Bill 2025,
Scrutiny Digest 6 of 2025
; [2025] AUSStaCSBSD
Schedule 1, item 3.
Schedule 2, item 41.
Schedule 3, items 10 and
Schedule 6, item 6.
Schedule 7, items
Schedule 7, item 14.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Australian Information
Commissioner Act 2010
Freedom of Information Amendment (Reform)
Freedom of Information
Amendment (Reform) Act 2010
, explanatory memorandum, p. 1.
Australian Government,
Review of the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Australian Information
Commissioner Act 2010
, 1 July 2013.
Australian Government,
Review of the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Australian Information
Commissioner Act 2010
, 1 July 2013, p. 13.
Senate Standing Committee
on Constitutional and Legal Affairs Legislation Committee,
Information Bill 1979, and aspects of the Archives Bill 1978
Senate Standing Committee
on Constitutional and Legal Affairs Legislation Committee,
Information Bill 1979, and aspects of the Archives Bill 1978
Senate Standing Committee
on Constitutional and Legal Affairs Legislation Committee,
Information Bill 1979, and aspects of the Archives Bill 1978
Standing Committee on
Constitutional and Legal Affairs Legislation Committee,
Information Bill 1979, and aspects of the Archives Bill 1978
Monis v The Queen
[2013] HCA 4
(2013) 249 CLR 92
, 128 [60]; and
Australian Capital Television v
Commonwealth
(1992) 177 CLR 106
, 108 (per Mason CJ).
Various provisions and
particularly Schedule 1, item 3; schedule 7, item 14; schedule 8, items
1–3. The committee draws senators’
attention to these provisions
pursuant to Senate standing order 24(1)(a)(i) and (iii).
Acts Interpretation
section 15AA.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Information Act 1982
existing paragraphs 3(2)(a) and (b) which refer
to ‘increasing public participation in Government processes, with a view
promoting better-informed decision-making’ and ‘increasing
scrutiny, discussion, comment and review of Government’s
activities.’
Freedom of Information
subsection 11A(5).
Freedom of Information
subsection 47C(1).
Explanatory memorandum,
Explanatory memorandum,
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Schedule 8, items 1, 2 and
3, proposed
sections 6D
, 16B and 51CA.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Schedule 8, item 2,
proposed subsection 16B(1).
Schedule 8, item 2,
proposed subsection 16B(2).
Schedule 8, item 3,
proposed subsection 51CA.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Attorney-General v
[2024] FCAFC 126.
Attorney-General v
[2024] FCAFC 126
, [48] and [56].
Attorney-General v
[2024] FCAFC 126
Schedule 2, item 41,
proposed section 15AD. The committee draws senators’ attention to this
provision pursuant to Senate standing
order 24(1)(a)(iii).
Schedule 2, item 41,
proposed subsection 15AD(1).
Schedule 2, item 41,
proposed subsections 15AD(2) and 15AD(4).
Schedule 2, item 41,
proposed paragraph 15AD(3)(a).
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
159 CLR 550
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZSSJ
(2016) 259 CLR 180.
Schedule 5, item 22. The
committee draws senators’ attention to this provision pursuant to Senate
standing order 24(1)(a)(ii).
Schedule 5, item 22.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Office of the Australian
Information Commissioner,
of information guidelines
, October 2025 (accessed 10 October 2025).
Office of the Australian
Information Commissioner,
of information regulatory action policy
, 18 May 2020 (accessed 10 October
Schedule 6, item 6,
proposed subsections 93C(1)–93C(2). The committee draws senators’
attention to these provisions
pursuant to Senate standing order 24(1)(a)(iii)
Schedule 6, item 6,
proposed subsection 93C(3).
Schedule 6, item 6,
proposed paragraph 93C(2)(a).
See, for example,
subsection 32(4)
Hazardous Waste (Regulation of Exports and Imports)
which provides that: 'The amount or rate of a fee must be
reasonably related to the expenses incurred or to be incurred by the
Commonwealth
in relation to the application or notice to which it relates, and
must not be such as to amount to taxation.'
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Administrative Review
decisions should be subject to merit review?
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (695 KB)
PDF format (159 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter