URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/ACTLAStaCEP/2020/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:05:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ACT Legislative Assembly Standing Committee on Environment and Transport and City Services ( Parliament) --- "Annual and Financial Report 2018-2019" [2020] ACTLAStaCEP 4 (26 March 2020)
Report on Annual and Financial Reports 2018-2019
The Committee
Committee Membership
Current Members
Previous Members
Secretariat
Resolution of appointment
Terms of reference
Recommendations
1 Introduction
Conduct of the inquiry
Structure of the report
Acknowledgements
2 Annual reporting requirements
Timing and presentation of reports
3 Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate
Introduction
Environment Protection Authority
Complaints relating to EPA matters
Committee comment
Sport and Recreation
4 Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate
Environment
ACT Heritage Council
Climate Change and Sustainability
Community Zero Emissions grants
Committee comment
Car-free initiatives
Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment
Climate Change Action Toolkit
Committee comment
5 Transport Canberra and City Services Directorate
City Services
Sportsgrounds and neighbourhood ovals
Billboard compliance
Waste and Recycling
Container Deposit Scheme
Recommended recycling habits
Committee comment
Roads and infrastructure
Traffic light timers
Veterinary Practitioners Board and Animal Welfare Authority
Transport Canberra
Changes to Network19
Light Rail Stage 2
Committee comment
Electric buses
Ticketing system
Weekend bus service and bus driver recruitment
Ticket vending machines
City public transportation interchange
Committee comment
ACT Public Cemeteries Authority
Cost and revenue from the sale of different products and services
6 Conclusion
Appendix A - Witnesses
Wednesday 13 November 2019
Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate (Environment Protection Authority)
Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate (Climate Change and Sustainability)
Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate (Environment and Heritage)
Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment
Friday 15 November 2019
Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate; and Transport Canberra and City Services (Sport and Recreation)
Transport Canberra and City Services
Appendix B – Questions taken on Notice/
Questions on Notice
Report on Annual and Financial Reports 2018-2019
Standing Committee on Environment and Transport and City
Current Members
Ms Tara Cheyne MLA Chair
Miss Candice Burch MLA Member (from 15 Feb 2018) and Deputy Chair
(from 28 Feb 2018)
Mr James Milligan MLA Member (from 20 September 2018)
Previous Members
Ms Suzanne Orr Chair (until 23 August 2019)
Mr Steve Doszpot MLA Deputy Chair (until 25 November 2017)
Mr Mark Parton MLA Member (until 15 February 2018)
Ms Tara Cheyne MLA Member (until 20 Sep 2018)
Ms Nicole Lawder MLA Member (from 15 February 2018 to 20 September
Ms Suzanne Orr MLA Chair (until 23 Aug 2019)
Secretariat
Danton Leary Committee Secretary
Lydia Chung Administration
Michelle Atkins Administration
Information
Telephone 02 6205 0124
Post GPO Box 1020, CANBERRA ACT 2601
LACommitteeETCS@parliament.act.gov.au
www.parliament.act.gov.au
of appointment
Legislative Assembly for the ACT (the Assembly) agreed by resolution on 13
December 2016 to establish legislative and general
purpose standing committees
to inquire into and report on matters referred to them by the Assembly or
matters that are considered
by the committees to be of concern to the community,
A Standing Committee on Environment and Transport and City Services to examine
matters related to city and transport services, public
infrastructure, heritage,
and sport and recreation and matters related to all aspects of climate change
policy and programs, water
and energy policy and programs, provision of water
and energy services, conservation, environment and ecological
sustainability.
Terms of reference
At its meeting on Thursday, 24 October 2019, the Legislative Assembly passed
the following resolution:
1) The annual and financial reports for the financial year 2018-2019 and for
the calendar year 2018 presented to the Assembly pursuant
Reports (Government Agencies) Act 2004
stand referred to the standing
committees, on presentation, in accordance with the schedule below;
2) The annual report of ACT Policing stands referred to the Standing
Committee on Justice and Community Safety;
3) Notwithstanding standing order 229, only one standing committee may meet
for the consideration of the inquiry into the calendar
years 2018 and financial
year 2018-2019 annual and financial reports at any given time;
4) Standing committees are to report to the Assembly on financial year
reports by the last sitting day in March 2020, and on calendar
year reports for
2018 by the last sitting day in March 2020; and
5) The foregoing provisions of this resolution have effect notwithstanding
anything contained in the standing
Annual Report (in alphabetical order)
Reporting areas
Ministerial Portfolio(s)
Standing Committee
Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate
Environment Protection Authority
Minister for the Environment and Heritage
Environment and Transport and City Services
Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate
Sport and Recreation
Minister for Sport and Recreation
Environment and Transport and City Services
Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate
Conservator of Flora and Fauna
Minister for the Environment and Heritage
Environment and Transport and City Services
Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate
ACT Heritage Council
Minister for the Environment and Heritage
Environment and Transport and City Services
Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment
Minister for Climate Change and Sustainability
Environment and Transport and City Services
Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate
Energy Efficiency (Cost of Living) Improvement Administrator
Minister for Climate Change and Sustainability
Environment and Transport and City Services
Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate
Climate Change Council
Minister for Climate Change and Sustainability
Environment and Transport and City Services
Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate
Environment
Minister for the Environment and Heritage
Environment and Transport and City Services
Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate
Conservation and Land Management
Minister for the Environment and Heritage
Environment and Transport and City Services
Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate
Minister for the Environment and Heritage
Environment and Transport and City Services
Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate
Climate Change and Sustainability
Minister for Climate Change and Sustainability
Environment and Transport and City Services
Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate
Land Strategy
Minister or Planning and Land Management
Environment and Transport and City Services
Transport Canberra and City Services Directorate
ACT Public Cemeteries Authority
Minister for City Services
Environment and Transport and City Services
Transport Canberra and City Services Directorate
ACT Veterinary Practitioners Board
Minister for City Services
Environment and Transport and City Services
Transport Canberra and City Services Directorate
Animal Welfare Authority
Minister for City Services
Environment and Transport and City Services
Transport Canberra and City Services Directorate
Transport Canberra
Minister for Transport
Environment and Transport and City Services
Transport Canberra and City Services Directorate
City Services
Minister for City Services
Environment and Transport and City Services
Transport Canberra and City Services Directorate
Roads and Infrastructure
Minister for Roads and Active Travel
Environment and Transport and City Services
Transport Canberra and City Services Directorate
Minister for City Services
Environment and Transport and City Services
Transport Canberra and City Services Directorate
Waste and Recycling
Minister for Recycling and Waste Reduction
Environment and Transport and City Services
Transport Canberra and City Services Directorate
City Maintenance and Services
Minister for City Services
Environment and Transport and City Services
Transport Canberra and City Services Directorate
Sports Grounds
Minister for Sport and Recreation
Environment and Transport and City Services
Transport Canberra and City Services Directorate
Capital Linen Service
Minister for City Services
Environment and Transport and City Services
Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate
Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment
Environment Protection Authority
Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate
Information and Communication Technology
Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment
Transport Canberra and City Services
Ticket Vending Machine
Table of Contents
Recommendations
1 Introduction
1.1 On 24 October 2019, the Assembly referred the annual and financial
reports for the financial year 2018-19 and for the calendar
year 2018 to
Assembly committees for inquiry and report by the last sitting day in March
1.2 The following annual reports, or sections of annual reports, were
referred to the Standing Committee on Environment and Transport
Services (the Committee):
 Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate
(CMTEDD) – Environment Protection Authority; Sport and
Recreation;
 Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate
(EPSDD) – Conservator of Flora and Fauna; ACT Heritage
Council; Energy
Efficiency (Cost of Living) Improvement Administrator; Climate Change Council;
Environment; Conservation and Land
Management; Heritage; Climate Change and
Sustainability;
 Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment;
 Transport Canberra and City Services Directorate (TCCS) – ACT
Public Cemeteries Authority; ACT Veterinary Practitioners
Board; Animal Welfare
Authority; Transport Canberra; City Services; Roads and Infrastructure;
Libraries; Waste and Recycling; City
Maintenance and Services; Sports Grounds;
Capital Linen Service.
Conduct of the inquiry
1.3 The Committee held two public hearings on 13 and 15 November 2019. At
these hearings, the Committee heard evidence from 37 witnesses.
Full details of
witnesses who appeared are listed in Appendix A of this report. Transcripts
from day one and day two of the hearings
are available on the Assembly
1.4 A total of 47 questions were taken on notice during the public hearings
and 33 questions were placed on notice after the hearings.
A list of the
questions is provided in Appendix B of this report. Answers to the questions
are available on the inquiry
Structure of the report
1.5 This report presents a summary of the Committee’s inquiry into the
annual reports listed in paragraph 1.2. In developing
this report, the
Committee has primarily focused on the issues that were raised at public
hearings although some additional material
has been drawn from annual report
1.6 The structure of the reports is as follows:
 Chapter 1: Introduction;
 Chapter 2: Annual reporting requirements;
 Chapter 3: Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development
Directorate;
 Chapter 4: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development
Directorate, and the Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability
Environment; and
 Chapter 5: Transport Canberra and City Services Directorate.
Acknowledgements
1.7 The Committee thanks relevant ACT Government Ministers and accompanying
Directorate officials for providing their time and expertise
as witnesses at its
Annual and Financial Reports hearings.
2 Annual reporting
requirements
Annual Reports (Government Agencies) Act 2004
framework for annual reporting across the ACT public sector. In accordance with
Annual Reports (Government Agencies) Act 2004
, the Annual Reports
Directions (the Directions) are issued annually to outline agency reporting
requirements.
2.2 As specified in the Directions, annual reports are ‘reports from
agency heads to their responsible Minister, the Legislative
Assembly and the
public that provide a detailed description of the agency’s activities
during a reporting year’. Annual
reports enable agencies to provide an
account of their performance, through Ministers, to the Legislative Assembly and
2.3 The Directions state that an effective annual report will:
 provide clear information about the reporting entity’s
purpose, priorities, outputs and achievements;
 focus on results and outcomes - communicate the success or
shortfalls of the reporting entity’s activities in pursuing
objectives in the reporting year, while accounting for the resources used in the
process and explaining changes in performance
 discuss results against expectations - provide sufficient
information and analysis for the Legislative Assembly and community
fully informed judgment on the reporting entity’s performance;
 clearly identify any changes to structures or functions of the
reporting entity during the reporting year;
 report on the reporting entity’s financial and operational
performance and clearly link this with budgeted priorities
and financial
projections as set out in annual Budget Estimate Papers and the entity Statement
of Intent and Corporate Plan;
 provide performance information that is complete and informative,
linking costs and results to provide evidence of value
 discuss risks and environmental factors affecting the reporting
entity’s ability to achieve objectives including any
strategies employed
to manage these factors, and forecast future needs and expectations;
 recognise the diverse needs and backgrounds of stakeholder groups
and present information in a manner that is useful to the
maximum number of
users while maintaining a suitable level of detail; and
 comply with legislative reporting requirements including the
Annual Reports (Government Agencies) Act 2004
and the Annual Report
Directions.
2.4 Annual reports are public documents and available for use by
stakeholders, including educational and research institutions, and
the broader
community. They provide a valuable tool for public reporting, accountability
and transparency.
Timing and presentation of
2.5 The Directions for 2019 required annual reports to be presented to the
responsible Minister before the close of business on 11
October 2019. Unless an
extension of time was granted under
of the Act, annual reports were
to be given to the Speaker’s office by the close of business on 11 October
3 Chief Minister, Treasury
and Economic Development Directorate
Introduction
3.1 The Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate
(CMTEDD), as a central agency in the ACT public sector, provides
advice and support to the Chief Minister, Ministers and Cabinet on policy,
economic and financial matters, service delivery,
whole-of-government issues,
and intergovernmental relations. In 2018-19 the Directorate was responsible
 advising the Chief Minister, the Directorate’s Ministers and
the Cabinet;
 ACT public sector employment legislation and conditions, employment,
industrial relations and human resource management;
 ACT Government collaboration with business, education institutions
and industry partners;
 providing financial and economic advice to the ACT Government;
 providing financial, information and communication technology (ICT),
human resources and procurement services to the ACT
Government;
 licensing and regulatory services through Access Canberra;
 ACT Government communications with the ACT
3.2 The Committee held a public hearing with Mr Mick Gentleman MLA, Minister
for Environment and Heritage, on 13 November 2019 to
examine the following areas
of the CMTEDD annual report for 2018-19: the annexed report of the Environment
Protection Authority and
areas of Access Canberra related to environmental
protection.
3.3 The Committee held a public hearing with Ms Yvette Berry MLA, Minister
for Sport and Recreation, on 15 November 2019 to examine
the Sports and
Recreation area of the CMTEDD annual report for 2018-19.
3.4 Other areas of the CMTEDD annual report were considered by other
committees.
Environment Protection
3.5 The Environment Protection Authority (the Authority) is:
...a statutory public servant position established by the
Environment Protection
. It is currently assigned to the Senior Director of the Environment
Protection Authority within Access Canberra. The Authority is
supported by the
Office of the Environment Protection Authority (also referred to as the EPA)
within Access Canberra, to carry out
the hearing on 13 November 2019, the Committee discussed the following topics
relating to the EPA:
 Complaints relating to EPA
 Environmental
authorisations;
 Light emissions at McKellar sporting
 Controlled waste
 Composting
regulations;
 Development applications referred to the
 Contaminated
Complaints relating to EPA matters
3.7 The Committee noted that Access Canberra had received 2,844 complaints
relating to EPA matters in 2018-19 and that 80 per cent
of those were related to
noise. The Committee asked for more detail on the nature of these noise
complaints.
3.8 Ms Narelle Sargent, Senior Director, Environment Protection, Access
Canberra, explained that, when the noise-related complaints
were broken down,
’51 per cent were amplified music, 22 per cent were
construction—building and construction sites—six
per cent were air
conditions, heaters and fans, six per cent were mechanical plants and equipment,
five per cent vehicles, four per
cent were people, three per cent were gym
equipment, two per cent were alarms, and one per cent was garden
3.9 The Committee asked for a breakdown of the construction-related noise
complaints and were provided the following information on
In 2018-2019 there were 496 complaints recorded by Access Canberra about
construction noise of which:
• 338 complaints alleged the construction noise occurred out of hours;
• 78 complaints concerned noise from construction work occurring during
permitted times; and
• 80 complaints had insufficient information about the time of the noise
to determine if the complaint was actually after
Committee asked who determines whether a breach has occurred in response to
noise complaints and were told that this was
the Environment Protection
Authority. Ms Sargent explained that the EPA must ‘take a noise reading
for 10 minutes to determine
what the dominant noise is’. By contrast, she
explained that ‘ACT Policing under the Crimes Act can just determine that
the noise being emitted is
offensive’.
3.11 Ms Sargent told the Committee about the circumstances in which the EPA
will attend noise complaints to take readings:
When they phone the centre, if it is a first complaint, we generally do not
attend. If it is a second complaint and it is to do with
non-environmental
nuisance matters, we attend. It also depends upon how many complaints we have
received and whether the officer
is available. It is the same with the policing
as well: if we need back-up from police, whether they are actually available.
it is based on risk and harm. If they are calling about an incident, if it
is some sort of immediate environmental threat like a
pollution incident, we
basically go straightaway. But when it is a complaint, that depends on how many
times the resident has complained.
Sometimes it will depend upon the stress and
the circumstances as
Committee noted that out of the 2,844 complaints received by Access Canberra
just seven enforcement actions occurred. Ms
Sargent explained that this was an
‘increase of 40 per cent in enforcement actions. That reflects the fact
that we have been
actively out there looking at things such as construction
noise and that type of
3.13 The Committee sought information on water pollution-related complaints.
Ms Sargent clarified that ‘[a]nything to do with
water, and water
pollution, would generally be classed as an incident, not a complaint. They are
actually notifying us that it has
On notice, the
Directorate informed the Committee it had ‘received 75 pollution
complaints/incidents, which were recorded into
three categories: drains, lakes
and sewerage’. They provided the following breakdown:
• 49 complaints (approx. 65 per cent) related to drains;
• 18 complaints (approx. 24 per cent) related to lakes; and
• 8 complaints (approx. 11 per cent) related to
3.14 The Committee noted a case of amplified music noise pollution in
Charnwood where an infringement notice was issued last financial
year’s Annual Report lists a prosecution for an amplified music noise
pollution offence in Charnwood.
The Committee sought clarification as to whether this persecution relates to the
infringement notice from the previous year. Ms Sargent
replied that
‘[y]es, that is my understanding. It carried across the reporting
Committee comment
3.15 The Committee notes that EPA recording of complaints could be clearer,
to specify how many complaints were, in fact, related
to legitimate incidents
and whether a complaint led to an infringement notice, an Environmental
Protection Order, or prosecution,
and how many were dismissed.
3.16 The Committee also believes that EPA can provide further clarity in the
reporting of cases where an infringement notice from
one financial year results
in a persecution in the following reporting period.
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government includes a breakdown of complaints data in its Chief Minister,
Treasury and Economic
Development Directorate annual report to demonstrate how
many complaints led to infringement notices, Environmental Protection Orders
prosecutions for breaches of the
Environment Protection Act 1997
many were dismissed.
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government includes information in its Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic
Development Directorate
annual report that specifies whether a noise complaint
prosecution recorded in one financial year stems from an infringement notice
issued in the previous financial year, so it is clear the data is in relation to
an ongoing matter that has crossed reporting periods.
Sport and Recreation
3.19 CMTEDD, through Sport and Recreation, is responsible for the delivery of
the Government’s sport and active recreation policies,
including targeted
funding programs, training opportunities and sector development that supports
increased sport and active recreation
participation for the ACT community. Sport
and Recreation also supports local athletes to reach their potential through the
ACT Academy
of Sport, which manages the Territory’s support scheme for
elite sporting teams, and works with a range of stakeholders in
identifying and
progressing future facility
3.20 During the hearing on 15 November 2019, the Committee discussed the
following topics relating to Sports and Recreation. The discussion
sportsgrounds is presented in the TCCS chapter.
 Encouragement of women in
 Ice Rink Sports Study and Indoor Sports Feasibility
 Multipurpose indoor sporting
facilities;
 Elite Sports Funding
 Climate change and sports in the
 Sports and Recreation Grants
4 Environment, Planning and
Sustainable Development Directorate
4.1 The Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate (EPSDD)
manages a wide range of policies and programs relating
to planning, land
management and the environment and is responsible for ‘water, heritage,
parks and nature conservation, climate
change and energy’. The
Directorate, additionally, provides corporate and governance support for the
Suburban Land Agency and
the City Renewal
4.2 The Committee held a public hearing with Mr Mick Gentleman MLA, Minister
for Environment and Heritage on 13 November 2019 to examine
the following areas
of the EPSDD annual report for 2018-19:
 Environment and Heritage.
4.3 The Committee held a public hearing with Mr Shane Rattenbury MLA,
Minister for Climate Change and Sustainability on 13 November
2019 to examine
the following areas of the EPSDD annual report for 2018-19:
 Climate Change and Sustainability.
4.4 Other sections of the EPSDD annual report were considered by other
committees.
Environment
4.5 The Environment division of EPSDD helps protect the natural environment
(air, land, water and biodiversity) through policy, programs,
monitoring,
research and on-ground projects. To this end, the Directorate partners with a
range of stakeholders, including environmental
volunteers, rural landholders,
community groups and non-government and government
organisations.
4.6 The Directorate’s policy and program areas:
...cover water and catchment management, conservation research, environment
protection, nature conservation, natural resource management,
forestry, fire and
agriculture (including biosecurity), management and reintroduction of threatened
species and mitigation of threats
to people and
ACT Parks and Conservation Service, within the Environment division of EPSDD, is
responsible for the ‘[o]perational
management of the ACT’s parks,
reserves, pine plantations and areas of unleased public land, including
associated community
infrastructure’.
4.8 The Conservator of Flora and Fauna is ‘a statutory position
established by the
Nature Conservation Act 2014
, with additional
responsibilities under the
Planning and Development Act 2007
Fisheries Act
The position is
currently held by the Executive Group Manager of Environment within EPSDD. The
Conservator manages the nature reserve
system, protects and conserves threatened
species and ecological communities and administers a licensing system for the
taking, keeping,
selling, importing, exporting, disturbing, displaying and
killing of native plants and
4.9 During the hearing on 13 November 2019, the Committee discussed the
following topics relating to Environment:
 Swift parrot, golden sun moth, superb parrot and
 Listing of threatened
 Feral animals (deer, horses and
 Kangaroos;
 Water policy and catchment
management;
 Grasslands;
 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander traditional land management
 Fire management.
4.10 The Committee noted that Directorate callouts for kangaroo and car
collisions have increased in comparison to the previous year
and sought more
detail on this.
4.11 Mr Ian Walker, Executive Group Manager, Environment, informed the
Committee that: ‘[o]ver the past decade we have seen
an increase in
callouts to kangaroo and car collisions. And that has been a steady
4.12 Adding to this, Mr Justin Foley, Acting Executive Branch Manager, ACT
Parks and Conservation Service, told the Committee that
‘[w]e are seeing a
trend upward and we are seeing trends associated with seasonal
conditions’. He continued:
...in 2018 the drought started to kick in. We started to see impact on our
reserves: less feed, as your herbage is mass produced,
and movement, I guess,
from kangaroos out of the reserves and towards feed on roadsides and into the
You are seeing that reflected in the issue of wildlife on our roads. It is an
issue of pressure on us as an agency but one that we
are managing, but just
acknowledging that it requires a great deal of expertise from the
response to a question on whether the Directorate is modelling where they think
kangaroo numbers will have increased due to
drought conditions, Mr Foley
We are monitoring every incident, so we know where all incidents are occurring.
We are able to map where they are occurring and at
what times they are
occurring, so we are understanding what is happening on our roads.
You will find that there is a combination of geographical funnels that direct
kangaroos. It might be a creek line or it might be
a ridge that funnels
kangaroos to particular points. We have done work with TCCS to put fences in
along Tuggeranong Parkway, for
example. So we are seeing changes where kangaroos
Committee asked whether the Directorate could erect temporary signage in zones
with high incidents of kangaroo-car collisions.
Mr Foley replied that
‘[i]t is something we are discussing with Roads
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government considers installing temporary signage in areas where there is a high
number of collisions
between vehicles and kangaroos to warn motorists of the
increased wildlife presence within the city during times of drought.
ACT Heritage Council
4.16 The ACT Heritage Council is responsible for the heritage provisions of
Heritage Act 2004
and assistance in the conservation of the
ACT’s heritage assets to ensure their recognition, registration and
conservation.
ACT Heritage within EPSDD provides administrative and operational
support to the Council and its projects, and administers the annual
the ACT Heritage Grants Program, the annual Canberra and Regional Heritage
Festival and Capital Works projects as they
relate to heritage conservation
4.17 During the hearing on 13 November 2019, the Committee discussed the
following topics relating to heritage:
 Strategic work of ACT
 Heritage nomination
 Norwood Park;
 Heritage Emergency
 Registered Aboriginal
Organisations;
 Cultural Heritage Management
Climate Change and
Sustainability
4.18 The Climate Change and Sustainability Division of EPSDD is responsible
for developing and implementing policy to adapt to the
current and expected
effects of climate change and assisting all sectors (government, non-government,
business, community and households)
to reduce greenhouse gas
4.19 During the hearing on 13 November 2019, the Committee discussed the
following topics relating to climate change and sustainability:
 ACT Renewable Energy
 Big battery;
 Energy security in the
 Climate change and tree
 Next Generation Energy Storage
 Climate Change
 Community Zero Emissions
 Renewable Energy Innovation
initiatives;
 Carbon-neutral government
initiatives;
 Energy Efficiency Improvement
 Actsmart Sustainable Home Advice
Community Zero Emissions grants
4.20 The Committee asked about the nature of the types of projects that
receive Community Zero Emissions grants. Mr Geoffrey Rutledge,
Director-General, Sustainability and the Built Environment, informed the
Committee that:
What we wanted to see is tangible benefits to the ACT. Some were non-government
organisations: SEE-Change, the Conservation Council,
the City Farm. Some of them
were employer groups. The Christian school [Brindabella Christian College] were
successful. We were looking
for a bit of innovation, trying to get some
engagement beyond who we would normally engage with. One with which we got a
different audience was the Australian Dance Party, which released series
of videos that really hit the arts community. The grants
were found meritorious
for both the product that they were going to deliver and for how they could
influence people that we would
otherwise not assume would be on the climate
Rutledge added that:
We wanted to basically unlock community ideas. There are lots of people out
there who are very enthusiastic and have a great idea
but do not quite have the
capital to get started. The grants could be quite small. The maximum is $25,000
but if someone just came
along and said, “I need $5,000 and this is the
project,” and it seemed like a decent project, they would be in the
Committee queried whether the grantees were required to report back on the
outcomes and impact of their project. Mr Rutledge
replied that while there was
an acquittal process, ‘we do not go back, say, a year later and then
retest it’.
Committee comment
4.23 The Committee believes that there would be value in the ACT Government
tracking the results, outcomes and impact of Community
Zero Emissions grants
projects in order that successful initiatives can be promoted more
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends the ACT
Government considers revisiting Community Zero Emissions grant recipients 12
months after grants
are issued to track the outcome of the relevant projects and
consider further opportunities to promote these initiatives to the broader
Car-free initiatives
4.25 The Committee asked for more details on the possibility of car-free
days/initiatives, announced as part of the ACT Climate Change
4.26 Mr Shane Rattenbury MLA, Minister for Climate Change and Sustainability,
This is one of 98 actions in the strategy. It is certainly not intended to be
one of the main actions but it is one that we think
is a valuable one. It picks
up a globally recognised concept of car-free days, which is the idea of shutting
down a road or some
roads in an area, usually on a weekend, to enable the
community to reclaim that space as part of the public realm and to use it in
different ways to just having regularly lots of cars whizzing along
Minister assured the Committee ‘that the ACT government has never intended
to ban car use right across the city. The
ACT government has never intended to
close down the Tuggeranong Parkway or Northbourne Avenue at 8:30 on a Monday
morning. These
are not the sorts of things we are talking about. These are not
what other cities do’.
4.28 The Committee noted other locations around the world had embraced the
concept of car-free days/initiatives and asked whether
the government was
looking to draw from the examples of other cities. The Minister responded:
They certainly provide inspiration. Cities much bigger than Canberra, and you
have touched on a couple of them, do this. Cities that
have much greater
congestion than we do have done it. I would hope that this would be a community
partnership and, in many ways,
community led. From a government point of view,
we would be very open to people making suggestions to us for things they want to
Committee asked whether interested community organisations could be exempted
from fees to close off roads or be given access
to streamlined permissions
processes in order to encourage these types of events. The Minister replied that
‘[w]e have not
quite got to that level of detail, but given that
government wants these to happen—it is part of the climate
strategy—we
would need to think about what in-kind support we could
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends the ACT
Government considers incentives for community organisations and businesses to be
involved in temporary
car-free initiatives, such as granting permits for street
closures without an associated fee.
Office of the Commissioner
for Sustainability and the Environment
4.31 The Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment is an
independent statutory office holder established by the
Commissioner for
Sustainability and the Environment Act 1993
who is responsible to the
Legislative Assembly for the ACT through the Minister for Climate Change and
Sustainability. The Commissioner
undertakes the following legislative
 Produce ‘State of the Environment’ reports for the
 Investigate complaints about the management of the environment by
the Territory or a territory authority, and issues relating
to ecologically
sustainable development;
 Conduct investigations as directed by the Minister; and
 Initiate investigations into actions of an agency where those
actions would have a substantial impact on the environment
4.32 During the hearing on 13 November 2019, the Committee discussed the
following topics with the Commissioner:
 Threats to water
 Feral animals;
 State of the Environment
 Community
engagement;
 Use of Twitter;
 Ecological
 Climate Change Action
Climate Change Action Toolkit
4.33 The Committee asked about the practical steps that ACT residents and
organisations can take to reduce their impact on climate
4.34 The Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment, Professor Kate
Auty, mentioned a report recently published by the Office,
Heat, humanity and
the hockey stick: climate change and sport in
The Commissioner
The reason that we did this report was to try to encourage people to understand
that there were challenges, that there were things
they could do. We have had
extraordinary cut-through with that. There is a toolkit in it for clubs in the
community about what they
can do, and we have explored the ways in which we can
feed that into the public through the networks that we built while we were
putting the paper
Committee asked for further information on the ‘extraordinary
cut-through’ that the report had had. Ms Caitlin
Roy, Assistant Director,
Investigations, responded:
We have had contact from a number of stakeholders interstate about presenting
the material at climatathons, reproducing the content
for their own forums that
are coming up. SEA, the particular Victorian organisation which brings sporting
personalities together
to promote climate change principles, has really grabbed
the material and recirculated it. We have also had a lot of interest from
community and different sporting clubs who have reached out to us about
implementing the toolkit. That has come through me and
my contacts directly, but
that is an extension of the
Committee comment
4.36 The Committee sees value in testing the usefulness of the Climate Change
Action Toolkit developed by the Commissioner for Sustainability
Environment for the use of sporting groups. The Committee believes that the ACT
Government should share this toolkit with
a sample of sporting groups to
evaluate its usefulness and report these findings back to the Committee.
Recommendation 6
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government shares the Government’s Climate Change Action Toolkit with a
sample of sporting
groups to allow them to apply and evaluate its usefulness and
report findings back to the committee in the 10
Assembly which has
portfolio responsibility for climate change policy and programs at the next
Annual and Financial Reports hearings.
5 Transport Canberra and
City Services Directorate
5.1 The Transport Canberra and City Services Directorate (TCCS) delivers a
range of services to the community including public transport,
libraries, waste
and recycling services, city amenity, infrastructure maintenance, and management
of the Territory’s assets
including sportsgrounds and recreational
facilities, local shops amenity and playground equipment.
5.2 The Directorate is responsible for the planning, building and maintenance
of infrastructure assets such as roads, bridges, cycling
and community paths and
the streetlight network. It also manages the city’s open space, parks,
neighbourhood play areas, sportsgrounds,
recreational facilities, local shops
and playground equipment.
5.3 TCCS manages several ACT Government businesses (Capital Linen Service,
ACT NoWaste, Yarralumla Nursery and Birrigai) and provides
administrative
oversight to the ACT Veterinary Surgeons Board, Animal Welfare Authority and ACT
Public Cemeteries Authority.
5.4 The Committee held a public hearing with Ms Yvette Berry, Minister for
Sport and Recreation, on 15 November 2018 to examine the
section of the TCCS
annual report relating to Sportsgrounds.
5.5 The Committee held a public hearing with Mr Chris Steel, Minister for
Transport, Minister for City Services, Minister for Recycling
Reduction and Minister for Roads and Active Travel, on 15 November 2019 to
examine the remaining areas of the TCCS annual
City Services
5.6 During the hearings on 15 November 2019 the
Committee discussed the following topics related to City Services:
 Sportsgrounds and neighbourhood
 Better Suburbs Statement
 Footpath in
 Library access for non-ACT
 Integrated library management
 Library fines;
management;
 Dog compliance
 Bushfire risk to street and park
 Playgrounds;
 Billboard
compliance;
 Performance analysis for City
 Abandoned
 Microparks.
Sportsgrounds and neighbourhood ovals
5.7 The Committee asked about the potential for enhancing neighbourhood ovals
with the use of hardy, drought-resistant plantings.
5.8 Mr Stephen Alegria, Executive Branch Manager, City Presentation,
explained that:
We are open to any of those sorts of ideas. They are a really cost-effective way
of enhancing a space without a big investment, and
the community can drive that.
We can facilitate it as a directorate and we can get the community to channel
their energy into something.
We are very much open to that kind of thing. Often
that kind of thing can actually reduce the burden of maintenance. If we are
some trees and mulching then we do not have to mow that section, for
example. It can be a real
Recommendation
The Committee recommends the ACT Government
considers further opportunities for the cost-effective enhancement of ovals,
such as planting
more drought-resistant plants or re-wilding the area.
Billboard compliance
5.10 The Committee asked about mobile billboard truck advertising on unleased
public lands and whether a particularly prolific company
engaged in such
practices had sought permits.
5.11 Mr Alegria replied that he was ‘not aware of whether that
particular company have applied for any permits’. He continued:
am aware that under the current legislation, the Public Unleased Land Act, it is
an offense to use public land without
Recommendation 8
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government undertakes regular enforcement of organisations and businesses
parking mobile advertising
trucks on public unleased land without approval to
send a deterrence message.
Recommendation 9
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government reviews the number of corporate infringements issued to organisations
and businesses
parking mobile billboard advertising trucks on public unleased
land without approval and considers increasing corporate infringements
deterrence measure.
Waste and Recycling
5.14 During the hearings on 15 November 2019 the Committee discussed the
following topics related to City Services:
 Green bins and disposal of green/organic
 Container Deposit
 Impact of recyclable waste export ban on
 Material Recovery
 Mixed and single-use
 Recommended recycling
 Sewer trial in multi-unit
developments.
Container Deposit Scheme
5.15 The Committee asked about the requirement, under the Container Deposit
Scheme, to put containers into plastic bags for collection
at the express return
points and the pods.
5.16 Mr Chris Steel MLA, Minister for City Services, explained that:
The express return points and the pods are not manned, so they have to be
provided in some sort of vessel. A lot of people are using
plastic bags. What
Return-It is doing is making sure that every one of those plastic bags is going
to be recycled. It is going to
a company in Albury that is recycling these
polypropylene plastics into street furniture, wheel stops and the like. They are
sure that any of those bags that are used through the scheme are being
Committee asked about other vessels that can be used to take containers to
unmanned collections points. The Minister replied
I think it is possible to provide it in a cardboard box. I have suggested to
David Singh, the managing director, that they explore
the re-usable buckets that
are being handed out and used in New South Wales, across the border. They are a
large bucket that people
can use to collect the containers over a period of time
and haul them down, in this case to a reverse vending machine. A bucket is
good one, because if there is any liquid remaining in the containers then it
asked about the possibility for a swap-and-go system similar to the reusable
coffee cup scheme, the Minister responded that
‘[i]t is a good
suggestion’.
Recommendation 10
The Committee recommends the ACT
Government investigates a swap-and-go system of vessels to collect containers at
all the Container
Deposit Scheme locations.
Recommended recycling habits
5.20 The Committee mentioned changes in the advice that the government
provides around recommended recycling practices and habits.
It noted that while
previously people were told that contamination of recyclable materials did not
really matter, they are now advised
that they should minimise contamination. The
Committee wanted to know why the advice had changed
5.21 The Minister provided the following explanation:
It started with China sword. The China sword policy and the banning of imports
into China was really around reducing contamination.
You could still import,
except if there were these contaminants. That has forced a major change in the
waste industry around trying
to reduce contamination as much as possible so that
you can still access markets for the materials. The new recycle right campaign
is very clear. One of the messages is “Keep it clean”. In terms of
materials, you should wash out your bottles; you should
wash out things before
you put them into the recycle
Minister provided further information:
If there is a pizza box, it can go into the recycling and it will be okay. We
are looking at what we can do to reduce the amount
of contamination in the paper
and cardboard stream, because we think that there will be this pressure, because
of the waste export
ban, on reducing contamination. The recycle right campaign
is very clear: keep it simple, keep it clean, and all the other messages
between. We are certainly asking people to look at
5.23 The Committee suggested that the government’s
messaging around recycling habits should be clearer. In response, the Minister
replied that ‘[t]he messages that are going out are very clear, with the
recycle right campaign and also the Recyclopaedia,
which has been recently
Committee comment
5.24 While the Committee acknowledges that the government provides clear
guidelines on recommended recycling practices, it also believes
government can provide clearer information explaining the reasons why such
advice changes. Such information would provide
people with reassurance that they
had not been recycling incorrectly in the past.
Recommendation 11
The Committee recommends the ACT
Government updates the recycling webpage where advice has changed on recommended
recycling habits
and explain why this advice has changed, and do this on an
ongoing basis.
infrastructure
5.26 During the hearing on 15 November 2019 the Committee discussed the
following topics related to roads and infrastructure:
 Roads and intersection
 Road resealing and pothole
 Strategic Asset
Management;
 Streetlights;
 Streetlights and women’s
 Car parking and traffic
Traffic light timers
5.27 On notice
Committee noted the popularity of traffic light timers in other jurisdictions
and asked whether the ACT Government had investigated
the feasibility of
installing these in the ACT, and if not, why not.
5.28 Mr Chris Steel MLA, Minister for Roads and Active Travel, provided the
following response:
The ACT uses an adaptive traffic signal technology (SCATS) which optimises the
green time movement for every traffic cycle phase,
based on the demand picked up
through inbuilt detectors. Hence counting down each phase could result in sudden
change in phasing,
which would be difficult to display and potentially confusing
to road users.
Transport Canberra and City Services is currently investigating the impact of
pedestrian countdown timers in other jurisdictions,
to obtain advice on
compatibility with the SCATS traffic signals operating
Recommendation
The Committee recommends the ACT
Government continues to investigate the feasibility of pedestrian countdown
timers in the ACT and
how this technology may interact with the ACT’s
existing adaptive signal technology.
Veterinary Practitioners
Board and Animal Welfare Authority
5.30 During the hearing on 15 November 2019 the Committee discussed the
following topics related to the Veterinary Practitioners Board
and the Animal
Welfare Authority:
 Dog attacks;
 Animal Welfare Authority’s governance
arrangements;
 RSPCA funding
 Animal welfare staff
 Independent review into dog management in the
Transport Canberra
5.31 During the hearing on 15 November 2019 the Committee discussed the
following topics related to transport:
 Changes to Network
 Consultation with local businesses concerning Light Rail
construction;
 Light Rail Stage
 Trackless
 Ticketing
 Customer satisfaction
 Weekend bus service and service over the Christmas
 Bus driver
recruitment;
 Ticket vending
 The flexibus
 School crossing supervisor
 City public transport interchange and
Changes to Network19
5.32 The Committee asked about the changes, or “tweaks”, made to
Network19 since its introductions and whether these tweaks
would increase
customer satisfaction with the network.
5.33 Ms Judith Sturman, Executive Group Manager, Transport Operations,
suggested that the 6.4 per cent increase in patronage of the
system (compared to
two per cent population increase) indicated that the new system was a success.
She explained the tweaks to the
system: ‘are put in predominately to
ensure future-proofing for reducing congestion going forward into the
5.34 The Minister provided more details on the tweaks that have been made to
the system:
There are a couple of route changes to note. Route 18 was extended to Canberra
racecourse to improve connections for passengers with
light rail. That was based
on feedback that the Mitchell Traders had provided directly to me in a meeting
that I had with local member
Michael Pettersson. Two bus stops were added on
Anthony Rolfe Avenue and several bus services were changed to add additional
to Ashley Drive. We have been looking at putting on articulated buses,
particularly where there is crowding on specific routes, in
getting used to how
the new network has been operating. We are putting on DDA-compliant buses where
needed on specific school
5.35 Adding
to the Minister’s comment, Mr Peter Steele, Director, Performance Analysis
and Business Improvements, Transport
Operations, provided more information on
the tweaks made to the network:
We have made some other changes since the introduction of the network, and
particularly listening to the community about capacity
on the network. Some
really key ones that come to mind are introducing additional Rapid 4 services,
southbound during the pm peak.
We were able to introduce nine extra services
between 4 pm and 6 pm, which added quite a significant amount of capacity
between the
city and Tuggeranong. One of the other really highly used routes on
the network is route 32, running through the south of Belconnen.
We introduced
some further services in the pm peak, again, to increase the capacity on that.
In the morning on that service as well
we were able to introduce high-capacity
vehicles, our articulated vehicles, to make sure that we have got more capacity
in the high-demand
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government makes publicly available the updated ‘list of tweaks’
made to Network19.
Light Rail Stage 2
5.37 During the hearing the Committee discussed Light Rail Stage 2. The
Committee asked about the contracts that have been entered
into so far for Stage
5.38 The Minister replied that the government ‘is currently in
negotiation through a sole-source procurement with Canberra Metro’
that they ‘are just working through that negotiation at the
5.39 Mr Duncan Edghill, Chief Projects Officer, added the following:
No contracts for the main works have been signed, but there are contracts around
some of the advisory services that we need to progress
the negotiations and
design of the system. There is a very small arrangement that we have entered
into with Canberra Metro to progress
design services. The reason for that is
that we are at a phase where we would be paying to progress design anyway but it
makes sense
for Canberra Metro to be involved at this stage, because ultimately
we want Canberra Metro to be bearing what is called the interfaced
risks in the
project. Canberra Metro, because we are negotiating on the basis of stage 2A
matching the operating terms of stage 1,
whatever ultimately gets built, need to
bear the risk of it actually working as against the design; hence the reason for
In terms of the broader process, we are working through, effectively, an early
contractor involvement arrangement with Canberra Metro,
which means that they
are undertaking design activities. In the first half of next year they will
provide an interim bid to us at
different points. Assuming that value for money
and appropriate contractual terms are achieved through that process then,
to cabinet approval, as was the case with stage 1, a contract for the
main works would be entered into around the middle of next
year. That is the
point at which Canberra Metro effectively will be in the construction phase at
that point in
notice, the Minister provided the following list of the design-related contracts
so far for Light Rail Stage 2A (Table 1).
LRS2 Design Related
Consultants
Contract Value
Arup PTY LTD
Upper limit of $16,536,389 (GST exclusive)
This contract was awarded in 2016 and is for work on the entire Stage 2
Project (including both Stage 2A and Stage 2B)
CAF Rail Australia Pty Ltd
€95,580 (GST inclusive)
This contract was awarded in 2018 and is for work on the entire Stage 2
Project (including both Stage 2A and Stage 2B)
SNC Lavalin Rail & Transit Pty Ltd
$723,702 (GST exclusive)
This contract was awarded in 2016 and is for work on the entire Stage 2
Project (including both Stage 2A and Stage 2B)
John Holland Pty Ltd, CPB Contractors Pty Limited, Canberra Metro
$1,000,000 (GST exclusive)
This was entered into following approval of the Stage 2A business case to
enable initial design work to progress.
Committee comment
5.41 The Committee believes that the government should publish the costs of
Light Rail Stage 2, including the costings for the ‘wire
technology required for sections of the route.
Recommendation 14
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government publishes the costs of Light Rail Stage 2A and 2B, as well as the
detailed costing
for the use of ‘wire free’ technology.
Electric buses
5.43 The Committee discussed the ACT Government’s leasing of electric
buses and asked why the buses are being sourced from China.
5.44 The Minister responded that:
We have decided to lease a new vehicle, an E12 Yutong. Yutong are the largest
bus manufacturer in the world. They have 120,000 buses
on the road. There are
100 of these electric vehicles on the road in Paris alone; they are in over 100
cities in the world. We are
leasing this vehicle for 12 months. There is the
option to extend that lease or buy the vehicle. It is an opportunity for us to
what this vehicle is
Minister noted that while some bus suppliers partially build their buses in
Australia the E12 Yutong ‘is wholly manufactured
in China’. He
explained further that this ‘particular E12 bus is a single piece built
all together to reduce the weight,
which is a bit of an issue with electric
vehicles because of the battery
5.46 The Minister told the Committee that:
Once we have gone through the process of developing a zero emissions transition
plan, we will then go out for procurement for further
buses. We have funding to
purchase 84 buses over the next few years. As part of that we hope to buy a
number of electric vehicles.
We have to do the work to support that procurement.
As part of that we will go out for procurement for electric buses, which may
open it up to a range of manufacturers.
Recently we have heard the news that BYD, which is a Chinese electric bus
manufacturer, has teamed up with Volgren, the bus body
manufacturer from
Australia. They may be producing a bus that is partially manufactured here,
locally, and that will be a really
interesting thing for us to consider as part
of the future procurement.
Yutong did suggest that, if there are enough orders in Australia for their
buses—I do not think that would be from the ACT
alone, somehow—they
would be interested in what the opportunities are in terms of establishing a
manufacturing base in Australia.
BYD certainly is already starting to do that. I
think that is an
opportunity.
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government further explores options for the procurement of electric buses made
and designed
in Australia.
Ticketing system
5.48 The Committee asked about the new ticketing system and when it is
expected to be rolled out.
5.49 The Minister made the following reply:
We have recently gone out to the market to get a sense of what might be
available. We are also aware that Queensland is currently
going through a
process of looking at a new ticketing system as well. I understand that New
South Wales, through their provider,
Cubic, has also been making some
improvements to its ticketing system. So we are interested in what is happening
in other jurisdictions.
We have not arrived at the point of making a decision
move to a new ticketing
Committee noted comments from the previous Minister for Transport that the
Territory would be leapfrogging the New South
Wales system with the introduction
of the new system and asked if this were still the case.
5.51 The Minister replied that he thought that would be the case, ‘in
the sense that their system will only get them thus far.
So if we end up
transitioning to a new system in the future, it will have better capabilities
than New South
5.52 The Committee asked the time frame for the introduction of the new
system, to which the Minister replied:
The government has not made a decision about transitioning yet. We have gone
through the process of going to the market on a ticketing
system, but we have
not actually made a decision about where we are going to go at this point in
Recommendation 16
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government explains the delay of the delivery of a new integrated ticketing
system, and releases
an indicative timeline for the delivery of this ticketing
Weekend bus service and bus driver recruitment
5.54 The Committee asked whether the reduction of the weekend service from
the changes made to the network on 28 September 2019 had
resulted in a reduction
in patronage for the network.
5.55 The Minister responded that:
We may be able to comment specifically on the breakdown of the routes but
overall what we have actually seen on the weekends is a
massive increase,
compared to year on year, for each of the
Sturman added that ‘70 per cent of our weekend travellers actually travel
on the rapid services. The lion’s share
was already travelling on those
rapids. That is why we made sure that we continued to offer
5.57 On notice, the Minister provided information which showed that while
there had been an increase in weekend patronage of rapid
services, there was a
decrease in patronage of local buses and shuttle services (Table 2).
Weekend bus
29 April to 27 September 2019 (weekend and public holidays
28 September to 17 November 2019 (weekend and public holidays only)
Average boardings per day
Proportion of boardings
Average boardings per day
Proportion of boardings
Rapid services
Local bus and shuttle services
5.58 In the answer, the Minister argued that ‘these figures appear to
reflect a modest shift towards using other modes (such
as walking, cycling or
driving) to access Rapid services instead of local buses, rather than a
reduction in the number of journeys
made on public transport each
5.59 The reduction to the weekend timetable was due to driver shortages on
the weekend and a resulting unreliability of weekend services.
The Committee
also discussed driver recruitment in the context of weekend service reliability.
The Committee asked why the government
failed to recruit adequate numbers of
drivers in the planning period for Network19.
5.60 The Minister replied that the government had done ‘some
recruitment in the lead-up... The government did recruit about
60 bus drivers in
the lead-up to the commencement of network
5.61 Ms Sturman provided additional explanation:
When we actually planned the services for network 19 we also found that we could
very positively have more services than we had originally
anticipated. Whilst we
were recruiting drivers, the actual dynamic of how the drivers opt for weekends
comes into play obviously
very specifically for weekend services. We had to
actually look at how many drivers we had, how we went into service and the
of the rate of drivers to opt in to those weekend
Minister noted that following the changes on 28 September, ‘[w]e are now
at 99.9 per cent reliability for the weekends.
But once we have got the extra
drivers on board, we will step up the
frequency’.
5.63 The Committee asked about the government’s progress in recruiting
new drivers.
5.64 The Minister answered that 66 new drivers had been recruited since the
introduction of the new network. He continued:
There are 11 in training now and we are continuing a rolling recruitment
campaign. Every time one group finishes, we have another
starting. But 32 have
left during that period as well, so there is an attrition rate there. Overall,
we are increasing numbers. We
just have not got quite to the mark that we need
to, to be able to step up weekend
Committee asked how many new recruits had indicated a willingness to work
weekend shifts.
5.66 The Minister responded that ‘[s]ome work has been done on
screening potential recruits’. He explained that during
the recruitment
process potential drivers have been screened ‘for their interest in
working weekend
added that during ‘the probationary period the drivers are encouraged to
work weekends’ and that ‘[w]hilst
the whole workforce is encouraged
to opt into weekend work, the newer drivers are more likely to cover those
weekend shifts’.
5.67 The Committee sought confirmation that while new recruits might be
encouraged to work weekends, there is no requirement for them
5.68 The Minister replied that:
There is not, but the way the system is operating at the moment is that the new
drivers—if they are not casuals then they actually
start as part timers
before they become full time—a lot of them, actually want to work more
hours. With the weekend timetable
at the moment, there is quite a lot of
competition now for taking those shifts. That is a good thing to make sure that
we have all
the shifts covered over the
Committee noted a recruiting campaign specifically for encouraging female
drivers to enrol for positions which resulted in
more than 100 responses. The
Committee wanted to know what the conversion rate was for those responses into
newly recruited staff.
5.70 Ms Sturman replied that it ‘was actually very low’. She
We had about six who actually went through in the end to become drivers.
However, having said that, we are currently at a 10 per
cent rate of female
drivers in the current campaign. From the beginning of the network, we have had
16 women drivers. That is really
good. Most schools have some women drivers. We
are still trying to encourage that. It is very clear that there is an
opportunity
for women, especially, to work at weekends; that is quite often the
time when they would like to do something for themselves, and
there is still an
opportunity out
Committee wanted to know whether the government surveyed those who responded to
the campaign, seeking information for the
reasons they either took up the
opportunity or did not. Ms Sturman responded that ‘[n]o, we did not do
5.72 The Committee asked if there was a time frame for when the weekend
service would be increased.
5.73 The Minister replied that ‘there is not’. He continued:
Once we are confident that we have got enough drivers to be able to step up the
shifts, then we will. We have just got to do a bit
of further work, more
training over the course of the new year, and then look at an appropriate timing
for the step-up in services
and exactly where that step-up occurs in terms of
the time of day, looking at the data around when people really need that
We have heard from the bus drivers that they would like to see that
in the mornings, on Saturday morning, in particular. That is
a period where
people want to go out and about and shop and so forth. Once we are confident, we
will increase the number of services
on the local routes. But the Rapids have
always remained the same; and that has not
Recommendation 17
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government holds more frequent recruiting rounds for bus drivers, and publishes
the results
of the recruitment rounds every month.
Recommendation 18
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government increases targeted driver recruitment for women to reduce attrition
rates and ensure
an adequate supply of drivers to meet original weekend
reliability targets.
Recommendation 19
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government considers introducing a feedback mechanism for any ACTION recruitment
to provide more context about the conversion rate of initial
responses to formal applications or new recruits.
Recommendation 20
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government makes publicly available a definitive date as to when weekend service
reliability
will begin to be incrementally restored to its original
Ticket vending machines
5.78 The Committee noted that Belconnen does not have a ticket vending
machine (TVM). The Committee wanted further information on
the prospects of
Belconnen receiving a ticket vending machine.
5.79 Mr Peter Steele noted that the government was currently attempting to
at the Westfield
stop. When asked why the machine had to be installed at Westfield, as opposed to
the Belconnen community bus stop,
Mr Steele explained that:
At the last check, about 80 per cent of all passenger movements in Belconnen
take place at Westfield. That design was to support
a lounge-type feel. There is
currently an ex-bus terminal that does not get a lot of use. What we would
really like to do is replace
that with a ticketing machine. We think that that
would add the best bang for buck in terms of putting the ticket machine into
The community station would be an option, but we are trying to
pursue, and are continuing to pursue, installing one at Westfield.
We have made
several attempts to reach out to them through different areas, and we will
continue to work to try and get that
Committee sough information on the difficulty of negotiating the installation
with Westfield. Mr Steele replied that ‘I
think it is a complex management
issue, between who manages Westfield itself locally compared to if it is managed
out of an office
5.81 The Committee asked whether there is a timeframe for negotiations after
which the government installs the machine in the Belconnen
community stop
instead. Mr Steele replied that ‘I would hope we could get it into
Westfield, but I agree that there could be
a time when we just put it where we
can and need to put
5.82 The Committee then discussed why more shops (post offices and
newsagencies) could not sell/top-up MyWay cards. Ms Sturman explained
That is to do with the equipment. Because we have an ageing product, there are
only a certain number of terminals that we are able
to use across the city.
Therefore, unless somebody relinquishes their agency and we go out to seek
another agent, we are tied down
to the number of terminals that we have on hand
Committee questioned why more vending machines could not be made available in
stores, especially considering that there was
no timeframe for the introduction
of the new ticketing system. Ms Sturman replied that ‘[u]nfortunately, it
does come down
to the hardware, and we would probably want to invest in more
TVMs for a solution that is available to more people and is easier
to position
where we know that people need
Recommendation 21
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government continues advocating for the installation of a MyWay ticket vending
machine at Westfield
Belconnen and:
Considers introducing a time limit for
negotiations with Westfield and, if unsuccessful within this time
Considers installing a ticket vending
machine at an alternative location, such as the Belconnen Community
Recommendation 22
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government procures and expands the available stock of MyWay vending machines
that can be purchased
by small businesses and reduces the red tape for
businesses applying to purchase these machines, given the extension of the MyWay
contract to 2022.
City public transportation interchange
5.86 Within the context of a discussion about the city public transportation
interchange, the Committee asked about the bus stop arrangements
coming from and going to Belconnen. The Committee noted that while R4, R3 and R2
rapid buses leaving the city for Belconnen
all leave form stop 3419, opposite
the GPO, coming into the city from Belconnen, the R4 and R2 leave from stop 3418
near the GPO
and the R3 leaves from stop 3409 on the corner of Alinga Street and
East Row. The Committee wanted to know why, at least, one of
these buses could
not depart for Belconnen from a more central location.
5.87 Mr Steele provided the following explanation:
When we designed the network, we put a lot of thought into how common trips can
be joined together. On the inbound trips, the 4 and
the 2 stop on the GPO side.
I think that is platform 2. The reason why they join there is that the 2 and the
6 both proceed to Barton.
So the idea is that you can get the 2 or the 6 to get
to Barton, so that is why they are grouped together, and the 4 is the direct
The 5, which is over the other side, also takes you to Woden but it is indirect,
so we do not want people to get on one bus or the
other. The reason why the 3
stops on the other side is that the 3 and the 5 both go to Russell. You could
get either bus to go to
Russell, so that is why they are paired together.
On the outbound to Belconnen, given that the 2, the 3 and the 4 all go to
Belconnen, we have grouped those
Steele added that some customers now ‘find that getting off at the
Assembly stop is now better for them, because the
Canberra Centre is just a
direct walk up that part of Ainslie Avenue. So there is a bit of education in
that space’.
Committee comment
5.89 The Committee believes that the distance between the outbound stop for
buses leaving the city for Belconnen (stop 3419) and the
city centre, and the
fact that it requires people to cross Northbourne Avenue, may discourage some
people from catching the bus.
The Committee believes that, at least, one of the
services from the city to Belconnen could depart from a location closer to City
5.90 The Committee also believes that ACT Government could provide further
information to commuters to make them aware of their travel
options, including
the existence of multiple services to individual locations and the bus stops
along a single route.
Recommendation 23
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government reviews outbound bus services from the city to Belconnen
(specifically buses 2, 3
and 4), which currently leave from platform one (stop
3419), and considers relocating at least one service to a more central part
the City Interchange as to assist commuters with mobility issues.
Recommendation 24
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government considers further information and education opportunities to help
make commuters
more aware of their bus travel options, including instances of
multiple services to individual locations and alternative bus stops
single route.
ACT Public Cemeteries
5.93 The ACT Public Cemeteries Authority is an independent statutory
authority established under the
Cemeteries and Crematoria Act 2003
manages and operates three public cemeteries at Gungahlin, Woden and
5.94 The purpose of the Authority is:
...to ensure the equitable availability of interment options and maintain burial
capacity in the medium to long term for the ACT
5.95 During
the hearing on 15 November 2019 the Committee discussed the following topics
relating to the Authority:
 Southern Memorial
 Public crematorium at
 Perpetual Care
 Implementation of independent audit recommendations by Norwood
 Cost and revenue from the sale of different products and
Cost and revenue from the sale of different products
and services
5.96 The Committee noted information in the ACT Public Cemeteries
Authority’s annual report on the ‘cost of
The Committee
wanted a more detailed breakdown of the total revenue received through the sales
of products and services by the Authority.
5.97 On notice, the Minister provided such a breakdown. The breakdown
included details on the following items:
• Internment sites ($157k);
• Burial costs ($82k);
• Plaques ($111k);
• Memorials ($69k);
• Allotment and Restoration Fees ($1.298m);
• Maintenance Fees ($1.462m);
• Memorial Fees ($149k);
• Burial Fees ($812k); and
• Plaques and Vaults
Recommendation 25
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government considers providing more detailed information in its
Canberra and City Services Directorate Annual Report Volume Two: ACT Public
Cemeteries Authority
services (including allotment, maintenance, burial, sale of plaques and
to include a breakdown of the number of each service or product
6 Conclusion
6.1 The Committee makes 25 recommendations in this report relating to a broad
range of the areas covered in the annual reports examined.
6.2 The Committee thanks the Ministers and directorate officials of ACT
Government for their contribution to the Inquiry.
Tara Cheyne MLA
25 March 2020
A - Witnesses
Wednesday 13 November 2019
Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development
Directorate (Environment Protection Authority)
 David Pryce, Deputy Director-General, Access Canberra
 Narelle Sargent, Senior Director, Environment Protection, Access
Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development
Directorate (Climate Change and Sustainability)
 Shane Rattenbury MLA, Minister for Climate Change and
Sustainability
 Ben Ponton, Director-General
 Geoffrey Rutledge, Deputy Director General, Sustainability and the
Built Environment
 Gene McGlynn, Executive Group Manager, Climate Change and
Sustainability
 Ros Malouf, Senior Director, Sustainability Programs
 Daniel Harding, Senior Director, Energy Markets and Renewables
 Antonia Harmer, Director, Energy Efficiency Improvement Scheme
 Hugo Temby, Senior Policy Officer, Energy Projects
Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development
Directorate (Environment and Heritage)
 Mick Gentleman MLA, Minister for the Environment and Heritage
 Ben Ponton, Director-General
 Ian Walker, Executive Director, Environment
 Fiona Moore, Senior Manager, Heritage
 Justin Foley, Acting Executive Branch Manager, ACT Parks and
Conservation Services
Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and the
Environment
 Kate Auty, Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment
 Caitlin Roy, Assistant Director, Investigations
Friday 15 November 2019
Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development
Directorate; and Transport Canberra and City Services (Sport and
Recreation)
 Yvette Berry MLA, Minister for Sport and Recreation
 Rebecca Kelly, Executive Branch Manager, Sports and Recreation
Transport Canberra and City Services
 Chris Steel MLA, Minister for City Services, Minister for Recycling
and Waste Reduction, Minister for Roads and Active Travel
and Minister for
 Alison Playford, Director-General
 Jim Corrigan, Deputy Director-General, City Services
 Stephen Bartos, Chair, ACT Cemeteries Authority
 Linda Addison, Deputy Chair, ACT Cemeteries Authority
 Cherie Hughes, Chief Operating Officer
 Duncan Edghill, Chief Projects Officer
 Ben McHugh, Executive Group Manager, City Operations
 Megan Oldfield, Executive Group Manager, Infrastructure Delivery and
 Judith Sturman, Executive Group Manager, Transport Operations
 Ken Marshall, Executive Group Manager, Roads ACT, City Operations,
City Services
 Jeremy Smith, Executive Branch Manager, Infrastructure Delivery,
City Services
 Vanessa Little, Executive Branch Manager, Libraries ACT
 Stephen Alegria, Executive Branch Manager, City Presentation, City
 Geoffrey Davidson, Executive Branch Manager, Development
Coordination Branch, City Operations, City Services
 Petra Crowe, Executive Branch Manager, People and Capability
 Anthony Haraldson, Acting Executive Branch Manager, ACT NoWaste,
City Services
 Geoff Virtue, Acting Executive Branch Manager, Development
Coordination Branch, City Operations, City Services
 Peter Steele, Director, Performance Analysis and Business
Improvements, Transport Operations
B – Questions taken on Notice/
Questions on Notice
Questions taken on Notice Tuesday 13 November 2018
Hearing date
Directorate/
Answer date
EPA (CMTEDD)
Construction-related noise complaints outside of allowable times
EPA (CMTEDD)
Light rail construction noise level restrictions
EPA (CMTEDD)
Water pollution incidents resulting in infringement notices
EPA (CMTEDD)
Environmental authorisations
EPA (CMTEDD)
Waste movement
EPA (CMTEDD)
Rectification work in Oaks Estate
Cat containment/feral cats
Fire management
Executive PDPs
Norwood Park
Heritage Emergency fund
Heritage Festival
Heritage Festival
NextGen Energy Storage program
NextGen Energy Storage program
SunSPoT Tool
Renewable Energy Innovation Fund
Questions taken on Notice Thursday 15 November 2018
Hearing date
Directorate/
Answer date
Average times taken to fill a pothole
Roads Strategic Asset Management Plan
Streetlight Contract
Streetlight related complaints
Streetlight outages
Belconnen Park and Ride
Republic Development
Cemeteries Authority service costs
Animal injuries
AWAC Board Members
RSPCA funding
Compulsory training
Green Bin uptake target
ACT Container Deposit Scheme
ACT Container Deposit Scheme
Recycling at multi-unit developments
Media spend on timetable changes
Campaign Advertising Report for Network 19
Light Rail Stage 2A
Light Rail user complaints
Local service data associated with weekend network changes
Wombat crossings
Moon Exhibition
African Love Grass map
Warnings/infringements related to dog de-sexing
Playground maintenance/upgrades
Public toilets
Abandoned vehicles
Response to Woden Experiment
Questions on Notice Wednesday 13 and Friday 15 November 2018
Hearing date
Directorate/
Answer date
Traffic crossing lights
Women in EPSDD leadership positions
Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment
Definition of “measure” on p. 11; Circular economy paper
TCCS workforce
Domestic Animal Services
Climate Change Action Plan
Graffiti and other vandalism
Maintenance and repair of street signs
2019 Bus Procurement
Adopt a Park
Commercial organic waste
Path maintenance and asset management
Path maintenance and asset management
Women’s safety
Shared path expenditure
IRAP and ANRAM
Path maintenance
Separated cycleway
Planning for City transport interchange
Projected travel times for Light Rail Stage 2A
Molonglo River bridge crossing
Streetlights
TCCS workforce breakdown
Integrated ticketing system
TCCS approved leave
Carbon Neutral Government Framework
Shared paths/bike paths
Micro Parks
Capital Linen Services
ACT Libraries
Street sweeping
Decommissioned items
Legislative Assembly for the
Minutes of Proceedings
No. 2, 13 December 2016, p. 13, accessible
https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/1017980/MoP002F1.pdf
Legislative Assembly for the
ACT, Minutes of Proceedings No. 119, 24 October 2019, available at:
https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0011/1435745/MoP119F.pdf
Day one (Tuesday 13 November
http://www.hansard.act.gov.au/hansard/2017/comms/environment20a.pdf
day two (Thursday 15 November 2018) at
http://www.hansard.act.gov.au/hansard/2017/comms/environment21a.pdf
https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/in-committees/standing-committees-current-assembly/standing-committee-on-environment-and-transport-and-city-services/inquiry-into-annual-and-financial-reports-2018-2019
Annual Reports (Government
Agencies) Directions 2019, Notifiable Instrument NI2019–296, p. 5.
Annual Reports (Government
Agencies) Directions 2019, Notifiable Instrument NI2019–296, p. 10.
Chief Minister, Treasury and
Economic Development Directorate,
Annual Report 2018-19
, Volume 1, p.
Chief Minister, Treasury and
Economic Development Directorate,
Annual Report 2018-19
, Volume 1, p.
Transcript of Evidence
13 November 2019, pp. 1-9, 14-15.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 9-10.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 10-11.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 11-13.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 13-14
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 15-16.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 16-19.
Ms Narelle Sargent, Senior
Director, Environment Protection, Access Canberra,
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, p. 2.
Question Taken
on Notice 1
, 25 November 2019.
Ms Narelle Sargent, Senior
Director, Environment Protection, Access Canberra,
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, p. 4.
Ms Narelle Sargent, Senior
Director, Environment Protection, Access Canberra,
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, p. 5.
Ms Narelle Sargent, Senior
Director, Environment Protection, Access Canberra,
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, p. 7.
Ms Narelle Sargent, Senior
Director, Environment Protection, Access Canberra,
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, p. 8.
Question Taken
on Notice 3
, 25 November 2019.
Chief Minister, Treasury and
Economic Development Directorate,
Annual Report 2018-19
, Volume 1, p.
Ms Narelle Sargent, Senior
Director, Environment Protection, Access Canberra,
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, p. 15.
Chief Minister, Treasury and
Economic Development Directorate,
Annual Report 2018-19
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 95-97.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 97-99.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 99-100.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 104-106.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 106-107.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, p. 107.
Environment Planning and
Sustainable Development Directorate,
Annual Report 2018-19
Environment Planning and
Sustainable Development Directorate,
Annual Report 2018-19
Environment Planning and
Sustainable Development Directorate,
Annual Report 2018-19
Environment Planning and
Sustainable Development Directorate,
Annual Report 2018-19
Environment Planning and
Sustainable Development Directorate,
Annual Report 2018-19
Environment Planning and
Sustainable Development Directorate,
Annual Report 2017-18
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 20-23.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, p. 24.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 24-26, 28-31, 40.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 26-28.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 31-34.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 34-35.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, p. 36.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 37-.
Mr Ian Walker, Executive
Group Manager, Environment,
Transcript of Evidence
, 13 November 2019, p.
Mr Justin Foley, Acting
Executive Branch Manager, ACT Parks and Conservation Service,
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, p. 27.
Mr Justin Foley, Acting
Executive Branch Manager, ACT Parks and Conservation Service,
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 27-28.
Mr Justin Foley, Acting
Executive Branch Manager, ACT Parks and Conservation Service,
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, p. 28.
Environment Planning and
Sustainable Development Directorate,
Annual Report 2018-19
Environment Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, Heritage,
‘About Us’,
https://www.environment.act.gov.au/heritage/about-us
viewed 5 March 2020.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 40-41.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 43-45.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 45-47.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 47-48.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 48-49.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 49-51.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 51-52.
Environment Planning and
Sustainable Development Directorate,
Annual Report 2018-19
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 54-56.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 56-57.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 57-58.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 59-61.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 61-63.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 63-65, 71-74, 80.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 66-68.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 68-71.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 71-72, 74.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, p. 76.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 77, 79-82.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 77-79.
Mr Geoffrey Rutledge, Deputy
Director-General, Sustainability and the Built Environment, ACT Parks and
Conservation Service,
Transcript of Evidence
, 13 November 2019, p.
Mr Geoffrey Rutledge, Deputy
Director-General, Sustainability and the Built Environment, ACT Parks and
Conservation Service,
Transcript of Evidence
, 13 November 2019, p.
Mr Geoffrey Rutledge, Deputy
Director-General, Sustainability and the Built Environment, ACT Parks and
Conservation Service,
Transcript of Evidence
, 13 November 2019, p.
ACT Government,
Climate Change Strategy 2019-25
https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/1414641/ACT-Climate-Change-Strategy-2019-2025.pdf/_recache
viewed 13 March 2020.
Mr Shane Rattenbury MLA,
Minister for Climate Change and Sustainability,
Transcript of Evidence
13 November 2019, p. 71.
Mr Shane Rattenbury MLA,
Minister for Climate Change and Sustainability,
Transcript of Evidence
13 November 2019, p. 71.
Mr Shane Rattenbury MLA,
Minister for Climate Change and Sustainability,
Transcript of Evidence
13 November 2019, p. 74.
Mr Shane Rattenbury MLA,
Minister for Climate Change and Sustainability,
Transcript of Evidence
13 November 2019, p. 74.
Office of the Commissioner
for Sustainability and the Environment, Annual Report 2018-19, p. 4.
Transcript of Evidence
, 13 November 2019, pp.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 84-85.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 85-87.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 87-88.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 88-89.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 89-90.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 90-91, 92-94.
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, p. 91.
Commissioner for
Sustainability and the Environment, September 2019,
Heat, humanity and the
hockey stick: climate change and sport in Canberra
https://www.envcomm.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/1428748/Issues-Paper_ClimateChange_Sport_OCSE_Sep2019.pdf
viewed 13 March 2020.
Professor Kate Auty,
Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment,
Transcript of
, 13 November 2019, pp. 90-91.
Ms Caitlin Roy, Assistant
Director, Investigations, Office of the Commissioner for Sustainability and the
Environment,
Transcript of Evidence
, 13 November 2019, p. 92.
Transport Canberra and City
Services Directorate,
Annual Report 2018-19
, Volume 1, p. 14.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 100-104.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 184-185.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, p. 185.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 185-186.
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, pp.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, p. 188.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 188-190.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 191-192, 194-195.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 192-195.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 195-199.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, p. 200.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 200-202.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 202-204.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 204-205.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, p. 205.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 206-208.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 208-210.
Mr Stephen Alegria,
Executive Branch Manager, City Presentation,
Transcript of Evidence
November 2019, p. 103.
Mr Stephen Alegria,
Executive Branch Manager, City Presentation,
Transcript of Evidence
November 2019, p. 203.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 138-140.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 140-143, 147-148.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 143-144.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 144-145.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, p. 145-147.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 148-150.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 150-151.
Mr Chris Steel MLA,
Minister for Recycling and Waste Reduction,
Transcript of Evidence
November 2019, p. 147.
Mr Chris Steel MLA,
Minister for Recycling and Waste Reduction,
Transcript of Evidence
November 2019, p. 147.
Mr Chris Steel MLA,
Minister for Recycling and Waste Reduction,
Transcript of Evidence
November 2019, p. 148.
Mr Chris Steel MLA,
Minister for Recycling and Waste Reduction,
Transcript of Evidence
November 2019, p. 149.
Mr Chris Steel MLA,
Minister for Recycling and Waste Reduction,
Transcript of Evidence
November 2019, p. 150.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 109-111.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 111-112.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 113-116.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 116-122.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, p. 122.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 122-125.
Question on
, 3 December 2019.
Question on
, 3 December 2019.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 132-133.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 133-134.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, p. 134.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 135-136.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 137-138.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 151-152, 163-165, 183.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, p. 153.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 153-157.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 157-160.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 160-162.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 162-163, 173-174.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 163-165.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 165-169, 170.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 169-171.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 171-172.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 174-176.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 176-178.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 178-183.
Ms Judith Sturman,
Executive Group Manager, Transport Operations,
Transcript of Evidence
November 2019, p. 164.
Mr Chris Steel MLA,
Minister for Transport,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p.
Mr Peter Steele,
Director, Performance Analysis and Business Improvements, Transport
Operations,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, pp. 164-165.
Mr Chris Steel MLA,
Minister for Transport,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p.
Mr Duncan Edghill, Chief
Projects Officer,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 157.
Taken on Notice 38
, 25 November 2019.
Mr Chris Steel MLA,
Minister for Transport,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p.
Mr Chris Steel MLA,
Minister for Transport,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p.
Mr Chris Steel MLA,
Minister for Transport,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p.
Mr Chris Steel MLA,
Minister for Transport,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, pp.
Mr Chris Steel MLA,
Minister for Transport,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p.
Mr Chris Steel MLA,
Minister for Transport,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p.
Ms Judith Sturman,
Executive Group Manager, Transport Operations,
Transcript of Evidence
November 2019, p. 165.
Question Taken on Notice 40
November 2019.
Taken on Notice 40
, 27 November 2019.
Mr Chris Steel MLA,
Minister for Transport,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p.
Ms Judith Sturman,
Executive Group Manager, Transport Operations,
Transcript of Evidence
November 2019, p. 167.
Mr Chris Steel MLA,
Minister for Transport,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p.
Mr Chris Steel MLA,
Minister for Transport,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p.
Mr Chris Steel MLA,
Minister for Transport,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p.
Ms Judith Sturman,
Executive Group Manager, Transport Operations,
Transcript of Evidence
November 2019, p. 169.
Mr Chris Steel MLA,
Minister for Transport,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p.
Ms Judith Sturman,
Executive Group Manager, Transport Operations,
Transcript of Evidence
November 2019, p. 171.
Ms Judith Sturman,
Executive Group Manager, Transport Operations,
Transcript of Evidence
November 2019, p. 171.
Mr Chris Steel MLA,
Minister for Transport,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, pp.
Mr Peter Steele,
Director, Performance Analysis and Business Improvements, Transport
Operations,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 172.
Mr Peter Steele,
Director, Performance Analysis and Business Improvements, Transport
Operations,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 172.
Mr Peter Steele,
Director, Performance Analysis and Business Improvements, Transport
Operations,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 172.
Ms Judith Sturman,
Executive Group Manager, Transport Operations,
Transcript of Evidence
November 2019, p. 173.
Ms Judith Sturman,
Executive Group Manager, Transport Operations,
Transcript of Evidence
November 2019, p. 173.
Mr Peter Steele,
Director, Performance Analysis and Business Improvements, Transport
Operations,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 182.
Mr Peter Steele,
Director, Performance Analysis and Business Improvements, Transport
Operations,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 182.
Transport Canberra and
City Services Directorate,
Annual Report 2018-19
, Volume 2, p. 10.
Transport Canberra and
City Services Directorate,
Annual Report 2018-19
, Volume 2, p. 10.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 125-126.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 126-128.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 129-130.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, pp. 130-132.
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, p. 132.
Transport Canberra and
City Services Directorate,
Annual Report 2018-19
, Volume 2, p. 52.
Taken on Notice 27
, 28 November 2019.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (764 KB)
PDF format (860 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter