URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/ACTLAStaCEP/2020/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:05:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ACT Legislative Assembly Standing Committee on Planning and Urban Renewal ( Parliament) --- "Inquiry into Annual and Financial Report 2018-2019" [2020] ACTLAStaCEP 5 (27 March 2020)
Report on Annual and Financial Reports 2018-2019
The Committee
Committee Membership
Secretariat
Resolution of appointment
Terms of reference
Recommendations
Conduct of the Inquiry
Structure of the Report
Acknowledgements
3 Annual Reporting Requirements
Timing and Presentation of Reports
4 Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate
Introduction
Planning Delivery
Ginninderry Joint Venture – Role of EPSDD
Ginninderry Joint Venture – Cross Border Planning
Electric Towers in Holt
Committee Comment
Planning and Building Policy
Housing Choices – Collaboration Hubs
Territory Plan Review
Apartment Guidelines for the ACT
Land Strategy
Affordable Housing Targets
Urban Renewal
Demonstration Housing
Section 72 Dickson – Urban Renewal Process
Section 72 Dickson – Lessons Learned – Community Consultation
Public Housing Renewal Program
Site Selection and Limits on Number of Dwellings
Loose Fill Asbestos Insulation Eradication Scheme
Residents in Properties yet to be Acquired
Asbestos Management Plans - Compliance
5 Suburban Land Agency
Introduction
Kingston Arts Precinct - successful tenderer, dwellings, parking
Kingston Arts Precinct - construction impacts and consultation with arts groups, residents and businesses
Land Sales in SLA Estates
Ginninderry Joint Venture Agreement – NSW Land
East Gungahlin and Kenny Projects
6 Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate
Introduction
Architects Board of the ACT
Academic Architect Representative Position
7 City Renewal Authority
Introduction
Development Application Referrals to CRA
Sydney and Melbourne Buildings – Maintenance and Heritage
Sydney and Melbourne Buildings – Waste Enclosures
City Centre Marketing and Improvements Levy (CCMIL)
West Basin/City to the Lake/Acton Waterfront
City Precinct Renewal Strategy – Consultation
8 Conclusion
Appendix A - Witnesses
7 and 8 November 2019
Appendix B – Questions taken on Notice/
Questions on Notice
on Annual and Financial Reports 2018-2019
Standing Committee on Planning and Urban Renewal
Ms Caroline Le Couteur MLA Chair
Mr Mark Parton MLA Deputy Chair
Mr Michael Pettersson MLA
Secretariat
Ms Annemieke Jongsma Secretary
Alice Houghton Senior Research Officer
Dr Frieda Scott Senior Research Officer
Ms Lydia Chung Administrative Assistant
Information
Telephone 02 6205 1253
Post GPO Box 1020, CANBERRA ACT 2601
Email LACommitteePUR@parliament.act.gov.au
www.parliament.act.gov.au
of appointment
13 December 2016 the ACT Legislative Assembly (the Assembly) agreed by
resolution to establish legislative and general purpose
standing committees to
inquire into and report on matters referred to them by the Assembly or matters
that are considered by the
committees to be of concern to the community,
(e) a Standing Committee on Environment and Transport and City Services to
examine matters related to city and transport services,
public infrastructure,
heritage and sport and recreation and matters related to all aspects of climate
change policy and programs,
water and energy policy and programs, provision of
water and energy services, conservation, environment and ecological
sustainability.
Assembly agreed that each committee shall have power to consider and make use of
the evidence and records of the relevant standing
committees appointed during
the previous Assembly.
Terms of reference
On 24 October 2019, the Assembly referred the annual and financial reports
for the calendar year 2018 and the financial year 2018-2019
to Assembly
committees for inquiry and report by the last sitting day in March 2020, in
accordance with a schedule.
reports were presented to the Assembly pursuant to the
Annual Reports
(Government Agencies) Act 2004
The reports and parts of reports referred to the Standing Committee on
Planning and Urban Renewal were:
 Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate -
Architects Board of the ACT
 Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate -
Planning; Loose Fill Asbestos Insulation Eradication Scheme;
Public Housing
Renewal Taskforce and Affordable Housing; Land Policy;
 City Renewal Authority; and
 Suburban Land Agency.
Australian Capital Territory
Australian Capital Territory Public Service
Canberra Institute of Technology
Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate
City Renewal Authority
Development Application
Economic Development
Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate
Land Development Agency
Public Housing Renewal Taskforce
Suburban Land Agency
Transport Canberra and City Services
Table of Contents
Recommendations
2.1 On 24 October 2019, the Assembly referred the
annual and financial reports for the calendar year 2018-2019 and the financial
2018 to Assembly committees for inquiry and report by the last sitting day
in March 2020.
2.2 The following annual reports, or sections of annual reports were referred
to the Standing Committee on Planning and Urban Renewal
(the Committee):
 Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate -
Architects Board of the ACT
 Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate
– Planning Delivery; Planning and Building Policy; Land
Strategy; Urban
Renewal; Loose Fill Asbestos Insulation Eradication Scheme; Public Housing
 City Renewal Authority; and
 Suburban Land Agency.
Conduct of the Inquiry
2.3 The Committee held public hearings on the 7 November 2019 and the 8
November 2019. At this hearings, the Committee heard evidence
from 25 witnesses.
Full details of witnesses who appeared are available in Appendix A of this
report. Transcripts from the hearings
are available at:
http://www.hansard.act.gov.au/hansard/2017/comms/default.htm#economic
2.4 A total of 17 questions were taken on notice during the public hearings
and 39 questions were placed on notice after the hearing.
Please refer to
Appendix B for a list of the questions. Answers to the questions are provided on
the inquiry webpage:
https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/in-committees/standing-committees-current-assembly/standing-committee-on-planning-and-urban-renewal/inquiry-into-annual-and-financial-reports-2018-2019
Structure of the Report
2.5 The report presents a summary of the Committee’s inquiry into the
annual reports listed in paragraph 1.2. In developing
this report, the Committee
has primarily focused on the issues that were raised at public hearings although
some additional material
has been drawn from annual report documents.
2.6 The structure of this report is as follows:
 Chapter 1: Introduction
 Chapter 2: Annual Reporting Requirements
 Chapter 3: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development
Directorate
 Chapter 4: Suburban Land Agency
 Chapter 5: Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development
Directorate
 Chapter 6: City Renewal Authority
 Chapter 7: Conclusion.
2.7 The EPSDD is responsible for the policy component of many matters for
which the operational component is the responsibility of
the CRA or SLA. Please
be advised that as questions during the hearings often addressed both policy and
operational issues in relation
to particular projects or aspects of operation
these matters may be discussed in this report either under the EPSDD chapter
in the CRA or SLA chapters.
Acknowledgements
2.8 The Committee thanks relevant ACT Government Ministers and accompanying
directorate officials for providing their time and expertise
as witnesses at its
annual reports hearings.
3 Annual Reporting
Requirements
Annual Reports (Government Agencies) Act 2004
sets out the
framework for annual reporting across the ACT public sector. In accordance with
Annual Reports (Government Agencies) Act 2004
, the Annual Reports
Directions (the Directions) are issued annually to outline agency reporting
requirements.
3.2 As specified in the Directions, annual reports are ‘reports from
agency heads to their responsible Minister, the Legislative
Assembly and the
Annual reports
enable agencies to provide an account of their performance, through Ministers,
to the Legislative Assembly and the
wider community.
3.3 The Directions state that an effective annual report will:
 provide clear information about the reporting entity’s
purpose, priorities, outputs and achievements;
 focus on results and outcomes - communicate the success or
shortfalls of the reporting entity’s activities in pursuing
objectives in the reporting year, while accounting for the resources used in the
process and explaining changes in performance
 discuss results against expectations - provide sufficient
information and analysis for the Legislative Assembly and community
fully informed judgment on a reporting entity’s performance;
 clearly identify any changes to structures or functions of the
reporting entity in the reporting period;
 report on reporting entity financial and operational performance and
clearly link this with budgeted priorities and financial
projections as set out
in annual Budget Estimate Papers and the entity Statement of Intent and
Corporate Plan;
 provide performance information that is complete and informative,
linking costs and results to provide evidence of value
 discuss risks and environmental factors affecting the reporting
entity’s ability to achieve objectives including any
strategies employed
to manage these factors, and forecast future needs and expectations;
 recognise the diverse needs and backgrounds of stakeholder groups
and present information in a manner that is useful to the
maximum number of
users while maintaining a suitable level of detail; and
 comply with legislative reporting requirements including the Annual
Reports Act and the Directions.
3.4 Annual reports are public documents and available for use by
stakeholders, including educational and research institutions, and
the broader
community. They provide a valuable tool for public reporting, accountability and
transparency.
Timing and Presentation of
3.5 The Directions for 2018-2019 required annual reports to be presented to
the responsible Minister before the close of business
on 4 October 2019. Unless
an extension of time was granted under
Annual Reports
(Government Agencies) Act 2004
, annual reports were required to be given to
the Speaker’s office by the close of business on 11 October 2019.
4 Environment, Planning and
Sustainable Development Directorate
Introduction
4.1 The Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate (EPSDD)
manages a wide range of policies and programs to deliver
Government’s key planning, land management and environment priorities.
Portfolio responsibilities cover topics such
as built environment, land
strategy, planning policy, urban renewal, building policy, development and
leasing applications, the environment,
water, heritage, parks and nature
conservation, climate change and energy.
4.2 The Directorate also provides corporate and governance support for the
Suburban Land Agency and the City Renewal
4.3 Sections of the EPSDD 2018-2019 Annual Report were referred to the
Committee for inquiry and report.
4.4 The Committee held a public hearing with Ms Suzanne Orr MLA, Minister for
Employment and Workplace Safety; on 8 November 2019
to examine the following
area of the EPSDD 2018-2019 Annual Report:
 Loose Fill Asbestos Insulation Eradication Scheme.
4.5 The Committee held a public hearing with Ms Rachel Stephen-Smith MLA,
Minister for Urban Renewal on 8 November 2019 to examine
the following area of
the EPSDD 2018-2019 Annual Report:
 Urban Renewal.
4.6 The Committee held a public hearing with Mr Mick Gentleman MLA, Minister
for Planning and Land Management on 7 November 2019 to
examine the following
areas of the EPSDD 2018-2019 Annual Report:
 Land Strategy;
 Planning Delivery; and
 Planning and Building Policy (Planning matters).
4.7 The Committee held a public hearing with Ms Yvette Berry MLA, Minister
for Housing and Suburban Development on 7 November 2019
to examine the following
area of the EPSDD 2018-2019 Annual Report:
 Public Housing Renewal
4.8 Other areas of the EPSDD 2018-2019 Annual Report were considered by other
Committees.
Planning Delivery
4.9 The EPSDD performs the functions of the planning and land authority under
Planning and Development Act 2007
. This includes the management of
development assessment processes, environmental impact assessments, the
administration of the leasehold
system, and the Office of the Surveyor General
and Land Information.
4.10 The Committee discussed the following issues with the Minister and
Directorate Officials:
 Development Application
 Development Application Approval
 Development Application
 Electric Towers in
 Ginninderry Joint Venture – Role of
 Ginninderry Joint Venture – Cross Border
 Ginninderry –
 Ginninderry – Territory Plan
Variations;
Ginninderry Joint Venture – Role of EPSDD
4.11 The Committee asked the Directorate what role the ESPDD had in the
Ginninderry joint venture. They were informed that:
The agreement with the Riverview Group that creates the Ginninderry JV is
between the territory and Riverview. In terms of EPSDD’s
involvement, as
the director-general and the territory’s representative to that agreement
I have provided an agency agreement
to the Suburban Land Agency to act as agent.
That is a long way of saying that we have a contractual relationship with
to create the JV, but in terms of operationalising that, it is
entirely the Suburban Land
was also asked what role the EPSDD had in the development of the joint venture
agreement and the Directorate stated that they
had no involvement:
...in terms of the agreement itself, settling the agreement. Obviously the
directorate at the time would have provided comment through
the cabinet process,
but in terms of drafting the agreement that was the then Land Development
Agency. I understand that originally
the then Land Development Agency was
intended to be the party to the agreement but late in the process that became
referenced to
the territory. There are some legal reasons as to why it then
becomes the directorate, as opposed to the Suburban Land
further questioning the Committee asked what is reported to the EPSDD under the
agreement and were informed that the Director-General
of EPSDD meets with the
CEO of the SLA weekly whilst there is also a meeting between senior executives
of the EPSD and the SLA. The
Committee were also told by the Chief Operating
Officer that he meets:
...with senior officers of the SLA on a fortnightly basis on matters that may
come up that we need to discuss around the joint venture—how
progress is
going and if there are outstanding questions around the joint venture. We keep
abreast of it that way. On a weekly basis
the joint venture provides a report to
the directorate, to the SLA, on the progress of how much concrete they have put
much bitumen is going down, sales and all those other
an Answer to a Question Taken on Notice the Directorate summarised the role of
the EPSDD indicating to the Committee that:
The Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate (EPSDD) is
involved in working towards the outcome of the JV through
its statutory planning
and regulatory functions under the
Planning and Development Act 2007
implementing the Territory Plan. EPSDD is involved in the outcome of the JV
through its statutory responsibilities for
delivery of nature conservation
functions under the
Nature Conservation Act 2014
and the exercise of the role
and responsibilities of the conservator of flora and fauna, particularly in the
Ginninderry conservation
corridor. EPSDD is responsible for administering the
funding agreement for the Ginninderry Conservation Trust established to manage
the conservation values of the conservation
Ginninderry Joint Venture – Cross Border
4.15 In further discussion about the Ginninderry Joint Venture the Committee
sought clarification on how the joint venture interacts
with the ACT Planning
Strategy and what work was done by the ACT Government to support the planning
and rezoning processes. They
were informed in an Answer to a Question Taken on
Notice that:
The development potential of West Belconnen was previously recognised in the
Canberra Spatial Plan (2004). In 2012 the Canberra Spatial
Plan was replaced by
the ACT Planning Strategy. That Strategy recognised the area of West Belconnen
as a future urban investigation
area for possible settlement, which supported
investigations into the suitability and capability of the area to be developed
urban purposes.
On 5 May 2016 Amendment 86 to the National Capital Plan was approved by the
Commonwealth Minister for Major Projects, Territories
and Local Government,
which incorporated changes proposed to the Plan by Draft Amendment 85 - West
Belconnen Urban Development.
The National Capital Authority's consultation process ran concurrently with
processes conducted by the ACT Government's then Environment
and Planning
Directorate in relation to Draft Territory Plan Variation 351, which was
required to ensure consistency between the
Territory Plan and the National
Capital Plan.
4.16 The Committee was told that Territory Plan Variation 351,
which commenced on 22 July 2016:
...rezoned an area immediately west of the suburbs of Holt and Macgregor for
future urban development. The main changes indicating
potential future urban
development patterns and guiding future development and assessment of the area
• rezoning part of the site to a range of urban zones
• introducing a nature reserve overlay to the Murrumbidgee River corridor
• rezoning the Strathnairn Arts Precinct and Belconnen Farm Heritage
Precinct to community facility zone
• applying a future urban area (FUA) overlay to part of the site
• introducing a site-specific structure plan and concept plan into the
terms of the requirements for environmental management and strategic assessment,
as specified in the EPBC Act, the Committee
was further informed, in an Answer
to a Question Taken on Notice, that:
On 24 June 2014 the Australian Government entered into an agreement with
Riverview Projects (ACT) Pty Ltd to undertake a strategic
assessment (the
strategic assessment) of a proposed urban development at West Belconnen, ACT and
The development site, now referred to as Ginninderry, involves land to the west
of the existing suburbs of Holt, Macgregor and Dunlop
in the ACT, and land
within NSW up to the Murrumbidgee River and Ginninderra Creek. The assessment
was required in accordance with
Environment Protection and
Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
The strategic assessment explored the impacts of the proposed urban development
in the West Belconnen areas on listed threatened
species and ecological
communities, listed migratory species and any other protected matter that may be
The draft strategic assessment and associated draft Program Report were open for
public comment from 14 May to 10 June
On 18 July 2017 a program for urban development and biodiversity conservation at
West Belconnen was endorsed by the Australian Government
Minister for
Environment and Energy under section 146 of the Environment Protection
Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
On 1 September 2017, the Minister granted approval for classes of actions under
the endorsed Program. The approval allows for urban
development and biodiversity
conservation at West Belconnen as identified in the program to proceed without
the need for further
approval from the Minister. The strategic assessment was
undertaken in parallel with and to inform the planning approval
To comply with the requirements of the strategic assessment, a series of plans
were required to be developed. The plans include:
• Ginninderry Conservation Corridor management Plan 2018-2023, September
• The Ginninderry Development Offsets Management Plan (for Pink-Tailed
Worm Lizard and Box Gum Woodland), 5 October 2018;
• Gooromon Grasslands: Offset Management Plan 2018-2012, October 2018;
• Ginninderry Development Construction Environment Management Plan
Framework, 12 October 2018.
The plans were endorsed by the ACT Conservator of Flora and Fauna on 19 November
2018 and approved by the Minister for Environment
and Heritage, on 31 January
The approved Ginninderry Conservation Management Plan is an interim
non-statutory plan that will be required to proceed through the
reserve management plan process under the
Nature Conservation Act 2014
time Minister for Environment and Heritage approved this interim plan, he noted
the intention of Ginninderry to incorporate
the plan into a statutory review of
the broader Murrumbidgee River Corridor Management Plan and this course of
action had been agreed
with the Commonwealth Department of Environment and
Committee also asked about the work being done by the ACT Government towards
achieving the outcomes of the joint venture,
particularly in terms of
cross-border planning. In an Answer to a Question Taken on Notice the Minister
indicated that:
It is a commitment of the Parliamentary Agreement between Labor and the Greens
to work towards moving the ACT-NSW border in West
Belconnen, with the effect
that the entire Ginninderry development would be within the ACT. Notwithstanding
this goal, the ACT is
working closely with NSW and Vass Valley Council on joint
planning for services and infrastructure for the cross-border development
Ginninderry estate.
The ACT-NSW Memorandum of Understanding for Regional Collaboration (ACT-NSW MoU)
is the primary framework for the ACT Government's
engagement with the NSW
Government. Under the auspices of this ACT-NSW MoU, the ACT Government has
engaged extensively with the NSW
Government to resolve issues around supporting
cross-border service access and delivery. This includes through two West
Belconnen/Parkwood
Cross-Border Agency Forums, which occurred in March 2016 and
2019 respectively. These Forums included significant representation
from NSW and
ACT Government agencies, including emergency services, utilities providers and
local government
representatives.
4.19 The Committee was further informed, in an Answer to a
Question Taken on Notice, that a number of approvals were made by the Minister
for Planning and Land Management, notably the:
Variation to the Territory Plan No. 351 to put in place the primary planning
documents setting the broad planning principles and
policies for the urban
development and specific planning and development requirements to guide the
design and assessment of the estate
development.
Committee was also informed that the Minister for Environment and Heritage had
approved ‘management plans for the Ginninderry
development as required by
the approval under the Commonwealth
Environment Protection and Biodiversity
Conservation Act
Electric Towers in Holt
4.21 There was extensive discussion about the electric towers in Holt. Noting
the ‘towers along the easement, 5A, 6A and 7A,
were built 20 metres away
from people’s backyards as opposed to building them in the middle of the
easement, 45 metres away
from people’s
the Directorate
was asked why they hadn’t been built according to the guidelines and who
knew about that. The Minister initially
gave the Committee some background on
the parties involved:
TransGrid are the proponent in this case, building a second electricity supply
for the ACT. My understanding is that these are 330-kilovolt
powerlines. My
understanding from ausnetservices.com.au is that the national requirement for
easement for 330-kilovolt powerlines
is 58 metres. In this sense, they should
have at least a 58-metre easement from the
powerlines.
The work started back in 2014. The ACT government and TransGrid commenced
consultation with the landholders and other relevant stakeholders
at that time.
The proponent was also required to undertake consultation as part of the
environmental impact statement process. This
is the proponent of the residential
development into the future as well. In regard to those transition lines within
the 90-metre
easement, consultation was undertaken with the lessee, which was
Woodhaven, which was the developer of the Gungahlin stage of the
blocks. They
were due to engage with purchasers of those blocks to advise of the possibility
of these towers going
Minister was then asked if the developers of the land knew about the towers and
how close they were to residents backyards.
During the hearing the Directorate
indicated that:
...in relation to the developer who was selling the land, the easement is
located on that company’s land and they were engaged
in the process in the
lead-up to and, in fact, signed the development application form to allow
lodgement of the application. They
certainly were aware of what was being
proposed because we needed the lessee’s consent for the application to be
I would be surprised if they signed an application form for a development on
their land without understanding what was
an answer to a Question Taken on Notice the Minister also indicated that:
ln 2014, the proponent (TransGrid) commenced consultation with all affected land
holders, including the adjacent lessee of the Holt
estate at the time (Woodhaven
Investments Pty Ltd).
In 2015, Woodhaven undertook a draft variation to the Territory Plan (DV340) and
acknowledged in the application that the existing
90 m easement was to remain to
cater for the future 330 kV powerlines. On 12 December 2016, representatives of
Woodhaven were advised
of the final location of the towers, following a detailed
review of their location. After this, Woodhaven undertook a design to relocate
greens and fairways on the golf course, confirming the layout
arrangements.
4.24 In the same Answer to a Question Taken on Notice the
Minister explained to the Committee the DA process that had been undertaken:
The proposal for construction of the electrical supply infrastructure was
considered under an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS)
and Impact Track
Development Application (DA) process. The documentation for the applications,
amongst other things, included a full
description of the proposal and included
detailed plans depicting the location of towers and powerlines, including a
detailed design
of each tower. The documentation also identified blocks that
would be affected and proposed mitigation measures to minimise the
All documentation was publicly notified by the planning and land authority
between 5 March 2018 and 26 April 2018 (35 working days).
The adjacent
landholders at the time were notified, as well as documentation being made
publicly available on the authority's
an Answer to a Question on Notice the Minister explained to the Committee that
there had been some administrative errors in
relation to the DA process for DA
Development application (DA) 201732500 was lodged on 22 February 2018 over 11
large blocks. Due to IT system limitations, a number
of blocks had to be
manually removed from the database in order for the public notification package
for that DA to be produced. Upon
completion of the public notification process,
the blocks that were removed from the database should have been entered back
the system. Due to an administrative oversight, this did not
At the time the lease conveyancing report was produced for Block 18 Section 128
Holt, DA201732500 on Block 2 Section 132 Holt was
not referenced as a result of
that administrative error. Once Access Canberra was made aware of the error, the
information in the
planning database was updated to reflect all the subject
blocks on which the development application was lodged and standard operating
procedures were reviewed and updated to ensure this error does not occur again
relation to the DA, the Minister made further note in his Answer to a Question
Taken on Notice that a number of elements were
taken into consideration by the
proponent and the team assessing the EIS and the DA:
The infrastructure was proposed within an electrical easement that is 90m wide,
which has existed for a number of decades. An easement
of this nature is to
establish and cater for crucial infrastructure that services the whole of the
ACT. The infrastructure was proposed
to be located adjacent to an existing 132
kV line within the easement. Separation between the two lines and other factors
were considered
by the proponent for the actual location of the powerlines.
These factors included:
• the distance from adjacent development
• the height of the powerlines
• the materials used for the towers
• the configuration of the towers and lines
• distance in-between the conductor
• potential impact on protected (environmental) matters and any avoidance
• impact on native vegetation
• and potential impact on the surrounding
During the assessment process, consideration was given to the matters above and
health, visual and environmental impacts (including
ACT and Commonwealth
protected matters). The EIS addressed avoidance and mitigation measures to
reduce the impacts, such as screening
planting between towers and residential
On completion of the assessment process, it was determined that the final
proposal, with the implementation of mitigation measures,
was the outcome with
the least overall
Minister also advised the Committee that the following Australian Standards and
Guidelines were also applicable to the construction
of the powerlines:
The powerline infrastructure is located within an existing 90m wide easement.
The easement currently contains a 132 kV powerline,
with the new 330 kV
powerline currently under construction adjacent to the 132 kV line within the
same easement.
The relevant Australian Standard for Overhead line design (AS/NZS 7000) provides
for typical easement widths for a range of powerlines
and requires a typical
easement width of 60m for 330 kV lines ('actual easement is 90m) and a building
restriction width of 30m,
measured from the centre of the overhead line to a
building (actual survey points of 31.42m and
The powerline infrastructure is also required to be designed and constructed in
accordance with the International Commission on Non-Ionizing
Protection (ICNIRP) Guidelines for limiting exposure to EMF and easement safety
requirements established by
asked to clarify if he had approved the construction of the towers the Minister
responded that yes he had and that he had
used his call in powers to do so,
based on the environmental impact statements. However, he did not recall if
there had been any
reference to the towers being built 20m from residents
4.29 In a statement he made later that afternoon (7 November 2019), to the
EDT Committee, the Minister stated that:
I just want to clarify some information sought by Mrs Kikkert and Mr Coe earlier
regarding the second electricity supply project.
As notified to Mrs Kikkert in
answer to a question on notice, the tower closest to residential properties, as
approved to be constructed,
is at a distance of 20.7 metres from the base of the
tower to the nearest boundary fence of the easement. So there are no homes or
fences within 20 metres of the electricity
My role in this decision was determining that the proposal met the relevant
requirements. I am confident that the proposal met these
requirements. Once a
decision is made, of course, then the enforcement is up to Access Canberra,
whether this is regarding the land,
the contracts or the safety of utilities. If
any of Mrs Kikkert’s constituents believe that any tower has been
constructed
within the 20 metres then this would be not compliant with the
approvals, and the constituent should contact the utilities technical
through Access Canberra.
The project underwent significant public consultation, especially with the
developer, and responsibility for notifying prospective
residents about
easements lies with the seller of the land, which in this case was a private
developer. Any residents who believe
they are being misled about the easement
should contact Access Canberra as a consumer law matter. In respect to property
the EIS may have indicated reduced property values as a potential risk.
But just because the EIS identifies a potential risk does
not necessarily mean
that this risk is realised. And I stand by my statement that I have not seen any
evidence of a decline in property
4.30 It was
noted that the TransGrid fencing guidelines:
‘suggest that metal fences parallel to a transmission line outside the
easement, within 10 metres of the easement, should be
earthed once in line with
each structure tower and once in the middle of each span. In addition, fences
within 20 metres of the easement
should be earthed once in line with each
structure.’
Consequently the Minister was asked what the responsibility of
the ACT Government was in regards to notifying residents that they
would need to
earth their metal fences. The Directorate indicated that this was actually a
matter for the Utilities Technical
4.31 In further discussions, the Minister was asked about the impact of the
330-kilovolt transmission line on property prices. It
was highlighted to the
minister that he had previously mentioned in the Assembly that there is
‘no evidence that it would drive
down any house prices at all,’
however the EIS that the minister had signed off on indicated that the
‘potential impact
to property prices is actually rated as
He was then asked
why his statement differed from the EIS statement and in response the Minister
stated that ‘Whether or not
there is a downgrade in property prices is a
different matter...I have not seen an impact on property
4.32 However the Committee was informed in an Answer to a Question Taken on
Notice that property values did appear to have been influenced
by the High
Voltage Transmission line with the ACT government offering a property owner
compensation.
The included
document entitled
Ginninderry Weekly Update For Minister Yvette Berry &
SLA Board Members
, dated 22 November 2019 indicated that:
Project team representatives met with the purchaser of Block 2 Section 8 (Ruth
Everett) on 23rd August to discuss her concerns (expressed
via social media)
further to the recent installation of a new HV transmission Tower near her
block. An offer to settle $233,500 exclusive
of GST has been accepted by Ruth
and the project has identified a third-party builder to purchase directly for
this price. Ruth’s
solicitor has now issued the contract to the
builder’s solicitor and exchange is pending. Recent advice from Ruth
father (Conor) is that they are hoping for the settlement to
occur by the 1st
evidence from this Answer to a Question on Notice does not appear to be
consistent with that given by the Minister during
his evidence to the
4.34 In referencing the earlier statement of the Minister about there being a
requirement for a 58 metre easement from the powerlines
the Committee asked why
structures had been approved that were less than 58 metres away. In response the
Minister stated that his
‘approval was that they would be within the
national guidelines and authority for transmission lines...If they were outside
those guidelines I would have to
4.35 The Directorate further indicated that it ‘would be a matter for
the utilities technical regulation team to examine if
something has been built
not in accordance with the
requirements.’
Committee Comment
4.36 The Committee notes that the discrepancies in the information provided
by the Minister during the hearings and the information
provided by the SLA in
an Answer to Question On Notice No. 31 (QON 31) were not immediately apparent to
the Committee. However after
being asked by Minister Berry to potentially redact
the content of the Answer to QON 31 in correspondence dated 12 March 2020 they
observed, during their considerations on 18 March 2020, there was a discrepancy
between the evidence given by the Minister during
the hearing on 7 November 2019
and the information provided in the Answer to QON 31.
4.37 Due to the tight time frame between identifying the discrepancies and
the requirements for deliberation and tabling of this report
the Committee has
been unable to raise the matter with the Minister or SLA so that the record
could be publicly corrected prior to
this report being tabled. As such the
Committee has recommended that the Minister seek to correct the record in the
Assembly as soon
as practicable.
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that all
ministers ensure they have accurate information when answering questions and
where they may have
unintentionally misled a Committee, they should immediately
correct the record.
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends that the Minister
seeks to clarify the statements he made to the Committee in relation to property
being impacted by the High Voltage Transmission Tower and make a
statement correcting the record in the Assembly at the earliest
opportunity.
Planning and Building
4.40 The Planning and Building Policy division of EPSDD is responsible for
the provision of high quality professional services in
strategic land planning;
administering the Territory Plan; planning for land release; developing policies
for high quality urban
design; and policies for buildings, building services,
and the building and construction
4.41 The Committee discussed the following issues with the Minister and
Directorate Officials:
 Territory Plan
 Housing Choices – collaboration
 Housing Choices – co-housing and infrastructure permeable
 Housing Choices – Woden and
Tuggeranong;
 Gungahlin Town Centre Planning
 Apartment Guidelines for the
 Billboards Working
 Advertising
 Traffic impact of multiple development –
 Traffic impact of multiple development –
 Geocon Garema Place Development – Entertainment action
Housing Choices – Collaboration Hubs
4.42 The Committee asked the Directorate what the current progress was with
regards to the housing choices collaboration hubs. In
response the Directorate
stated that:
With housing choices, there were a couple of recommendations that we wanted to
proceed with. We have looked at separating a couple
so that we can try to do
those ahead of the planning review work. We are advancing the ones associated
with site coverage that also
connect with the living infrastructure work. We are
in discussions with the minister and the government about advancing that one.
The other, which is a bit more about zoning, we are wrapping into the planning
review work, because it brings up other issues around
zoning, so we want to look
at that in a broader perspective. Some of the other elements have been carried
through with demonstration
Directorate went on to state that:
One of the other recommendations we are moving forward with is the concept of
co-housing, providing a range of housing options. That
is something we are
working on as
Committee then sought clarification as to what is meant by co-housing and was
informed that it was separate to the co-housing
concept in the demonstration
housing project. They were also told that:
During the housing choices engagement, we heard from a variety of people. The
idea of co-housing is that it has shared facilities.
That might be a shared
kitchen or a shared living room; it is something that is not a full house on its
own. It is not multi-unit
housing; it is something where you have a shared
facility. We are just investigating
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that the ACT
government expedite all of the Territory Plan changes needed to give effect to
the housing choices
recommendations, including changes that will increase the
supply of ‘missing middle’ housing.
Territory Plan Review
4.46 The Committee asked the Directorate what the timeline was on the
Territory Plan review and were informed that the project ‘is
project’ which is expected to run for three years. The Committee was told
that the last twelve months had been focused
on engagement and consultation with
the Canberra community:
That started with a session with the community councils back in December 2018.
It was really just an introduction to the concept.
In around March and April we
had a fairly detailed workshop with industry and community groups, including the
community councils.
In around June or July we communicated with those people
that we had been in contact with. In response to the feedback that we had
received about over-engaging and making sure that we did not overload people in
the engagement exercise, we also tapped into the
wellbeing indicators engagement
work that was being done. We have been doing that in terms of using that process
to get a better
understanding of what people value in their local communities
and what is important to them from a wellbeing
perspective.
4.47 The Directorate went on to indicate that the current phase
...doing some behind the scenes work and also some broader and targeted
consultation and engagement activities. For example, we had
stakeholder panel on 29 July and also a Kingston drop-in session. We have held a
stakeholder roundtable and workshop on
the entertainment action plan. We have
had a “your say” community panel survey with just under 1,000
respondents, 994
respondents, with 400 of those people advising that they would
like to participate in more detailed focus group sessions on the planning
review. We are currently working through that, developing the next round of
focus groups with many of those participants and analysing
what we heard through
those engagement activities.
4.48 The Directorate also told the Committee that social
inclusion and engagement with ATSI communities was also a current focus:
...we needed to do more in terms of engaging in the planning space with
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities, so we
have been doing that as
well. We have been working with those communities to better understand how we
can effectively engage with
them on planning matters. We have also been working
with ACTCOSS on engagement opportunities that focus on social inclusion. That
is, obviously, linked into the work that we are doing on the planning
role of the environment and planning forum was noted by the Directorate as an
element of their current work:
There has also been work on revitalising the environment and planning forum. We
have taken a pause with that forum because the feedback
that I was receiving was
that it was not necessarily fit for purpose. It was really a case of directorate
officials talking to community
and industry people, as opposed to giving them
the chance to really workshop and explore ideas. We are in a position to go back
EPF members later this month to talk through how we think we can better
engage with that group. One of the first workshop sessions
with that group will
be around social inclusion as it relates to the planning
Committee was told that with all the activities that have taken place that it
was important to work ‘on securing additional
resources for the next phase
of work’ and with the recognition that more targeted consultation is
needed they indicated that:
We expect that we will be in a position to provide an update to the community,
particularly through the community councils, in late
November or early December
in terms of where things are heading in relation to this work, with a view to
then undertaking further
engagement in early 2020, particularly around the
development assessment system and district-level planning, with a view to
advice to government soon
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government provide 6 monthly updates to the Assembly and the Planning and Urban
Renewal Standing
Committee on the progress of the Territory Plan Review.
Recommendation 5
That the ACT government re-establish the
Planning and Development forum, or an alternative that meets the needs of
stakeholders, as
soon as possible.
Apartment Guidelines for the ACT
4.53 In the context of the regularly raised issue of overheating apartments,
the Committee asked about the work being undertaken to
develop the new rules for
the design of apartments and if that work was proceeding. In response the
Directorate indicated that it
was ‘well underway’ and that:
In fact, the apartment guidelines that you are referring to—the New South
Wales reference is SEPP 65—we have done quite
a bit of work in developing
those guidelines and incorporating those provisions into a Territory Plan
variation that we hope to be
released soon for the Northbourne Avenue corridor,
giving effect to the city and gateway work, as a way to start to trial these
guidelines. In terms of the status of that work, we are in the process
of advising the minister. Hopefully, we will be in a position
to make some more
public statements
Directorate further indicated that they had ‘developed apartment
guidelines based on SEPP 65’ and that they were
giving statutory effect to
those through a Territory Plan Variation (city and gateway) which was
concurrently being prepared. They
also told the Committee they were also looking
at other ways, such as the use of the Design Review Panel, to make sure that
developments have to
4.55 The Committee asked about whether the new rules would consider climate
change issues and the Directorate indicated in an Answer
to a Question on Notice
The City and Gateway Urban Design Framework (the Framework) recommends improved
solar access to habitable rooms for apartment development.
As part of its
implementation, the ACT Government will introduce improved solar access
provisions as a part of upcoming variations
to the Territory Plan. The National
Capital Authority (NCA) has also introduced similar provisions through Amendment
91 to the National
Capital Plan. These improved solar access provisions
• a variety of apartment designs such as dual aspect, shallow layouts, two
storey and mezzanine levels;
• all habitable rooms to have an operable window in an external wall with
a minimum glass area of not less than 15% of the
floor area of the room to
increase sunlight penetration and improve ventilation;
• shading and glare controls to manage sun penetration in warmer months;
• no more than 15% of the apartments to receive no direct sunlight between
9am and 3pm on the winter solstice to decrease the
number of apartments
receiving no direct
The Territory Plan contains a variety of controls which contribute to the
overall environmental performance of a building, enabling
buildings to be
adaptable in a changing climate. These rules relate to solar access, private and
site open space, planting areas,
cross flow-ventilation, shading and new block
orientation. None of these rules preclude a building from being
'all-electric'.
The ACT Climate Change Strategy 2019-25 and ACT Planning Strategy 2018
acknowledge that the energy performance of our buildings,
and the type of energy
they use, will affect the comfort of occupants and the ability to reduce
emissions over coming decades.
The City and Gateway Urban Design Framework (the Framework) supports sustainable
building performance. As part of its implementation,
the ACT Government will
introduce improved natural ventilation provisions as a part of upcoming
variations to the Territory Plan.
The National Capital Authority (NCA) has also
introduced similar provisions through Amendment 91 to the National Capital
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government extend the proposed apartment guidelines so that they apply to all
apartments in
Recommendation 7
The committee recommends that the ACT
government improve planning controls and building rules to improve the ability
of all new buildings
in Canberra to alleviate the impacts of hot weather and not
Land Strategy
4.58 The Land Strategy division of EPSDD focus on providing strategic, policy
and planning support, including preparation of the four-year
Indicative Land
Release Program (ILRP). The ILRP sets out the Government’s intended
program for land release and seeks to facilitate
housing diversity, provide
affordable housing, stimulate economic activity, and meet the demand for land in
the Territory and support
a competitive land development and construction
4.59 The Committee discussed the following issues with the Minister and
Directorate Officials:
 Indicative Land Release Program
 Affordable Housing
 Land supply for Woden and
Tuggeranong;
 Management of Delivery of Affordable
 Affordable Blocks and Community Housing
 EOI Process for Builders of Affordable
Affordable Housing Targets
4.60 The Directorate were asked as to why the government had fallen 139
dwellings short of the 2018-19 affordable housing target.
The Committee was told
...it was because of the release time; some of the properties were not released
within the time frame we had thought. One of the
ongoing things we have with the
indicative land release program is tracking the timing of when the land is ready
for release, whether
we are meeting the targets, and if we are not meeting them
how we will catch up to meet
Committee was assured that the Directorate would be intending to meet the
target, however concerns were raised that the needs
of the community would not
be addressed. The Directorate acknowledged there was still a need and that their
‘intention is to
constantly monitor the need and what we can appropriately
release and what the SLA can also
4.62 When it was raised by the Committee that land was being sold at a median
of $355,000 in a particular suburb, Taylor, which was
$20,000 more than the
bottom affordable housing tier and $26,000 and $80,000 above the other two
tiers, the Directorate sought to
refer it to the SLA for consideration, however,
did acknowledge that:
With respect to the comparison—I will let the minister answer if he
likes—we have been doing that analysis ourselves.
It may be more
appropriate for Minister Berry to respond, but we are looking at whether if the
market is providing a certain product
in a certain threshold then perhaps we
need to look at what other mechanisms we have available to ensure that we can
meet the needs
of people who need affordable housing if they cannot get into the
market at that level. We are aware of some of those pricing issues
and how the
affordable product and the affordable housing mechanisms through sale and rent
we are using can still meet the
also reiterated that:
The affordable housing targets and the number of dwellings are certainly within
Minister Gentlemen’s portfolio and responsibilities,
but the housing
policy is for the housing minister, Minister Berry, and the delivery of that is
with the Suburban Land Agency. Whilst
I appreciate the line of questioning, what
the land is being sold for is a matter for the Suburban Land
an answer to a Question Taken on Notice the Minister noted that:
Single residential blocks of land in Taylor for affordable housing are not
currently being sold to builders at a median price of
The Suburban Land Agency has identified packages of single residential blocks in
Taylor that include compact blocks suitable for
affordable housing as part of a
recent Expression of Interest process. This process closed on Thursday 26
September 2019 and is currently
subject to evaluation. The land value of these
packages of blocks will be considered based on independent valuations depending
the proposals which are
later questioning of the Suburban Land Agency the land price affordability
comparison was again put officials by the Committee.
The CEO of the SLA told the
Committee that:
There are a couple of things to note: firstly, product types lend themselves to
different blocks of land. Specifically, for the detached
houses in Taylor the
blocks of land currently on sale are not the ones that have been identified as
affordable housing. They are
for housing which is generally available to the
public, and the prices reflect that. The current land which has been identified
affordable has been selected specifically by the SLA team working with EPSDD
and acknowledges the affordable requirement on that
land. We have gone out to
tender through an expression of interest with the land that has been identified.
We definitely see it as
possible to build the affordable stock on there, but we
also note that it will be challenging. We are going through a process of
expressions of interest with the builders to work with them to find the best
solution for those
SLA CEO continued, explaining to the Committee that:
If I take an example of the lots that have been identified as affordable
housing, we say the top value is $434,000 for a 105-square-metre
block. At a
build price of about $1,800 per square metre that would reflect a build cost of
for the block of land, which is
relatively reflective of the land we have selected to be part of the affordable
I also say the expression of interest is in its machinations at the moment.
However, it was designed to work innovatively with industry
to find solutions. I
also note that we are working within government to finalise my ability to price
land which is reflective of
the affordable requirement. In response to your
first question, I am confident that we can provide these blocks to support
housing in the
Committee questioned whether the blocks would be market price and were informed
that ‘it may not be if the affordability
requirements restrict the highest
best use. It will be highest best use taking into account those affordability
requirements,’
they were seeking legal advice on the ability to do that as well as considering
alternative options that would enable them
to be able to provide the required
level of affordable
4.68 In an answer to a Question Taken on Notice the Minister told the
Committee that:
The Government understands it can price land to account for the affordability
policy requirement and is seeking advice to confirm
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government finalise legal advice so that it can act accordingly in relation to
valuing land
whist also taking into account affordability requirements.
Recommendation 9
The committee recommends that the ACT
government ensure that the land sold as affordable land will be reserved for
affordable housing
and that this is able to be reflected in the price of the
Urban Renewal
4.71 Urban Renewal delivers projects that involve multiple policy outcomes.
This work includes the identification of key precincts
and individual projects,
prioritisation of projects based on community need, undertaking feasibility
studies and due diligence, and
project delivery including demolition and minor
works. This work seeks to integrate urban renewal opportunities across
around defined urban renewal precincts, including within town and
group centres and within pockets of established suburbs such as
4.72 The Committee discussed the following issues with the Ministers and
Directorate Officials:
 Due diligence on urban
 Demonstration
 Section 72 Dickson – urban renewal
 Section 72 Dickson – lessons learned - community
consultation;
Demonstration Housing
4.73 The Committee made reference to the 18 demonstration housing projects
and asked a number of questions about the progress to date.
4.74 The Committee was informed that the demonstration housing project is a
two stage process and that the projects were divided into
two streams. The
Directorate indicated that:
We have gone through the first phase where projects have been shortlisted and
then, for the with-site stream, we have actually gone
through the second stage
of the process, where proponents had to submit a detailed
submission.
They are evaluated through a panel that included the Government Architect. They
have also all been required to go through the design
review panel and undertake
community consultation on their proposal, with EPSDD supporting them in a
community consultation by going
along and talking about what the demonstration
housing project is and giving people an overview of what that is. We have met
both the North Canberra Community Council and the Griffith/Narrabundah
Community Association.
The challenge for the other bit about the without-site stream has been
identifying suitable sites that relate to the particular projects.
proposals really wanted sites that were located close to facilities, preferably
on a light rail line.
And of course there are so many of those! We have done quite a substantial piece
of work looking at sites that might be suitable
for that, where we might be able
to subdivide sites, where we might be able to include them within urban renewal
projects. We have
got to the point where we have a number of sites that are
suitable for proponents. We are just finalising the review of the financial
criteria the proponents need to go through to see whether their proposal will be
suitable for government to sell them land to deliver
it. The sites will be
valued and each of the proponents will pay market value for that site once their
proposal goes through that
evaluation process with the panel, as well as then
going through the design review panel and community
consultation.
Committee then queried the number of projects, with land, in the first stream
and were informed that:
There were six that were successful through that process and there were another
three that were given an opportunity to refine their
proposal a bit further and
come forward. One of those has withdrawn and another two we expect to come in in
the next couple of weeks
for the panel to review
Committee also queried the timeline for the siteless projects and were informed
With each of those projects it is not like they are all going to be released at
the same time. As we are ready to go out with the
request for tender to those
proponents, we will. There will be a progressive approach with each of those. It
is as the sites are
ready to be released and we have done all the due diligence
work that we need to do on those sites to confirm that they are suitable
that type of
development.
being informed that the tender process would only be released in the current
financial year, the Committee noted that ‘some
groups or some siteless
entities are finding it harder to keep going for this period of time, not
knowing whether there is going
to be any sort of
conclusion’
the Directorate to respond to this. They indicated to the Committee that:
We are trialling new things, and in the end we will need site-specific Territory
Plan variations and we will evaluate the whole project
because we need to learn
from it. I think one of the things to note is that it would be remiss of us only
to learn from the projects
that are successful. Those that are put forward and
get knocked out on the first stage we are going to learn as much from as we will
learn from those that get knocked out on the second stage and then those that do
not proceed, because I think we need to work out
what are the barriers to
delivering this in the
I think this is what the Assembly wanted and that is what the response is. What
we found, just even at the first stage, was that
people thought they had a good
idea. But they might have been first-time builders or first-time cooperatives
and they really had
not thought through the proposals. As you have mentioned,
the time is a challenge. The holding costs for those with sites...is a
But that would be the same if demonstration housing had not come up and they
were looking for redevelopment opportunities.
They would then be limited by what
is only available in the current planning. So they have come forward to take on
a demonstration
housing project because they think they can deliver something
greater than what would currently be
I think, yes, there are a few things that we are learning along the way. I think
the success will be when we see projects built,
delivered and communities
accepting that. That will be success, but I think we will learn a lot about what
barriers are in place
once we move beyond the design competition and actually
ask people to put their time, effort and money behind it. So there are lessons
being learnt every day on
4.78 The Directorate acknowledge the uncertainty but also
indicated that there was a high level of engagement to keep everyone
All of the proponents that have been on this journey have been talking to the
team every day. But the government, through its support
through our directorate,
has certainly tried to encourage all of these proponents along the process. The
process has been well explained
during that time. They have been updated along
the way. But no building project is without
uncertainty.
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government expedites the demonstration housing process so that those projects
with sites start
the public consultation process this financial year and those
without sites are offered sites this financial year.
Section 72 Dickson – Urban Renewal Process
4.80 The Committee asked a number of questions in relation to Section 72
Dickson. During the discussions the Minister informed the
Committee that a
number of blocks were being looked at for use as part of an estate development.
These were block 6, block 22 and
block 25. She told the Committee that:
Block 6 and block 25 are currently owned by the ACT government. Block 22 is a
lease owned by—even though we do not own things
in the ACT, to use that
language—the Salvation Army. When that process commenced, there was an
expectation that the Salvation
Army was going to surrender that site to the ACT
government as part of its future development. That has not yet occurred.
Conversations
are ongoing with the Salvation Army in relation to its future
plans for that
Minister acknowledged there was a diversity of views about how Section 72 should
be used however she noted that there were
key issues that the community appeared
to have near universal agreement on including:
...“contains a mix of uses, including new community facilities, in an
integrated precinct that better connects and builds on
existing uses and
services”, “be a safe environment, inviting and permeable with
appropriate lighting, passive surveillance
and improved connections, especially
for pedestrians and cyclists”, “feature attractive and usable green
space with existing
trees retained to the greatest extent possible, increased
urban tree canopy and places for children and families” and “ensure
development comprises primarily low to medium buildings up to three to four
establishment of a community reference group was suggested by the North Canberra
Community Council and this was noted by
the Minister who indicated that she was
open to the idea. However, the Minister did also indicate that one had not been
established
as there were still uncertainties about the blocks. She told the
Committee that during the next stage of the project one will be
established.
4.83 The Minister indicated that in order to continue with the commitment to
Common Ground a Territory Plan Variation was required
in order to change the
block ‘from CZ6 zoning, which is a commercial zone of leisure and
accommodation, to community facility
zoned land but with an
‘there is currently a Territory Plan variation out for comment—I
think community comment on that closed yesterday—in
relation only to block
4.84 In further discussion on the Territory Plan Variation for block 25 the
Minister noted there was some concern that ’the
Territory Plan variation
for block 25 will provide some kind of authority for other developments that are
in some background documents
in relation to through roads and the like, that it
would require the removal of numerous trees, and so on and so
4.85 The Minister sought to reassure the Committee that these concerns were
unfounded and that she can see that a great deal of the
concern had arisen
because it appeared that a proposed road was to go straight though some
Some documentation in relation to future planning of the site that was prepared
on the basis of one of those draft proposals designed
for further engagement
with the community did have a through road that would go into the existing green
space between block 22, block
28 and block 27 and go into block 26, where the
current trees are, between the developable sites and the stormwater
4.86 The Minister continued, emphasising that:
those through roads are not part of the plan for Common Ground. The intention is
that road reserves that are part of the Territory
Plan variation for block 25
will not be through roads; they will end in turning circles. It is quite clear
in a range of the background
documentation that that is what is
We have no capacity at the moment to build through roads through block 22. I
personally do not support the building of a through
road through the treed area
of block 26. I will not say “not on block 26 at all” because the
southern boundaries of the
blocks vary. You can have a straight road along the
bottom of block 25, slightly below block 22, within block 26, that would
essentially
end at the car park. We cannot build a through road into a private
car park outside the dance school. But there are numerous options
for creating
through capacity, either for vehicles or for pedestrians and cyclists. My
personal view is that building that road through
that current treed area would
not be appropriate. And that is absolutely not what the Territory Plan variation
would provide authority
Committee sought clarification asking the Minister ‘if those roads were
there in the Common Ground maps just because
of the bigger
Minister indicated:
Yes. That was background material that had been prepared in relation to the
bigger process. We postponed or put on hold the community
consultation around
the estate development plan for section 72 as a whole at a time when that
proposal had been developed by some
consultants to put on the table to further
discuss with the community. That was the latest iteration of that proposal to
with the community. We had not had the opportunity to discuss with the
community those through roads and the location thereof, so
we had not had the
opportunity to go back and say, “No, that’s not where we want the
through roads. Let’s reconsider
that option.” Some technical work
was done around the latest iteration of those plans that were part of the
community consultation,
but those plans do not have any government imprimatur.
And, as I have said, I personally do not think that they represent the best
the context that the plans may not have any ‘government imprimatur’
but were still government plans the Committee
sought further clarification as to
what would occur if the plans as distributed were to go ahead and how many trees
would be lost
as a result. The Directorate indicated that:
The short answer is no. The longer answer is that when you ask a road engineer
to work out where the road is, they normally just
do it straight; they do the
simplest road possible. That is their early draft. When you see that it would go
through trees, you would
go, “Okay, let’s do some work on
that.” I think what has happened here is that in our fervour for being
releasing all of the documentation, what was essentially the first
draft of the road engineer has been taken by members of the community
stone, as a grand scheme for the removal of a lot of trees. The answer to the
question is that we have done a tree survey,
but we have not got to the point
where we have worked out what the estate development plan would be and then what
trees would be
removed and what trees would remain. We just were not up to that
stage. It is always a challenge when doing community engagement.
How much do you
release? If you do not release technical reports, there is an accusation that
you are hiding something.
And when you release an early technical report—which is, as I say, at best
a first draft of where you might go—we see,
as you say, much community
concern about this grand scheme for removing those trees. As the minister said,
they were not part of
some grand scheme and they were never slated for removal.
This community concern is upsetting, I am sure, for the community, but
challenging for us. As I said, in our fervour for being open and transparent, we
may have unnecessarily drummed up some community
Directorate further emphasised that:
If I could just add to that, the minister has made it very clear that those
plans have not been endorsed by the government. Equally,
and building on Mr
Rutledge’s comments, it was not endorsed by the directorate either. It was
a body of work that was done
by consultants. We did not get to the point of
doing the detailed analysis, going back and exploring options, because the
for that body of work, as the minister said, ceased at that point in
It was a body of work that was done. In the normal course, we would have had the
planning and urban design team look at that and
put that overlay on the
engineers’ drawings. We would have done the further work in relation to
the trees. We would have looked
at alternative options before going back to the
community with a range of different options. I just reinforce Mr
point that it was the very first set of drawings prepared by a
consultant with a particular skill
Committee asked an additional question in relation to the trees and the waste
access coming from the creek corridor and were
informed that ’the waste
access in on the southern side of the site...within block 25’ and does not
involve any tree
Section 72 Dickson – Lessons Learned –
Community Consultation
4.91 The Committee noted that issues that arose as part of the community
consultation process for Section 72 Dickson and asked the
Directorate what had
been learnt from this process. The Minister responded that:
You are absolutely right that we are constantly learning lessons about community
engagement and how to do it better. Part of the
challenge is that each situation
is unique...Probably the primary lesson for me out of this is understanding the
sensitivity of the
community around section 72. We certainly were very well
aware of that, but we probably should have had a closer look at those background
documents that were being uploaded in relation to the Territory Plan variation.
Presumably there was a view that people would understand
that these were
background documents and that the Territory Plan variation for block 25 stood
alone. I think that we could have been
clearer earlier that those background
documents were to inform the work around Common Ground but were not endorsed
documents or future
Some of the technical work has informed the development of the Common Ground
proposal and the territory planning variation but does
not say anything about
the future plans for section 72. In retrospect, perhaps we should have picked up
earlier that that would become
a sensitivity in the community and we should have
been on the front foot in addressing
observation was made by the Committee that possibly efforts to better engage
with the community had made the issues worse
but if they had not done that
equally frustrating issues would have arisen. The Committee asked the Minister
to comment on whether
it is ‘just a case of finding the sweet point of how
much information we release and when we release
The Minister
I think the other thing is, as I said, that in the next stages of the
conversation about section 72 in the broad, I have committed
establishment of a community reference group. We made a decision not to do that
while the future of block 22 was uncertain.
In retrospect, was that the right
decision? Should we have established a reference group which essentially did not
meet very often
but was a vehicle for keeping people up to date on what was
going on and an opportunity for people to have a point where they could
ask questions?
Having said that, people who are raising concerns have a lot of good connections
into the area of EPSDD that is responsible for these
matters. They can always
pick up the phone to those people or to my office if they have questions. But
potentially a community reference
group would have provided a formal opportunity
to update people and provide some further
background.
4.93 Whilst acknowledging the lessons learned, the Minister also
made reference to some positive commentary that had been received
community in relations to the planning for Section 72, particularly:
with the Dickson pool forecourt enhancement. That is some temporary work to
uplift the Dickson pool forecourt that is being tested
over summer. That has
been welcomed by the community. That was a response to one of the things we
heard from that community engagement
around section 72: that the pool forecourt
was a pretty dowdy and unattractive place to hang
It has been pleasing to see that at the same time that people are expressing
concern about block 25, they are also expressing appreciation
for the work that
officials have done around that, which I think has been very much welcomed by
Public Housing Renewal
4.94 The EPSDD is responsible for the coordination of the Public Housing
Renewal program. Since 2014, the Public Housing Renewal Taskforce
delivering the biggest upgrade to Canberra’s ageing public housing since
self-government in 1989. This program concluded
4.95 The Committee discussed the following matters with the Minister and
Directorate officials:
 Occupancy;
 Site selection and limits on number of
 Housing renewal program – community
engagement.
Site Selection and Limits on Number of Dwellings
4.96 The Committee queried with the Directorate whether there had been enough
consideration of social connections and connections
to services when selecting
the sites. In response the Directorate stated that site selection was done:
...through expression of interest where we bought in older suburbs as well.
Those are where the new developments are. I will go through
them. From memory,
in Woden we picked up nine; Weston Creek, 36; Tuggeranong, 173; and Belconnen,
94. In the inner suburbs there
were probably a dozen there and in Gungahlin,
530. Those in the EOI process, which covered 300 dwellings, are not represented
that map. So the salt and pepper approach has been applied evenly. What we
tried to do there for the purpose of the graphics is to
show where we had new
builds that we did
further questioning about this salt and pepper approach the Committee asked
number of dwellings in new public
housing developments. In response the Directorate stated:
Each dwelling was looked at individually. We looked at how many surrounding
public housing dwellings there may have been in a particular
situation. In
answer to your question, no, when we were working with Housing ACT there was not
a fixed rate for the number of units.
So the upper limit was 32 for some of our
units in Taylor. But, yes, that was the maximum but we had a range of different
and different
Minister further indicated that:
We were moving from dwellings of 200 individuals to 20 to 30 being sort of the
most. What I am hearing from the housing and homelessness
sector is that that is
probably about the limit you would want to get to with that higher density of
people on lower incomes and
with complex
Loose Fill Asbestos
Insulation Eradication Scheme
4.99 The EPSDD is responsible, through the Asbestos Response Taskforce, for
delivering the Loose Fill Asbestos Insulation Eradication
4.100 The Committee discussed the following issues with the Minister and
Directorate Officials:
 Outstanding properties – not
 Outstanding properties – not
demolished;
 Residents in Properties yet to be
 Asbestos Managements Plans –
 Asbestos Managements Plans –
compliance.
Residents in Properties yet to be Acquired
4.101 The Committee noted that there were 38 residences that had not yet been
acquired by the government and that the majority of
residents in those
residences are ‘older residents whose desire is to live out their time
there and who are probably well aware,
even if they were not before the hearings
of the royal commission, that any move is likely to be detrimental to their
The Committee
queried what the plan was for these residences and were informed that:
The next step in what happens after the program is finished is really a decision
for government. That is something that cabinet is
considering at the moment. We
will have more to say; I cannot pre-empt what cabinet will decide. I would like
to observe that, in
determining the next steps, part of the process has been to
work very closely with the people who are still in the homes to understand
circumstances and how they can be best supported to transition out of their
Directorate further indicated that:
The other important point to note is that, of that 38, we have a number that
have signed a surrender deed with the task force. The
task force was to run to
30 June 2020. A number of those, particularly the elderly, look to the latest
date possible to surrender
their property. We have approximately 18 of those
properties that will fall into that category, that have that later surrender
they have opted into the program but will surrender to the task force on
30 June 2020. As you rightly point out, some of the conversations
we have had
are very much about people dying in
Committee noted that it appeared that there were no decision in place as yet and
it was affirmed by the Directorate that
many residents have ‘have
complicated medical needs as it is, and they have strong support networks that
exist around them.’
The Directorate indicated that ‘it is all about
retaining that support network and getting the best quality of life in later
Recommendation 11
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government provide adequate support for remaining residents in Mr Fluffy homes,
in particular
those with medical needs.
Asbestos Management Plans - Compliance
4.105 The Committee asked the Directorate how many of the 20 homeowners, who
were not part of the later surrender date, have an asbestos
management plan
(AMP). They were informed by the Work Safety Commissioner that:
Of the 38 residential properties, 30 have compliant asbestos management plans.
There are seven additional properties—so that
is 37—that have
asbestos management plans which have not been fully implemented yet. That means
that there are some minor works
or minor improvements to be made to ensure the
medium-term safety of those places. Some of those have not been done. So there
seven we classify as partially compliant; they have an AMP, but it has not
been fully implemented yet. There is one property that
is non-compliant and does
not have an
it was further queried as to what would be happening with the eight that are
either not at all compliant or not fully compliant,
particularly in light of the
letters sent to them in 2019 outlining the consequences, such as fines and
imprisonment, for non-compliance
the Work Safety Commissioner noted that:
This is about community safety. As we have heard, we are very sensitive to the
specific needs of individual householders. We have
been working with the task
force for a number of years now, liaising, informing, having meetings and
communicating with the individual
householders. There were a number of
householders—just a very small number compared to the whole
program—that were not
compliant in meeting their community safety needs by
having an asbestos management plan. Over the last few years, I have written
series of letters—I think six all up—outlining their
responsibilities and encouraging each householder to contact us
and talk to our
dedicated inspector, who will liaise with them and assist them to be community
safety compliant.
Most people were compliant with those requests, as it were. There were a small
number overall that were not. As part of being completely
transparent, we
outlined what the legal situation was if they remained non-compliant and the
various actions that maybe taken in
terms of what we may
pressed further about the compliance options of fines and imprisonment he went
on to tell the Committee that:
There are provisions in the legislation for non-compliance. We identified those
sections of the legislation, including the maximum
penalties that the
legislative provisions provide. To be completely transparent, we did point those
out to those householders so
that they knew the seriousness of meeting the
community safety
requirements.
4.108 Whist
assuring the Committee that he didn’t believe that someone would be sent
to jail in these circumstances, the Work
Safety Commissioner reiterated
As I said, to maintain complete transparency as to what the legal requirements
were and what the maximum penalties were. It would
be a matter for the court to
decide, if it ever went to court. I would be extremely hopeful that it never
would go to court. But
if it did, it would be a matter for the court to decide
as to what penalty, if any, would be appropriate. In terms of that transparency,
we thought it was appropriate that they understood the seriousness of their
community safety
requirements.
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that, as the ACT
Government has indicated that it is hopeful that non-compliant Mr Fluffy
asbestos matters
will not go to court, it takes a more cooperative approach to
its communications with Mr Fluffy affected residents and instead focuses
supporting them to be compliant.
5 Suburban Land Agency
Introduction
5.1 The Suburban Land Agency (SLA) was established as a statutory authority
City Renewal Authority and Suburban Land Agency Act 2017
5.2 The SLA is responsible for developing and releasing suburban land,
encouraging and promoting urban renewal outside of declared
urban renewal
precincts, contributing to the growth and diversification of the
Territory’s economy, and social and environmental
sustainability.
5.3 The key functions of the SLA as outlined in the
City Renewal Authority
and Suburban Land Agency Act 2017
 buy and sell leases of land on behalf of the Territory;
 ensure a mixture of public and private housing in new suburbs;
 increase the supply of affordable and community housing;
 meet housing targets;
 carry out development of land in a manner that is environmentally
sustainable;
 exercise our functions in a way that supports statutory greenhouse
gas emissions targets and delivers environmentally sustainable
development;
 follow and support whole of government
strategies.
5.4 The Committee held a public hearing with Ms Yvette Berry MLA, Minister
for Housing and Suburban Development on 7 November 2019
to examine the Suburban
Land Agency 2017-2018 Annual Report.
5.5 The Committee held a public hearing with Ms Rachel Stephen-Smith MLA,
Minister for Urban Renewal on 8 November 2019 to examine
the Suburban Land
Agency 2017-2018 Annual Report – as relates to Urban Renewal Sites.
5.6 The Committee discussed the following matters with the Minister’s
and SLA officials:
 Land Sales in SLA
 Level of Supply in the
 SLA impact on Housing
 Consultations with Indigenous Community in relation to
developments;
 Ginninderry – Joint Venture
 Ginninderry – Joint Venture Agreement – parties and
 Ginninderry – Joint Venture Agreement – schedule of
 Ginninderry – Joint Venture Agreement – equity
contributions and commercial
 Ginninderry – Joint Venture Agreement –
 Ginninderry – Joint Venture Agreement –
 Ginninderry – Joint Venture Agreement – risk
distribution;
 Ginninderry – Joint Venture Agreement – management and
 Ginninderry – Joint Venture Agreement – NSW
 Crace – Joint Venture
 Denman Prospect
 Solar Orientation of blocks in SLA
 Kingston Arts Precinct – successful tenderer, dwellings,
 Kingston Arts Precinct – construction impacts and consultation
with arts groups, residents and
businesses;
 Belconnen Health Centre Site –
demolition;
 Belconnen Health Centre Site – demonstration
 Car park near Belconnen Community Centre –
 Belconnen Water Police
 Frewin Centre
 Former Ambulance Station, Police Station and Remand Centre sites in
 Woden CIT
 East Gungahlin and Kenny projects – urban renewal
 East Gungahlin and Kenny projects – future
 Living Infrastructure
implementation;
 Gold Creek Homestead –
 Gold Creek Homestead –
consultation.
Kingston Arts Precinct - successful tenderer,
dwellings, parking
5.7 The Committee asked Directorate about the current status of the proposed
development of the Kingston Arts precinct, including
the successful tenderer and
the number of dwelling proposed for the site. They were informed by the Minister
that ‘Geocon was
identified as the successful tenderer, as opposed to the
preferred tenderer’
whilst the Directorate indicated that there was no parameter put on the maximum
number of dwellings and the proponents were not asked
to define the number of
dwellings. They explained that this was:
predominantly because the definition of the developable site area and the
heights within the site are already defined. It was up
to the proponents to
consider the precinct holistically and think about all the possible uses that
can occur on the site that are
complementary to the arts precinct and to develop
their own opportunities within the residential
5.8 Management
of parking during construction was also a concern for the Committee and the
Directorate indicated that:
Again, as part of the documentation that went to all the proponents, they were
asked to think about how parking will be managed during
the construction period.
Certainly there was a response to that in Geocon’s proposal.
We have to remember that the documents were written in 2015 and submissions were
made in 2016. Some of the land that was available
at the time that could have
been used for the purposes of temporary parking has now gone, so new thinking is
being put in place on
how to tackle that. Geocon are required to demonstrate
that as part of their development application proposal. We have not really
to that point as yet, but they are certainly thinking about it and it is a topic
for conversation with the community panel and
the broader
Committee then asked what the net growth or loss of public parking spaces would
be and were informed that:
To be honest, we would have to do the calculations to answer that question
definitively. I can say that the number of car parks available
at the moment as
surface parking will be replaced one for one. Additional public parking will be
made available on top of those numbers
which forms part of that 500-space car
parking structure. As part of the studies that have been done over time, and
taking into account
the success of the Old Bus Depot Market on the weekends, in
addition to those 500-plus spots the proponent is required to make another
available over the
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government provide more detail on the number of dwellings anticipated for the
Kingston Arts
Precinct Development.
Recommendation 14
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government provide more detail on the proposed parking arrangements for the
Kingston Arts Precinct
Development.
Kingston Arts Precinct - construction impacts and
consultation with arts groups, residents and businesses
5.12 The Committee asked Directorate what plans were being developed to
ensure that businesses in the Kingston area would not be adversely
affected by
construction. They were informed that:
Certainly there have been a number of initial conversations with businesses as
part of the introduction of the project process. Businesses
have been invited on
to the community panel and they have their representatives on the community
panel. Again, the discussions around
how the construction will be staged across
the site and how the parking laws will be staged are yet to happen.
The period we are in right now is establishing strong links and relationships
and knowing exactly the people we will need to discuss
all those concerns with.
The construction will not start for at least another two years, so there is a
long period where we can nut
out all the details for the best way going
5.13 Further
to this the Committee asked how consultation was occurring with the arts groups
and were informed that:
We are doing it together with artsACT; they are the conduit to the arts
organisations. We have established a regular monthly meeting
with all the arts
organisations where we brief them on the progress of the project, on the
community engagement and on matters that
are important to them. In addition to
those monthly meetings where all the arts organisations come together, depending
are talking about and what solutions we are looking to agree on, they
have direct access to the design team. There have been a number
of meetings
between the design team and both individual arts organisations and groups. We
have had quite a bit of interaction with
the arts organisations over the last
this context the Committee made further queries as to the level of consultation
that has been undertaken with all stakeholders,
including arts groups, local
residents and businesses and were told that:
We have been thinking about this in the context of the arts organisations being
a stakeholder and the community groups having a slightly
different interest in
the project. Certainly at the next community panel artsACT have been invited to
discuss the project. Certainly
the members of the arts organisations are free to
participate in the community engagement process, as members of the community.
we are thinking about the moment where we can bring the two together because
it is important for the arts organisations to present
themselves and for the
broader community to understand what they will bring to the
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government ensure that full and transparent consultation is undertaken with arts
groups, local
residents and businesses.
Land Sales in SLA Estates
5.16 The Committee noted that the SLA Annual Report (p18) indicated that land
sales had slowed in SLA estates and that this was due,
in part, to increasing
competition from other estates. The SLA was asked to elaborate on this and the
SLA CEO told the Committee
we work in a market where we really only have about 50 per cent market share.
Some of that competition is coming from estates such
as Denman Prospect within
the ACT. There are other parts within the ACT with land for sale, but there are
also estates across the
border that are providing land in competition with the
also indicated that fifty percent of buyers are looking to buy from the SLA
which means that ‘if demand is around 1,200
blocks of land in a year then
we would suspect that about 600 of that would come from the Suburban Land
5.18 When asked how much of the remaining 600 would be purchases in NSW the
SLA indicated that:
There is no publicly available data for New South Wales so we do not have an
equivalent data source to what we get for the ACT...Most
of the supply at the
moment is actually in non-single residential product so we are competing for a
very small pool of people who
want to buy residential land. The competitors are,
as you probably know, south Jerrabomberra and Googong as well as Denman
We also have the Ginninderry joint venture, and while we have a 60 per
cent interest in that it also takes up some of that
5.19 It was also indicated to the Committee that:
If you look across the market we are seeing two things: one is record levels of
supply in greenfields land. We have around 540 blocks
for sale at the moment. We
think that the competition has somewhere between 200 and 250 blocks for sale. If
you add the multi-unit
product there is something in the order of 20,000 units
either built, being built, in the planning process—that is going through
the DA process—or in the hands of developers but yet to proceed down that
planning pipeline. That is probably a record for
the territory as well; there is
a huge amount of supply for a fairly small number of people at the
asked why people would want to buy property over the border the SLA indicated
The question is what is over the border. South Jerrabomberra is over the border
but it is about 18 kilometres from the CBD of Canberra,
so it is relatively
close. The product they are offering, while it may appear to be slightly cheaper
than some of our estates on
a per square metre basis, is slightly more expensive
because the blocks are smaller. So if you look at that as being over the border,
that product will compete with our products.
Googong is a lower priced product generally, but it is also 25 kilometres from
the CBD. The reality is that it is an urban suburb
in a rural setting whereas
our estates are sitting in the urban area of Canberra. For example, Throsby,
Coombs and Wright are about
11 kilometres from the CBD. Taylor is 17 kilometres
away and Whitlam will be about nine kilometres away when the first places go
there. So they are much closer to the heart of Canberra than some of these other
estates. Other estates in, say, Murrumbateman
or Bungendore are 40 kilometres
from the city. They are a long way away and they do not have the service levels
offered in central
Ginninderry Joint Venture Agreement – NSW
5.21 The Committee asked a number of questions about the delineation of the
land involved in the Ginninderry Joint Venture and was
informed that in terms of
the Ginninderry site ‘the government owns the ACT land and Riverview owns
the NSW land.’
5.22 In an Answer to a Question on Notice the Committee was informed that the
breakdown of this land was as
Territory Blocks 1605,1606, 1607, 1420, 1586, 1329, 1621, 1622, 1440, 858, 859,
853, 860, 1333, 860,857, 1540 Belconnen
Riverview Blocks 1,2,3,7 DP771051
5.23 The value of the land at
the time of signing the joint venture was quoted by the Directorate in an Answer
to a Question on Notice
as; ACT - $141 million and NSW $221
5.24 The Committee queried the breakdown of housing types that would be built
in the ACT and in NSW and was informed in an Answer
to a Question on Notice
The product mix for Neighbourhood 1 (approximately 1,150 blocks) is
approximately 50% detached/ semi-detached housing and 50% integrated
(Terraces & Multi Unit homes). The lotting plan for the remainder of the
Ginninderry Joint Venture is yet to be prepared
however consistent with the
masterplan for the whole of Ginninderry the indicative split is:
• ACT Lands is 60% detached/semi-detached housing and 40% integrated.
• NSW Lands is 90%detached/semi-detached housing and 10%
integrated.
further questioning the Committee asked about the plans for the rezoning of the
NSW land. The Directorate indicated that:
The rezoning at this point has progressed significantly through the New South
Wales process. It is now with the New South Wales state
government to do their
final deliberation on it. That said, if it does not proceed, after a period of
time the land will revert back
to the territory. The territory will essentially
get the land for $1. That land enables a huge amount of development within the
Without that land, the territory could not extend its residential
development to the border. With the land, we can extend it to the
border. It is
a significant contribution to the overall development of land in the
Minister further indicated that:
The reason for that, which might not be clear to the committee, is that with the
developable land between the ACT and the border,
there needs to be a buffer.
Under the national capital planning act, there needs to be a buffer with the
joint venture partner’s
land on the New South Wales side of the border. It
gave the opportunity for more land in the ACT to be developable than would have
been available had the joint venture partner not had the land on the other side
of the border, because of the national capital planning
regulations.
East Gungahlin and Kenny Projects
5.27 The Committee asked the Minister as to why east Gungahlin and Kenny were
being called urban renewal areas. They were informed
Essentially, that is because when we talked about the EPIC Kenny urban renewal
project, Kenny sits between EPIC, an existing developed
site, and Mitchell, an
existing developed and long-managed developed site...Harrison obviously is also
a developed suburb. At this
point, Kenny is now intensification rather than
expansion of the suburban perimeter of the ACT. But I think it is a fair point.
is also a greenfield
development.
additional questioning the Committee queried the details on investigations for
future planning for these sites and what that
future would be. The Directorate
indicated that:
There have been a lot of investigations over many years in relation to the Kenny
site in particular. That has primarily been because,
as we have done work, it
has identified further issues, particularly with the geology of the Kenny area.
There has been a lot of
ongoing working in that space. In terms of the more
recent work that you may be referring to, that is broadening beyond just Kenny
itself and looking at those areas that the minister referred to surrounding
Kenny. That is providing context. That does include the
EPIC area, but that is
not about changing the use of EPIC. I need to make that really clear. It is just
understanding that Kenny
is part of the broader
Directorate further indicated that:
the Kenny nature reserve was established under the Gungahlin strategic
assessment. There have been studies of both the geology and
the conservation
values of the area. I suppose that the next round of studies has been more
specifically around Kenny, what buffer
will be required to the nature reserve
and where the two would interact.
Then I suppose that the next part of the study—this has already
occurred—updates all the time. As the city grows, there
are a lot of users
around EPIC. The growth of Gungahlin has been quite strong over that time. So we
are just retesting those. As
Mr Ponton said, there are geology studies and also
any contaminated sites et cetera. That is the sort of stuff that we are looking
When you think about urban renewal, it is important to consider what sorts of
facilities you need for a growing city. The work that
we are doing now really
explores that precinct and what the environmental constraints or opportunities
might be, what some of the
planning constraints and opportunities might be,
their uses, the transport access, all of those things that can build a picture
informs any sort of government decision and thinking in the
Committee asked the Minister as to why east Gungahlin is the last section in the
area to ‘come online’. The Committee
were informed that some blocks
were ‘because of some of those challenges that we have referred to through
those studies around
the geology and the environmental values. It has been more
challenging to work through those issues in that area’ whilst other
were because of ‘staging in terms of when the demand is there for those
particular parcels of
5.31 The Committee sought further clarification on why the construction had
begun further away and towards the town centre, rather
than working out from the
town centre. The Minister stated that:
...it is probably a bit of both because you are building low-rise residential
and low to medium density around the outside in building
the town centre, but
then there will be a limit to the demand for building potentially higher density
developments closer to the
town centre. There is a limit to the market demand
for those, which grows over time, but you need to balance the demand for
balanced that way.
I also note that the construction of light rail has been a significant project
in that area that may have limited the capacity for
people to undertake other
development work at the same time. That may have also been a factor in the
timing of the
an answer to a Question Taken on Notice the Minister indicated that:
It is assumed that the Member's question relates to the timing of the land
release and development of the remaining undeveloped land
in Gungahlin town
centre, located east of Kate Crace Street, and as such, the answer is as
This area has not been released to date by the Government because the area is
reserved exclusively for large scale commercial office
development (such as
Federal Government departments) by the Territory Plan. The Territory Plan is the
key statutory document that
guides planning and development in the ACT and this
exclusive use was introduced in 2011. Since that time, the town centre has not
attracted any large-scale office development for these sites.
With the introduction of light rail, the Government has explored new
opportunities for this area through the Gungahlin Town Centre
Planning Refresh.
It is now proposed through Draft Variation to the Territory Plan No. 364
(Gungahlin Town Centre Planning Refresh)
to introduce additional uses in this
area, including residential, while reserving 65,000m2 for large scale office
development. This
change has been made in response to new commercial trends and
to support the long-term viability and diversity of the Gungahlin town
Public consultation on the Draft Variation has recently closed and all
submissions are being considered ahead of a Recommended Final
Draft Variation
being prepared for consideration by the Minister for Planning and Land
Management and the Legislative Assembly's
Standing Committee for Planning and
Urban Renewal. The Draft Variation is anticipated to be referred early in 2020.
The Draft Variation
has interim effect meaning that the Territory Plan applies
as if it had been varied by the Draft Variation. The timing of the final
approval of the Variation will be dependent upon whether the Standing Committee
chooses to undertake an inquiry.
Once this process has been completed, decisions can then be made about the
staging of land release for the range of uses permitted
by the Variation to the
Territory Plan.
Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate
Introduction
6.1 The Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate
(CMTEDD) leads the ACT Public Service (ACTPS) working collaboratively
government and the community to deliver government priorities and drive
initiatives aimed at making Canberra a better place
6.2 As a central agency, CMTEDD:
 supports the Chief Minister, the directorate’s Ministers and
the Cabinet by providing informed and innovative advice;
 provides support and direction across the ACTPS on policy and
 leads the ongoing development of the ACTPS to best deliver to
Ministers and the Canberra community including advising on
the structure of the
ACTPS, ACT public sector employment legislation and conditions, employment,
industrial relations and human resource
management;
 drives the evolution of Canberra into a smart and connected digital
city, through leading-edge initiatives;
 improves the liveability and productivity of the city in
collaboration with business, education institutions and industry
 provides strategic financial and economic advice to the ACT
Government with the aim of improving the Territory's financial
position and
economic management;
 supports government through the provision of financial, information
and communication technology (ICT), human resources and
procurement
 connects businesses and communities to government through Access
Canberra’s ‘one-stop shop’ licensing and
regulatory services;
 keeps the Canberra community informed about what government is doing
and involves Canberrans in the decisions that impact
6.3 The annexed Annual Report of the ACT Architects Board was referred to the
Committee for inquiry and report.
6.4 The Committee held a public hearing on 7 November 2019 to examine the
2018-2019 Annual Report of the ACT Architects Board.
6.5 Other areas of the CMTEDD 2018-2019 Annual Report were considered by
other committees.
Architects Board of the
6.6 The ACT Architects Board (the Board) is established under the
Architects Act 2004
. Its role is to ensure registered architects provide
services to the public in a professional and competent
6.7 The ACT Architects Board's functions are to:
 register architects;
 investigate complaints given to the Board about registered people
and people who have been registered;
 consider whether it is necessary to take disciplinary action against
registered people and people who have been registered
and, if it is, to take the
necessary action;
 consider and report to the Minister about issues referred to the
Board by the Minister for advice;
 advise the Minister in relation to the practice of architecture, for
example, about codes of professional conduct;
 further a common and harmonious approach to the administration of
legislation about architects by cooperation with local
 accredit courses of study in architecture; and
 provide general advice to consumers about the professional conduct
and standards of competence expected of registered
architects.
6.8 The Committee discussed the following matters with Board officials:
 Update on the number of registered
architects;
 Number of architects refused
registration;
 Architecture program at University of
 Cost of AACA annual
 Academic Architect representative
Academic Architect Representative Position
6.9 The Committee identified that the academic architect position on the
board had been vacant for some time and were advised by the
ACT Registrar of
Architects that the:
...position has been advertised and nominations have been sought. I understand
it is in the process of being completed, from a government
perspective, with a
person identified to be put to the minister for a
Committee were also advised that the role of the academic architect
representative enabled the board to better connect with
the higher education
sector and that the position was usually filled with a person who was an expert
where the industry is going from an academic perspective and the challenges
associated with education—things like emerging
technologies that impact
the profession... so that the board can understand the challenges faced by the
sector but also influence
the sector in terms of the areas they should be
considering.
ACT Registrar of Architects further stated that:
The board sees that position as very valuable to connect the education side to
the profession side and also the ability to transition
and ensure that people
who are completing the qualification take the next step to
registration.
also told the Committee that a recent example of their engagement with the
University of Canberra, who are the only provider
of the architecture program in
the ACT, where the recent focus has been on building quality and on
‘pursuing some more hands-on,
technical-based program work within the
architecture program at
Recommendation 16
The Committee recommends that the vacant
position of academic architect representative on the ACT Architects Board be
filled as soon
as practicable.
7 City Renewal
Introduction
7.1 The City Renewal Authority (CRA) is a Territory Authority established
City Renewal Authority and Suburban Land Agency Act 2017
7.2 As defined in the
City Renewal Authority and Suburban Land Agency Act
, the CRA’s role is to:
 encourage and promote a vibrant city through the delivery of
design-led, people focussed urban renewal;
 encourage and promote social and environmental sustainability;
 operate effectively with sound risk management practices to ensure
value for money.
7.3 The Committee held a public hearing with Mr Andrew Barr MLA, Chief
Minister on 7 November 2019 to examine the City Renewal Authority
Annual Report.
7.4 The Committee discussed the following matters with the Minister and CRA
 Sydney and Melbourne Buildings – maintenance and
 Sydney and Melbourne Buildings – engagement with
 Sydney and Melbourne Buildings – economic
revitalisation;
 Sydney and Melbourne Buildings – waste
enclosures;
 City Centre Marketing and Improvements
 City Centre Marketing and Improvements Levy – maintenance
 City Centre Marketing and Improvements Levy – other
expenditure;
 City Precinct Renewal Strategy –
consultation;
 West Basin/Acton Waterfront/City to the
 Access to Acton
Waterfront;
 Parkes Way
 CRA Consultancy
 Communication and Engagement versus Design and Strategy
 Development Application referrals to
 Development Application referrals outside of CRA
 Place intelligence
Development Application Referrals to CRA
7.5 It was noted that as per the
Planning and Development Regulation 2008
CRA are a formal referral entity for development applications (DAs) within the
precinct. The Committee asked what was involved
in this referral process and
were informed by the CRA CEO that:
Under those arrangements with EPSDD, we are obliged when those applications are
referred to us to turn our advice around and provide
that advice within 15 days.
We receive those applications. We provide comments based upon those principles
that you talked about
earlier, the kinds of objectives that we have particularly
around sustainability and high quality design. There are around seven
different criteria. We also provide a copy of all of that advice over the
two-month reporting period to our board for
Committee further queried what kind of advice was given as part of this process
and were informed that:
We make suggestions, and they are only suggestions. We are not the
decision-maker. But, hand in glove with the DA team, we reinforce
the sorts of
things that we know the planning directorate are seeking to encourage through
those development applications. As I said
a moment ago, they really relate
primarily to better design outcomes. For example, if we saw a new proposal
coming forward with extensive
ground floor blank frontage—not contributing
to street life—we would ask the architect, and generally the architect and
applicant are present together, why it is that we could not actually see a
retail tenancy opening up on to the street. They are small
but really important
suggestions that we are making to applicants to actually achieve a more
responsive development outcome and one
that contributes, of course, to city
illustrate the process the Committee was informed by the CRA CEO about the CRA
involvement as a referral entity for the Geocon
proposal for the hotel in Garema
In that particular project, we supported the view of the capital design review
panel, which was that solar access, particularly during
the winter solstice on
22 June, was really important to Garema Place. What was submitted initially
as a proposal was a building up
to RL617, which is the maximum height. This is a
building to the north of Garema Place, precisely where it would potentially
in quite a lot of overshadowing of Garema Place to an excessive
Again, through a careful negotiation with the DA team and with the National
Capital Design Review Panel, the applicant—in this
Geocon—understood that that was a non-negotiable aspect. They needed to
reduce the height of that building in order to
ensure that the things that we
wanted to protect in Garema Place, including one of the most important
aspects—solar access
in winter—were recognised and that their design
responded to these aspects. The height was dropped. They ended up acquiring
additional site and consolidated that site. So it was a similar GFA, similar
gross floor area, but a much lower building. Therefore,
the impact has been able
Committee then asked what the role of the planning directorate and the community
was in all of this. The Chief Minister responded
telling the Committee that
...is not a decision-maker but its input is requested. I think that is
appropriate. It and a number of other agencies are asked for
views in relation
to development applications. Given the design expertise both on the board and
within the authority selected for
that specific purpose, it is appropriate that
they are a referral entity. Yes, ACTPLA is the ultimate decision-maker, but I do
think it is unreasonable that there are referral
Chief Minister continued, defending the ability of the CRA to be a part of the
development application process for developments
in the City Precinct when other
ACT precincts do not have the benefit of a similar authority acting in their
Being a referral entity for the handful of development applications that there
are each year within the precinct is an entirely reasonable
area for the City
Renewal Authority to have some function and commitment in. I do not necessarily
accept your line of thinking. If
you have a different view, you are welcome to
Sydney and Melbourne Buildings – Maintenance and
7.10 The Committee noted that the government were looking at developing
legislation to ‘force’ maintenance for the Sydney
and Melbourne
buildings and asked the Chief Minister when and how this would occur. In
response, the Chief Minister told the Committee
The government has indicated a desire to see a change from the status quo in
relation to the status of those buildings. We have a
process underway to develop
legislation in order to enable consistency in terms of the work that is
undertaken in and around the
precinct, both publicly funded work and
requirements for the private
In a very practical sense, it could mean adherence to a consistent colour
scheme. If you walk around the buildings, you will note
that is not currently
the way that individual owners are approaching the situation. Some people go to
a lot of effort to repaint,
but in a slightly different colour to other parts of
the building. That is one very practical manifestation of what we are seeking
An early precursor to this has been the work the authority has undertaken around
the shared waste enclosures. That involved a considerable
amount of consultation
and engagement.
In light of recent government investments in the public areas immediately
adjoining the buildings...there is a need now to turn our
attention to a
collaborative arrangement with the private owners, some of whom are already
undertaking renewal projects and
We work very closely with the property owners and we are currently developing
legislation. It will not be appearing in the Assembly
for a little while yet,
but it is my intention to proceed with that in
7.11 The Committee then queried the nature of the proposed
legislation and its relationship with the Heritage Act, and were informed
All of those issues are to be finalised through a cabinet process, so I will not
pre-empt all of that. We are looking at the range
of options. We are probably
leaning more towards discrete Sydney and Melbourne buildings legislation, as
opposed to seeking to expand
that beyond those two buildings. Then there are
provisions within the Heritage Act that can be drawn upon. But it may be that
best approach is to undertake a legislative intervention through the City
Renewal Authority
legislation.
further explaining the reasons for having a tailored piece of legislation for
the Sydney and Melbourne buildings and no other
sites of heritage significance,
the Chief Minister told the Committee:
These specific buildings, original Canberra buildings, are iconic and, in and of
their own right, have a unique set of circumstances.
Therefore, I think it will
require a unique and tailored piece of legislation. But we are not yet concluded
in our processes in relation
to that, so I am not going to pre-empt anything
today other than to say that we have put this on the agenda, we have sought to
over a number of years now, and there are specific individual projects
that have been completed and will soon be
operational.
Sydney and Melbourne Buildings – Waste
7.13 During the hearing, reference was made to the ongoing issue of
installing waste enclosures in Odgers Lane (Melbourne Building)
and Verity Lane
(Sydney Building). The Chief Minister was asked when they would be operational.
In response, he stated that it would
be this month, following the conclusion of
existing waste agreements. He explained there would be a 28 day transition
7.14 The CRA Chief Operating Officer stated that the 28 day transition period
is enable transition from existing waste arrangement
to the new waste
arrangements and the Committee was informed that:
work is ongoing at present and collections under the new arrangement are
scheduled to begin on 1 December. The transitional arrangements
are underway,
where JJ Richards are working with business owners to transition the waste
arrangements, and then operations commence
There is a licence agreement with JJ Richards to operate the waste enclosures
and then they establish individual relationships with
each of the
businesses.
Committee queried why the process up until this stage had taken so long, at
least 12 months and were informed that it was
because there ‘were 102
different waste arrangements that had to be worked together into a final
also told by the CRA CEO that negotiations had also been difficult and
We are trying to do something that has not been done in Civic before. One of the
reasons we are persisting with this is that in many
of the other sections within
Civic you have those similar territory-land courtyard arrangements, where you
have businesses literally
dumping rubbish in those central spaces. If we get
this right we are confident that we can roll out a similar arrangement for other
parts of Civic. At the moment, having six contractors and garbage trucks
constantly going in and out is just not
CRA CEO continued, telling the Committee that:
At the moment we have a number of bins and quite a large number of bins stored
on public land space in the laneways. The waste enclosures
are a solution to
that, provided by ACT government. Instead of storing it ad hoc around the lanes,
there is this facility which people
can opt in to. Businesses can choose not to
opt in. Every business is entitled to opt in in those buildings, but businesses
not to. If you have the physical capacity to store waste on your
premises then that arrangement is completely up to
telling the Committee that the program is in the first instance a 12 month trial
the CRA CEO advocated that these waste
enclosures would go some way to
preventing illegal dumping and would encourage better practices in terms of
recycling. The CRA Chief
Operating Officer of stated that the rationale is to
...reduce the total number of bins by having the shared facility for those who
opt in. There are the efficiencies, through reducing
the number of bins, of
having a single daily pick-up rather than Cleanaway and JJs all coming in at
various different times. There
is the attempt to gain some efficiencies by
pooling the product, through the waste enclosures, to reduce the number of bins
reduce the frequency of collection and the challenges with access and
egress in that environment and an opt-in arrangement. That
is the rationale for
the trial, which we will be looking
in discussions the CRA was asked why the costing for the waste enclosures had
increased by $100,000 and were informed that:
When they were digging the foundations, they came across Icon assets in the form
of a high voltage electricity cable which had not
appeared on any previous plans
of where the utilities were, and also a sewer connection. The facility has to be
able to be washed
down, and that has to go straight to the sewer, not to the
stormwater course.
Recommendation 17
The Committee recommends that at the
conclusion of the waste enclosure program 12 month trial, the City Renewal
Authority consider
expanding the program to include other areas of
Recommendation 18
The Committee recommends that at the
conclusion of the waste enclosure program 12 month trial, the City Renewal
Authority expand the
program to trial the collection of food waste for
composting.
City Centre Marketing and Improvements Levy
7.21 The Committee had a number of queries about the City Centre Marketing
and Improvements Levy (CCMIL). In the first instance they
asked the CRA CEO what
levy payers believed were the key issues. In response he stated that:
The key issue for levy contributors, who often remind me that it is their
money—which it is not—is that they want to
see, understandably, a
return on the investment, so to speak. They are very engaged and they want to
make sure that the way in which
we are committing the funds is having a real
cause and effect relationship, with improved retail sales and improved economic
asked to elaborate further about what traders were saying, the CRA CEO indicated
We are certainly hearing from traders that they want us to attract more people
to the precinct; there is no doubt about that. We
do not want the Canberra city
centre to be the best-kept secret. We want it, of course, to be a place so that
when people do visit
Canberra, when they come for a major event like Floriade or
Enlighten, they also increase their night stays and say, “We’ll
and explore the city centre. We’ll go and explore the city centre
precinct.” We recognise, as does Invest Canberra,
who we have been talking
to about this particular idea, the need to help position the city centre as a
very attractive visitor
destination.
Committee was informed that levy payers were consulted on their priorities for
expenditure of CCMIL funds with thirteen surveys
completed online and 15 people
attending the workshop.
7.24 In an Answer to a Question on Notice the Chief Minister affirmed
The priorities identified by levy payers for the expenditure of CCM IL 2019-20
funds were: place management (cleaning, maintenance,
place presentation},
vibrant streets (includes provision of high quality street furniture, planter
boxes and green spaces and minor
capital works), and City Grants.
Results from the consultation were an important consideration in the planning of
the 2019-20 CCMJL budget. The three top priorities
identified by levy payers
received significant funding in the 2019-20 CCMIL
Percentage of Budget
Place Management
Partnerships and Events
Vibrant Streets
City Grants
Communications and Engagement
Safer Communities
Performance and Accountability
7.25 In expanding on the noted priorities, the CRA CEO told the
Committee that the priority of cleaning and place management was:
...why we have put in place the new place management arrangements, with a
dedicated team in the levy collection area. They were very
keen to ensure that
Civic remained a safer place. That is why the levy has contributed to the
pre-existing program around taxi ranks
and the way in which we can provide a
safe night environment for people coming in to
7.26 In terms of capital improvements, the CRA CEO told the
Committee that the focus was:
...particularly in places like Braddon, where the streetscapes and the condition
of the public environment were quite variable. The
combination includes what I
would say is the physical aspect. Certainly, there is the presentation of Civic
and the way in which
those actions might contribute to greater
7.27 When asked whether there would be any changes to the levels
of funding and what the funding is allocated to, the CRA CEO stated:
We have had feedback from a small group of traders, particularly in the Braddon
area, who have indicated that they would like to
see greater benefits flowing to
that particular part of the levy area. We have heard that loud and clear, and we
have decided to
form an advisory group of levy contributors. We put out terms of
reference for that advisory group, which would meet at least four
times a year
to help advise me and my team in relation to those very
priorities.
We realise we have to keep the lines of communication open at all times with the
levy contributors, and this is one way in which
we can ensure that we are
listening. If those levy contributors have suggestions or ideas for how the
impact of the levy, for them
as business and commercial property owners, can be
improved, certainly we are listening to that. I think this advisory committee
arrangement will go a long way to demonstrating our commitment to that. We
prepare an annual performance statement which we distribute
to all levy
contributors, so we are very open in terms of what we believe we are achieving
with the funding that comes
West Basin/City to the Lake/Acton Waterfront
7.28 The Committee queried why there was a naming change for the waterfront
precinct at West Basin and was informed by the Chief Minister
that the West
Basin terminology is more applicable to the body of water whilst the Acton
Waterfront is the more appropriate terminology
for the land.
7.29 The Chief Minister also indicated that it is not called City to the Lake
Certain issues that were being actively considered as part of city to the
lake—most particularly the relocation of the Civic
pool to the Acton
waterfront, which, before Mr Fluffy, was going to be a project that would happen
within the next five years—were
7.30 He went on to explain that:
The authority, through its board, and Mr Snow and his team have undertaken some
further work in relation to the Acton waterfront
precinct and government has
made some further decisions in relation to land release and transport provision
since 2013. The city
to the lake concept, as it was 15 years ago in its initial
Griffin legacy manifestation under the Howard government and their National
Capital Authority-led changes to the National Capital Plan that then flowed
through into the Territory Plan, has evolved beyond that
now to the work the
City Renewal Authority has
undertaken.
Also in that period the planning authority undertook further work in relation to
the city precinct and it has been the responsibility
of the City Renewal
Authority since its establishment to coordinate those planning legacy works,
together with a realistic forward
infrastructure plan based upon the
territory’s infrastructure needs and land release programs. That is why it
is not called
city to the lake anymore—it has a broader
The core philosophy of bringing the city to the lake remains; those principles
and ideas remain, but their application is on a different
timetable, as a result
principally of Mr Fluffy but also of subsequent decisions as they relate to, for
example, stage 2A of light
rail, the raising of London Circuit to an at-grade
intersection and various land release decisions, as well as decisions from the
commonwealth in relation to their designated land. They have all impacted on
both the 2004 work and the 2011-13 work in relation
to city to the
7.31 The Committee asked about the status of negotiations for
West Basin, and were advised in an Answer to a Question on Notice that:
Officials from Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate are
in regular communication with officials from the
National Capital Authority and
the Department of Finance on a range of matters relating to land across the ACT.
West Basin is one
of the subject sites as pa rt of those
discussions.
additional questioning about the timeline for completion of West Basin the
Directorate indicated in an Answer to a Question
on Notice that:
Stage 1: Henry Rolland Park was completed in April 2018. The final project cost
was $13.356 million (Ex GST). Stage 2 land reclamation,
lake wall construction
and boardwalk extension. This stage has been appropriated $ 37.4 million (Ex
GST). Progression of these works
is dependent upon the successful resolution of
the land ownership. Future Stages are not funded and are subject to the City
Authority Board consideration of the West Basin Review. The Review is
programmed to be completed by June
City Precinct Renewal Strategy –
Consultation
7.33 The Committee were told that the community was involved in creating the
precinct renewal strategy via combination of surveys
and workshops and when
asked how they had contributed, the CRA CEO stated:
Specifically, there was a dedicated workshop over a day. We invited a number of
industry sector, not-for-profit and community groups
to join us to help to
confirm what we had seen and read through previous engagements around renewal.
We provided them with that information
and asked them, as a representative
cross-section of the Canberra community, what they wanted to see with
That led on to us talking to them about the components of the renewal
program—whether they thought they were the priorities
for them as a
representative group; whether there were other ideas that they would like to see
explored, particularly around those
early priorities for renewal. There was
quite an extensive engagement process, and we continue to maintain a strong
engagement with
those community groups, particularly through workshops and
presentations, and by reporting back against the progress we are making
the implementation of that
Committee asked the CRA to expand on the six themes that contributors felt were
key to the renewal of the city:
One of the very first things we did was to look at all of the previous
engagements that had been conducted where renewal was a focus
of the feedback
that government was looking for. We looked at 30,000 different responses that
had been received in relation to similar
community engagements. We found, when
we analysed those 30,000 different submissions that had come over that period of
six themes emerged quite strongly in relation to sustainability,
economic revitalisation and the physical condition of the city.
There was really
strong affirmation through that consultation that those were the sorts of
themes. As I said a second ago, that was
reaffirmed through the more focused
work we did, both in relation to the workshop and in the online
engagement.
asked about the numbers of those involved in the CRA consultation the Chief
Minister in an Answer to a Question Taken on
Notice indicated that:
Early in 2018 the Authority reviewed 15 years of community consultation, both by
government and some by third parties that were publicly
available. We summarised
the results of 30,000 pieces of feedback into six key themes, which we then took
to the broader comm unity
through a YourSay consultation that ran from May to
During the YourSay consultation we received nearly 2000 visits to the program
consultation page, resulting in 136 contributions.
The Authority used the results from the YourSay engagement, along with the
summary of previous engagements, to inform a workshop
with a number of
stakeholders. Representatives from 40 government, private sector and community
organisations were invited to take
part in the workshop, of which 27 attended.
A summary of findings from the workshop are available on the YourSay page
(www.yoursay.act.gov.au/precinct-renewal-program).
8 Conclusion
8.1 The Committee has made 18 recommendations in this report relating to a
broad range of topics.
8.2 The Committee would like to thank ACT Government Ministers and
directorate officials for their contribution this this inquiry.
Ms Caroline Le
Couteur MLA
25 March 2020
A - Witnesses
7 and 8 November 2019
Andrew Barr MLA, Chief Minister; Treasurer
Ms Yvette Berry MLA, Minister for Housing and Suburban
Development
Ms Rachel Stephen Smith MLA, Minister for Urban
Ms Suzanne Orr MLA, Minister for Employment and Workplace
Mr Mick Gentleman MLA, Minister for Planning and Land
Mr Ben Ponton, Director-General, EPSDD
Mr Geoffrey Rutledge, Deputy Director-General, Sustainability and
the Built Environment, EPSDD
Ms Lea Durie, Acting Executive Branch Manager, Urban Renewal,
Mr John Dietz, Chief Executive Officer, Suburban Land Agency
Mr Tom Gordon, Executive Director, Development Delivery, Suburban
Land Agency
Mr Nicholas Holt, Executive Director, Built Form and Divestment,
Suburban Land Agency
Ms Irena Sharp. Development Director, Urban Projects, Development
Delivery, Suburban Land Agency
Mr Neil Bulless, Deputy Chief Executive Officer
Mr Joey Lee, Chief Financial Officer, Suburban Land Agency
Mr Bruce Fitzgerald, Executive Group Manager, Urban Renewal,
Mr Greg Jones, Director, Executive Branch Manager, Workplace
Protection, Access Canberra, CMTEDD
Mr Ben Green, Executive Branch Manager, Construction and
Utilities, Access Canberra, CMTED; ACT Registrar of Architects
Mr Malcolm Snow, Chief Executive Officer, City Renewal
Mr Craig Gillman, Chief Operating Officer, Business Operations
Officer, City Renewal Authority
Dr Erin Brady, Deputy Director-General, Land Strategy and
Environment, EPSDD
Mr George Cilliers, Acting Executive Director, Merit and Estate
Assessment and Deed Management Assessment, EPSDD
Mr Craig Simmons, Chief Operating Officer, EPSDD
Ms Alix Kaucz, Senior Director, Territory Plan, Planning, Land and
Building Division, EPSDD
Appendix B –
Questions taken on Notice/
Questions on Notice
Questions taken on Notice – 7 and 8 November 2019
Hearing date
Directorate/
Answer date
How much is being spent on cleaning/maintenance?
Who were the stakeholders at the renewal workshops and how many were
engaged online?
$128k for performance and accountability this financial year – what
is this money being spent on
Cleaning and maintenance – when did the maintenance expenditure
Work by the ACT Government, Planning Directorate, and the Minister, towards
the outcomes of the Ginninderry Joint Venture (particularly
as this relates to
cross-border re-zoning issues concerning the lobbying of the NSW Government and
the Yass Valley Council)
Gungahlin Town Centre planning refresh
Advertising trucks in Belconnen on streets/nature strips
Since the establishment of the Billboards Working Group how many times has
CFMEU/hoarding/building sites
Details on the planning work done (e.g. roads/transport from NSW) for
Ginninderry
Details about the contraction of electric towers near a residential
development in Holt
Affordable housing threshold—why are blocks in Taylor being sold for
so much, how can they be affordable? How’s the affordable
housing program
How many blocks in Throsby that were passed-in at auction and how many of
them are now available over the counter?
What previous experience does Riverview have in land development?
How much of the developable area of Ginninderry in the Act did Riverview
What are the options to permit the SLA to legally provide blocks below
market value for affordable homes?
(East Gungahlin discussion). In terms of staging, why would you build
further away from the town centre and work your way in, as opposed
to your way
out from the town centre. It seems like reverse staging.
Questions on Notice - related to hearings of 7 and 8 November 2019
Directorate/
Answer date
Ms Le Couteur
CMTEDD / CRA / Chief Minister
In relation to: Future Civic Public Transport Interchange
Ms Le Couteur
ESPDD / Minister for Planning and Land Management
In relation to: Apartment Guidelines, ref: discussion in committee hearing,
p74 & onwards of uncorrected proof transcript
Ms Le Couteur
ESPDD / Minister for Planning and Land Management
In relation to: Concessional Leases
Regarding: DAs to deconcessionalise leases.
Ms Le Couteur
ESPDD / Minister for Planning and Land Management
In relation to: Coombs Peninsula
Ms Le Couteur
EPSDD / Minister for Urban Renewal
In relation to: Section 72 Dickson Urban Renewal proposals
ESPDD / Minister for Planning and Land Management
Ref: EPSDD Annual report, page 39.
In relation to: The Molonglo Commercial Centre Territory Plan
ESPDD / Minister for Planning and Land Management
Ref: EPSDD Annual report, page 18, Strategic Objectives and
Indicators.
In relation to: The Red Hill Integrated Plan and the proposed Federal Gold
Club development.
Mrs Kikkert
ESPDD / Minister for Planning and Land Management
Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate,
2018–19 Annual Report, output class 1.2 Planning and Building
Policy, pp.
In relation to construction of transmission towers for the ACT Second
Electricity Supply Project between Ginninderra Estate and the
Belconnen Magpies
Golf Club, Holt
CRA / Chief Minister
Ref: City Renewal Authority - staffing
SLA / Minister for Housing and Suburban Development
Ref: Suburban Land Agency Annual Report
In relation to: video content
SLA / Minister for Housing and Suburban Development
Ref: Suburban Land Agency Annual Report
In relation to: promotional material
SLA / Minister for Housing and Suburban Development
Ref: Suburban Land Agency Annual Report
In relation to: community engagement and social events
ESPDD / Minister for Planning and Land Management
Ref: EPSDD Annual Report, Output 4.1, Land Strategy
In relation to: Strata Laws
SLA / Minister for Housing and Suburban Development
Ref: Suburban Land Agency Annual Report
In relation to: Land Release
ESPDD / Minister for Planning and Land Management
Ref: EPSDD Annual Report, Output 4.1, Land Strategy
In relation to: ACT Land and Property Report
CRA / Chief Minister
Ref: City Renewal Authority Annual Report
In relation to: West Basin
CRA / Chief Minister
Ref: City Renewal Authority
In relation to: video content
CRA / Chief Minister
Ref: City Renewal Authority Annual Report
In relation to: Street furniture
CRA / Chief Minister
Ref: City Renewal Authority Annual Report
In relation to: promotional material
CRA / Chief Minister
Ref: City Renewal Authority Annual Report
In relation to: community engagement and social events
CRA / Chief Minister
Ref: City Renewal Authority Annual Report
In relation to: City Centre Marketing and Improvement Levy (CCMIL) –
Vibrant Streets
CRA / Chief Minister
Ref: City Renewal Authority Annual Report
In relation to: City Centre Marketing and Improvement Levy (CCMIL) –
CRA / Chief Minister
Ref: City Renewal Authority Annual Report
In relation to: City Centre Marketing and Improvement Levy (CCMIL) –
CRA / Chief Minister
Ref: City Renewal Authority Annual Report
In relation to: City Centre Marketing and Improvement Levy (CCMIL) –
Maintenance and Place Management
CRA / Chief Minister
Ref: City Renewal Authority Annual Report
In relation to: City Centre Marketing and Improvement Levy (CCMIL) –
Communications
CRA / Chief Minister
Ref: City Renewal Authority Annual Report
In relation to: City Centre Marketing and Improvement Levy (CCMIL) –
Business Plans
CRA / Chief Minister
Ref: City Renewal Authority Annual Report
In relation to: City Centre Marketing and Improvement Levy (CCMIL) –
Breakdown of 2019-20 initiatives
SLA / Minister for Housing and Suburban Development
Ref: Suburban Land Agency Annual Report
In relation to: Riverview and Ginninderry – Payments and loans
SLA / Minister for Housing and Suburban Development
Ref: Suburban Land Agency Annual Report
In relation to: Riverview and Ginninderry – Marketing and sale of
SLA / Minister for Housing and Suburban Development
Ref: Suburban Land Agency Annual Report
In relation to: Riverview and Ginninderry – Financial and other
SLA / Minister for Housing and Suburban Development
Ref: Suburban Land Agency Annual Report
In relation to: Riverview and Ginninderry - Deeds of agreement
SLA / Minister for Housing and Suburban Development
Ref: Suburban Land Agency Annual Report
In relation to: Riverview and Ginninderry – ACT and NSW
SLA / Minister for Housing and Suburban Development
Ref: Suburban Land Agency Annual Report
In relation to: Riverview and Ginninderry – Project management,
incentives and board
Legislative Assembly for the
ACT, Minutes of Proceedings No. 02, accessible at
https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/1017980/MoP002F1.pdf
Legislative Assembly for the
ACT, Minutes of Proceedings No. 119, accessible at
https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0011/1435745/MoP119F2.pdf
Annual Reports (Government
Agencies) Directions 2019 -
Notifiable Instrument NI2019-296, p. 10.
Annual Reports (Government
Agencies) Directions 2019 -
Notifiable Instrument NI2019-296, p. 10.
Environment, Planning and
Sustainable Development Directorate Annual Report 2018-19
Environment, Planning and
Sustainable Development Directorate Annual Report 2018-19
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, pp. 51 – 52.
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, pp. 50 – 52.
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 23.
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, pp. 54 – 59; Standing Committee on Economic
Development and Tourism,
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p.
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, pp. 32 – 34.
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, pp. 34; 40-41.
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, pp. 35 – 36.
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, pp. 36 – 37.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 32.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, pp. 32-33.
Mr Simmons,
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 32.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 5
, Answered 27 November 2019.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 10
, Answered 21 November 2019.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 10
, Answered 21 November 2019.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 10
, Answered 21 November 2019.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 10
, Answered 21 November 2019.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 10
, Answered 21 November 2019.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 10
, Answered 21 November 2019.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 10
, Answered 21 November 2019.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 10
, Answered 21 November 2019.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 10
, Answered 21 November 2019.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 10
, Answered 21 November 2019.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 10
, Answered 21 November 2019.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 10
, Answered 21 November 2019.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 5
, Answered 27 November 2019.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 5
, Answered 27 November 2019.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 5
, Answered 27 November 2019.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 5
, Answered 27 November 2019.
Mrs Kikkert MLA,
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 54.
Minister Gentleman,
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, pp. 54-55.
Minister Gentleman,
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, pp. 54-55.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, pp. 55-56.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 56.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 11
, Answered 21 November 2019.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 11
, Answered 21 November 2019.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 11
, Answered 21 November 2019.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 11
, Answered 21 November 2019.
Answer to Question on
Notice No. 08
, Answered 10 February 2020.
Answer to Question on
Notice No. 08
, Answered 10 February 2020.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 11
, Answered 21 November 2019.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 11
, Answered 21 November 2019.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 11
, Answered 21 November 2019.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 11
, Answered 21 November 2019.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 11
, Answered 21 November 2019.
Minister Gentleman,
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 55.
Minster Gentleman,
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 90.
Minster Gentleman,
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 90.
Minster Gentleman,
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 90.
Mrs Kikkert MLA,
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 56.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 56.
Mrs Kikkert MLA,
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, pp. 56-57.
Minster Gentleman,
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 57.
Answer to Question on
Notice No. 31- Attachment A
, Answered 13 January 2020.
Answer to Question on
Notice No. 31- Attachment A
, Answered 13 January 2020.
Minster Gentleman,
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 58.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 58.
Environment, Planning and
Sustainable Development Directorate Annual Report 2018-19
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, pp. 28 – 45.
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 28.
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 29, pp. 62 – 64.
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, pp. 48 – 50.
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 36.
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, pp. 62 – 64.
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, pp. 37 – 38.
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 39.
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 54.
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, pp. 53 – 54.
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 24, p. 43.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, pp. 28-29.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 29.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 29.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 29.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, pp. 29-30.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 30.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 30.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 30.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 30.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 62.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, pp. 62-64
Answer to Question on
Notice No. 02
, Answered 22 November 2019.
Answer to Question on
Notice No. 02
, Answered 22 November 2019.
Environment, Planning and
Sustainable Development Directorate Annual Report 2018-19
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, pp. 59 – 62.
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, pp. 59 – 61.
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 48.
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, pp. 60 – 62.
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 59.
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 88.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 59.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 59.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 60.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 61.
Answer to Question
Taken on Notice No 12
, Answered 19 November 2019.
of Evidence,
7 November 2019, pp. 83-84.
of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 84.
of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 84.
of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 85.
of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 85.
Answer to Question
Taken on Notice No 16
, Answered 25 November 2019.
Environment, Planning
and Sustainable Development Directorate Annual Report 2018-19
Transcript of
8 November 2019, pp. 102 – 108.
Transcript of
8 November 2019, p. 98.
Transcript of
8 November 2019, p. 90.
Transcript of
8 November 2019, p. 91.
of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 107.
of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 108.
of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 108.
of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 108.
of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 108.
of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 108.
Ms Le Couteur MLA,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 109.
Mr Rutledge,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 109.
Mr Rutledge,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 109.
Mr Rutledge,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 109.
Mr Rutledge,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 110.
Minister Stephen-Smith,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 91.
Minister Stephen-Smith,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, pp. 91-92.
Minister Stephen-Smith,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, pp. 90-96.
Minister Stephen-Smith,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 92.
Minister Stephen-Smith,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 90.
Minister Stephen-Smith,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 92.
Minister Stephen-Smith,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 92.
Minister Stephen-Smith,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 92.
Minister Stephen-Smith,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 93.
Ms Le Couteur MLA,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 93.
Minister Stephen-Smith,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 93.
Mr Rutledge,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 93.
Mr Rutledge,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 94.
of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 94.
Mr Rutledge,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 96.
Minister Stephen-Smith,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 95.
Minister Stephen-Smith,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 95.
Mr Parton MLA,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 95.
Minister Stephen-Smith,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 95.
Minister Stephen-Smith,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 95.
Minister Stephen-Smith,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 96.
Minister Stephen-Smith,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, pp. 95-96.
Environment, Planning
and Sustainable Development Directorate Annual Report 2018-19
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 66.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, pp. 66 – 67.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 67.
Mr Rutledge,
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 67.
Mr Fitzgerald,
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 67.
Minister Berry,
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 67.
Environment, Planning
and Sustainable Development Directorate Annual Report 2018-19
Transcript of
8 November 2019, p. 115.
Transcript of
8 November 2019, p. 115.
Transcript of
8 November 2019, pp. 115 - 116.
Transcript of
8 November 2019, p. 118.
Transcript of
8 November 2019, pp. 116 - 117.
Ms Le Couteur MLA,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 115.
Minister Orr MLA,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, pp. 115-116.
Mr Fitzgerald,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 116.
Mr Fitzgerald,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 116.
of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 116.
of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 117.
of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 117.
of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 117.
of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 118.
Suburban Land Agency
Annual Report 2018-19
Suburban Land Agency
Annual Report 2018-19
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 68.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 69.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 42.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 85.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, pp. 70 – 72.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, pp. 73 -74.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 74.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 74.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 75.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 75.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 76.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 77.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 98.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 79.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, pp. 41; 78.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, pp. 74 – 80.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 78.
Transcript of
8 November 2019, p. 82.
Transcript of
8 November 2019, p. 96.
Transcript of
8 November 2019, p. 97.
Transcript of
8 November 2019, p. 98.
Transcript of
8 November 2019, p. 98.
Transcript of
8 November 2019, pp. 99- 100.
Transcript of
8 November 2019, p. 101.
Transcript of
8 November 2019, p. 105.
Transcript of
8 November 2019, pp. 103 – 104.
Transcript of
8 November 2019, p. 106.
Transcript of
8 November 2019, p. 110.
Transcript of
8 November 2019, p. 110.
Transcript of
8 November 2019, p. 112.
Transcript of
8 November 2019, pp. 113 – 114.
Transcript of
8 November 2019, p. 113.
Minister Stephen-Smith,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 96.
of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 96.
of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 97.
of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 97.
of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 97.
of Evidence,
8 November 2019, pp. 97-98.
of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 98.
of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 69.
of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 69.
Mr Bulless,
of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 69.
Mr Bulless,
of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 69.
Mr Bulless,
of Evidence,
7 November 2019, pp. 70-71.
of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 77.
Answer to Question on
Notice No 32
, Answered 13 January 2020.
Answer to Question on
Notice No 32
, Answered 13 January 2020.
Answer to Question on
Notice No 32
, Answered 13 January 2020.
of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 78.
Minister Berry,
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 78.
Minister Stephen-Smith,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 110.
of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 110.
Mr Rutledge,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 111.
of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 111.
of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 111.
Minister Stephen-Smith,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 112.
Minister Stephen-Smith,
Transcript of Evidence,
8 November 2019, p. 112.
Answer to Question
Taken on Notice No 17
, Answered 16 December 2019.
Chief Minister,
Treasury and Economic Development Annual Report 2018-19,
Chief Minister,
Treasury and Economic Development Annual Report 2018-19,
ACT Architects Board
Annual Report 2017-18
as annexed in the
Chief Minister, Treasury and
Economic Development Annual Report 2018-19,
ACT Architects Board
Annual Report 2018-19
as annexed in the
Chief Minister, Treasury and
Economic Development Annual Report 2018-19,
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 1.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 1.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, pp. 2 -3.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 3.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 2.
of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 2.
of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 2.
of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 3.
of Evidence,
7 November 2019, pp. 2-3.
City Renewable
Authority Annual Report 2018-19
Transcript of
7 November 2019, pp. 4 - 5.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 8.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 6.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, pp. 4 -10.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 10.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 12.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 15.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, pp. 17 – 18.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, pp. 17- 18.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 18.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 18.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 7, p. 25, p. 43.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 23.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, pp. 24 – 25.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, pp. 25 -26.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 26.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 23.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 24.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 24.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 24.
Mr Andrew Barr, Chief
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 25.
Mr Andrew Barr, Chief
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 25.
Mr Andrew Barr, Chief
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 4.
Mr Andrew Barr, Chief
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 4.
Mr Andrew Barr, Chief
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 4.
Mr Andrew Barr, Chief
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 5.
Mr Andrew Barr, Chief
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 5.
Mr Andrew Barr, Chief
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 5.
Mr Andrew Barr, Chief
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 5.
Mr Andrew Barr, Chief
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 7.
Mr Gillman,
of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 7.
Mr Gillman,
of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 7.
Mr Andrew Barr, Chief
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 8.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 8.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 8.
Mr Gillman,
of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 8.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 16.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 11.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, pp. 11-12.
Answer to Question
Taken on Notice No. 23
, Answered 4 December 2019.
Answer to Question
Taken on Notice No. 23
, Answered 4 December 2019.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 10.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, pp. 10-11.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 11.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 11.
Mr Andrew Barr, Chief
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 18.
Mr Andrew Barr, Chief
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 18.
Mr Andrew Barr, Chief
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 18.
Mr Andrew Barr, Chief
Transcript of Evidence,
7 November 2019, p. 18.
Answer to Question on
Notice No. 16
, Answered 4 December 2019.
Answer to Question on
Notice No. 16
, Answered 4 December 2019.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 12.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, pp. 11-12.
Transcript of
7 November 2019, p. 13.
Answer to Question
Taken on Notice No 02
, Answered 11 November 2019.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (662 KB)
PDF format (1.19 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter