URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUHRStaCARFF/2017/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:06:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Agriculture and Water Resources (45th Parliament) --- "Safe Keeping: Inquiry into the biosecurity of Australian honey bees" [2017] AUHRStaCARFF 1 (27 March 2017)
Deputy Chair
Secretariat
Introduction
Terminology
Role and value of honey bees
The honey bee industry and biosecurity
The Varroa mite
Incursion risks
Current biosecurity arrangements
National Bee Pest Surveillance Program
The catchbox program
Sentinel hives
Effectiveness of sentinel hives and catchboxes
New Zealand
The initial program
New program
Enhanced and comprehensive versions
Further research and development
Other issues to consider
Pre-embarkation inspections
Resistance breeding
Committee comment
Roundtable – Thursday, 24 November 2016
Australian Honey Bee Industry Council
Department of Agriculture and Water Resources
Plant Health Australia
PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Safe Keeping
Inquiry into the biosecurity of Australian honey bees
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Agriculture and Water
© Commonwealth of Australia
ISBN 978-1-74366-598-5 (Printed Version)
ISBN 978-1-74366-599-2 (HTML Version)
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 3.0 Australia License.
The details of this licence are available on the Creative Commons website:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/au/
Terms of Reference
List of Recommendations
1 Roundtable on the biosecurity of the
Australian honey bee industry
Introduction
Terminology
Role and value of honey bees
The honey bee industry and
biosecurity
The Varroa mite
Incursion risks
Current biosecurity arrangements
2 Interception
National Bee Pest Surveillance
The catchbox program
Sentinel hives
Effectiveness of sentinel hives and
The initial program
New program
Enhanced and comprehensive
Further research and
development
Other issues to consider
Pre-embarkation inspections
Resistance breeding
Committee comment
A. Submissions and public
Mr Rick Wilson MP
Deputy Chair
Ms Meryl Swanson MP
Mr Andrew Broad MP
Ms Justine Keay MP
Mr Matt Keogh MP
Dr John McVeigh MP
Mr Tony Pasin MP
Mr Rowan Ramsey MP
Secretariat
Committee Secretary Dr Anna Dacre
Inquiry Secretary Anthony Overs
Researcher Peter Pullen
Office Manager Louise Milligan (from 9/1/17)
Jessica Hargreaves (to 14/12/16)
Terms of Reference
On Thursday, 20 October 2016, the Standing Committee on Agriculture and Water
Resources resolved to inquire into a matter arising
from the 2014-15 annual
report of the Department of Agriculture, namely the biosecurity of the
Australian honey bee industry.
List of Recommendations
Recommendation 1
2.56 The Committee recommends that the National Bee Pest Surveillance Program
implement, by 30 June 2017, the proposed enhanced Model
3 program, as outlined
in the recent review and redesign. The appropriate proportion of funds should be
provided by the relevant
Commonwealth agencies involved in the program
partnership.
Recommendation 2
2.58 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government investigate the
development of an easy to use smart phone application
which may help members of
the public to more easily contribute to eradication programs.
Recommendation 3
2.61 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government immediately
initiate the necessary research and development that will
allow the efficiency
of the National Bee Pest Surveillance Program to be assessed, with a view to the
development of any program
refinements, adjustments or modifications. The
rigorous statistical analysis of all methodologies should be the highest
with particular focus on the effectiveness or optimisation of standard
and remote catchboxes. The research and analysis should aim
to be completed by
Recommendation 4
2.64 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government complete the
analysis of pest bee risk ratings for the Australian ports
that do not have such
ratings. The assessment should include airports, and it should also include
pre-embarkation inspections and
processes at various ports. The assessment
should be completed by the end of 2017 and a copy of the completed assessment
to the Committee.
Recommendation 5
2.66 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government undertake a
detailed analysis of the smuggling of bees into Australia.
The analysis should
include, but not be limited to, the total number of incidents, the percentage of
incidents where pests were discovered,
the potential for further incursions, and
how to prevent, detect or combat such incidents. A copy of the analysis should
be provided
to the Committee upon completion.
Recommendation 6
2.70 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, in conjunction
with domestic and possibly international industry partners,
initiate research
and development into selective breeding of honey bees that are resistant to
pests and diseases that may have a
detrimental effect on the Australian honey
bee industry.
1. Roundtable on the biosecurity of the Australian
honey bee industry
Introduction
1.1 On Thursday 20 October 2016, the House of Representatives Standing
Committee on Agriculture and Water Resources resolved to conduct
an inquiry into
a matter arising from the 2014-15 annual report of the Department of
Agriculture, namely the biosecurity of the Australian
honey bee industry.
1.2 The Committee held a roundtable discussion on honey bees and biosecurity
on 24 November 2016. The roundtable was attended by the
Department of
Agriculture and Water Resources (DAWR), CSIRO, the Australian Honey Bee Industry
Council (AHBIC), and Plant Health
Australia (PHA).
1.3 The Committee approached the roundtable as an opportunity to better
understand the biosecurity threats the beekeeping industry
faces and assess the
adequacy of Government risk mitigation strategies. This report will summarise
the evidence received at the roundtable
and will outline the conclusions the
Committee has reached based on that evidence.
Terminology
1.4 There are a variety of bee species, both native and imported, that live
in Australia. Amongst them are:
§ the European honey bee (
Apis mellifera
, referred to throughout
as the honey bee), an imported species that has spread throughout Australia and
is present both in the wild
and in hives managed by beekeepers (the honey bee is
the main focus of this report);
§ the Asian honey bee (
Apis cerana
) which is native to south-east
and mainland Asia, and which has recently become established in northern
Queensland;
§ diverse species of native bees, which are found throughout Australia;
§ bumble bees (
Bombus terrestris
), which are present only in
1.5 Honey bees in Australia may be referred to as ‘managed’,
which means they live in hives kept by bee keepers. They
may also be called
‘wild’ or ‘feral’, which means they live in the
environment without human intervention.
According to the CSIRO,
Australia’s population of feral honey bees is amongst the highest in the
world due to the prevalence
of high-pollen tree species like eucalypts and
Role and value of honey
1.6 The economic value of honey and other hive products produced by managed
honey bees in Australia is comparatively small at an estimated
$100 million per
1.7 However, honey bees make an enormous indirect contribution to
Australia’s economy through the pollination services they
Pollination of crops and plants involves the fertilisation of flowering plants
via the transfer of pollen between them.
Many fruit, nut, vegetable, legume and
seed crops cannot bear fruit or seeds without being pollinated. Although a range
species can pollinate plants, honey bees play a vital role in
pollinating many horticultural
1.8 In addition to pollinating crops, honey bees can also assist the grazing
industry by improving the yield and persistence of common
fodder crops such as
clovers. This can reduce agricultural input costs and may also have
environmental benefits by reducing graziers’
need to use fertilisers or
other chemicals.
1.9 Though their value to Australia’s economy is difficult to quantify,
AHBIC estimates that pollination services provide approximately
$4 billion per
annum in value to the agricultural
In 2014 the
Senate’s Rural and Regional Affairs References Committee’s honey bee
report noted estimates of $1-4 billion
per annum in
Honey bees therefore provide
substantial value to Australia’s agricultural industry and the Australian
economy more generally.
The honey bee industry and
biosecurity
1.10 At the roundtable, representatives from AHBIC painted a mostly
optimistic picture of the honey bee industry but also drew the
Committee’s
attention to a range of biosecurity threats which could have a severe impact on
honey bees and the pollination
services they provide in the near
1.11 Australia has been historically fortunate in that its physical isolation
has enabled it to remain free of many of the worst plant
and animal pests and
diseases. However, the risk of invasive pests or diseases arriving here has
become more acute due to growing
trade links with the rest of the world and
increasing international travel.
1.12 The Australian honey bee industry is not immune to these risks and faces
a range of biosecurity threats. These include invasive
bee species such as the
Asian honey bee, which has become established in northern Queensland in recent
years, and a range of bee
pests. However, the discussion of biosecurity threats
at the roundtable overwhelmingly focused on the threat posed by the Varroa
The Varroa mite
1.13 Varroa mites are small parasites that feed on the haemolymph (a fluid
equivalent to blood) of larval and adult bees. There are
two primary species of
V. destructor
V. jacobsoni
. Most strains of
can only target the Asian honey bee and it is therefore regarded
as less of a threat to the Australian honey bee industry.
V. destructor
which can affect honey bees, has spread to every beekeeping country in the world
except Australia. On its website, DAWR describes
Varroa as follows:
[The] Varroa mite,
Varroa destructor
, is a small mite, around 1 mm in
diameter, that parasitises species of bees in the genus
Apis cerana
, the Asian honey bee, and
Apis mellifera
, the species
that includes the European honey bee. In the 20th century two strains of
moved hosts from the natural host, the Asian honey bee, to the
European honey bee. The K strain of
Varroa destructor
(K stands for
Korea, the country in which the strain is thought to have originated) has spread
world-wide and is regarded as the
major challenge facing beekeeping
internationally.
1.14 Varroa
infestation can have catastrophic consequences on honey bee colonies. While bee
hives with low numbers of Varroa mites
can continue to function normally, mite
numbers will tend to rise over time and cause a range of increasingly serious
problems, culminating
in the collapse of the hive:
Heavy Varroa mite infestations can build up in 3–4 years and cause
scattered brood, crippled and crawling honey bees, impaired
flight performance,
a lower rate of return to the colony after foraging, a reduced lifespan and a
significantly reduced weight of
worker bees. Colony symptoms, commonly called
parasitic mite syndrome, include an abnormal brood pattern, sunken and chewed
and larvae slumped in the bottom or side of the cell. This ultimately
causes a reduction in the honey bee population, supersedure
of queen bees and
eventual colony breakdown and
V. destructor
incursion in Australia is regarded as a serious threat to
both the beekeeping and horticulture industries. It would most likely decimate
Australia’s feral bee population while making it significantly more
difficult to operate managed hives. This could have a substantial
effect on Australia’s horticulture industry. Australia’s
preparedness for a
V. destructor
incursion is discussed in Chapter 2.
Incursion risks
1.16 The ongoing risk of bee pests like Varroa arriving in Australia is high.
Lindsay Bourke from AHBIC indicated that there are ‘between
four’ detections of pest bees or bee pests at the border each
1.17 Australia’s biosecurity controls are focused on detecting these
kinds of pests arriving at Australian ports and have so
far been successful.
However there is an additional risk that pests could arrive in Australia on bees
that have been smuggled into
the country:
There have been two cases prosecuted in Australia for smuggling. Both of them
were for improved genetics ... [T]here is work going
on overseas to breed bees
resistant to Varroa, so that is an incentive to bring them in. In those cases
where we had the importation
protocol for queen bees [the bee keeper] just did
not want to go through that, so they tried to bring them in. One was through the
post and the other one was the famous one that came in biros—in
pens—and was
intercepted.
Paul de Barro from the CSIRO noted that the risk of Varroa becoming established
in Australia is much higher if it arrives
on smuggled bees:
We get smuggling of queen bees through the mail, and those bees may well have
Varroa on them. Of course, they are going to be put
straight into hives so it is
in fact likely that establishment is much higher ... [It is] a major issue,
because it circumvents all
our surveillance. The surveillance assumes a port of
entry. But, of course, if you are getting bees smuggled in they are going to
into towns and cities, and will probably be well established before you actually
have a chance of detecting
major bee biosecurity incursions have occurred in recent years. These are the
arrival and establishment of the Asian honey
bee in far north Queensland, and
the recent detection of
V. jacobsoni
in Townsville.
1.20 The Asian honey bee was detected in Cairns in 2007 and an eradication
program was begun which included:
§ attempts to destroy Asian honey bee colonies;
§ restrictions on the movement of managed bee hives and equipment; and
§ a notification system to more effectively locate Asian honey bee
1.21 However, the eradication program did not succeed. The Asian honey bee
breeds rapidly, frequently relocates its nests and can
travel long distances. It
proved too difficult to locate and destroy all Asian honey bee hives, especially
in remote terrain. Consequently,
the eradication effort ceased and biosecurity
authorities transitioned to a containment and management strategy with respect
Asian honey bee. Information on the Asian honey bee management program
can be found on the DAWR
1.22 The second major bee biosecurity incursion was the June 2016 detection
V. jacobsoni
in a colony of feral Asian honey bees near the port
of Townsville. While
V. jacobsoni
is considered to be the less
threatening variant of Varroa, the detection nevertheless set off a substantial
biosecurity response.
Dr Kim Ritman from DAWR outlined the response:
The detection is reported to me, to my office, within 24 hours of it being
detected. That then triggers a meeting of the Consultative
Committee on
Emergency Plant Pests, which includes the relevant industries—so, AHBIC in
this case—and other industries,
the state governments and the federal
government ... In the case of the
, we react immediately and
convene a committee to look at the technical feasibility and cost beneficiality
of eradication. The combatant
state— in this case, in Townsville,
Queensland—puts together a response plan, which then goes for
consideration to the
National Management Group, which is heads of agencies and
industry around the country, to okay the money to pay for it. In this case,
was $2.5 million or so to undertake that
Ritman noted that on-the-ground eradication efforts commenced immediately and
were underway in parallel with these administrative
We had officers from the department collecting the bees, sending them off to
CSIRO for analysis of viruses and inspecting them for
Varroa ... What is found
is destroyed. Queensland immediately applies within its powers quarantine and
movement restrictions so that
you do not get managed hives being moved out of
1.24 Trevor
Weatherhead from AHBIC elaborated on the processes involved in the eradication
The response when they first find the Varroa is to send the bees off for
identification checking, and then they do delimiting surveys.
They check to see
if there are any more around. They have processes, one of which is called floral
sweeping. This is where they go
out and check the flowers, and if they find
Asian bees—because the Asian bee is the vector for this particular
flowers they then do what they call beelining. They convert the
bees over to sugar and water, and then they watch where the bees
go. They can
follow them back and find the nest and destroy the nest in those
situations.
Weatherhead also noted the major role members of the public can play in an
eradication program:
The biggest help is the public. A lot of publicity went out. As the officers
were going through the streets, checking all the floral
sources—the
flowers—they would drop little notes in the letterboxes. Most of the
detections—we are up to 10 now—have
come through the public
reporting the activity of
eradication effort with respect to
V. jacobsoni
in Townsville is ongoing.
Current biosecurity
arrangements
1.27 In response to the high level of biosecurity risk, the Australian
Government has established a strong suite of biosecurity protections.
indicated that Australia is working very hard to mitigate the biosecurity risk
Australia has a world-class biosecurity system with robust processes in place
across the continuum to mitigate the risks of exotic
1.28 Australia’s
biosecurity framework is risk-based, meaning that resources and effort are
concentrated at points where the
biosecurity risks are considered to be most
acute. The determination of risk is made by scientific methods, according to
The assessment of biosecurity risk is based on scientific analysis and is
applied to vessels and cargo across import pathways. All
vessels arriving and
cargo imported into Australia must be reported to the department and are
profiled for biosecurity risk. Vessels
or cargo of potential concern may be
assessed on documents, inspected or sent for mandatory treatment, depending on
the nature of
the biosecurity risk. Measures are also applied to manage
non-cargo-related risks such as hitchhiker pests—and bees are included
relation to honey bees, Australia employs a range of strategies to try to
prevent biosecurity incidents. These include activities
beyond, at, and behind
Australian borders:
We have annual surveys in the Solomons, Papua New Guinea and Timor Leste, and
also in the Torres Strait, which targets pest bees
and bee pests. That gives us
heads-up intelligence about what is in those locations ... we have inspections
of cargo and material
coming into Australia ... We then have the National Bee
Pest Surveillance Program, administered by Plant Health Australia. That is
targeted at ports of entry, with sentinel hives, lures, traps and so forth to
try to get them. We have awareness onshore through
industry and good relations
with industry—sharing information on interceptions and detections so that
any report can then trigger
response processes ... So we have a multifaceted
addition to DAWR's activities beyond and at the borders, Australia also has
measures in place which aim to discover any bee
pests which evade biosecurity
detection. In relation to honey bees, this role is filled by the National Bee
Pest Surveillance Program.
1.31 The NBPSP is an early warning system designed to detect incursions of
exotic bee pests and pest bees. The aim of the program
is to ensure that any
incursion of bee pests is detected quickly to give authorities the best chance
of eradication or containment.
The program targets bee pests such as Varroa
mites, Tropilaelaps mite, and Tracheal mites, while also targeting exotic bee
like the Asian honey bee, the giant honey bee, and exotic strains of the
European honey bee. It also works to prevent the spread
of regionalised pests
already present in
1.32 Although the NBPSP employs a range of surveillance methods, its key
means of detection are sentinel hives and catchboxes. The
hives and boxes are
placed at high-risk locations around Australian ports and monitored regularly
for invasive species and bee pests.
In remote areas, catchboxes may be fitted
with solar-powered sensors and cameras that can transmit data, enabling
biosecurity authorities
to monitor a wider range of areas at less
1.33 Should an incursion be detected, Australia’s response plan is set
out in the Emergency Plant Pest Response Deed (EPPRD).
The deed is an agreement
between PHA, the Australian government, all State and Territory governments and
national plant industry
bodies. It sets out arrangements for the management of
an incursion beyond Australia's borders, and lays out processes which should
occur when an incursion is detected with the goal of ensuring the eradication of
the biosecurity threat.
1.34 In case of a detected incursion, measures taken in response will include
scientific testing and identification checking, 'delimiting'
surveys to uncover
the extent of the incursion, detection of pest hives though on-the-ground checks
and via public reports.
2. Interception
2.1 Interception at likely entry points into Australia was identified as the
key method of dealing with the intrusion of bee pests.
This interception at
ports is considered the first line of defence. The National Bee Pest
Surveillance Program (NBPSP), which operates
at key entry points around
Australia, was established to provide risk-based early warning for the entry of
bee pests and pest bees.
2.2 Discussion at the roundtable focused on the adequacy of interception and
response methods.
National Bee Pest
Surveillance Program
2.3 The Plant Health Australia (PHA) submission to the inquiry, provided on
request after the roundtable, outlined the frontline defence
against potential
incursions of bee pests, as operated by the NBPSP.
2.4 The submission explained that seven methodologies are required to provide
adequate coverage against the various exotic threats
to the honey bee industry.
Those methodologies are:
... standard catchboxes, remote surveillance catchboxes, sentinel hives, floral
mapping and sweep netting, surveillance for Asian
honey bees, surveillance for
viruses and surveillance for Asian
submission also explained that a unified approach is required for the program as
no single methodology can provide adequate
coverage for all
The catchbox program
Sentinel hives
2.6 A sentinel hive is a hive of European honey bees of a known health status
that are maintained at ports believed to be of high
risk throughout Australia.
These hives are tested every six weeks for external and internal
2.7 Standard catchboxes positioned in high risk port areas provide a means of
early detection of exotic bee species. Inadvertently
imported swarms of bees may
be picked up using catchboxes and can subsequently be sampled for exotic mites
on a regular basis.
2.8 A remote surveillance catchbox is an empty hive that can detect when
honey bees are present in the hive using a mobile phone camera
and sensors. The
phone captures an image at frequent intervals and performs image analysis to
determine the presence of a swarm.
The phone can upload a daily image or if
image analysis detects activity. Power to the phone is provided by a solar panel
and batteries
in the catchbox lid. An electronic door on the catchbox entry can
be triggered remotely to close and open the hive door. Remote surveillance
catchboxes are positioned in locations that are not easily and frequently
accessible, but are of high risk concern for exotic
Effectiveness of sentinel
hives and catchboxes
2.9 Lindsay Bourke, the Chairman of AHBIC, suggested that sentinel hives are
too far from ports, and if a swarm of affected bees is
discovered in a sentinel
hive that it will be too late,
V. destructor
will be established and
it will be extremely difficult to remove:
We may well be not doing enough with our surveillance at ports. We do the best
we can. Sentinel hives is a wonderful program because
it is a national program,
but you cannot put the sentinel hives where you should have them ... some of
them are located up to three
kilometres away from the port. That is far too
late. We do test them every two months; it is very good. We test to see if we
Varroa in there. But, once we find them, that Varroa will have infected all
the amateur hives and everything else that is within
the vicinity of that
Bourke further suggested that more needs to be done concerning identifying and
capturing bees when they first arrive at ports,
utilising many more
catchboxes:
We can put [remote catchboxes] where we want them. Waterside workers have even
had their lunch on one of them! You can put them in
the right position where
they should be, and you can put many of them in. CSIRO suggested that we need 10
at larger ports and five
at smaller ports. That is about 800 that are needed at
a cost of about $1,000 to put together. We should have a lot more of those.
are fiddling. We are not doing
New Zealand
2.11 The Australian interception and surveillance program has been informed
by the New Zealand experience which did not contain
V. destructor
The subsequent establishment of
V. destructor
throughout new Zealand
increased the risk of its passage to Australia.
2.12 New Zealand has had
V. destructor
present since 2000, where it
became established in the North
2.13 Varroa was found in Nelson in the South Island in June 2006, at which
time a government decision was made to not attempt eradication.
This was based
on the estimated cost of NZ$8-9 million and the strong probability that a
reinvasion from the North Island would most
likely occur sooner rather than
later. The estimated success of an eradication of mites from the South Island
was 80-85 per cent.
2.14 While the prevalence of Varroa in New Zealand has increased the risk of
intrusion into Australia, it has also provided opportunities
interception methods.
2.15 In March 2007, the Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation
supported a study group of nine Australian beekeepers
and scientists that
travelled through New Zealand, discussing beekeeping issues with a range of
beekeepers and scientists in the
North Island. The group gathered information on
Varroa and other topics of importance to beekeepers in Australia. The group was
in identifying key points that should be carefully considered by the
Australian beekeeping industry, in order to prepare itself for
the arrival of
2.16 Trevor Weatherhead, the Executive Director of AHBIC, discussed the
importance of sentinel hives in the identification of bee
pests in North
Queensland in 2016, comparing that to the New Zealand experience with Varroa:
I believe the situation in North Queensland was that they picked them up fairly
early there. They checked every six weeks. I think
that, if we found Varroa in
some of those, we would still stand a chance to eradicate the mite, because we
would pick it up very
early. We have only got to find one mite. In the New
Zealand situation, they had it for about two years before they even picked it
up. They never knew what they were looking at. In our case we are doing active
surveillance of these hives. We have only got to pick
up one mite to know that
they are there and go into it straight
Bourke of AHBIC reiterated the importance of port surveillance, particularly now
that Australia has direct shipping from New
Zealand, and emphasised
AHBIC’s concern that the mite will arrive in Australia
undetected.
2.18 Mr Greg Fraser, Chief Executive Officer of PHA, also emphasised the fact
that the Australian Government is going to make a concerted
and sustained effort
to make sure that the
V. destructor
does not come here from New
We are doing a lot of work in New Zealand to understand what lessons we can
learn and what we have learned. We have seen what has
happened there. I think
expanding the program is an element of all the things you do to try and get
yourself prepared for a potential
incident. We give ourselves the best chance we
possibly can of picking it up as soon as we can if it gets here, containing it
reducing the speed at which it
The initial program
2.19 Recognising the increased risk of passage of Varroa to Australia, and
its potential economic impact, the NBPSP is subject to
periodic review and
redesign to ensure it is appropriately responsive and targeted. The PHA
submission to the inquiry outlined the
recent NBPSP Review and Redesign.
2.20 Model 1 was the program initiated in 2013 and superseded by Model 2 in
December 2016. The original program, at an annual cost
of $669 192, allowed
§ coverage at 39 ports;
§ 167 sentinel hives;
§ 129 standard catchboxes;
§ 20 remote catchboxes; and
§ 11 floral sweeping
New program
2.21 Model 2 of the NBPSP Review and Redesign, which will cover the period
from December 2016 until 2021, at an annual cost of $920
218, allows for:
§ coverage at 32 ports;
§ 174 sentinel hives;
§ 170 standard catchboxes;
§ 40 remote catchboxes;
§ 260 Asian honeybee catchboxes; and
§ 15 floral sweeping
2.22 The Asian honey bee catchboxes are new to the program. Also of note is
that the number of ports has been reduced by seven, however,
the number of
high-risk ports has increased by
2.23 Mr Fraser explained that the program has been expanded and refunded
significantly, to establish more sentinel hives and cover
2.24 PHA, in its submission, noted that Model 2 of the program covers the 14
high-risk ports that account for 95 per cent of the total
import volume of trade
into Australia.
2.25 Mr Fraser emphasised the importance of collaboration between industry
and government:
We are trying to do more with the resources we have. There has been great
support from industry. AHBIC have changed a number of things
around their levies
over the last couple of years, which has given the industry a lot of ability to
engage in conversations with
RDCs and governments about improving those
surveillance
PHA submission explained that, in response to the program review, a greater
focus would be on catchbox location, and the
potential for the use of lures and
baits will be considered to improve their effectiveness. The submission also
suggested that several
technology improvements could be made to remote
catchboxes in the next phase of the program, again, considering location and
for lures and baits to optimise
effectiveness.
2.27 Mr Fraser reiterated that the key issue is to make sure that the
catchboxes are in place and checked on a regular basis, with
captured data going
into the AUSPestCheck
2.28 Mr Fraser discussed the wider range of activities being conducted and
coordinated under the program:
There is a whole range of activity going on at the moment, let alone simulation
exercises, practising, so on and so forth, and contingency
planning. With the
assistance of AHBIC, again, we are establishing bee biosecurity officers in
every state in partnership with the
state governments ... The programs that we
are running are the sentinel, the surveillance program and the bee biosecurity
That is about a $10 million investment over the next few years, and
that is about having all those people I talked about before—the
industries, the governments—involved in trying to improve not only the
chances of picking up Varroa at the border
or just after the border but also
training around skills for beekeepers so that if something does come in they
know what to
Fraser was confident that the program would be successful in identifying and
controlling Varroa at the border:
We have got a pretty fair chance of being successful if something comes in, as
long as we get it quickly. I think the Varroa program
in Townsville is running
extremely well at the moment, and I am pretty sure we will be successful in that
one as well.
Enhanced and comprehensive
2.30 At the roundtable, the Committee asked PHA to provide a budget breakdown
of enhanced and comprehensive versions of the NBPSP.
These figures were provided
in the submission to the inquiry.
2.31 The proposed Model 3 (Enhanced) of the NBPSP, at an annual cost of
$1 888 444, would allow for:
§ coverage at 54 ports;
§ 278 sentinel hives;
§ 150 standard catchboxes;
§ 210 remote catchboxes;
§ 345 Asian honeybee catchboxes; and
§ 32 floral sweeping
2.32 The proposed Model 4 (Comprehensive) of the NBPSP, at an annual cost of
$3 141 865, would allow for:
§ coverage at 54 ports;
§ 324 sentinel hives;
§ 580 remote catchboxes;
§ 580 Asian honeybee catchboxes; and
§ 54 floral sweeping
2.33 This comprehensive version would feature remote catchboxes only, making
monitoring entirely off-site.
2.34 Funding for the program is a result of a substantial and comprehensive
partnership, given that the relatively small beekeeping
industry cannot afford
to do it alone, and recognising the wider industry and economic impacts should
bee pests become
established.
2.35 Dr Kim Ritman, the Australian Chief Plant Protection Officer, summarised
the current funding arrangements:
... the funding for the ongoing program, in discussion at the moment, comes
through the [RDCs]. There is matching funding from the
Commonwealth, in that it
is an industry program. [PHA runs] a technical committee, which includes
industry, to look at improvements
to the program. There are a number of
recommendations that have come out of that, and the Commonwealth, with Plant
Health Australia,
is looking to fund some of
Fraser further expanded on funding arrangements, working with partners engaged
in biosecurity activities:
One way we can do that, clearly, is to work through organisations like
Horticulture Innovation, which has a lot of pollination-dependent
industries or
growers of those commodities as their members. What we can actually do is look
at engaging with the RDCs. The two we
work with on pollination-related
activities are RIRDC and HIA. We also work with all states and territories and
the Commonwealth
government as well. We try and put together a program that is
funded by as many people as possible, so that we can not only increase
quantum of funds but also share the activity a bit and get resources. Some of
those resources might be in kind from a state
perspective, for example, but that
is fine, if it allows us to do the job
Further research and
development
2.37 The PHA submission to the inquiry briefly outlined several areas that
require further research and development effort.
2.38 The submission stated that, while rigorous statistical analysis of the
sensitivity of sentinel hives has been carried out, an
equivalent level of
analysis for the other NBPSP methodologies has yet to be performed. Further, the
analysis will be necessary to
assess the efficiency of the program and where
modifications should be
2.39 The submission also states that both standard and remote catchboxes have
yet to be optimised, with further research required
to determine how to make
them more attractive to honey bee swarms and whether pheromone or floral lures
may be useful.
2.40 Additionally, some Australian ports still have unknown risk ratings.
Detailed risk analysis of these ports and airports is required
to determine the
best way to direct the
Other issues to
Pre-embarkation
inspections
2.41 Dr Ritman discussed some of the evidence-based work that occurs along
the biosecurity defence continuum:
The border is important, and it is part of the system ... there is pre-border
work that we do offshore ... with shipping companies
with awareness at the ports
by handlers. We do surveys overseas. We have webcrawlers that are looking for
where pests are moving
internationally to be able to get intelligence about
where things are on the move ...
Weatherhead of AHBIC suggested that a key part of the defence should be
pre-embarkation inspections, before goods are loaded
onto vessels. Mr
Weatherhead discussed a recent incursion of Asian honey bees in Brisbane:
... they came in a cable reel that came out of Singapore or somewhere like that.
That nest was in there, and our contention is: why
did they not pick it up when
they loaded it on the way in? We have had vehicles come out of Malaysia with
nests actually in the vehicles.
Why did they not pick them up when they loaded
those vehicles into the
2.43 The potentially major issue of smuggling was raised in the roundtable by
Dr Paul De Barro of CSIRO.
2.44 Dr De Barro stated that there have been examples of the smuggling of
queen bees through the mail, with those bees potentially
carrying Varroa.
Further, Dr De Barro suggested that even though these incidents are reasonably
rare, those bees will be put straight
into hives, enabling rapid establishment
2.45 Dr De Barro suggested that smuggling could possibly be a major issue,
because it circumvents all surveillance efforts which assume
Resistance breeding
2.46 Breeding bees that are resistant to pests and diseases was raised as a
potential opportunity for the Australian beekeeping industry
to be one step
ahead of the Varroa threat.
2.47 Mr Fraser of PHA was fully supportive of this approach, which is carried
out in many other agricultural industries:
I would really like to encourage the industry, too, to look at these breeding
opportunities that exist, as we do in a whole range
of other commodities. When
we have got a potential threat out there, we try and build resistance into our
own crops to make sure
it is less risky when things do come
Barro of CSIRO supported the pursuit of improved selective breeding:
We should be looking simply outside of the box a bit to say, ‘Could we do
something similar in bees or like?’ and starting
to look more broadly.
There are two issues: resistance to the Varroa and resistance to the virus. How
could we perhaps look at other
perhaps non-traditional ways to give us that edge
because we have not really explored that right
Weatherhead of AHBIC explained that the Australian beekeeping industry is
working on genetically improving bees through breeding:
There are programs overseas at the moment, and we are looking to import some of
that genetic material into Australia. The contention
with the breeding program
itself is whether the resistance is to the actual mite or to the viruses that
are being vectored by the
bee. It is actually viruses that kill the bee in the
long run; it is not the Varroa ... One of the ways we are looking to do that
that we have a provision to be able to import queen bees into Australia. The
latest is through drone bee semen, but we are having
a disagreement with the
department on what protocols should be in place to check for this deformed wing
virus in particular, when
it arrives in
Committee comment
2.50 The Committee applauds the collaborative approach being undertaken
against the significant threat that the arrival of Varroa
presents to the
Australian honey bee and wider agricultural industries.
2.51 The Committee is of the opinion that front-line defence before
(pre-embarkation) and at Australian ports is crucial, and plays
significant role in preventing the introduction of pest bees and bee pests.
2.52 The Committee notes that Model 2 of the National Bee Pest Surveillance
Program is now being implemented. This model sees a substantial
increase in
efforts to monitor entry of pest bees. The Committee recognises that Model 2,
which commenced in December 2016 and will
continue until 2021, covers 14
high-risk ports that account for 95 per cent of the total import volume of trade
in Australia.
2.53 Noting that early interception remains the most critical factor in
preventing the establishment of bee pests, the Committee recommends
an extension
of the program, based on Model 3 proposed in the program’s review and
redesign provided by Plant Health Australia.
Effectively doubling the funding
for the program would substantially increase port coverage, from 32 to 54 ports.
The number of sentinel
hives would increase from 174 to 278. The number of
standard catchboxes would be slightly reduced, however the number of remote
would increase significantly from 40 to 210. Asian honeybee
catchboxes would increase by 30 per cent, and floral sweeping efforts
doubled. The Committee understands that remotely operated catchboxes would
replace standard catchboxes in many locations,
reducing or eliminating the need
for physical on-site examination.
2.54 Implementation of Model 3 would see a significant increase in effective
coverage across the country, accounting for 54 ports
and close to 100 per cent
of the total port import volume of trade. The annual cost of approximately $1.9
million is comparatively
small, given that the program essentially protects a
$100 million beekeeping industry and pollination services provided to a $4
agriculture industry. The value that this program provides to the
protection of the broader Australian agriculture industry cannot
underestimated.
2.55 The Committee expects that a cost-benefit analysis of Model 4 may
demonstrate that an annual expenditure of $3.14 million would
only achieve
marginal further port coverage benefits.
Recommendation 1
2.56 The Committee recommends that the National Bee Pest Surveillance
Program implement, by 30 June 2017, the proposed enhanced Model
3 program, as
outlined in the recent review and redesign. The appropriate proportion of funds
should be provided by the relevant
Commonwealth agencies involved in the program
partnership.
2.57 The Committee notes the central role that members of the public have
played in detecting and reporting biosecurity incursions,
and the assistance
they have provided to recent pest eradication programs. The Committee also
considers that technology (for example,
smartphone applications which may help
educate members of the public and assist them to record sightings of pest bees)
fully utilised.
Recommendation 2
2.58 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government investigate
the development of an easy to use smart phone application
which may help members
of the public to more easily contribute to eradication programs.
2.59 The Committee agrees with the Australian Honey Bee Industry Council
regarding the location of some sentinel hives, in that they
should be closer to
ports where practicable. The Committee encourages the managers of the National
Bee Pest Surveillance Program
to investigate the relocation of particular
sentinel hives that industry partners may deem to be too far away from a
2.60 The Committee recognises the urgent need to complete the necessary
research and development on various aspects of the National
Surveillance Program. The Committee recommends that the program partners
immediately initiate the rigorous statistical analysis
of all program
methodologies, which will allow the efficiency of the program to be assessed,
and the development of any program refinements,
adjustments or modifications.
Particular focus should be given to research on the effectiveness or
optimisation of standard and remote
catchboxes.
Recommendation 3
2.61 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government immediately
initiate the necessary research and development that will
allow the efficiency
of the National Bee Pest Surveillance Program to be assessed, with a view to the
development of any program
refinements, adjustments or modifications. The
rigorous statistical analysis of all methodologies should be the highest
with particular focus on the effectiveness or optimisation of standard
and remote catchboxes. The research and analysis should aim
to be completed by
2.62 The Committee expects that this research and analysis should aim to be
completed by June 2018, with any National Bee Pest Surveillance
adjustments to be implemented immediately thereafter.
2.63 Detailed risk analysis of Australian ports will inform the direction and
implementation of the National Bee Pest Surveillance
Program. The Committee
recommends that the Australian Government complete the analysis of pest bee risk
ratings for the remaining
Australian ports that do not have such ratings. The
assessment should include airports, and it should also include pre-embarkation
inspections and processes at various ports.
Recommendation 4
2.64 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government complete the
analysis of pest bee risk ratings for the Australian ports
that do not have such
ratings. The assessment should include airports, and it should also include
pre-embarkation inspections and
processes at various ports. The assessment
should be completed by the end of 2017 and a copy of the completed assessment
to the Committee.
2.65 The issue of smuggling of bees warrants further investigation. The
Committee wishes to see a detailed examination of this issue,
including the
number of incidents, the percentage of incidents where pests were discovered,
the potential for further incursions,
and how to prevent, detect or combat such
Recommendation 5
2.66 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government undertake a
detailed analysis of the smuggling of bees into Australia.
The analysis should
include, but not be limited to, the total number of incidents, the percentage of
incidents where pests were discovered,
the potential for further incursions, and
how to prevent, detect or combat such incidents. A copy of the analysis should
be provided
to the Committee upon completion.
2.67 The Committee expects that this research and analysis should aim to be
completed by June 2018, with any National Bee Pest Surveillance
adjustments to be implemented immediately thereafter.
2.68 Given the immediacy of the risks and the need for rapid response when a
pest entry is identified, the Committee has set timeframes
recommendations. The Committee seeks an expedited response to its report and
dedicated efforts to meet the timeframes recommended.
2.69 The issue of selective breeding of bees that are resistant to pests and
the diseases that they carry was raised during the roundtable.
The discussion
was relatively short and warrants further examination and broader industry
investigation. In particular, research
and development is required into the
selective breeding of honey bees for disease resistance.
Recommendation 6
2.70 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, in
conjunction with domestic and possibly international industry partners,
research and development into selective breeding of honey bees that are
resistant to pests and diseases that may have a
detrimental effect on the
Australian honey bee industry.
2.71 The Committee thanks all individuals and organisations that provided
information and participated in the roundtable for this
inquiry. The Committee
will maintain a watching brief on Australian honey bee industry issues.
Mr Rick Wilson MP
2 March 2017
A. Submissions and public hearings
Roundtable – Thursday,
24 November 2016
Committee Room 1R2, Parliament House, Canberra
Australian Honey Bee Industry
Mr Lindsay Bourke
Mr Trevor Weatherhead
Department of Agriculture and
Water Resources
Dr Kim Ritman
Ms Tina Hutchison
Dr Murli Baker-Gabb
Plant Health
Mr Greg Fraser
Dr Paul de Barro
Submissions
1. Plant Health Australia
Rural and Regional Affairs and
Transport References Committee,
Future of the Beekeeping and pollination
service industries in Australia
, July 2014, p. 2.
Dr Paul De Barro, Research
Director, CSIRO,
Committee Hansard
, 24 November 2016, p. 8.
Mr Linday Bourke, Chair,
Australian Honey Bee Industry Council,
Committee Hansard
, 24 November
2016, p. 3.
Rural and Regional Affairs and
Transport References Committee,
Future of the Beekeeping and pollination
service industries in Australia
, July 2014, pp 5-6.
Rural and Regional Affairs and
Transport References Committee,
Future of the Beekeeping and pollination
service industries in Australia
, July 2014, p. 6.
Lindsay Bourke,
, 24 November 2015, p. 2.
Rural and Regional Affairs and
Transport References Committee,
Future of the Beekeeping and pollination
service industries in Australia
, July 2014, p. 7.
Lindsay Bourke,
, 24 November 2015, p. 3.
Department of Agriculture and
Water Resources,
Honey bees, crop pollination and varroa mite frequently
asked questions
http://www.agriculture.gov.au/pests-diseases-weeds/bees/honeybees-faqs
viewed 16 January 2017.
http://beeaware.org.au/archive-pest/varroa-mites/
, viewed 16
January 2017.
Lindsay Bourke,
, 24 November 2016, p. 1.
Trevor Weatherhead,
Executive Director, Australian Honey Bee Industry Council,
, 24 November 2016, p. 5.
Dr Paul de Barro,
Committee Hansard
, 24 November 2016, pp. 4-5.
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources, Status of the Asian honey bee in mainland Australia,
http://www.agriculture.gov.au/pests-diseases-weeds/bees/the-asian-honey-bee-in-australia
viewed 25 January 2017.
Dr Kim Ritman, Australian
Chief Plant Protection Officer, Department of Agriculture and Water Resources,
Committee Hansard
, 24 November 2016, p. 5.
Dr Kim Ritman,
, 24 November 2016, p. 5.
Trevor Weatherhead,
Committee Hansard
, 24 November 2016, p. 6.
Trevor Weatherhead,
Committee Hansard
, 24 November 2016, p. 6.
Dr Kim Ritman,
, 24 November 2016, p. 2.
Dr Kim Ritman,
, 24 November 2016, p. 2.
Dr Kim Ritman,
, 24 November 2016, p. 5.
National Bee Pest
Surveillance Program,
http://www.planthealthaustralia.com.au/national-programs/national-bee-pest-surveillance-program/
visited 16 January 2017.
Greg Fraser, Chief Exective
Officer, Plant Health Australia,
Committee Hansard
, 24 November 2016, pp.
Greg Fraser,
, 24 November 2016, p. 2.
Trevor Weatherhead,
Committee Hansard
, 24 November 2016, p. 6.
Plant Health Australia,
ubmission 1
Plant Health Australia,
ubmission 1
Plant Health Australia,
Submission 1
Plant Health Australia,
Submission 1
Plant Health Australia,
Submission 1
Mr Lindsay Bourke, Chair,
Australian Honey Bee Industry Council,
Committee Hansard
24 November 2016, p. 7.
Lindsay Bourke,
, 24 November 2016, p. 7.
Goodwin, M. and Van Eaton,
Control of Varroa - A Guide for New Zealand Beekeepers
Zealand Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry.
Somerville, D. (2008)
study of New Zealand beekeeping - lessons for Australia
. Rural Industries
Research and Development Corporation, p. vii.
Somerville, D. (2008)
study of New Zealand beekeeping - lessons for Australia
. Rural Industries
Research and Development Corporation, p. vii.
Mr Trevor Weatherhead,
Executive Director, Australian Honey Bee Industry Council,
, 24 November 2016, p. 9.
Lindsay Bourke,
, 24 November 2016, p. 1.
Mr Greg Fraser, Chief
Executive Officer, Plant Health Australia,
Committee Hansard
24 November 2016, p. 9.
Plant Health Australia,
Submission 1
Plant Health Australia,
Submission 1
Plant Health Australia,
Submission 1
Greg Fraser,
, 24 November 2016, p. 7.
Plant Health Australia,
Submission 1
Greg Fraser,
, 24 November 2016, p. 7.
Plant Health Australia,
Submission 1
Greg Fraser,
, 24 November 2016, p. 12.
Greg Fraser,
, 24 November 2016, p. 12.
Greg Fraser,
, 24 November 2016, p. 12.
Plant Health Australia,
Submission 1
Plant Health Australia,
Submission 1
Lindsay Bourke,
, 24 November 2016, p. 7.
Dr Kim Ritman, Australian
Chief Plant Protection Officer, Department of Agriculture and Water Resources,
Committee Hansard
, 24 November 2016, p. 7.
Greg Fraser,
, 24 November 2016, p. 7.
Plant Health Australia,
Submission 1
Plant Health Australia,
Submission 1
Plant Health Australia,
Submission 1
Dr Kim Ritman,
, 24 November 2016, p. 10.
Trevor Weatherhead,
Committee Hansard
, 24 November 2016, p. 9.
Dr Paul De Barro, Research
Director, CSIRO,
Committee Hansard
, 24 November 2016, pp. 4-5.
Dr Paul De Barro,
Committee Hansard
, 24 November 2016, p. 5.
Greg Fraser,
, 24 November 2016, p. 9.
Dr Paul De Barro,
Committee Hansard
, 24 November 2016, p. 13.
Trevor Weatherhead,
Committee Hansard
, 24 November 2016, p. 13.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (199 KB)
PDF format (212 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter