URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBSD/2025/80.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:15:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Strengthening Oversight of the National Intelligence Community Bill 2025 - Commentary on Ministerial Responses [2025] AUSStaCSBSD 80 (29 October 2025)
Strengthening Oversight of the National Intelligence Community Bill 2025366
Significant matters in delegated legislation368
Attorney-General’s response369
Committee comment
Reversal of the evidential burden of proof370
Attorney-General’s response373
Committee comment
Immunity from civil and criminal liability374
Attorney-General’s response377
Committee comment
Strengthening Oversight of
the National Intelligence Community Bill
The bill seeks to amend the
Intelligence Services Act 2001
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act 1986
to expand the
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence
and Security (PJCIS) to include
four additional agencies: the Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission, the
Australian Federal
Police, Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre
(AUSTRAC) and the Department of Home Affairs.
The bill also seeks to strengthen the relationship between the PJCIS, the
IGIS and the Independent National Security Legislation Monitor,
including by
providing the PJCIS with a power to request the IGIS conduct an inquiry,
providing an own-motion power to the PJCIS
to review certain legislation and a
requirement that the IGIS and the Director-General of National Intelligence
provide briefings
to the PJCIS.
Attorney-General
House of Representatives on 30 July 2025
Bill status
Before the House of Representatives
2.45 On 30 July 2025, the
Strengthening Oversight of the National
Intelligence Community Bill 2025
was introduced and read for a first time in the
House of Representatives.
2.46 It proposes to amend the
Intelligence Services Act 2001
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act 1986
(IGIS Act) to
expand the jurisdictions of the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
and the Parliamentary Joint Committee
on Intelligence and Security (PJCIS) to
include four additional agencies: the Australian Criminal Intelligence
Commission, the Australian
Federal Police, Australian Transaction Reports and
Analysis Centre (AUSTRAC) and the Department of Home Affairs.
2.47 Additionally, the bill seeks to strengthen the relationship between the
PJCIS, the IGIS and the Independent National Security
Legislation Monitor,
including by providing the PJCIS with a power to request the IGIS conduct an
inquiry, providing an own-motion
power to the PJCIS to review certain
legislation and a requirement that the IGIS and the Director-General of National
Intelligence
provide briefings to the PJCIS.
2.48 The committee outlined its scrutiny concerns in relation to these powers
Scrutiny Digest 4 of
On the 16 September
2025, the minister provided a response addressing the committee’s concerns
(first requested on 28 August
2025) surrounding these issues.
Significant matters in delegated
legislation
2.49 Item 6 of Schedule 1 to the bill seeks to insert proposed section 3A
into the IGIS Act. Proposed section 3A would provide definitions
intelligence functions of three national intelligence community agencies: the
Australian Federal Police, Australian Transaction
Reports and Analysis Centre
(AUSTRAC) and the Department of Home Affairs (the Department). Under section
8(3A) of the IGIS Act, the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security has
the function of inquiring into certain matters to the extent that they relate
an intelligence function of an agency. The definition of intelligence function
is therefore relevant to establishing the jurisdiction
of the Inspector General
of Intelligence and Security (IGIS).
2.50 The intelligence functions of the Australian Federal Police and of
AUSTRAC are set out in some detail in proposed subsections
3A(1) to (3). By
contrast, proposed subsection 3A(4) states that the intelligence function for
the Department of Home Affairs has
the meaning given by the regulations.
Scrutiny Digest 4 of 2025
the committee requested the
Attorney-General’s detailed advice as to:
• why it is considered both necessary and appropriate to set out the
meaning of ‘intelligence function’, as it applies
to the Department
of Home Affairs, within delegated legislation; and
• whether the bill could be amended so that:
• any intelligence functions of the Department of Home Affairs which
are already legislated are set out within the bill; and
• to provide further high-level guidance about the use of the
regulation-making powers set out at proposed subsections 3A(4)
Attorney-General’s
2.52 The Attorney-General advised that due to its status as a department of
State, the intelligence functions of the Department of
in the Administrative Arrangements Order (AAO) and so are more frequently and
rapidly amended than the functions
of agencies established by legislation. It
was further advised that the proposed regulation-making power would enable
responsive,
consistent and detailed characterisation of the precise scope of
IGIS oversight of the Department’s intelligence functions.
2.53 The Attorney-General further advised that intelligence capability within
the Department is distributed across disparate intelligence
functions that are
tied to the responsibilities of the Minister for Home Affairs set out in the AAO
and accordingly subject to change.
To the extent that the intelligence functions
of the Department are legislated, it is advised that their inclusion in the
legislation would not permit timely updates where ministerial
responsibility for those functions is varied, which would give rise
uncertainty and complexity for agencies, oversight bodies and stakeholders.
Committee comment
2.54 The committee thanks the Attorney-General for this response.
2.55 The committee notes the Attorney-General’s advice that defining or
providing high-level guidance with respect to the intelligence
functions of the
Department in proposed subsection 3A(4) of the bill would be impractical and
inconsistent with the intent to provide
clear and consistent oversight of the
National Intelligence Community.
2.56 The committee also acknowledges the Attorney-General’s advice that
the regulation-making power is intended to ensure accurate,
consistent and
uniform oversight arrangements that can be promptly updated following
administrative changes. Nevertheless, the justification
advanced in the
Attorney-General’s advice does not recognise as an equal possibility that
intelligence functions of the Department
may be carved out of the scope of IGIS
oversight without appropriate parliamentary oversight. For this reason, the
committee retains
concerns about the absence of high-level guidance on the
nature of functions to be included within ‘intelligence functions’,
a matter which is not addressed in the response provided.
2.57 In light of the above, the committee leaves to the Senate as a whole
the appropriateness of prescribing the definition of the
intelligence functions
of the Department of Home Affairs in regulations rather than on the face of the
2.58 The committee also draws this matter to the attention of the Senate
Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation.
Reversal of the evidential burden of
2.59 The bill seeks to establish several defences which reverse the
evidential burden of proof. The committee has scrutiny concerns
in relation to
these reverse burden provisions as listed in the footnote below. All of the
defences established by the bill will
apply to existing information disclosure
offences, which make it an offence for persons to make a record of, disclose or
use certain
kinds of information in certain circumstances. The explanatory
memorandum states that these amendments are intended to clarify that
relevant information can be provided to IGIS without
limitation.
2.60 It is a defence for each of these offences if the person used, disclosed
or made a record of the information in connection with
the performance of their
functions or duties or exercising their powers. The bill would also provide
additional defences whereby
the relevant offence does not apply if the affected
person uses or discloses the information for the purpose of, or in connection
with, an IGIS official exercising a power or performing a function or duty. The
defendant would bear the evidential burden for both
the existing defences and
the defences proposed by the bill.
Scrutiny Digest 4 of 2025
, the committee requested the
minister’s advice as to why it is proposed to use offence-specific
defences (which reverse the
evidential burden of proof) in this instance.
The committee also noted that its consideration of the appropriateness of a
provision which reverses the burden of proof is assisted
if the advice
explicitly addresses relevant principles as set out in the Guide to Framing
Commonwealth Offences (the
Attorney-General’s
2.62 The Attorney-General advised that it is appropriate and proportionate to
reverse the evidential burden having regard to the sensitivity
information with which the offences are connected and the serious consequences
arising from its disclosure.
2.63 Due to the highly classified nature of information that may be disclosed
to IGIS officials and related context, the Attorney-General
noted that the
prosecution may be unable to easily adduce evidence about a defendant having
disclosed information in relation to
an IGIS inquiry, inspection or specific
request for information. The Attorney-General’s response advised that such
as well as the existence of particular records that evidence the
connection between the disclosure and the activities of an IGIS
official, would
be peculiarly within the knowledge of a defendant.
2.64 Further, the Attorney-General noted that because the information is
likely to relate to national security and law enforcement
matters, its
disclosure would, in many cases, pose a grave danger to public safety.
Committee comment
2.65 The committee thanks the Attorney-General for this response. The
committee notes the Attorney-General’s advice that the
reversal of the
evidential burden in relation to relevant Schedule 1 offence-specific defence
provisions is appropriate and that
the defendant is best placed to adduce
evidence about any disclosure of information to an IGIS official. The committee
also welcomes
that the Attorney-General’s advice explicitly addresses the
principles set out in the Guide, including whether the matters
relied on to
establish the defence would be significantly more difficult or costly for the
prosecution to disprove.
2.66 The committee accepts that a defendant may generally be in a position to
adduce evidence that indicates a reasonable possibility
that they disclosed
information as required by an IGIS official. It is also recognised that in such
circumstances, the operation
of strict secrecy provisions and limited authorised
disclosures may prevent an IGIS official from verifying, either to the
prosecution
or in court, that an impugned disclosure was made to a defendant for
the purpose of, or in connection with, the exercise of a power
or function of an
IGIS official. The committee notes that its scrutiny concerns in relation to
reversing the evidential burden could
be further ameliorated by making
legislative provisions authorising discrete and strictly confined disclosures by
an IGIS official
to the prosecution or a court for the purposes of verifying a
defendant’s account.
2.67 Further, given that the bill seeks to enact a range of offence-specific
defences across multiple pieces of legislation, the committee
continues to
expect that a discrete justification to be provided for each defence for which
the evidential burden is reversed. Such
justification would enable greater focus
on the projected risks of grave danger to the public safety related to
unauthorised disclosures
in the context of the relevant disclosures.
2.68 The committee draws its scrutiny concerns to the attention of
senators and leaves to the Senate as a whole the appropriateness
of reversing
the evidential burden of proof in relation to these defences.
Immunity from civil and criminal
2.69 Item 4 of Schedule 3 to the bill seeks to insert proposed section 476.7
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Criminal Code), the effect of which
would be to exempt persons from civil and criminal liability for certain
‘computer related
conduct’ that is engaged in in the proper
performance of authorised Australian Defence Force (ADF) activities.
2.70 More specifically, the proposed section would provide immunities in two
different circumstances. Proposed subsection 476.7(1)
provides that a defence
official would not be liable for engaging in conduct where the official held a
reasonable belief that the
conduct was likely to cause a computer-related act,
event, circumstance or result to take place outside Australia.
2.71 'Defence official' refers to a wide range of persons, and would include
a member of the ADF, a defence civilian, an employee
of the Department of
Defence, a consultant or contractor to the department, or any other person
specified in a class of persons by
the secretary or Chief of the ADF by
legislative instrument.
2.72 Proposed subsection 476.7(2) provides that a person is not subject to
any civil or criminal liability for undertaking conduct
related to authorised
ADF activities taking place outside Australia, where the conduct taken together
with a computer-related act,
event or circumstance, could amount to an offence
and would not have amounted to an offence in the absence of the computer-related
2.73 'Computer related conduct' is defined under proposed section 476.1 to
mean a range of acts, events, circumstances or results
involving the use of
computers, including electronic communication, or the act of possessing,
controlling, modifying, accessing,
producing, supplying, or obtaining computer
Scrutiny Digest 4 of 2025
the committee requested the
Attorney-General’s detailed advice as to:
• why the proposed immunities from liability in subsections 476.7(1)
and 476.7(2) are each necessary and appropriate; and
• Why the immunity conferred by the bill differs from that recommended
in the National Intelligence review. Namely, the committee
requested the
Attorney-General’s advice as to:
• why conferring civil immunity is both necessary and appropriate;
• why conferring criminal immunity beyond the offences set out in Part
10.7 of the Criminal Code is both necessary and appropriate;
• why it is necessary and appropriate to provide that the immunity
would extend to persons other than ADF members, including
employees of the
Department of Defence, consultants, contractors, or persons specified by
legislative instrument;
• why it is necessary and appropriate to confer immunity on persons who
are undertaking actions inside Australia, including
why the threshold test of
whether a computer-related event is 'likely' to take place outside of Australia
is the appropriate test;
• whether processes are in place to ensure that decisions as to whether
the relevant conduct is likely to cause a computer-related
event to take place
outside of Australia are undertaken in a robust and consistent manner; and
• why it is necessary and appropriate to confer an immunity on persons
who are undertaking conduct that is preparatory to, in
support of, or otherwise
directly connected with, authorised ADF activities outside
Attorney-General’s
2.75 The Attorney-General advised that the immunity is necessary and
appropriate to ensure that the prospect of civil or criminal
liability does not
deter the ADF from deploying its cyber capabilities effectively and
responsively. The Attorney-General’s
advice indicates that the immunity is
only conferred on ADF activities that are ‘authorised by the Chief of the
Defence Force
(CDF) in connection with the defence or security of
Australia’ and defence officials engaged in the proper performance of
activities.
2.76 In relation to why conferring immunity beyond the offences set out in
Part 10.7 of the Criminal Code is both necessary and appropriate,
Attorney-General’s response advised that relevant activities may attract
civil or criminal liability under other laws.
2.77 Further, the Attorney-General’s response advises that the activity
covered by the immunity is confined by the definitions
of computer-related act,
event, circumstance or result. An official is obliged to notify the CDF (or
Secretary of the Defence Department)
in writing where their conduct causes
material damage, material interference or material obstruction to a computer
within Australia,
which is intended to support accountability and internal
review or disciplinary processes as appropriate.
2.78 The Attorney-General noted that the proposed immunity from both criminal
and civil liability is consistent with immunities for
staff members and agents
of the Australian Signals Directorate (ASD), Australian Geospatial-Intelligence
Organisation (AGO) and the
Australian Secret Intelligence Service (ASIS) under
Part 10.7 of the Criminal Code, as situated in section 476.6.
2.79 In relation to why it is necessary and appropriate to confer immunity on
persons undertaking actions in Australia, the Attorney-General
advised that the
immunity would only apply to a defence official (including a consultant or
contractor) who reasonably believes that
the computer related act is likely to
cause an effect outside Australia. As to the rationale for this threshold test
(being, on reasonable
belief that the act is ‘likely’ to have an
effect outside Australia), the Attorney-General’s advice indicates that
is not always possible to reliably determine the geographic location of a
device, data or a computer (including where physical
locations are deliberately
obfuscated).
2.80 In relation to robust and consistent processes for decision-making about
the likelihood of conduct causing a computer-related
event to occur outside of
Australia, the Attorney-General advised that such processes include
'context-specific legal advice that
addresses domestic and international law,
targeting directives, and rules of engagement.’
2.81 In relation to why it is necessary and appropriate to confer immunity on
persons undertaking preparatory conduct for authorised
ADF activities, the
Attorney General advised that this is needed as complex cyber operations may
require the ADF to undertake pre-positioning
computer-related activities prior
to armed conflict, which are not subject to combat immunity under the Australian
common law.
Committee comment
2.82 The committee thanks the Attorney-General for this information.
2.83 While noting the advice in the Attorney-General’s response, the
committee considers that the response does not adequately
articulate why the
scope of the proposed immunity exceeds that contemplated by recommendation 72 of
Comprehensive Review of the Legal Framework of the National Intelligence
(the Review) on which the explanatory memorandum states the
amendments are premised. It is noted that although the Review considered
the immunity would resemble that which exists for computer-related activities
undertaken by ASD, ASIS and AGO, the Review recommended
that that any immunity
be limited to computer-related acts done
Australia and that it
apply only to activities undertaken in the proper performance of defence
officials’ functions as part
of properly declared operations under legally
approved rules of engagement – conditions that do not appear to be present
the face of the bill and are not addressed in the minister’s
2.84 Other than in relation to the review, the committee notes that the
response does not substantively differ from the information
that was previously
provided to the committee with respect to its comments on the Intelligence
Services Amendment Bill 2023. Further,
the committee notes that the information
provides does not substantively improve on the limited information already
provided in the
explanatory materials.
2.85 Accordingly, the committee reiterates its concerns that the immunity
from civil and criminal liability in proposed section 476.7
of the bill differs
in several respects from the recommendations of the Review and may be overbroad.
With respect to defence officials’
computer-related activity having
unexpected adverse consequences, the committee notes that an affected individual
may have limited
recourse available unless they are able to establish that the
computer-related activity was not part of authorised ADF activities
or otherwise
contrary to proposed section 476.7.
2.86 In light of the above, the committee retains its scrutiny concerns in
relation to this matter, and draws its concerns to the
attention of senators and
leaves to the Senate as a whole the appropriateness of the broad civil and
criminal immunity provided for
in proposed section 476.7.
This entry can be cited as:
Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Strengthening Oversight of
the National Intelligence Community Bill 2025
Scrutiny Digest 6 of 2025
[2025] AUSStaCSBSD 80.
Senate Standing Committee
for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Digest 4 of 2025
(27 August 2025), pp. 51-57.
Schedule 1, item 6, proposed
subsections 3A(4) to (6). The committee draws senators’ attention to this
provision pursuant
to Senate standing order 24(1)(a)(iv).
The minister responded to
the committee’s comments in a letter dated 16 September 2025. A copy of
the letter is available
on the committee’s
(see correspondence included with the committee’s assessment of this
Various provisions of
Schedule 1, including items 103, 105, 106, 108, 110, 116, 121, 124, 128, 142,
144 and 152. The committee draws
senators’ attention to these provisions
pursuant to Senate standing order 24(1)(a)(i).
See, for example,
explanatory memorandum, p. 59.
Senate Standing Committee
for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Digest 4 of 2025
(27 August 2025), pp. 53-54.
The minister responded to
the committee’s comments in a letter dated 16 September 2025. A copy of
the letter is available
on the committee’s
(see correspondence included with the committee’s assessment of this
Schedule 3, item 4, proposed
section 476.7. The committee draws senators’ attention to this provision
pursuant to Senate standing
order 24(1)(a)(i).
Schedule 3, item 4,
proposed subsection 476.7(8).
Senate Standing Committee
for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Digest 4 of 2025
(27 August 2025), pp. 55–57.
The minister responded to
the committee’s comments in a letter dated 16 September 2025. A copy of
the letter is available
on the committee’s
(see correspondence included with the committee’s assessment of this
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (141 KB)
PDF format (144 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter