URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJStaCPW/2019/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:09:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Parliamentary Joint Standing Committee on Public Works (45th Parliament) --- "Report 01/2019 - Proposed Replacement of the Wharf Crane and Mooring Systems on Christmas Island - PP 41/2019" [2019] AUPJStaCPW 1 (18 February 2019)
Committee Secretariat
Structure of the Report
Conduct of the inquiry
Need for the works
Flying Fish Cove
Smith Point
Nui Nui wharf crane and mooring systems
Options considered
Scope of the works
Cost of the works
Committee comment
Proposed replacement of the wharf crane and mooring infrastructure on Christmas Island
Proposed replacement of the wharf crane and mooring systems on Christmas Island
Friday, 7 December 2018 – Canberra, ACT
Department of Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities
GHD Pty Ltd
PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Report 1/2019
Referral made October 2018
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works
© Commonwealth of Australia
ISBN 978-1-74366-981-5 (Printed Version)
ISBN 978-1-74366-982-2 (HTML Version)
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 3.0 Australia License.
The details of this licence are available on the Creative Commons website:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/au/
List of Recommendations
1 Introduction
2 Replacement of the Wharf Crane and Mooring
Systems, Christmas Island
Appendix A. List of
Submissions
Appendix B. List of Witnesses and Public
The Hon Dr John McVeigh MP
Deputy Chair
Mr Tony Zappia MP
Senator Alex Gallacher
Mr Ian Goodenough MP
Ms Justine Keay MP
Ms Joanne Ryan MP
Senator Amanda Stoker
Mr Andrew Wallace MP
Senator John Williams
Committee Secretariat
Committee Secretary
Pauline Cullen
Inquiry Secretary
James Bunce
Office Manager
Tanya Pratt
List of Recommendations
Recommendation 1
2.48 The Committee recommends that the House of Representatives resolve,
pursuant to
Section 18(7)
Public Works Committee Act 1969
is expedient to carry out the following proposed works: replacement of the wharf
crane and mooring systems, Christmas Island.
1. Introduction
1.1 Under the
Public Works Committee Act 1969
(the Act), the
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works is required to inquire into and
report on public works referred to
it through either house of Parliament.
Referrals are made pursuant to
of the Act, and by practice are made
by the Minister for Finance or their delegate in the House of
Representatives.
1.2 All public works that have an estimated cost exceeding $15 million must
be referred to the Committee and cannot be commenced until
the Committee has
made its report to Parliament and the House of Representatives receives that
report and resolves that it is expedient
to carry out the
1.3 Under the Act, a public work is a work proposed to be undertaken by the
Commonwealth, or on behalf of the Commonwealth concerning:
§ the construction, alteration, repair, refurbishment or fitting-out of
buildings and other structures;
§ the installation, alteration or repair of plant and equipment designed
to be used in, or in relation to, the provision of services
for buildings and
other structures;
§ the undertaking, construction, alteration or repair of landscaping and
earthworks (whether or not in relation to buildings
and other structures);
§ the demolition, destruction, dismantling or removal of buildings,
plant and equipment, earthworks, and other structures;
§ the clearing of land and the development of land for use as urban land
or otherwise; and
§ any other matter declared by the regulations to be a
1.4 The Act requires that the Committee consider and report on:
§ the purpose of the work and its suitability for that purpose;
§ the need for, or the advisability of, carrying out the work;
§ whether the money to be expended on the work is being spent in the
most cost effective manner;
§ the amount of revenue the work will generate for the Commonwealth, if
that is its purpose; and
§ the present and prospective public value of the
1.5 The Committee pays attention to these and any other relevant factors when
considering the proposed work.
Structure of the
1.6 The Special Minister of State, The Hon Alex Hawke MP, referred the
following proposed project to the Committee in October 2018:
§ Proposed replacement of the wharf crane and mooring systems on
Christmas Island.
1.7 In considering the works, the Committee analysed the evidence presented
by the proponent agency, submissions and evidence received
at public and
in-camera hearings.
1.8 In consideration of the need to report expeditiously as required by
Section 17(1) of the Act, the Committee has only reported
on significant issues
of interest or concern.
1.9 Chapter 2 addresses the proposed replacement of the wharf crane and
mooring systems on Christmas Island. The estimated cost of
this project is $26.2
million (excluding GST).
1.10 Submissions are listed at Appendix A, and hearings and witnesses are
listed at Appendix B.
2. Replacement of the Wharf Crane and Mooring
Systems, Christmas Island
2.1 The Department of Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities (the
Department) seeks approval to proceed with the replacement
of the wharf crane
and mooring systems on Christmas Island in Australia’s Indian Ocean
Territories (IOT).
2.2 Christmas Island is a non-self-governing territory located 1,550
kilometres north-west of the Australian mainland, for which the
Government fulfils the role of both Commonwealth and State Government. The
Department is responsible for the provision,
management and operation of the
port facilities on Christmas Island on behalf of the Australian
Government.
2.3 The Department states that this proposal will address ‘identified
safety and operational concerns’ with the existing
wharf crane and mooring
systems, and will:
§ Ensure the Port can continue to operate with a higher level of safety
and with increased reliability;
§ Provide greater capacity and increased operational flexibility into
the future; and
§ Reduce the escalating ongoing repair
2.4 The estimated cost of the project is $26.2 million (excluding GST).
2.5 The project was referred to the Committee on 25 October 2018.
Conduct of the
2.6 Following referral, the inquiry was publicised on the Committee’s
website and via media release.
2.7 The Committee received one submission and two confidential submissions.
A list of submissions can be found at Appendix A.
2.8 On 7 December 2018, the Committee conducted a site inspection by
presentation, public and in-camera hearings. A transcript of
the public hearing
is available on the Committee’s
2.9 According to the Department, the IOT ‘are heavily dependent upon
reliable Port facilities for deliveries ‘of essential
supplies by
sea-freight’. The Department stated that:
The Australian Government owns all of the IOT Port’s onshore assets (fixed
and mobile) and a number of offshore assets and
vessels. The assets are
maintained on behalf of the Australia Government, by Linx Stevedoring Pty Ltd,
under a service delivery contract
with the Department for the provision of Port
facilities management
its submission, the Department outlined the port facilities on Christmas
Currently there are two wharf cranes (one operational and one non-operational)
and six mooring berths (five operational and one non-operational)
located across
the three sites utilised, as follows:
1 Flying Fish Cove:
a. Wharf crane – a Favelle Favco M760 wharf-mounted tower crane.
b. Mooring systems – comprising an outer mooring system and an inner
mooring system, with shared componentry, which services
the Rock and Crane
i. Rock Berth – a six-point mooring for vessels loading phosphate via
two cantilever loaders that are owned and operated by
the local phosphate
ii. Crane Berth – a six-point mooring for freight and bagged phosphate
2 Smith Point:
a. Tanker One Berth – a five-point mooring.
b. Tanker Two Berth – a three-point mooring.
c. Passenger Berth – a two-point/two heading mooring (or a single point
mooring between the span extensions for large cruise
3 Norris Point (Nui Nui):
a. Wharf crane – a Favelle Favco M440 tower crane
(non-operational).
b. Nui Nui Berth – a two point/two head mooring
(non-operational).
2.11 The Department told the Committee that 179 vessels berthed at the
Christmas Island port facilities in 2017. Of these, 51 per
cent moored at Smith
Point, 34 per cent moored at the Rock Berth in Flying Fish Cove, and 15 per cent
moored at the Crane Berth.
The Department further stated that 48 per cent of the
vessels were Royal Australian Navy or Australian Border Force, 42 per cent
vessels servicing the phosphate mine operated by Phosphate Resources Ltd, seven
per cent were general cargo vessels, and three
per cent were fuel
Need for the works
2.12 The Department advised that:
Technical investigation and ongoing consultation with major users of the Port
have identified a range of concerns regarding the safety,
capability and
adequacy of key elements of the existing
infrastructure.
2.13 Furthermore,
in addition to these concerns the Department noted that:
The wharf crane and mooring systems in Flying Fish Cove both recently
experienced critical failures, requiring costly emergency repairs,
disrupting Port operations. Without immediate replacement, these ageing assets
will continue to fail and severely impact Port
operations, which support
Australia’s strategic capability in the region, and ensure the
sustainability of this isolated island
Flying Fish Cove
2.14 In its submission, the Department outlined the specific concerns
identified in the existing crane and mooring infrastructure
at Flying Fish Cove.
In regard to the wharf crane at Flying Fish Cove, the Department stated
§ The existing Favelle Favco M760D wharf-mounted tower crane at Flying
Fish Cove, which is the primary freight-handling crane
for the Port, was not
built specifically for marine purposes and operates in an exposed and harsh
marine environment.
§ The existing crane’s limited reach also constrains vessel size
and Port operations, and introduces risk due to vessels
being required to be
moored close to the cliff face and the potential for swell at the rock face.
§ To minimise risk, ships’ captains position vessels at the limit
of the crane capacity for each lift. This practice,
whilst reducing the
operational risks to vessels, increases the forces on the crane structure and
reduces its life.
2.15 The Department argued that replacing the existing crane with an upgraded
marine crane will:
...provide a safer solution with regard to vessel and crane operation, reduce
the number of lifts at full capacity, reduce ongoing
maintenance costs, and
provide greater operational reliability and increased flexibility with regard to
reach and load
2.16 According
to the Department:
Flying Fish Cove is the main cargo facility on Christmas Island and comprises
two mooring systems: an outer mooring system and an
inner mooring system, with
shared componentry, which services the Rock and Crane
the outer mooring system is ‘used predominantly for bulk phosphate
operations’, the inner mooring systems ‘is
used for both bagged
phosphate operations and vessels coming alongside for general cargo
2.18 The Department noted that while the mooring systems are ‘currently
serviceable’, they have required urgent repairs
on at least four occasions
since 2016. Additionally:
...the existing components and configuration no longer meet the current or
future operational requirements of the Port users, and
the outer mooring system
is now four years beyond its six-year design life (having been due for
replacement in
Department told the Committee that, following the wreck of the
the inner mooring system was replaced in 2013 and is approaching the end of its
design life. Further:
If, as proposed, the existing Flying Fish Cove wharf crane is replaced by a
crane with greater reach and lifting capacity, the mooring
layout will also
require reconfiguration to
Smith Point
2.20 In its submission, the Department outlined the role of the port
facilities at Smith Point:
The Smith Point mooring system supports fuel bunkering and large vessel
refuelling, handling bulk distillate and medium fuel oil
for both power
generation and the operations of Phosphate Resources
Department noted that:
In 2009, driven by a need to diversify the island’s economy, the Smith
Point mooring system was reconfigured to accommodate
cruise ships up to the size
Pacific Sun
(approximately 47,000 tonne and passenger capacity of
1,500). At the time, it was intended that the cruise ships would moor at Smith
Point, with passengers being transferred to and from the ship via a tender
vessel to the jetty in Flying Fish Cove. However, only
three cruise ships have
moored at Smith Point in that time, mainly due to the cruise ships visiting
during the swell season, making
it challenging to safely access and/or approach
2.22 According
to the Department:
The 2009 alterations to the Smith Point mooring system inadvertently resulted in
less safe berthing operations for vessels off-loading
or refuelling, due to the
repositioning of the buoys. Further, the type of breast buoys installed during
the reconfiguration have
proven not to be sufficiently robust to withstand the
onset of north-westerly swells; and have insufficient deck surface area to
facilitate safe buoy jumping operations to catch and release mooring
Nui Nui wharf crane and
mooring systems
2.23 This facility was constructed in 2004 to off-load fuel and support the
now defunct Asia-Pacific Space Centre project. It was
intended that Niu Niu be
used as an emergency off-loading facility for fuel and cargo following the
closure of the Asia-Pacific Space
2.24 The Department noted that the mooring system at Nui Nui has been used
only four times since its construction, and further that:
...the intended purpose of the system as an emergency off-loading facility is
now largely redundant, due to the Department putting
in place measures to reduce
the risk of running low on aviation fuel supplies and perishable food
its submission, the Department also discussed several concerns with the crane
and mooring facilities at Nui Nui:
§ In 2014, the Nui Nui moorings failed after being impacted by severe
weather and damaging swell conditions associated with Cyclone
effectively rendering the system non-operational. To prevent further damage to
the system, three buoys were removed from
the water in early 2015. At present,
the Nui Nui mooring system remains inoperable.
§ The Favelle Favco M440D wharf-mounted tower crane installed at Nui Nui
is now 25 years old. Following an inspection undertaken
in May 2016, the
manufacturer recommended the crane not be operated in its current state.
§ While the Port operator continues to undertake routine inspections of
the crane as required under the agreed maintenance schedule,
there are no
financially viable repair options available to reinstate the crane into
2.26 As a result of these concerns and the operational changes implemented to
stockpiling on Christmas Island, the Department is proposing
Removal and off-island disposal of the crane and remaining mooring system
componentry will relieve the Australian Government of the
ongoing maintenance
liability for these assets, and remove the potential for unauthorised and
high-risk use of remaining mooring
componentry.
Committee is satisfied that the need for the works exists.
Options considered
2.28 The Department considered a range of options to replace the existing
crane at Flying Fish Cove in 2015. This assessment determined
replacement needed, at minimum, to meet the following criteria:
§ Lift capacity of 45 tonne at a reach of 45 metres to provide
flexibility and options for vessel orientation;
§ Hoist speed greater than 25 metres per minute; and
§ Designed for marine
operations.
2.29 In its submission, the Department also outlined the three options
examined for the Flying Fish Cove crane foundations. The Department
stated that,
although it did include the option of doing nothing, the proposed new crane will
‘impose substantially larger
loads on its supporting foundation’,
and that as such ‘a more robust foundation is
2.30 These options are:
§ Upgrading the existing crane foundation;
§ Constructing a new piled foundation offshore from the existing
cliffline; and
§ The construction of a new landward foundation across the existing
wharf space, including the installation of 16 rock anchors
around the concrete
foundation perimeter.
2.31 The Department told the Committee that upgrading the existing foundation
was determined to represent the best value of money
solution as it ‘meets
the operational requirements while minimising construction related risks’,
including ‘geotechnical
constructability risks, potential environmental
impact and impact on wharf
operations’.
2.32 In considering the best approach for replacing the moorings at Flying
Fish Cove, the Department examined three options:
Option 1: Simultaneous Mooring Configuration.
This option
involved separate mooring systems for the Rock and Crane Berths, to allow
mooring of vessels at the Rock Berth and Crane
Berth simultaneously. This option
generally required new mooring elements to be installed, with use of existing
elements where practicable.
While this option is preferred by a key user of the
Port, simultaneous mooring of vessels at the Rock and Crane Berths is not deemed
critical to achieving the project objectives, and introduces additional
operational safety risks.
Option 2: Shared Mooring Configuration (Single Vessel Mooring)
– Adaptive re-use of existing mooring components.
This option
primarily utilised existing mooring components at the Crane and Rock Berths, and
involved only minimal new mooring componentry
while allowing for berthing of a
200 metre vessel at Rock berth, or a 110 metre vessel at the Crane Berth.
Shared Mooring Configuration (Single Vessel
Mooring) – Combination of New and Adaptive Re-use.
This option
involved utilising a combination of new and existing mooring componentry across
the Rock and Crane Berths. This option
is similar to Option 2, however involved
a greater amount of new componentry (versus re-use of existing componentry), and
greater operational flexibility as it also enables berthing of a 130
metre vessel at Rock Berth.
2.33 The Department took the view that Option 3 represented the best value
for money, as it met user requirements while ‘minimising
operational
safety risks and impact on Port
operations’.
2.34 To replace the mooring facilities at Smith Point, the Department
considered two options:
Option 1 – Parallel berthing.
A six-point mooring system
which facilitates mooring of a 150 metre tanker or 150 metre cruise ship to the
Parallel or perpendicular berthing.
six-point mooring system which facilitates mooring of a 150 metre cruise ship or
150 metre tanker parallel to the shore, or mooring
of a 150 metre tanker
perpendicular to the shore (using a four-point mooring configuration). Providing
the perpendicular mooring
functionality improves the operational safety of fuel
bunkering and vessel refuelling operations, particularly during adverse weather
conditions.
2.35 Following an analysis of these options, the Department determined that
Option 2 represents the best value for money, as it addressed
‘operational
safety risks’ and facilitates ‘year-round access to the fuel
2.36 The Department told the Committee that it undertook an ‘options
assessment for the Nui Nui moorings system’ in December
2016, which
considered:
§ The current condition of the residual moorings componentry which is
not operational; and
§ The reduced need for an ‘emergency off-loading facility’
on Christmas Island (as a result of the Department’s
recent ‘Fuel
Consolidation Project’, which increased the bulk quantity of aviation fuel
maintained at the airport).
2.37 According to the Department, this assessment ‘recommended that the
remaining salvageable mooring componentry be removed
and disposed of (off
Scope of the works
2.38 The Department split the proposed works into three project elements.
2.39 Project Element 1 is proposed to take place at Flying Fish Cove, and
involves the following works:
§ Replacement and upgrade of the existing wharf crane to meet
operational requirements, including:
- Decommissioning and off-island disposal of the existing crane;
- Upgraded crane foundation; and
- Installation of a new wharf crane.
§ Upgrade of the Flying Fish Cove Moorings System to increase capacity
(to safely accommodate larger vessel sizes) and align
with upgraded wharf crane,
- Installation of new componentry for outer mooring system;
- Combination of new mooring components and adaptive re-use of existing
components for inner mooring system; and
- Decommissioning and off-island disposal of the existing mooring components
(where not suitable for re-use within the new
2.40 Project Element 2 proposes to reconfigure ‘mooring systems and
ensure safe fuel bunkering and vessel refuelling’
at Smith Point, and
includes the following works:
§ Replacement, upgrade and reconfiguration of the existing mooring
system; and
§ Decommissioning and off-island disposal of the existing components no
longer required as part of the upgraded mooring
2.41 Project Element 3 is proposed to take place at Nui Nui, and includes the
following works:
§ Decommissioning and off-island disposal of the existing wharf crane;
§ Removal and off-island disposal of the remaining components of the Nui
Nui mooring system.
2.42 The Committee finds that the proposed scope of works is suitable for the
works to meet its purpose.
Cost of the works
2.43 The project has a budget of $26.2 million, exclusive of GST. It includes
the cost of construction, management and design fees,
contingencies and an
escalation allowance.
2.44 The Department provided further detail on project costings in its
confidential submission and during an in camera hearing.
2.45 The Committee is satisfied that the costings for the project provided to
it have been adequately assessed by the proponent entity.
Committee comment
2.46 The Committee did not identify any issues of concern with the proposal
and is satisfied that the project has merit in terms of
need, scope and
2.47 Having regard to its role and responsibilities contained in the
Public Works Committee Act 1969
, the Committee is of the view that this
project signifies value for money for the Commonwealth and constitutes a project
fit for purpose, having regard to the established need.
Recommendation 1
2.48 The Committee recommends that the House of Representatives resolve,
pursuant to
Section 18(7)
Public Works Committee Act 1969
is expedient to carry out the following proposed works: replacement of the wharf
crane and mooring systems, Christmas Island.
2.49 Proponent entities must notify the Committee of any changes to the
project scope, time, cost, function or design. The Committee
also requires that
a post-implementation report be provided within three months of a project
completion. A report template can be
found on the Committee’s website.
Hon Dr John McVeigh MP
A. List of Submissions
Proposed replacement of the
wharf crane and mooring infrastructure on Christmas Island
1 Department of Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities
1.1 Confidential
B. List of Witnesses and Public Hearings
Proposed replacement of the
wharf crane and mooring systems on Christmas Island
Friday, 7 December 2018
– Canberra, ACT
Department of Infrastructure,
Regional Development and Cities
Ms Christine Dacey, Executive Director, Territories Division
Ms Sharon Greenshields, Project Director
GHD Pty Ltd
Mr Steffen Hornei, Design Manager
Mr Peter Seman, Project Manager
All public works that have an
estimated cost exceeding $15 million must be referred to the Committee and
cannot be commenced until
the Committee has made its report to Parliament and
the House of Representatives receives that report and resolves that it is
to carry out the work.
The Act, Section 5.
The Act, Section 17.
Department of Infrastructure,
Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of Infrastructure,
Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
<www.aph.gov.au/pwc>
Department of Infrastructure,
Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of Infrastructure,
Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of Infrastructure,
Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities,
Submission 1
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (146 KB)
PDF format (422 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter