URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJStaCPW/2019/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:09:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Parliamentary Joint Standing Committee on Public Works (46th Parliament) --- "Report 04/2019 - Proposed Fitout of New leased AFP Premises at 140 Lonsdale Street, Melbourne, Victoria - PP 290/2019" [2019] AUPJStaCPW 7 (14 October 2019)
Membership of the 45th Parliament
Membership of the 46th Parliament
Committee Secretariat
Dissolution of the 45th Parliament
Structure of the Report
Conduct of the inquiry
Need for the works
Options considered
Scope of the works
Cost of the works
Committee comment
Monday 1 April 2019 – Canberra, ACT
PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Report 4 2019
Referral made September 2019
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works
© Commonwealth of Australia
ISBN 978-1-76092-029-6 (Printed Version)
ISBN 978-1-76092-030-2 (HTML Version)
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 3.0 Australia License.
The details of this licence are available on the Creative Commons website:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/au/
Membership of the
The Hon Dr John McVeigh MP
Deputy Chair
Mr Tony Zappia MP
Senator Alex Gallacher
Mr Ian Goodenough MP
Ms Justine Keay MP
Ms Joanne Ryan MP
Senator Amanda Stoker
Mr Andrew Wallace MP
Senator John Williams
Membership of the
The Hon Dr John McVeigh MP
Deputy Chair
Mr Tony Zappia MP
Ms Lisa Chesters MP
Senator Alex Gallacher
Senator Hollie Hughes
Hon Barnaby Joyce MP
Senator Susan McDonald
Mr David Smith MP
Mr Rick Wilson MP
Committee Secretariat
Committee Secretary
Pauline Cullen
Inquiry Secretary
James Bunce
Office Manager
Tanya Pratt
List of Recommendations
1 Introduction
Dissolution of the 45th
Structure of the Report
2 Proposed Fitout of New Leased AFP
Premises at 140 Lonsdale Street, Melbourne, Victoria
Conduct of the inquiry
Need for the works
Options considered
Scope of the works
Cost of the works
Committee comment
Appendix A. List of
Submissions
Appendix B. Public Hearing and
List of Recommendations
Recommendation 1
2.29 The Committee recommends that the House of Representatives resolve,
pursuant to
Section 18(7)
Public Works Committee Act 1969
is expedient to carry out the following proposed works: proposed fit-out of new
leased Australian Federal Police Premises
in Melbourne Victoria.
1. Introduction
1.1 Under the
Public Works Committee Act 1969
(the Act), the
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works is required to inquire into and
report on public works referred to
it through either house of Parliament.
Referrals are made pursuant to
of the Act, and by practice are made
by the Minister for Finance or their delegate in the House of
Representatives.
1.2 All public works that have an estimated cost exceeding $15 million must
be referred to the Committee and cannot be commenced until
the Committee has
made its report to Parliament and the House of Representatives receives that
report and resolves that it is expedient
to carry out the
1.3 Under the Act, a public work is a work proposed to be undertaken by the
Commonwealth, or on behalf of the Commonwealth concerning:
§ the construction, alteration, repair, refurbishment or fitting-out of
buildings and other structures;
§ the installation, alteration or repair of plant and equipment designed
to be used in, or in relation to, the provision of services
for buildings and
other structures;
§ the undertaking, construction, alteration or repair of landscaping and
earthworks (whether or not in relation to buildings
and other structures);
§ the demolition, destruction, dismantling or removal of buildings,
plant and equipment, earthworks, and other structures;
§ the clearing of land and the development of land for use as urban land
or otherwise; and
§ any other matter declared by the regulations to be a
1.4 The Act requires that the Committee consider and report on:
§ the purpose of the work and its suitability for that purpose;
§ the need for, or the advisability of, carrying out the work;
§ whether the money to be expended on the work is being spent in the
most cost effective manner;
§ the amount of revenue the work will generate for the Commonwealth, if
that is its purpose; and
§ the present and prospective public value of the
1.5 The Committee pays attention to these and any other relevant factors when
considering the proposed work.
Dissolution of the
1.6 The Proposed fitout of New Leased AFP premises at 140 Lonsdale Street,
Melbourne, Victoria project was referred to the Public
Works Committee (PWC) of
Parliament on 21 February 2019.
1.7 The Committee had completed the inquiry processes but did not table a
report prior to the dissolution of the Parliament. The referral
1.8 The Proposed fitout of New Leased AFP premises at 140 Lonsdale Street,
Melbourne, Victoria project was referred to the PWC of
Parliament on 10 September 2019. The Committee decided not to repeat the inquiry
process as it was advised by the Australian Federal
Police that there had been
no significant changes to the work since the original referral. Evidence taken
on the inquiry is available
on the Committee’s website.
1.9 The Committee thanks members of the PWC of the 45
for their time and expertise in conducting the inquiry.
Structure of the
1.10 In considering the works, the Committee analysed the evidence presented
by the proponent agencies, submissions and evidence received
at public and
in-camera hearings.
1.11 In consideration of the need to report expeditiously as required by
Section 17(1) of the Act, the Committee has only reported
on significant issues
of interest or concern.
1.12 Chapter 2 addresses the proposed fitout of New Leased AFP premises at
140 Lonsdale Street, Melbourne, Victoria project. The estimated
cost of this
project is $98.43 million (excluding GST).
1.13 Submissions are listed at Appendix A, and hearings and witnesses are
listed at Appendix B.
2. Proposed Fitout of New Leased AFP Premises at 140
Lonsdale Street, Melbourne, Victoria
2.1 The Australian Federal Police (AFP) seeks approval to proceed with an
office fit-out for their Melbourne State Office in new leased
premises located
at 140 Lonsdale Street in Melbourne, Victoria.
2.2 The AFP undertakes a range of law enforcement activities at state level,
working closely with its state counterparts including
Victoria Police (VicPol).
According to the AFP, these activities include support of operations, capability
and capacity.
2.3 In its submission, the AFP states that:
Within the AFP’s property portfolio, State Offices are maintained to lead
and coordinate the functions within their jurisdictions.
State Offices are
required to be fit-for-purpose and accommodate the AFP resources allocated to
prosecute operations and therefore
must be carefully
considered.
estimated cost of the project is $98.43 million (excluding GST).
2.5 The project was referred to the Committee of the 45
Parliament on 21 February 2019. This inquiry lapsed with the dissolution of the
House of Representatives on 11 April 2019. The
project was re-referred on 10
September 2019.
Conduct of the
2.6 Following referral and re-referral, the inquiry was publicised on the
Committee’s website via media release.
2.7 The Committee received one submission and one confidential submission. A
list of submissions can be found at Appendix A.
2.8 On 1 April 2019, the Committee conducted a site inspection by
presentation, public and in-camera hearings. A transcript of the
public hearing
is available on the Committee’s website. Following re-referral in the
Parliament, the Committee determined that further hearings were
unnecessary.
Need for the works
2.9 The AFP told the Committee that its current Melbourne State Office (MSO)
is located at 383 La Trobe Street in Melbourne’s
central business
district. The lease at these premises expires in December 2022, and according
to the AFP:
...the building owner has advised they will not extend the lease beyond this
date. Consequently, the AFP has undertaken a rigorous
analysis of accommodation
options for the MSO and now proposes to relocate to 140 Lonsdale Street,
its submission, the AFP outlined some key considerations that needed to be taken
into account in identifying a suitable location
for the new MSO:
The AFP operates 24 hours a day, 365 days per year and are an integral function
of maintaining a safe Australian community environment.
AFP operations must be
able to continue undisrupted through adverse weather events, civil unrest,
services outages (power and communications),
and other events including acts of
terrorism. Ensuring operational capability, integrity and redundancy is of
paramount importance
to the AFP’s capability to maintain a safe Australian
environment.
2.11 Further,
the AFP stated that the ‘increasing frequency of threats and attacks on
police’ has raised the ‘security
of AFP members’ as a
paramount consideration and driver of the need for ‘enhanced
2.12 The Committee is satisfied that the need for the works exists.
Options considered
2.13 In selecting 140 Lonsdale Street as the location for the proposed works,
the AFP undertook a competitive procurement process
which began in July
The AFP invited expressions of interest (EOI) and leasing proposals based on its
business requirements and selection criteria covering
quality, size and location
of the premises and economic considerations including best value for
initial procurement process did not identify any suitable premises. Following
this determination, according to the AFP:
A sublease within VicPol’s new tenancy at 311 Spencer Street was presented
to the AFP and extensive due diligence was conducted
which led to the execution
of a Memorandum of
Understanding.
2.15 However,
in early 2018:
The further evaluation of documents and the design development process
identified risks and capability deficiencies relating to space
limitations,
compromised functionality, lack of visibility into key lease terms, and an
inability to influence the tender and design
processes led to its removal from
consideration.
in turn led to a third procurement process, which commenced in 2018. The AFP
explained this process:
A market scan was conducted to search for potential buildings which met the
AFP’s updated criteria. Four options were evaluated
in detail with
consideration for both financial and non-financial outcomes to determine an
overall suitability and
these four proposals, one option ‘met the majority of the AFP’s
evaluation criteria’, and as a result 140
Lonsdale Street was selected at
the preferred option.
Scope of the works
2.18 In its submission, the AFP states that it ‘intends to lease a
purpose-built tenancy within a newly developed precinct’
of 21,500 square
meters of dedicated tenancy space for a period of 30 years, with two additional
five year options.
2.19 The scope of the office fit-out component includes:
§ Activity based workspace with shared facilities;
§ Functional workspaces allowing for 561 occupants to utilise
workstations installed in a generally open plan arrangement with
areas located, segregated and controlled to support operational policing
requirements;
§ Operational rooms and briefing facilities;
§ Specialist laboratories and workshops;
§ Secure storage;
§ Interview rooms;
§ Firing range;
§ Operational lockers;
§ Specialist capability and functional operational policing training
§ Breakout and muster spaces;
§ Meeting rooms and muster area;
§ Communications/server rooms;
§ Shared facilities including conference and training rooms, gymnasium
and media centre;
§ End-of-trip facilities; and
§ Amenities area.
2.20 A range of base building works are required to meet the AFP’s
requirements, including mechanical services, hydraulic services,
services, fire protection and specialist information and communications
technology services.
2.21 The AFP discussed its specific security requirements, noting that the
security measures need to ensure:
§ Compliance with ASIO’s and AFP’s respective policies and
frameworks.
§ Adoption of a consistent Operational Security Management Plan across
the building premises to ensure currency of the security
measures at the
2.22 Three of the key security priorities that informed the assessment of
security requirements included:
§ Improved explosive device (IED) protection. Strengthening of
facilities to increase protection against IED attack.
§ Intruder resistance protection. Strengthening intruder resistance
(both pedestrian and vehicle) at points of entrance at the
facilities.
§ System response capability. Systems that provide the capability to
respond rapidly and effectively to an
2.23 The Committee examined the issue of security requirements in more detail
in the in-camera hearing, and is satisfied that the
need has been adequately
addressed. Moreover, the Committee finds that the proposed scope of works is
suitable for the works to
meet its purpose.
Cost of the works
2.24 The project has a budget of $98.43 million, exclusive of GST. It
includes a lease incentive of $63.43 million from the landlord.
2.25 The AFP provided further detail on project costings in its confidential
submission and during the in-camera hearing.
2.26 The Committee is satisfied that the costings for the project provided to
it have been adequately assessed by the proponent entity.
Committee comment
2.27 The Committee did not identify any issues of concern with the proposal
and is satisfied that the project has merit in terms of
need, scope and
2.28 Having regard to its role and responsibilities contained in the
Public Works Committee Act 1969
, the Committee is of the view that this
project signifies value for money for the Commonwealth and constitutes a project
fit for purpose, having regard to the established need.
Recommendation 1
2.29 The Committee recommends that the House of Representatives resolve,
pursuant to
Section 18(7)
Public Works Committee Act 1969
is expedient to carry out the following proposed works: proposed fit-out of new
leased Australian Federal Police Premises
in Melbourne Victoria.
2.30 Proponent entities must notify the Committee of any changes to the
project scope, time, cost, function or design. The Committee
also requires that
a post-implementation report be provided within three months of a
project’s completion. A report template
can be found on the
Committee’s website.
Hon Dr John McVeigh MP
A. List of Submissions
Proposed Fitout of New Leased AFP Premises at 140 Lonsdale Street,
Melbourne, Victoria
Australian Federal Police
§ 1.1 Confidential
B. Public Hearing and Witnesses
Monday 1 April 2019 –
Canberra, ACT
Australian Federal Police
Mr Darren Box, Chief Financial Officer
Ms Mel Moore, Manager, Infrastructure and Logistics
Mr Craig Petrie, Manager, Security
Charter Hall Group
Mr Simon Stockfield, Regional Development Director
Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu
Mr Philip Windus, Partner
All public works that have an
estimated cost exceeding $15 million must be referred to the Committee and
cannot be commenced until
the Committee has made its report to Parliament and
the House of Representatives receives that report and resolves that it is
to carry out the work.
The Act, Section 5.
The Act, Section 17.
Australian Federal Police,
Submission 1
Australian Federal Police,
Submission 1
Australian Federal Police,
Submission 1
Australian Federal Police,
Submission 1
Australian Federal Police,
Submission 1
Australian Federal Police,
Submission 1
Australian Federal Police,
Submission 1
Australian Federal Police,
Submission 1
Australian Federal Police,
Submission 1
Australian Federal Police,
Submission 1
Australian Federal Police,
Submission 1
Australian Federal Police,
Submission 1
, pp. 13-14.
Australian Federal Police,
Submission 1
, pp. 15-16.
Australian Federal Police,
Submission 1
Australian Federal Police,
Submission 1
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (129 KB)
PDF format (382 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter