URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBRp/2016/58.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:13:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Counter-Terrorism Legislation Amendment Bill (No 1) 2016 [2016] AUSStaCSBRp 58 (23 November 2016)
Counter-Terrorism Legislation Amendment Bill (No. 1) 2016
Trespass on personal rights and liberties—use of information obtained where interim control order declared void
Schedule 8, item 1, proposed
section 3ZZTC
Crimes Act 1914
Schedule 9, item 58, proposed
section 299
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
Schedule 10, item 45, proposed
section 65B
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
Trespass on personal rights and liberties—fair hearing
Schedule 15, general comment
Trespass unduly on personal rights and liberties—retrospective commencement
Schedule 15, item 32
Counter-Terrorism Legislation Amendment Bill
(No. 1) 2016
This bill amends various legislation in relation to:
• extending control orders to children aged 14 or 15 years
• control orders and tracking devices
• preventative detention orders
• telecommunications interception
• use of surveillance devices
• a new offence of advocating genocide
• delayed notification search warrants
Attorney-General
Senate on 15 September 2016
This bill passed both Houses on 22 November 2016
The committee dealt with this bill in
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016
Attorney-General responded to the committee’s comments in a letter
received on 7 November 2016. The committee sought further
information
and the Attorney-General responded in a letter dated 21 November 2016. A copy of
the letter is attached to this report.
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
Trespass on personal rights and liberties—use
of information obtained where interim control order declared
Schedule 8, item
1, proposed section 3ZZTC of the
Schedule 9, item 58, proposed section
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
Schedule 10, item 45, proposed
section 65B of the
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
section 3ZZTC
Crimes Act 1914
(as outlined in item 1
of Schedule 8), specifies certain purposes for which things seized, information
obtained or a document produced
pursuant to a monitoring warrant can be
communicated or adduced as evidence where a court has subsequently declared the
interim control
order to be void. The same amendment is made in relation to
information obtained under the provisions of
Telecommunications (Interception
and Access) Act 1979
(the TIA Act) (see Schedule 9, item 58, proposed
section 299) and to information obtained under the provisions of the
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
(the SD Act) (see Schedule 10, item 45,
proposed section 65B) where the control order is subsequently declared to
The committee previously noted that the use of information obtained in these
circumstances may have serious implications for personal
rights and liberties.
As such, the committee sought the Attorney-General’s advice as to whether
similar provisions appear in
other Commonwealth legislation and requested a more
detailed justification for the use of material obtained in circumstances in
the relevant control order has been declared void.
The Attorney-General provided a response to the committee, much of which now
forms the reasons given in the statement of compatibility
as to why these
provisions do not undermine a right to a fair trial and fair hearing
(pp 44–45). The statement of compatibility
notes that the provision
‘enables agencies to further use either lawfully intercepted information
or lawfully accessed information
obtained under an interception warrant relating
to an interim control order which is subsequently declared void’ (p.
It is a fundamental principle of the Australian legal
system that courts have a discretion as to whether or not to admit information
as evidence into proceedings, irrespective of the manner in which the
information was obtained. As an example, the
discretion places the
onus on the accused to prove misconduct in obtaining certain evidence and to
justify the exclusion of the evidence.
This principle is expanded on in
Commonwealth statute,
where there
is an onus on the party seeking admission of certain evidence to satisfy the
court that the desirability of admitting
the evidence outweighs the
undesirability of admitting it, given the manner in which it was obtained. This
fundamental principle
reflects the need to balance the public interest in the
full availability of relevant information in the administration of justice
against competing public interests, and demonstrates the role the court plays in
determining admissibility of evidence.
However, the TIA Act departs from these fundamental principles, by imposing
strict prohibitions on when material under those Acts
may be used, communicated
or admitted into evidence.
the TIA Act, it is a criminal offence for a person to deal in information
obtained under these Acts for any purpose, unless
the dealing is expressly
permitted under one or more of the enumerated and exhaustive exceptions to the
general prohibition. This
prohibition expressly overrides the discretion of the
judiciary, both at common law and under the Evidence Act, to admit information
into evidence where the public interest in admitting the evidence outweighs the
undesirability of admitting it, given the manner
in which it was obtained. There
is also a risk that the prohibition might be interpreted, either by a court
considering the matter
after the fact, or by an agency considering the question
in extremis, to override the general defence to criminal responsibility
the Criminal Code.
The committee welcomes the incorporation of this further information in the
explanatory materials. However, the relevant provisions
remain unchanged from
the previous bill. In relation to the justification provided, the committee
makes the following observations.
Although it is said that the information is obtained ‘lawfully’
it remains the case that, if that basis for obtaining
the information is
subsequently declared to be void, the information was obtained in excess of the
powers granted to obtain information.
In this context, describing the
information as ‘lawfully obtained information’ does not capture the
essential point that
information was obtained on the bases of a legally invalid
exercise of power.
It may be accepted that there is a default judicial discretion about whether
or not information may be admitted as evidence into proceedings,
irrespective of
the manner in which it was obtained. However, describing the imposition of
strict prohibitions on when materials
may be used, communicated or admitted into
evidence under the SD Act and TIA Act as a departure from this
‘fundamental’
principle downplays the reasons why that approach was
taken. The strict limits on the use that may be made of information obtained
reflects a recognition that the methods of surveillance authorised by these Acts
constitutes a significant invasion on an individual’s
The committee notes that the explanatory memorandum states that the current
prohibitions in the TIA Act override a fundamental principle
of the Australian
legal system, that courts have a discretion as to whether or not to admit
information as evidence into proceedings,
irrespective of the manner in which
the information was obtained. However, the provisions as currently drafted,
allow a person to
adduce the thing, information or document as evidence so long
as that person reasonably believes doing so is necessary to assist
in preventing
or reducing the risk of a number of harms (or for the purposes of a preventative
detention order (PDO)). It does not
appear to allow the court any discretion as
to whether such evidence should be adduced; it appears that it may be enough
person who wants to adduce the evidence has the belief or is using it
for the purpose of the PDO. It also appears that
section 138
, which allows the court the discretion to exclude evidence that was
improperly or illegally obtained, may not apply where evidence
was obtained
pursuant to a control order which is later declared to be void. If this is the
case, it is not clear to the committee
why this fundamental principle of the
court having the discretion to admit evidence has been overridden in this
For the above reasons the committee reiterates its scrutiny concerns in
relation to these provisions and requests the Attorney-General’s
whether the provisions override judicial discretion as to whether the evidence
should be adduced and, if so, why provisions
section 138
Evidence Act 1995
do not apply (which sets out the matters that should be
taken into account by the court in deciding to allow certain evidence to
Attorney-General’s initial response - extract
section 3ZZTC
Crimes Act 1914
section 299
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
(the TIA Act) and
section 658 of the
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
(the SD Act) expressly
permit agencies to rely on things, information or documents obtained under a
monitoring warrant where the control
order is subsequently declared void in very
limited circumstances. Specifically, the things, information or documents can be
to prevent, or lessen the risk of, a terrorist act, serious harm to a
person, or serious damage to property. These provisions also
permit the use of
such information to apply for, and in connection with, a preventative detention
order. While agencies are therefore
entitled to adduce such evidence under these
provisions, the court’s discretion as to whether or not that evidence may
be admitted
as evidence into the proceedings, irrespective of the manner in
which the information was obtained, remains unaffected.
The provisions do not affect a court’s discretion to refuse to admit
evidence in a proceeding before it. In addition, these
provisions do not
override a court’s duty to refuse to admit improperly obtained evidence in
particular circumstances, or its
determination of the weight to be given to
particular evidence. Similarly, these provisions do not impact upon a
party’s right
to adduce or challenge evidence in court.
Committee’s initial response
The committee thanks the Attorney-General for this response.
The committee notes the Attorney-General’s advice that the provisions
do not affect a court’s discretion in relation to
the admissibility of
The committee requests that the key information provided by the
Attorney-General be included in the explanatory memorandum, noting
importance of these documents as a point of access to understanding the law and,
if needed, as extrinsic material to assist with
interpretation (see
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
The committee draws its concerns to the attention of Senators and leaves the
appropriateness of enabling the use of information obtained
where an interim
control order is subsequently declared void to the consideration of the Senate
as a whole.
Attorney-General’s further response - extract
Schedules 8, 9 and 10
Use of information obtained where interim control order declared
The Committee requested that key information provided by the Attorney-General
in the Digest in relation to this matter be included
in the explanatory
memorandum to the Bill. In accordance with the request of the Committee, the
Revised Explanatory Memorandum, which
will accompany the Bill when it is
introduced into the House of Representatives, will note that the court’s
decision to refuse
to admit evidence in a proceeding before it will not be
affected by the proposed amendments to the
Crimes Act 1914
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
Committee’s further response
The committee thanks the Attorney-General for this further response and for
indicating that key information will be inserted into
the explanatory memorandum
as requested by the committee. The committee welcomes the inclusion of
additional information in explanatory
material accompanying bills as these
documents are an important point of access to understanding the law and, if
needed, may be used
as extrinsic material to assist with interpretation.
In light of the fact that this bill has already passed both Houses of
Parliament the committee makes no further comment in relation
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
Trespass on personal rights and liberties—fair
Schedule 15, general comment
The broad purpose of the
National Security Information (Criminal and Civil
Proceedings) Act 2004
(the NSI Act) is to prevent the disclosure of
information in federal criminal and civil proceedings where disclosure is likely
prejudice national security. Schedule 15 proposes some significant amendments
to that Act by enabling a court to make three new types
of orders in control
order proceedings. The effect of the proposed amendments can generally be
described as allowing the court to
determine that it can rely, in control order
proceedings, on secret evidence in particular circumstances. The three new
court may make are:
• that the subject of the control order and their legal representative
may only be provided with a redacted or summarised form
of national security
information. Despite this, however, the court may consider the information in
its entirety (proposed new subsection
• that the subject of the control order and their legal representative
may not be provided with any information in an original
source document. Despite
this, however, the court may consider all of that information (proposed new
subsection 38J(3)); and
• when a hearing is required under subsection 38H(6) the subject of the
control order and their legal representative can be
prevented from calling the
relevant witness, and if the witness is otherwise called, the information
provided by the witness need
not be disclosed to the subject of the control
order or their legal representative. Despite this, however, the court may
all of the information provided by the witness (proposed new subsection
Notably, the provisions provide that a court may determine whether one of the
new orders should be made in a closed hearing, that
is, a hearing at which the
parties to the control order proceeding and their legal representatives are not
These proposals clearly undermine the fundamental principle of natural
justice which includes a fair hearing. In judicial proceedings
a fair hearing
traditionally includes the right to contest any charges against them but also to
test any evidence upon which any
allegations are based. In many instances it may
not be possible in practice to contest the case for the imposition of control
without access to the evidence on which the case is built. Evidence is
susceptible to being misleading if it is insulated from challenge.
the burden of proof in civil cases is lower than criminal proceedings, that risk
is magnified.
The explanatory materials point to the increasing ‘speed of
counter-terrorism investigations’ as the reason why these
necessary (p. 142). At the general level, the explanatory memorandum suggests
that ‘for control orders to be effective,
law enforcement need to be able
to act quickly, and be able to present sensitive information...to a court as
part of a control order
proceeding without risking the integrity, safety or
security of the information or its source’ (p. 142).
On the other hand, the explanatory memorandum also recognises that it is
important that a court, in the context of control order proceedings,
continue to
be able to ensure procedural fairness and the administration of justice.
However, it is questionable whether the amendments
in the bill adequately
preserve procedural fairness to the subject of a control order.
The committee reiterates its previous comments in relation to the overall
approach of requiring the courts to determine when the disclosure
of information
will be likely to prejudice national security. Courts are not well placed to
second-guess law enforcement evaluations
of national security risk which means
that it may be particularly challenging to protect an individual’s
interest in a fair
hearing. The fact that the court has discretion as to how to
draw the balance between national security and any adverse effect on
‘substantive hearing’ (in relation to whether a special order be
made, or in the exercise of any general powers to
stay or control its
proceedings) cannot be said to ‘guarantee’ procedural fairness.
In considering the extent to which judges will be able, in the exercise of
their discretionary powers under the proposed regime, to
resist the claims of a
law enforcement agency that an order should be made, it should be noted that
judges routinely accept that
the courts are ‘are ill-equipped to evaluate
intelligence’ [
Leghaei v Director-General of Security
[2007] FCAFC 37
(2007) 97 ALD 516]
and the possibility that law enforcement agencies
may be wrong in their national security assessments. For this reason, the fact
that security information is read by judges in the context of the legislative
regime proposed in this schedule does not mean that
they will be well placed to
draw a different balance between security risk and fairness than is drawn by law
enforcement agencies.
The committee previously requested, and received, from the Attorney-General,
a justification for the proposed approach including whether
further safeguards
for fairness had been considered. Following that advice, the committee
previously concluded that it was not persuaded
that the previous bill provided
an appropriate balance between the need to protect national security information
and the controlee’s
right to procedural fairness.
Schedule 15 of this bill has made a number of amendments to the scheme. The
committee’s view in relation to these amendments
is set out below.
Sufficient information to be provided
The PJCIS in its Advisory Report recommended (recommendation 4) that the bill
be amended to ensure that the subject of the control
order proceeding be
provided with ‘sufficient information about the allegations against him or
her to enable effective instructions
to be given in relation to those
allegations’.
As a result, item 21, proposed paragraph 38J(1)(c) has been altered so that
the court must be satisfied that the relevant person has
‘sufficient information about’ the allegations on which the control
order was based, to ‘enable effective
instructions to be given in relation
to those allegations’ Previously the bill had provided that the court must
be satisfied
that the relevant person has been given ‘notice of the
allegations on which the control order request was based (even if the
person has not been given notice of the information supporting those
allegations)’. This change provides a greater
level of detail about the
allegations on which the control order request is made to be provided to the
potential subject of the order.
The committee welcomes this amendment which will enable the person who may be
subject to the control order to be given more information
to better enable them
to provide instructions and present their defence. However, the committee notes
that with the introduction
of special advocates (see further below) it is
important that the disclosure of this ‘sufficient information’ be
prior to national security information being disclosed to a special
advocate, to enable the special advocate to obtain effective
instructions from
the controlee. This is important as communication between the controlee and
their legal representative is heavily
restricted after national security
information has been disclosed to the advocate.
The committee welcomes the amendment to ensure sufficient information is
provided to a person who may be subject to a control order
in order to obtain
effective instructions. However, the committee seeks the
Attorney-General’s advice as to whether the ‘sufficient
information’ will be provided to a person before a special advocate has
been provided with national security information (disclosed
pursuant to proposed
section 38PE) to enable them to adequately communicate with the special
Attorney-General’s initial response - extract
The amendments contained in Part 1 of Schedule 15 enable a court to make
three new types of protective orders in control order proceedings.
Under revised
section 38J
National Security Information (Criminal and Civil
Proceedings) Act 2004
(NSI Act), each of the new protective orders allows
the court to consider sensitive national security information that the controlee
and their ordinary legal representative are prevented from hearing or seeing.
of Schedule 15 provides that a special advocate may be appointed to
represent the interests of the controlee in parts of the control
proceedings where the controlee and their ordinary legal representative have
been excluded.
In determining whether to make a protective order under revised
section 38J
the court must be satisfied that the controlee has been given ‘sufficient
information about the allegations on which the control
order request was based
to enable effective instructions to be given in relation to those
allegations’ (new paragraph 38J(1)(c)).
This implements Recommendation 4
of the PJCIS Advisory Report.
Whether the controlee is provided the ‘sufficient information’
prior to the special advocate seeing the sensitive national
security information
will depend on the circumstances of the control order application.
In the ordinary case, the controlee will be given sufficient information
based, such that they
can instruct their ordinary legal representative and special advocate in
relation to those allegations. This
information is provided by the AFP pursuant
to the various disclosure obligations under Division 104 (for instance,
subparagraph
104.12A(2)(a)(iii)) as well as under other applicable procedural
rights in federal civil proceedings (for instance, normal processes
discovery). Given the controlee will have access to this information prior to
the special advocate seeing the sensitive national
security information under
section 38PE
, the controlee and the special advocate will generally be able
to communicate freely.
There may be some circumstances where further information is disclosed to the
controlee after a special advocate has been appointed
and received the sensitive
national security information. Following the receipt of the sensitive national
security information by
the special advocate, any communication from the special
advocate to the controlee will require the authorisation of the court, pursuant
section 38PF.
Following the closed hearing, if the court determines that
the information should be subject to a new protective order under revised
section 38J
, the court must ensure the controlee is provided ‘sufficient
information’ about the allegations contained in that
‘information’
such that they are able to instruct their ordinary
legal representative and special advocate in relation to those allegations.
The communication restrictions in new
section 38PF
do not prevent the
controlee from communicating with the special advocate nor providing information
to the special advocate that
the controlee considers relevant in relation to the
‘sufficient information’. Pursuant to new
subsection 38PF(8)
controlee can continue to communicate with the special advocate in writing
through their ordinary legal representative without
restriction.
Committee’s initial response
The committee thanks the Attorney-General for this response.
The committee notes the Attorney-General’s advice that there may be
circumstances in which a person who may be subject to a
control order (the
‘controlee’) will not be given sufficient information prior to a
special advocate seeing the sensitive
national security information (at which
point communication between the two is heavily restricted).
The committee accepts that a controlee is able to communicate with the
special advocate after the advocate has seen the sensitive
national security
information. However, such communication can only be in writing through their
legal representative, and the advocate
can only submit a written communication
to the court for the court’s approval to forward it to the controlee or
their legal
representative (see proposed
section 38PF).
This is a heavily
restricted approach to communication between the controlee and the special
advocate, who may be the only person
able to represent the interests of the
controlee at many stages of the proceedings.
The committee considers that if a controlee is only given ‘sufficient
information’ about the allegations against them
restrictions
are placed on communication with the special advocate, there will be limited
opportunity for proper instructions to
be given to the special advocate. The
committee considers this would appear to defeat the purpose of the special
advocate scheme
in instances where the information is not provided to the
controlee before the special advocate has received the sensitive national
security information.
The committee reiterates its view that the secret evidence provisions are apt
to undermine the fundamental principle of natural justice
which includes the
right to a fair hearing. The right to a fair hearing traditionally includes the
right to contest any charges and
test any evidence on which allegations are
based. If sufficient information about the allegations against the controlee is
not provided
to the controlee until after communications with the special
advocate are heavily restricted, the committee considers the scheme
the bill does not appear to provide an appropriate balance between the need to
protect national security information and
the controlee’s right to
procedural fairness.
The committee requests that the key information provided by the
Attorney-General be included in the explanatory memorandum, noting
importance of these documents as a point of access to understanding the law and,
if needed, as extrinsic material to assist with
interpretation (see
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
The committee draws its scrutiny concerns to the attention of Senators and
leaves the appropriateness of the timing of when ‘sufficient
information’ is provided to the controlee to the consideration of the
Senate as a whole.
Attorney-General’s further response - extract
Schedule 15
Sufficient information
The Committee requested that the key information provided by the
Attorney-General in response to the Digest be included in the explanatory
memorandum to the Bill. In accordance with the request of the Committee, the
Revised Explanatory Memorandum will include further
detail about the interaction
of the ‘sufficient information’ requirement under new paragraph
38J(1)(c) with the special
advocate role.
The Revised Explanatory Memorandum will clarify that in the ordinary case,
the controlee will be given sufficient information about
the allegations on
which a control order request is based prior to the special advocate being
provided the sensitive national security
information under new subsection
38PE(2). Accordingly, the controlee and the special advocate will generally be
able to communicate
without restrictions when the ‘sufficient
information’ has been provided to the controlee.
The Revised Explanatory Memorandum will also outline that in some
circumstances, further information may be disclosed to the controlee
special advocate has been provided the sensitive national security information.
Under such circumstances, the special advocate
will need the approval of the
court to communicate with the controlee. However, the controlee can continue to
communicate with the
special advocate without restriction, so long as the
communication is in writing through their ordinary legal representative.
Committee’s further response
The committee thanks the Attorney-General for this further response and for
indicating that key information will be inserted into
the explanatory memorandum
as requested by the committee. The committee welcomes the inclusion of
additional information in explanatory
material accompanying bills as these
documents are an important point of access to understanding the law and, if
needed, may be used
as extrinsic material to assist with interpretation.
In light of the fact that this bill has already passed both Houses of
Parliament the committee makes no further comment in relation
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
In addition, the bill tightly regulates communication between special
advocates and controlees (and their legal representatives) after
security information has been disclosed. However, subsection 38PD(1) allows
unrestricted communication prior to the disclosure
of that information. Proposed
subsection 38PD(2) provides that the court may restrict or prohibit
communication between the controlee
and the special advocate if satisfied that
it is in the interests of national security to do so and the orders are not
inconsistent
with the Act or regulations made under it. No justification is
provided in the explanatory memorandum as to why this exception is
required. It
is unclear why such communication need be restricted given at this point in time
no sensitive information would have
been disclosed to the special advocate. If
communication prior to national security information being disclosed is
restricted it
may make it very difficult for the special advocate to adequately
perform their functions given that communication after disclosure
is so tightly
regulated by the provisions.
The committee considers that the exception in proposed subsection 38PD(2) is
not sufficiently explained in the explanatory materials
and seeks the
Attorney-General’s advice as to why it is necessary to empower the court
to prohibit or restrict communication
between a special advocate and a controlee
prior to sensitive national security information being disclosed to the special
Attorney-General’s initial response - extract
New section 38PD provides that communication between the special advocate and
the controlee is generally not subject to any restriction
prior to the special
advocate being provided with the sensitive national security information under
new subsection 38PE(2). The limited
exception to this is outlined in new
subsection 38PD(2). New subsection 38PD(2) states that the court may make orders
restricting
or prohibiting communications between the special advocate and the
controlee even prior to the special advocate being disclosed the
national security information if the court is satisfied that the order is in the
interest of national security, and the
order is not inconsistent with the NSI
Act or regulations made under the Act.
The limited exception to the general rule in favour of unrestricted
communication is to prevent the inadvertent unauthorised disclosure
of sensitive
national security information. There are circumstances where the appointed
special advocate may have already acquired
sensitive national security
information, including the sensitive national security information that is to be
subject to, or is already
the subject of, a new protective order under revised
section 38J. Where the special advocate has knowledge of such material, which
relevant to the control order proceeding, there is a risk that the special
advocate may inadvertently disclose that information
to the controlee. A court
order under new subsection 38PD(2) which restricts or prohibits communication
between the special advocate
and controlee guards against the risk of
inadvertent disclosure.
In making an order under new subsection 38PD(2), the court may require that
any communication from the special advocate to the controlee
be authorised by
the court pursuant to the process outlined in new section 38PF. Such a process
ensures that the court can review
proposed communications from the special
advocate to the controlee to minimise the risk of inadvertent disclosure of
sensitive national
security information. The process under new section 38PF
still allows the controlee to communicate with the special advocate without
restriction, so long as the communication is in writing and goes through their
ordinary legal representative.
Noting the importance of promoting open and unrestricted communication
between the special advocate and controlee prior to the special
receiving the sensitive national security information, it is likely that the
court would only make an order under new subsection
38PD(2) in exceptional
circumstances where the risk of inadvertent disclosure of sensitive national
security information cannot be
mitigated in any other way.
Committee’s initial response
The committee thanks the Attorney-General for this response.
The committee notes the Attorney-General’s advice that there may be
circumstances where the appointed special advocate may have
already acquired
sensitive national security information before a protective order is made. As
such, the Attorney-General advises
that proposed subsection 38PD(2), in allowing
the court to restrict the disclosure of information between the special advocate
the controlee, is necessary to protect against the risk of inadvertent
disclosure. The committee notes that the advice did not provide
any examples as
to the circumstances in which a special advocate would have knowledge of the
national security information prior
to it being officially disclosed to
The committee also notes the Attorney-General’s advice that it is
likely that the court would only make such an order in exceptional
circumstances
where the risk of disclosure could not be mitigated in any other way. However,
proposed subsection 38PD(2), as drafted,
is not limited to exceptional
circumstances, and could be used any time the court considers it appropriate to
do so if satisfied
that it is in the interests of national security and the
orders are not inconsistent with the proposed Act.
In light of the above comments, the committee seeks the
Attorney-General’s further advice as to whether consideration has been
- amending proposed subsection 38PD(2) to require the court to consider
whether the risk of disclosure could be mitigated in any
other way prior to
restricting or prohibiting communications between a controlee and special
advocate; and
- enabling the court to appoint a new special advocate who does not have
access to sensitive national security information, to enable
a controlee to
properly communicate with their special advocate before a protective order is
Attorney-General’s further response - extract
Communication restrictions between the special advocate and controlee
prior to the disclosure of sensitive information to the special
The Committee noted the response of the Attorney-General to the Digest that
there may be instances where the appointed special advocate
may have already
acquired sensitive national security information before a disclosure is made by
the Attorney-General to the special
advocate under new subsection 38PE(2).
Alternatively, it may be the case that the special advocate has knowledge of
other sensitive
national security information that is highly relevant to the
control order proceeding on foot. In such circumstances, it is appropriate
communication between the special advocate and the controlee be restricted in
order to prevent the inadvertent disclosure of
the sensitive national security
information.
A scenario where the court may consider that a restriction or prohibition is
appropriate even prior to the sensitive national security
information being
disclosed to the special advocate is when the appointed special advocate has
previously been involved in a control
order proceeding where specific sensitive
national security information was subject to a protective order under revised
section 38J.
In the subsequent control order proceeding, the Australian Federal
Police may seek to rely on the same specific sensitive national
information, over which the Attorney-General may again seek a protective order
under revised section 38J. In such circumstances,
the court may consider that an
order under new subsection 38PD(2) is appropriate because the prior knowledge of
the special advocate
of the sensitive information heightens the risk of
inadve1ient disclosure of that information to the controlee.
The Committee sought additional information as to whether consideration has
been given to:
• amending proposed subsection 38PD(2) to require the court to consider
whether the risk of disclosure could be mitigated in
any other way prior to
restricting or prohibiting communications between a controlee and special
advocate; and
• enabling the court to appoint a new special advocate who does not
have access to sensitive national security information,
to enable a controlee to
properly communicate with their special advocate before a protective order is
The amendments proposed by the Committee are not required. The NSI Act is
designed to provide the court flexibility and discretion
to conduct its
proceedings in such a way as to accord procedural fairness to all parties. The
overarching responsibility of courts
to provide procedural fairness, the
existing safeguards contained in the NSI Act and the additional safeguards
contained in Schedule
15 of the Bill ensure that the controlee is guaranteed a
right to a fair hearing during a control order application. Given this context,
and in particular the intent of the special advocate role to vigorously
represent the interests of the controlee, it is likely that
the court will only
make an order under new subsection 38PD(2) where it considers that the risk of
inadvertent disclosure of the
sensitive national security information cannot be
mitigated in any other way.
Committee’s further response
The committee thanks the Attorney-General for this further response and notes
that it would have been useful had this key information
been included in the
explanatory memorandum.
The committee notes the Attorney-General’s advice that it is not
necessary to amend the provisions to require the court to consider
whether the
risk of disclosure could be mitigated in any way other than restricting
communication between the controlee and special
advocate because it is intended
that the court have flexibility and discretion to conduct its proceedings. The
committee also notes
the Attorney-General’s advice that this power is set
out in the context of existing safeguards in the NSI Act and additional
safeguards in Schedule 15 of the bill, and that the intent of the special
advocate scheme is to vigorously represent the interests
of the controlee.
However, the committee reiterates its view that the secret evidence
provisions are apt to undermine the fundamental principle of natural
which includes the right to a fair hearing, and that the special advocates
scheme, as drafted, does not appear to provide
an appropriate balance between
the need to protect national security information and the controlee’s
right to procedural fairness.
In this context the committee considers that,
from a scrutiny perspective, it is insufficient to leave a broad discretion to
court to limit communication between a controlee and special advocate so
long as it is satisfied it is in the interests of national
security and the
orders are not inconsistent with the proposed Act.
In light of the fact that this bill has already passed both Houses of
Parliament the committee makes no further comment in relation
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
Trespass unduly on personal rights and
liberties—retrospective
commencement
Schedule 15, item 32
Item 32 of Schedule 15 states that the new special orders in relation to
secret evidence that may be made under proposed section 38J
apply to civil
proceedings that begin before or after the commencement of this item.
The explanatory materials do not explain why the amendments should apply to
proceedings which have already begun, especially given
that (as explained above)
the amendments may be in conflict with the fair hearing principle. The committee
previously sought the
Attorney-General’s advice as to the rationale for
the proposed retrospective application of the amendments to proceedings already
commenced and as to how many current proceedings or potential proceedings are,
or are likely to be, affected by this provision.
The Attorney-General responded:
It is appropriate that the new orders are available as soon as they come into
force, regardless of whether a control order proceeding
has already commenced.
This is consistent with existing protections that are available under the NSI
Act. Section 6A of the NSI Act
provides that the Act can apply to civil
proceedings that take place after the NSI Act has been invoked, irrespective of
the proceedings commenced prior to the invocation of the Act. However,
the new orders will only be available to those parts of the
proceeding that have
not yet occurred. Accordingly, the provisions will not operate
retrospectively.
Unfortunately this further information was not included in the current
explanatory memorandum as requested by the committee. The committee
that the explanatory memorandum be amended to include this information. On the
basis of the committee’s previous correspondence
the committee leaves the
question of whether the new orders should be available in proceedings that have
started before the commencement
of these new provisions to the Senate as a
Attorney-General’s initial response - extract
The Explanatory Memorandum currently states that the new protective orders
will apply to control order proceedings irrespective of
whether the control
order proceeding has commenced and irrespective of whether or not the NSI Act
has been invoked. However, this
does not mean that the new protective orders can
be sought in respect of parts of the control order proceeding which have already
concluded. As noted in the
Attorney-General’s previous response, the new protective orders will
only be available in those parts of the control order proceedings
that have not
yet occurred and where the NSI Act has been invoked. Accordingly, the provisions
will not operate retrospectively.
The existing Explanatory Memorandum already provides a description of the
operation of the amendments contained in Part 1 of Schedule
Committee initial response
The committee thanks the Attorney-General for this response.
The committee reiterates its request that the key information provided by the
Attorney-General be included in the explanatory memorandum,
importance of these documents as a point of access to understanding the law and,
if needed, as extrinsic material to assist
with interpretation (see
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Attorney-General’s further response - extract
Retrospective commencement
The Committee requested that additional information provided by the
Attorney-General in response to the Digest be included in the
explanatory
memorandum. In accordance with the request of the Committee, the Revised
Explanatory Memorandum will clarify that the
amendments to the NSI Act contained
in Part 1 of Schedule 15 will not operate retrospectively.
The Revised Explanatory Memorandum will note that the new protective orders
will become available as soon as they come into force,
regardless of whether a
control order proceeding has already commenced. This is consistent with existing
protections that are available
under the NSI Act. Section 6A of the NSI Act
provides that the NSI Act can apply to civil proceedings that take place after
Act has been invoked, irrespective of whether the proceedings commenced
prior to the invocation of the Act. However, the new protective
orders under
revised section 38J will only be available in those parts of the proceedings
that have not yet occurred.
Committee’s further response
The committee thanks the Attorney-General for this further response and for
indicating that key information will be inserted into
the explanatory memorandum
as requested by the committee. The committee welcomes the inclusion of
additional information in explanatory
material accompanying bills as these
documents are an important point of access to understanding the law and, if
needed, may be used
as extrinsic material to assist with interpretation.
In light of the fact that this bill has already passed both Houses of
Parliament the committee makes no further comment in relation
[1978] HCA 22
(1978) 141 CLR 54.
Section 138
See s 63 of the TIA Act.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (155 KB)
PDF format (223 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter