URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBRp/2016/69.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:13:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Narcotic Drugs Legislation Amendment Bill 2016 [2016] AUSStaCSBRp 69 (30 November 2016)
Narcotic Drugs Legislation Amendment Bill 2016
Delegation of legislative power and parliamentary scrutiny
Schedule 2, item 28, proposed subsection 26B(2)
Narcotic Drugs Legislation Amendment Bill
This bill amends the
Narcotic Drugs Act 1967
(the ND Act) to provide
protection of sensitive law enforcement information used in licencing decisions
under the ND Act
House of Representatives on 14 September 2016
Received the Royal Assent on 23 November 2016
The committee dealt with this bill in
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016
Minister responded to the committee’s comments in a letter received on
27 October 2016. The committee sought further
information and the
Minister responded in a letter dated 22 November 2016. A copy of the
letter is attached to this report.
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 -
Delegation of legislative power and parliamentary
Schedule 2, item 28, proposed
subsection 26B(2)
Proposed new subsection 26B(2) provides that in making legislative standards
for the purposes of the Act, the standards may incorporate
any matter contained
in an instrument or other writing as in force or existing from time to time. The
effect of this provision is
to deprive parliamentary oversight of legislative
standards as they may be amended by virtue of changes made to any incorporated
instrument or other writing.
At a general level, the committee has scrutiny concerns where provisions in a
bill allow the incorporation of legislative provisions
by reference to other
documents because such an approach:
• raises the prospect of changes being made to the law in the absence
of parliamentary scrutiny;
• can create uncertainty in the law; and
• means that those obliged to obey the law may have inadequate access
to its terms (in particular, the committee will be concerned
where relevant
information is not publicly available or is available only if a fee is
The explanatory memorandum provides no reason for the need for this
provision, nor does it indicate whether any such standards will
be publicly and
freely available.
The committee therefore seeks the Minister’s advice as to:
• why it is necessary to rely on material incorporated by reference
(including details about any measures taken to identify
alternatives to
incorporating material by reference and why such alternatives are not
appropriate in this instance); and
• if the approach is still considered necessary:
how persons interested in, or likely to be affected by, any
changes will be notified or otherwise become aware of changes to the law;
whether a requirement specifying that any material incorporated by
reference must be freely and readily available can be included
in the bill.
Minister’s initial response - extract
The Committee sought the Minister’s advice as to why it is necessary to
rely on material incorporated by reference (including
details about any measures
taken to identify alternative to incorporating material by reference and why
such alternatives are not
appropriate in this instance) and if the approach is
still considered necessary:
• how persons interested in, or likely to be affected by, any changes
be notified or otherwise become aware of changes to the law; and
• whether a requirement specifying that any material incorporated by
reference must be freely available and readily available
can be included in the
Recent amendments to the ND Act implement the national licensing scheme
allowing the lawful cultivation in Australia of cannabis plants
for medicinal
and scientific purposes. This would enable a sustainable, high quality and safe
supply of locally grown and manufactured
medicinal cannabis products to
Australian patients.
Subsection 26B(1) of the ND Act authorises the Minister for Health to issue
standards for the purposes of the Act. The standards issued
under subsection
26B(1) are legislative instruments. Decisions under that Act, such as the
granting, suspension or revocation of
a licence (medicinal cannabis licence,
cannabis research licence and manufacture licence) would take into account
whether applicable
standards issued by the Minister under subsection 26B(l) have
been met, or will be met as the case requires. These decisions are
legislative in nature.
A reliable source of high quality and safe cannabis plants, cannabis and
cannabis resins for the manufacture of medicinal cannabis
products for supply to
patients in Australia is crucial for the success of the Australian medicinal
cannabis framework. As the ultimate
products are to be used for pharmaceutical
and medical research, the overall process involving cultivation, production and
manufacture
of drugs derived from cannabis plants must be carried out to produce
a product of acceptable pharmaceutical quality and safety standards
Suitable collection, cultivation, harvesting, drying, fragmentation and
storage conditions are essential to the quality of the dried
cannabis products.
They must be free from impurities, such as soil, dust, dirt, and other
contaminants (such as fungal, insect, bacterial
contamination and other animal
contamination). The dried cannabis products must also comply with requirements
for pesticide residues,
heavy metals content, aflatoxin content and microbial
contamination. Most of these standards and requirements are set out in
Pharmacopoeial
Monographs such as the European Pharmacopeia and British
Pharmacopeia. These Pharmacopoeias are amended from time to time.
In addition to pharmaceutical quality and safety standards in relation to
medicinal cannabis products derived from cannabis plants,
standards relating to
security of the premises, packaging and transport may also be relevant to ensure
that any storage, or movement
or cannabis plants, cannabis, cannabis resins,
drugs and narcotic preparations are protected from unauthorised access and to
diversion risks for illicit purposes.
The allowance for the Ministerial standards to refer to other documents or
instruments is therefore appropriate where the standard
seeks to apply
specifications or restrictions for a given activity or product in relation to
cannabis that are applicable to similar
activities or products overseas. It will
be appropriate to the emerging industry to comply with these international
standards as
the end products are for therapeutic use and that any inferior or
poor quality products should be not be supplied to patients. Allowing
such references and standards as they change from time to time ensures that
Australia’s regulatory framework in
the cultivation, production and the
manufacture of medicinal cannabis products from cannabis plants remain in step
or is comparable
with other pharmaceutical products internationally. This will
also provide export opportunities for the industry in the future if
medicinal cannabis products manufactured in Australia are of high quality and
comply with overseas regulatory standards.
International standards and Pharmacopeias are not freely available. Any
access or copying requires copyright licensing from the owners
instruments, including for the use by Commonwealth Departments and agencies.
While the provision appears to be very wide in its application, the number
and extent of documents that will be included in the issuing
of standards will
be limited and be mostly in relation to Pharmacopoeial monographs and Australian
and international standards. In
addition, before a standard is finalised and as
part of the requirement for consultation under the
Legislation Act 2003
the proposal will undergo consultation with the industry and other relevant
stakeholders to ensure that the industry is informed
and provided time to adhere
to the relevant standards proposed to be issued. Any changes to the referenced
material will be communicated
to industry to ensure that they become aware and
are able to get ready to comply with any amendments to the incorporated
instrument.
As the standards to be issued by the Minister under subsection 26B(1) is a
legislative instrument, the instrument is required to be
tabled in Parliament
after registration, and undergo Parliamentary scrutiny.
Committee’s initial response
The committee thanks the Minister for this detailed response.
The committee notes the Minister’s advice that the ‘cultivation,
production and manufacture of drugs derived from cannabis
plants must be carried
out to produce a product of acceptable pharmaceutical quality and safety
standards like any medicine’
and that ‘most of these standards and
requirements are set out in Pharmacopoeial Monographs such as the European
Pharmacopeia
and British Pharmacopeia’ which are amended from time to
time. The committee also notes the Minister’s advice that
‘international
standards and Pharmacopeias are not freely available’
and that ‘any access or copying requires copyright licensing from
owners of these instruments, including for the use by Commonwealth Departments
and agencies’.
While the committee understands the need to ensure that medicinal cannabis
products conform with pharmaceutical quality and safety
standards, the committee
takes this opportunity to reiterate its scrutiny concerns in relation to
provisions such as proposed subsection
26B(2) which allow the incorporation of
legislative provisions by reference to other documents. In particular, the
committee will
be concerned where incorporated information is not publicly
available or is available only if a fee is paid as persons interested
affected by the law may have inadequate access to its terms.
A fundamental principle of the rule of the law is that every person subject
to the law should be able to freely and readily access
its terms. The issue of
access to material incorporated into the law by reference to external documents
such as Australian and international
standards has been an issue of ongoing
concern to Australian parliamentary scrutiny committees. Most recently, the
Joint Standing
Committee on Delegated Legislation of the Western Australian
Parliament has published a detailed report on this issue:
Australian Standards Adopted in Delegated Legislation
(June 2016). This
report comprehensively outlines the significant scrutiny concerns associated
with the incorporation of material
by reference, particularly where the
incorporated material is not freely available. The committee draws this report
to the attention
of Senators as the matters raised are relevant to all
Australian jurisdictions.
The committee also takes this opportunity to highlight the expectations of
the Senate Standing Committee on Regulations and Ordinances
that delegated
legislation which applies, adopts or incorporates any matter contained in an
instrument or other writing should:
- clearly state the manner in which the documents are incorporated—that
is, whether the material is being incorporated as in
force or existing from time
to time or as in force or existing at the commencement of the legislative
instrument. This enables persons
interested in or affected by the instrument to
understand its operation without the need to rely on specialist legal knowledge
advice, or consult extrinsic material (see also
Legislation Act 2003
- contain a description of the documents and indicate how they may be
obtained (see paragraph 15J(2)(c) of the
Legislation Act 2003
The committee requests that the key information provided by the Minister
be included in the explanatory memorandum, noting the importance
documents as a point of access to understanding the law and, if needed, as
extrinsic material to assist with interpretation
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Noting the above comments, the committee also requests the
Minister’s further advice as to whether material incorporated by
under proposed subsection 26B(2) can be made available to persons interested in
or affected by the law.
Minister’s further response - extract
The Senate passed the
Narcotic Drugs Legislation Amendment Bill 2016
November 2016. As the Bill has already been passed by both Houses, I will no
longer be able to amend the Explanatory Memorandum
to incorporate the additional
information requested by the Committee. I assure the Committee that key
information, including those
identified by the Committee in
Alert Digest No.
will be included in any future memorandum relating to this
legislation.
Use of international standards promotes the global alignment in quality and
safety requirements for medicinal cannabis products. The
Office of Drug Control
will endeavour to make the incorporated documents in these standards publicly
available, unless restrictions
are imposed by the owners of the incorporated
documents with regard to publication of those documents. In regulation,
reference to
international standards is approp1iate and necessary to ensure
consistency. For example, access to Pharmacopoeial monographs on which
Medicines Regulation framework depends is based on subscription or purchase,
with limits in relation to the number of copies
that can be made and the number
of persons able to access and use these documents.
Compliance with global standards will make Australia's medicinal cannabis
industry internationally competitive.
Committee’s further response
The committee thanks the Minister for this further response.
The committee welcomes the Minister’s advice that the Office of Drug
Control will endeavour to make the relevant international
standards incorporated
into the law publicly available, unless restrictions are imposed by the owners
of the incorporated documents.
The committee also notes the Minister’s advice that access to some of
these international standards is indeed restricted. For
example, access to
Pharmacopoeial monographs (on which the Australian medicines regulation
framework depends) is based on subscription
or purchase, with limits in relation
to the number of copies that can be made and the number of persons able to
access and use the
As previously noted, the committee understands the need to conform with
international pharmaceutical quality and safety standards
in the new regulatory
scheme for medicinal cannabis. However, the committee again takes this
opportunity to reiterate that it will
have scrutiny concerns where external
materials (such as Pharmacopoeial monographs) are incorporated into the law,
particularly where
such materials are not freely and readily available and
therefore persons interested in or affected by the law may have inadequate
access to its terms.
The committee draws the comments that it has made in relation to the
incorporation of external material into the law (and the expectations
Senate Standing Committee on Regulations and Ordinances in this regard) to the
attention of Senators and departmental officials
(see pp 661 above).
The committee draws the delegation of legislative power in subsection
26B(2) of this bill to the attention of the Senate Standing
Committee on
Regulations and Ordinances for information.
In light of the fact that this bill has already passed both Houses of
Parliament the committee makes no further comment in relation
to this particular
The committee notes that it has commented on the general issue of
incorporation of external material into the law on several occasions
reports and will continue to take an active interest in this important issue in
the future.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (88 KB)
PDF format (153 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter