URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBRp/2016/52.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:13:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Counter-Terrorism Legislation Amendment Bill (No 1) 2016 [2016] AUSStaCSBRp 52 (9 November 2016)
Counter-Terrorism Legislation Amendment Bill (No. 1) 2016
Trespass on personal rights and liberties—use of information obtained where interim control order declared void
Schedule 8, item 1, proposed
section 3ZZTC
Crimes Act 1914
Schedule 9, item 58, proposed
section 299
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
Schedule 10, item 45, proposed
section 65B
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
Trespass on personal rights and liberties—fair hearing
Schedule 15, general comment
Delegation of legislative power
Schedule 15, item 41, proposed subsection 38PA(2)(a)
Trespass unduly on personal rights and liberties—Delayed commencement
Item 2 (commencement) and Schedule 15,
Trespass unduly on personal rights and liberties—retrospective commencement
Schedule 15, item 32
Counter-Terrorism Legislation Amendment Bill
(No. 1) 2016
This bill amends various legislation in relation to:
• extending control orders to children aged 14 or 15 years
• control orders and tracking devices
• preventative detention orders
• telecommunications interception
• use of surveillance devices
• a new offence of advocating genocide
• delayed notification search warrants
Attorney-General
Senate on 15 September 2016
This bill is similar to a bill introduced in the previous
The committee dealt with this bill in
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016
Attorney-General responded to the committee’s comments in a letter
received on 7 November 2016. A copy of the letter is
attached to this
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
Trespass on personal rights and liberties—use
of information obtained where interim control order declared
Schedule 8, item 1, proposed section
3ZZTC of the
Schedule 9, item 58, proposed section
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
Schedule 10, item 45, proposed
section 65B of the
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
section 3ZZTC
Crimes Act 1914
(as outlined in item 1
of Schedule 8), specifies certain purposes for which things seized, information
obtained or a document produced
pursuant to a monitoring warrant can be
communicated or adduced as evidence where a court has subsequently declared the
interim control
order to be void. The same amendment is made in relation to
information obtained under the provisions of
Telecommunications (Interception
and Access) Act 1979
(the TIA Act) (see Schedule 9, item 58, proposed
section 299) and to information obtained under the provisions of the
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
(the SD Act) (see Schedule 10, item 45,
proposed section 65B) where the control order is subsequently declared to
The committee previously noted that the use of information obtained in these
circumstances may have serious implications for personal
rights and liberties.
As such, the committee sought the Attorney-General’s advice as to whether
similar provisions appear in
other Commonwealth legislation and requested a more
detailed justification for the use of material obtained in circumstances in
the relevant control order has been declared void.
The Attorney-General provided a response to the committee, much of which now
forms the reasons given in the statement of compatibility
as to why these
provisions do not undermine a right to a fair trial and fair hearing
(pp 44–45). The statement of compatibility
notes that the provision
‘enables agencies to further use either lawfully intercepted information
or lawfully accessed information
obtained under an interception warrant relating
to an interim control order which is subsequently declared void’ (p.
It is a fundamental principle of the Australian legal
system that courts have a discretion as to whether or not to admit information
as evidence into proceedings, irrespective of the manner in which the
information was obtained. As an example, the
discretion places the
onus on the accused to prove misconduct in obtaining certain evidence and to
justify the exclusion of the evidence.
This principle is expanded on in
Commonwealth statute,
where there
is an onus on the party seeking admission of certain evidence to satisfy the
court that the desirability of admitting
the evidence outweighs the
undesirability of admitting it, given the manner in which it was obtained. This
fundamental principle
reflects the need to balance the public interest in the
full availability of relevant information in the administration of justice
against competing public interests, and demonstrates the role the court plays in
determining admissibility of evidence.
However, the TIA Act departs from these fundamental principles, by imposing
strict prohibitions on when material under those Acts
may be used, communicated
or admitted into evidence.
the TIA Act, it is a criminal offence for a person to deal in information
obtained under these Acts for any purpose, unless
the dealing is expressly
permitted under one or more of the enumerated and exhaustive exceptions to the
general prohibition. This
prohibition expressly overrides the discretion of the
judiciary, both at common law and under the Evidence Act, to admit information
into evidence where the public interest in admitting the evidence outweighs the
undesirability of admitting it, given the manner
in which it was obtained. There
is also a risk that the prohibition might be interpreted, either by a court
considering the matter
after the fact, or by an agency considering the question
in extremis, to override the general defence to criminal responsibility
the Criminal Code.
The committee welcomes the incorporation of this further information in the
explanatory materials. However, the relevant provisions
remain unchanged from
the previous bill. In relation to the justification provided, the committee
makes the following observations.
Although it is said that the information is obtained ‘lawfully’
it remains the case that, if that basis for obtaining
the information is
subsequently declared to be void, the information was obtained in excess of the
powers granted to obtain information.
In this context, describing the
information as ‘lawfully obtained information’ does not capture the
essential point that
information was obtained on the bases of a legally invalid
exercise of power.
It may be accepted that there is a default judicial discretion about whether
or not information may be admitted as evidence into proceedings,
irrespective of
the manner in which it was obtained. However, describing the imposition of
strict prohibitions on when materials
may be used, communicated or admitted into
evidence under the SD Act and TIA Act as a departure from this
‘fundamental’
principle downplays the reasons why that approach was
taken. The strict limits on the use that may be made of information obtained
reflects a recognition that the methods of surveillance authorised by these Acts
constitutes a significant invasion on an individual’s
The committee notes that the explanatory memorandum states that the current
prohibitions in the TIA Act override a fundamental principle
of the Australian
legal system, that courts have a discretion as to whether or not to admit
information as evidence into proceedings,
irrespective of the manner in which
the information was obtained. However, the provisions as currently drafted,
allow a person to
adduce the thing, information or document as evidence so long
as that person reasonably believes doing so is necessary to assist
in preventing
or reducing the risk of a number of harms (or for the purposes of a preventative
detention order (PDO)). It does not
appear to allow the court any discretion as
to whether such evidence should be adduced; it appears that it may be enough
person who wants to adduce the evidence has the belief or is using it
for the purpose of the PDO. It also appears that
section 138
, which allows the court the discretion to exclude evidence that was
improperly or illegally obtained, may not apply where evidence
was obtained
pursuant to a control order which is later declared to be void. If this is the
case, it is not clear to the committee
why this fundamental principle of the
court having the discretion to admit evidence has been overridden in this
For the above reasons the committee reiterates its scrutiny concerns in
relation to these provisions and requests the Attorney-General’s
whether the provisions override judicial discretion as to whether the evidence
should be adduced and, if so, why provisions
section 138
Evidence Act 1995
do not apply (which sets out the matters that should be
taken into account by the court in deciding to allow certain evidence to
Attorney-General's response - extract
section 3ZZTC
Crimes Act 1914
section 299
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
(the TIA Act) and
section 658 of the
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
(the SD Act) expressly
permit agencies to rely on things, information or documents obtained under a
monitoring warrant where the control
order is subsequently declared void in very
limited circumstances. Specifically, the things, information or documents can be
to prevent, or lessen the risk of, a terrorist act, serious harm to a
person, or serious damage to property. These provisions also
permit the use of
such information to apply for, and in connection with, a preventative detention
order. While agencies are therefore
entitled to adduce such evidence under these
provisions, the court's discretion as to whether or not that evidence may be
as evidence into the proceedings, irrespective of the manner in which
the information was obtained, remains unaffected.
The provisions do not affect a court’s discretion to refuse to admit
evidence in a proceeding before it. In addition, these
provisions do not
override a court’s duty to refuse to admit improperly obtained evidence in
particular circumstances, or its
determination of the weight to be given to
particular evidence. Similarly, these provisions do not impact upon a party's
adduce or challenge evidence in court.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Attorney-General for this response.
The committee notes the Attorney-General’s advice that the provisions
do not affect a court’s discretion in relation to
the admissibility of
The committee requests that the key information provided by the
Attorney-General be included in the explanatory memorandum, noting
importance of these documents as a point of access to understanding the law and,
if needed, as extrinsic material to assist with
interpretation (see
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
The committee draws its concerns to the attention of Senators and leaves
the appropriateness of enabling the use of information obtained
where an interim
control order is subsequently declared void to the consideration of the Senate
as a whole.
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
Trespass on personal rights and liberties—fair
Schedule 15, general comment
The broad purpose of the
National Security Information (Criminal and Civil
Proceedings) Act 2004
(the NSI Act) is to prevent the disclosure of
information in federal criminal and civil proceedings where disclosure is likely
prejudice national security. Schedule 15 proposes some significant amendments
to that Act by enabling a court to make three new types
of orders in control
order proceedings. The effect of the proposed amendments can generally be
described as allowing the court to
determine that it can rely, in control order
proceedings, on secret evidence in particular circumstances. The three new
court may make are:
• that the subject of the control order and their legal representative
may only be provided with a redacted or summarised form
of national security
information. Despite this, however, the court may consider the information in
its entirety (proposed new subsection
• that the subject of the control order and their legal representative
may not be provided with any information in an original
source document. Despite
this, however, the court may consider all of that information (proposed new
subsection 38J(3)); and
• when a hearing is required under subsection 38H(6) the subject of the
control order and their legal representative can be
prevented from calling the
relevant witness, and if the witness is otherwise called, the information
provided by the witness need
not be disclosed to the subject of the control
order or their legal representative. Despite this, however, the court may
all of the information provided by the witness (proposed new subsection
Notably, the provisions provide that a court may determine whether one of the
new orders should be made in a closed hearing, that
is, a hearing at which the
parties to the control order proceeding and their legal representatives are not
These proposals clearly undermine the fundamental principle of natural
justice which includes a fair hearing. In judicial proceedings
a fair hearing
traditionally includes the right to contest any charges against them but also to
test any evidence upon which any
allegations are based. In many instances it may
not be possible in practice to contest the case for the imposition of control
without access to the evidence on which the case is built. Evidence is
susceptible to being misleading if it is insulated from challenge.
the burden of proof in civil cases is lower than criminal proceedings, that risk
is magnified.
The explanatory materials point to the increasing ‘speed of
counter-terrorism investigations’ as the reason why these
necessary (p. 142). At the general level, the explanatory memorandum suggests
that ‘for control orders to be effective,
law enforcement need to be able
to act quickly, and be able to present sensitive information...to a court as
part of a control order
proceeding without risking the integrity, safety or
security of the information or its source’ (p. 142).
On the other hand, the explanatory memorandum also recognises that it is
important that a court, in the context of control order proceedings,
continue to
be able to ensure procedural fairness and the administration of justice.
However, it is questionable whether the amendments
in the bill adequately
preserve procedural fairness to the subject of a control order.
The committee reiterates its previous comments in relation to the overall
approach of requiring the courts to determine when the disclosure
of information
will be likely to prejudice national security. Courts are not well placed to
second-guess law enforcement evaluations
of national security risk which means
that it may be particularly challenging to protect an individual’s
interest in a fair
hearing. The fact that the court has discretion as to how to
draw the balance between national security and any adverse effect on
‘substantive hearing’ (in relation to whether a special order be
made, or in the exercise of any general powers to
stay or control its
proceedings) cannot be said to ‘guarantee’ procedural fairness.
In considering the extent to which judges will be able, in the exercise of
their discretionary powers under the proposed regime, to
resist the claims of a
law enforcement agency that an order should be made, it should be noted that
judges routinely accept that
the courts are ‘are ill-equipped to evaluate
intelligence’ [
Leghaei v Director-General of Security
[2007] FCAFC 37
(2007) 97 ALD 516]
and the possibility that law enforcement agencies
may be wrong in their national security assessments. For this reason, the fact
that security information is read by judges in the context of the legislative
regime proposed in this schedule does not mean that
they will be well placed to
draw a different balance between security risk and fairness than is drawn by law
enforcement agencies.
The committee previously requested, and received, from the Attorney-General,
a justification for the proposed approach including whether
further safeguards
for fairness had been considered. Following that advice, the committee
previously concluded that it was not persuaded
that the previous bill provided
an appropriate balance between the need to protect national security information
and the controlee’s
right to procedural fairness.
Schedule 15 of this bill has made a number of amendments to the scheme. The
committee’s view in relation to these amendments
is set out below.
Sufficient information to be provided
The PJCIS in its Advisory Report recommended (recommendation 4) that the bill
be amended to ensure that the subject of the control
order proceeding be
provided with ‘sufficient information about the allegations against him or
her to enable effective instructions
to be given in relation to those
allegations’.
As a result, item 21, proposed paragraph 38J(1)(c) has been altered so that
the court must be satisfied that the relevant person has
‘sufficient information about’ the allegations on which the control
order was based, to ‘enable effective
instructions to be given in relation
to those allegations’ Previously the bill had provided that the court must
be satisfied
that the relevant person has been given ‘notice of the
allegations on which the control order request was based (even if the
person has not been given notice of the information supporting those
allegations)’. This change provides a greater
level of detail about the
allegations on which the control order request is made to be provided to the
potential subject of the order.
The committee welcomes this amendment which will enable the person who may be
subject to the control order to be given more information
to better enable them
to provide instructions and present their defence. However, the committee notes
that with the introduction
of special advocates (see further below) it is
important that the disclosure of this ‘sufficient information’ be
prior to national security information being disclosed to a special
advocate, to enable the special advocate to obtain effective
instructions from
the controlee. This is important as communication between the controlee and
their legal representative is heavily
restricted after national security
information has been disclosed to the advocate.
The committee welcomes the amendment to ensure sufficient information is
provided to a person who may be subject to a control order
in order to obtain
effective instructions. However, the committee seeks the
Attorney-General’s advice as to whether the ‘sufficient
information’ will be provided to a person before a special advocate has
been provided with national security information (disclosed
pursuant to proposed
section 38PE) to enable them to adequately communicate with the special
Attorney-General's response - extract
The amendments contained in Part 1 of Schedule 15 enable a court to make
three new types of protective orders in control order proceedings.
Under revised
section 38J
National Security Information (Criminal and Civil
Proceedings) Act 2004
(NSI Act), each of the new protective orders allows
the court to consider sensitive national security information that the controlee
and their ordinary legal representative are prevented from hearing or seeing.
of Schedule 15 provides that a special advocate may be appointed to
represent the interests of the controlee in parts of the control
proceedings where the controlee and their ordinary legal representative have
been excluded.
In determining whether to make a protective order under revised
section 38J
the court must be satisfied that the controlee has been given ‘sufficient
information about the allegations on which the control
order request was based
to enable effective instructions to be given in relation to those
allegations’ (new paragraph 38J(1)(c)).
This implements Recommendation 4
of the PJCIS Advisory Report.
Whether the controlee is provided the ‘sufficient information’
prior to the special advocate seeing the sensitive national
security information
will depend on the circumstances of the control order application.
In the ordinary case, the controlee will be given sufficient information
based, such that they
can instruct their ordinary legal representative and special advocate in
relation to those allegations. This
information is provided by the AFP pursuant
to the various disclosure obligations under Division 104 (for instance,
subparagraph
104.12A(2)(a)(iii)) as well as under other applicable procedural
rights in federal civil proceedings (for instance, normal processes
discovery). Given the controlee will have access to this information prior to
the special advocate seeing the sensitive national
security information under
section 38PE
, the controlee and the special advocate will generally be able
to communicate freely.
There may be some circumstances where further information is disclosed to the
controlee after a special advocate has been appointed
and received the sensitive
national security information. Following the receipt of the sensitive national
security information by
the special advocate, any communication from the special
advocate to the controlee will require the authorisation of the court, pursuant
section 38PF.
Following the closed hearing, if the court determines that
the information should be subject to a new protective order under revised
section 38J
, the court must ensure the controlee is provided ‘sufficient
information’ about the allegations contained in that
‘information’
such that they are able to instruct their ordinary
legal representative and special advocate in relation to those allegations.
The communication restrictions in new
section 38PF
do not prevent the
controlee from communicating with the special advocate nor providing information
to the special advocate that
the controlee considers relevant in relation to the
‘sufficient information’. Pursuant to new
subsection 38PF(8)
controlee can continue to communicate with the special advocate in writing
through their ordinary legal representative without
restriction.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Attorney-General for this response.
The committee notes the Attorney-General’s advice that there may be
circumstances in which a person who may be subject to a
control order (the
‘controlee’) will not be given sufficient information prior to a
special advocate seeing the sensitive
national security information (at which
point communication between the two is heavily restricted).
The committee accepts that a controlee is able to communicate with the
special advocate after the advocate has seen the sensitive
national security
information. However, such communication can only be in writing through their
legal representative, and the advocate
can only submit a written communication
to the court for the court’s approval to forward it to the controlee or
their legal
representative (see proposed
section 38PF).
This is a heavily
restricted approach to communication between the controlee and the special
advocate, who may be the only person
able to represent the interests of the
controlee at many stages of the proceedings.
The committee considers that if a controlee is only given
‘sufficient information’ about the allegations against them
restrictions are placed on communication with the special advocate,
there will be limited opportunity for proper instructions to
be given to the
special advocate. The committee considers this would appear to defeat the
purpose of the special advocate scheme
in instances where the information is not
provided to the controlee before the special advocate has received the sensitive
security information.
The committee reiterates its view that the secret evidence provisions are
apt to undermine the fundamental principle of natural justice
which includes the
right to a fair hearing. The right to a fair hearing traditionally includes the
right to contest any charges and
test any evidence on which allegations are
based. If sufficient information about the allegations against the controlee is
not provided
to the controlee until after communications with the special
advocate are heavily restricted, the committee considers the scheme
the bill does not appear to provide an appropriate balance between the need to
protect national security information and
the controlee’s right to
procedural fairness.
The committee requests that the key information provided by the
Attorney-General be included in the explanatory memorandum, noting
importance of these documents as a point of access to understanding the law and,
if needed, as extrinsic material to assist with
interpretation (see
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
The committee draws its scrutiny concerns to the attention of Senators and
leaves the appropriateness of the timing of when ‘sufficient
information’ is provided to the controlee to the consideration of the
Senate as a whole.
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
Special advocates
The major change to the schedule and the process by which the court can
prevent the disclosure of information to the potential subject
of a control
order, is the introduction of a special advocates scheme. This was introduced as
a result of recommendation 5 of the
PJCIS’s report. The PJCIS had
recommended that a system of special advocates be introduced to represent the
interests of persons
subject to control order proceedings where the subject and
their legal representative have been excluded. A special advocate is to
security-cleared lawyer who represents the interests of a person who may be
subject to a control order (the controlee) who has
been excluded from parts of
the control order proceeding. The explanatory memorandum (at pp 156–157)
explains that the special
advocate may represent the interests of the controlee
• making submission to the court at any part of a hearing when the
controlee or their legal representative are not entitled
to be present;
• adducing evidence and cross-examining witnesses at such a hearing;
• making written submissions to the court.
While the special advocate scheme may help to ameliorate some of the
committee’s concerns regarding the fairness of adducing
evidence without
the controlee knowing the full extent of that evidence, the committee is
concerned that the current formulation
of the special advocate scheme may not
guarantee a controlee’s procedural rights. In particular, a controlee is
not entitled
to insist that a special advocate be appointed. Rather, whether a
special advocate is appointed remains in the discretion of the
explanatory memorandum (at p. 163) provides the following justification for this
The provisions are designed to provide the court flexibility to conduct the
control order proceedings in the manner it considers most
appropriate. This
will require the court to balance the need to conduct proceedings efficiently
and effectively with the need to
protect the procedural rights of the
One instance in which the court may not appoint a special advocate even where
the criteria outlined above have been satisfied is where
the court considers
itself adequately equipped to manage the sensitive national security
information. Courts are not unfamiliar
with considering sensitive national
security information. The courts are well-equipped to make judgments as to the
weight that should
be given to the risk that disclosing information will
prejudice national security.
However, if secret evidence is to be used against a controlee and they are
not entitled to insist on the appointment of a special
advocate, this
significantly diminishes the adequacy of the special advocate scheme in
ameliorating the apparent unfairness of the
new regime.
Given this, the committee requests a more detailed justification from the
Attorney-General as to the rationale for leaving the appointment
of a special
advocate to the discretion of the court.
Attorney-General's response - extract
Under new subsection 38PA(1), the court may appoint a person to be a special
advocate if the proceeding is a control order proceeding
and the court makes an
order under new subsection 381(3A), or new subsections 38J(2), 38J(3) or
New section 38PA is designed to provide the court with flexibility to conduct
the control order proceeding in any manner it considers
appropriate. This allows
the court to appropriately balance the requirements of conducting the control
order proceedings efficiently
and effectively with the controlee's right to a
fair hearing.
In some instances the court may decide that it can sufficiently safeguard the
controlee's right to a fair hearing, while in other
circumstances, it may decide
that the special advocate can provide valuable assistance to the court in
protecting the rights of the
controlee. That determination should be made on a
case by case basis, taking into account all relevant considerations.
For example, the new protective orders under revised section 38J are likely
to be sought only in relation to specific information
that forms part of the
matrix of facts in relation to a control order application. Accordingly, there
may be instances where the
court considers itself sufficiently experienced and
capable of analysing this targeted information. Under such circumstances, there
may be little work left for the special advocate to do.
Comparable special advocate regimes in Canada and New Zealand provide the
court with discretion as to whether to appoint a special
Committee response
The committee thanks the Attorney-General for this response.
The committee notes the Attorney-General’s advice that this provision
is designed to provide the court with flexibility to conduct
the proceedings as
it considers appropriate, balancing the need for efficient and effective
proceedings with the right to a fair
hearing. The committee also notes the
Attorney-General’s advice that the court may consider itself sufficiently
experienced
and capable of analysing targeted information and, in such
circumstances, there may be little work for the special advocate to do.
However, the committee considers that the right to a fair hearing requires
a controlee to be able to challenge the case brought against
controlee and their legal representative are excluded from all or parts of a
proceeding, the ability to challenge that
evidence is limited. The special
advocate scheme was introduced to help to ameliorate the inherent unfairness of
the court relying
on secret evidence. However, if a special advocate is not
appointed in all cases, the controlee may be left with no mechanism to
the evidence against them which could undermine the controlee’s right to a
fair hearing.
As such, proposed section 38PA, in giving courts the discretion as to
whether to appoint a special advocate, significantly diminishes
the adequacy of
the special advocate scheme in ameliorating the unfairness of the secret
evidence provisions set out in Schedule
The committee draws its scrutiny concerns to the attention of Senators and
leaves the appropriateness of giving the court the discretion
not to appoint a
special advocate when secret evidence is admitted to the consideration of the
Senate as a whole.
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
In addition, the bill tightly regulates communication between special
advocates and controlees (and their legal representatives) after
security information has been disclosed. However, subsection 38PD(1) allows
unrestricted communication prior to the disclosure
of that information. Proposed
subsection 38PD(2) provides that the court may restrict or prohibit
communication between the controlee
and the special advocate if satisfied that
it is in the interests of national security to do so and the orders are not
inconsistent
with the Act or regulations made under it. No justification is
provided in the explanatory memorandum as to why this exception is
required. It
is unclear why such communication need be restricted given at this point in time
no sensitive information would have
been disclosed to the special advocate. If
communication prior to national security information being disclosed is
restricted it
may make it very difficult for the special advocate to adequately
perform their functions given that communication after disclosure
is so tightly
regulated by the provisions.
The committee considers that the exception in proposed subsection 38PD(2)
is not sufficiently explained in the explanatory materials
and seeks the
Attorney-General’s advice as to why it is necessary to empower the court
to prohibit or restrict communication
between a special advocate and a controlee
prior to sensitive national security information being disclosed to the special
Attorney-General's response - extract
New section 38PD provides that communication between the special advocate and
the controlee is generally not subject to any restriction
prior to the special
advocate being provided with the sensitive national security information under
new subsection 38PE(2). The limited
exception to this is outlined in new
subsection 38PD(2). New subsection 38PD(2) states that the court may make orders
restricting
or prohibiting communications between the special advocate and the
controlee even prior to the special advocate being disclosed the
national security information if the court is satisfied that the order is in the
interest of national security, and the
order is not inconsistent with the NSI
Act or regulations made under the Act.
The limited exception to the general rule in favour of unrestricted
communication is to prevent the inadvertent unauthorised disclosure
of sensitive
national security information. There are circumstances where the appointed
special advocate may have already acquired
sensitive national security
information, including the sensitive national security information that is to be
subject to, or is already
the subject of, a new protective order under revised
section 38J. Where the special advocate has knowledge of such material, which
relevant to the control order proceeding, there is a risk that the special
advocate may inadvertently disclose that information
to the controlee. A court
order under new subsection 38PD(2) which restricts or prohibits communication
between the special advocate
and controlee guards against the risk of
inadvertent disclosure.
In making an order under new subsection 38PD(2), the court may require that
any communication from the special advocate to the controlee
be authorised by
the court pursuant to the process outlined in new section 38PF. Such a process
ensures that the court can review
proposed communications from the special
advocate to the controlee to minimise the risk of inadvertent disclosure of
sensitive national
security information. The process under new section 38PF
still allows the controlee to communicate with the special advocate without
restriction, so long as the communication is in writing and goes through their
ordinary legal representative.
Noting the importance of promoting open and unrestricted communication
between the special advocate and controlee prior to the special
receiving the sensitive national security information, it is likely that the
court would only make an order under new subsection
38PD(2) in exceptional
circumstances where the risk of inadvertent disclosure of sensitive national
security information cannot be
mitigated in any other way.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Attorney-General for this response.
The committee notes the Attorney-General’s advice that there may be
circumstances where the appointed special advocate may have
already acquired
sensitive national security information before a protective order is made. As
such, the Attorney-General advises
that proposed subsection 38PD(2), in allowing
the court to restrict the disclosure of information between the special advocate
the controlee, is necessary to protect against the risk of inadvertent
disclosure. The committee notes that the advice did not provide
any examples as
to the circumstances in which a special advocate would have knowledge of the
national security information prior
to it being officially disclosed to
The committee also notes the Attorney-General’s advice that it is
likely that the court would only make such an order in exceptional
circumstances
where the risk of disclosure could not be mitigated in any other way. However,
proposed subsection 38PD(2), as drafted,
is not limited to exceptional
circumstances, and could be used any time the court considers it appropriate to
do so if satisfied
that it is in the interests of national security and the
orders are not inconsistent with the proposed Act.
In light of the above comments, the committee seeks the
Attorney-General’s further advice as to whether consideration has been
- amending proposed subsection 38PD(2) to require the court to consider
whether the risk of disclosure could be mitigated in any
other way prior to
restricting or prohibiting communications between a controlee and special
advocate; and
- enabling the court to appoint a new special advocate who does not have
access to sensitive national security information, to enable
a controlee to
properly communicate with their special advocate before a protective order is
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
Delegation of legislative
Schedule 15, item 41, proposed
subsection 38PA(2)(a)
Proposed section 38PA sets out when a court may appoint a person as a special
advocate. Paragraph 38PA(2)(a) provides that a person
may be appointed as a
special advocate only if they meet ‘any requirements in the
regulations’. The primary legislation
does not specify any requirements as
to the qualifications or experience of persons who are to be appointed as
special advocates,
nor does it specify any further details. The explanatory
memorandum states that a special advocate is a ‘security cleared
but this does not appear to be a legislative requirement for this
(see p. 156).
The explanatory memorandum indicates that matters relating to the terms on
which a person serves as a special advocate, including
terms relating to
remuneration, conflicts of interest or immunity will be dealt with in the
regulations (see proposed section 38PI
and p. 172 of the explanatory
memorandum). The explanatory memorandum indicates that the additional details
provided for by regulations principally relate to
‘administrative arrangements’. On the contrary, however, it may be
argued that matters such as those listed above are centrally relevant to the
question of whether special advocates are, and appear
to be, impartial of the
government. Such details would also presumably relate to the ethical obligations
of special advocates.
For the reasons set out above, the committee seeks the advice of the
Attorney-General as to why details regarding the appointment
process of persons
as special advocates, and the terms and conditions of their appointment, are not
provided for in the primary legislation.
Attorney-General's response - extract
Part 2 of Schedule 15 of the Bill creates the architecture for a special
advocate role. The inclusion of a special advocate role implements
Recommendation 5 of the PJCIS Advisory Report, which required that legislation
giving effect to a special advocate system should
be introduced as soon as
possible, and by no later than the end of 2016.
The important details about the role and function of the special advocate are
contained in the Bill. The supporting details and administrative
arrangements to
ensure the effective implementation of the special advocate role will be
contained in regulations. The regulation-making
power in new section 38PI allows
for regulations to cover a range of matters relating to special advocates,
including the terms of
their remuneration, conflicts of interest and immunity.
These features are the subject of ongoing consideration by the Government.
there are no pre-existing legislative special advocate schemes in Australia,
these matters raise issues that will require time
to analyse and resolve. This
is why the PJCIS, in recommending the implementation of a special advocate role,
also noted that ‘Extensive
consultation will be necessary to ensure that a
robust and highly effective system of special advocates tailored to the
context is ultimately established’.
Schedule 15 of the Bill provides that the special advocate amendments will
commence no later than 12 months after the date on which
the Act receives the
Royal Assent. Accordingly, the supporting regulations and administrative
arrangements will be established as
soon as practicable in order to
operationalise the special advocate role swiftly.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Attorney-General for this response.
The committee notes the Attorney-General’s advice that the regulations
will set out a range of matters relating to special advocates.
The explanation
provided suggests that these are to be set out in regulations, rather than on
the face of the primary legislation,
because these features of the scheme are
subject to ongoing consideration by the government and time is required to
analyse and resolve
these issues.
The committee considers issues such as the appointment process for persons
as special advocates and the terms and conditions of their
appointment,
particularly issues around conflict of interest and immunity provisions, are
fundamental questions that go to whether
special advocates are, and appear to
be, impartial and likely to be effective in their role of representing a
controlee. The committee
considers it is important for Senators to know these
details when considering this legislation in order to properly assess the
of the special advocate scheme in ameliorating the unfairness of the
secret evidence scheme.
The committee draws its scrutiny concerns to the attention of Senators and
leaves the appropriateness of delegating important details
of special advocates to the regulations to the consideration of the Senate as a
Trespass unduly on personal rights and
liberties—Delayed commencement
(commencement) and Schedule 15, Part 2
The commencement provisions of the bill sets out that Part 2 of Schedule 15
will commence on a day to be fixed by proclamation, and
in any event, within 12
months. This differs from Part 1 of Schedule 15, which sets out the changes to
allow secret evidence to be
adduced in court, which is said to commence the day
after the Act receives Royal Assent. The explanatory memorandum justifies this
approach on the following basis (at p. 159):
The delayed commencement ensures that sufficient time is provided to
operationalise the special advocate role. This will include
making appropriate
regulations which will govern a range of matters including the process by which
an individual serves as a special
advocate, the remuneration of special
advocates and conflicts of interests. It will also be necessary to ensure
sufficient special
advocates are available such that the controlee has a
‘choice’ of special advocates to choose from. These supporting
regulations and administrative arrangements will be established as soon as
practicable in order to operationalise the special advocates
role swiftly.
The delayed commencement of the special advocates amendments mean that the
amendments contained in Part 1 will apply for up to 12
months before the special
advocates role in Part 2 becomes operational. However, as noted by the
Committee advisory report, nothing
in the amendments contained in Parts 1 or 2
of Schedule 15 preclude the court from exercising its inherent powers to appoint
advocate on an ad hoc basis if it considers it necessary.
The committee notes the justification in the explanatory memorandum relies,
in the main, on administrative convenience as the basis
for delaying the
commencement of these provisions. However, it also states that the court has an
inherent power to appoint a special
advocate on an ad hoc basis if it considers
it appropriate and the provisions in the bill do not limit this inherent power.
claim is left unelaborated but it appears to be based on the following
statement in the PJCIS’s Advisory Report:
The Committee considers it important to note that prior to the establishment
of a special advocates scheme, nothing in the proposed
amendments to the NSI Act
precludes the court from exercising its inherent discretion to appoint a special
advocate on an ad hoc
basis during control order proceedings where the subject
of the control order and their legal representative have been excluded.
Committee further notes that in
[2006] NSWSC 586
Whealy held that the framework of the NSI Act is not inconsistent with the
appointment of a special advocate and that its
provisions were sufficiently
broad to permit special advocates to take part in specific hearings under the
NSI Act. (see p. 80 of
the PCJIS Advisory Report)
There are, however, difficulties with the reliance on the existence of the
courts’ inherent powers to appoint special counsel
to justify the delayed
commencement of the statutory scheme, a scheme which attempts to offset the
unfairness involved in the secret
evidence proposals.
The courts’ power to make such appointments is uncertain. Based on the
explanatory materials it appears that there is an absence
of Australian
appellate authority for the proposition that the courts’ inherent powers
warrant the development of the common
law to construct a scheme for the
appointment of special advocates and closed material proceeding generally in
civil or criminal
litigation, nor in a particular context. As Whealy J noted in
at [12], that case was the first in which an application
for the appointment of a special advocate has been made in Australia.
Furthermore,
case was decided in a very different context and
it is not clear to the committee that it provides direct support for the
on an inherent power to appoint special counsel, particularly in the
context of the proposed legislative changes.
Given the dearth of legal analysis provided on this issue, the committee has
concluded that the question of whether the courts in
Australia possess an
inherent power to appoint special counsel may be less certain that the
explanatory material asserts. But even
if such a power exists, it is unclear
that the inherent power of the court to appoint special counsel (if it exists)
would be exercised
in particular cases, and if it could continue to exist in
light of a statutory scheme to establish closed evidence procedures. Nor
senators able to evaluate any details about how such a judicially created scheme
would work in practice. Details about how such
a scheme would operate are
unknown. No judicial practice of appointing special counsel has developed in
Australia, in this or any
other context.
For the reasons set out above the committee does not believe that
persuasive reasons have been provides for the delayed commencement
amendments in Part 2. To the extent the special advocate scheme is thought to
ameliorate the unfairness involved in the amendments
in Part 1, this issue
of delayed commencement is matter of significant concern. The committee
therefore seeks the Attorney-General’s
advice as to why the commencement
of Part 1 of Schedule 15 should not be delayed until such time as the special
advocate scheme is
in place. The committee notes that if (as set out above in
relation to the delegation of legislative power) the important details
concerning the appointment of the special advocate scheme were included in the
primary legislation then this issue may not arise
Attorney-General's response - extract
The Explanatory Memorandum, at paragraph 166, outlines the urgency of the
amendments contained in Part 1 of Schedule 15:
In the absence of the amendments contained in Part 1 of Schedule 15 there is
a substantial risk that the inability to rely on, and
protect, sensitive
information may result in a control order being unable to be obtained against an
individual who poses a risk to
the safety of the community. This is because law
enforcement would not be satisfied that existing protections under the NSI Act
the risks associated with the disclosure of such information.
In light of these operational realities, the PJCIS stated that:
cognisant of the changing nature of the operational environment and the
increased need to rely on and protect sensitive information
in control order
proceedings, the Committee considers that the proposed amendments to the NSI Act
in Schedule 15 [Part 1) should
proceed without delay.
Practically, this results in an interim period of no longer than 12 months
where the new protective orders under revised section 38J
may be sought by the
Attorney-General and a statutory special advocate role will not be in place.
However, as recognised by the PJCIS,
nothing in Schedule 15 precludes the court
from exercising its inherent power to appoint a special advocate to represent
the interests
of the controlee where it considers it appropriate.
The PJCIS expressly cited
[2006] NSWSC 586
in support of the
proposition that the court possesses an inherent power to appoint special
Committee response
The committee thanks the Attorney-General for this response.
The committee notes the Attorney-General’s advice that nothing in
Schedule 15 precludes the court from exercising its inherent
power to appoint a
special advocate even before the special advocate scheme is established by
legislation. The committee notes the
Attorney-General’s advice did not
address the concerns set out by the committee that the courts’ power to
make such appointments
is uncertain. The committee notes the
Attorney-General’s advice that there is a need for urgency to establish
the secret evidence
provisions.
The committee reiterates its view that delaying the commencement of the
special advocate scheme for up to 12 months after the secret
evidence provisions
commence, significantly undermines the adequacy of the special advocate scheme
in ameliorating the unfairness
of the secret evidence provisions.
The committee draws its scrutiny concerns to the attention of Senators and
leaves the appropriateness of delaying the commencement
of the special advocate
scheme for up to 12 months after the provisions in Part 1 of Schedule 15
commence to the consideration of
the Senate as a whole.
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
Trespass unduly on personal rights and
liberties—retrospective
commencement
Schedule 15, item 32
Item 32 of Schedule 15 states that the new special orders in relation to
secret evidence that may be made under proposed section 38J
apply to civil
proceedings that begin before or after the commencement of this item.
The explanatory materials do not explain why the amendments should apply to
proceedings which have already begun, especially given
that (as explained above)
the amendments may be in conflict with the fair hearing principle. The committee
previously sought the
Attorney-General’s advice as to the rationale for
the proposed retrospective application of the amendments to proceedings already
commenced and as to how many current proceedings or potential proceedings are,
or are likely to be, affected by this provision.
The Attorney-General responded:
It is appropriate that the new orders are available as soon as they come into
force, regardless of whether a control order proceeding
has already commenced.
This is consistent with existing protections that are available under the NSI
Act. Section 6A of the NSI Act
provides that the Act can apply to civil
proceedings that take place after the NSI Act has been invoked, irrespective of
the proceedings commenced prior to the invocation of the Act. However,
the new orders will only be available to those parts of the
proceeding that have
not yet occurred. Accordingly, the provisions will not operate
retrospectively.
Unfortunately this further information was not included in the current
explanatory memorandum as requested by the committee. The committee
that the explanatory memorandum be amended to include this information. On the
basis of the committee’s previous correspondence
the committee leaves the
question of whether the new orders should be available in proceedings that have
started before the commencement
of these new provisions to the Senate as a
Attorney-General's response - extract
The Explanatory Memorandum currently states that the new protective orders
will apply to control order proceedings irrespective of
whether the control
order proceeding has commenced and irrespective of whether or not the NSI Act
has been invoked. However, this
does not mean that the new protective orders can
be sought in respect of parts of the control order proceeding which have already
concluded. As noted in the
Attorney-General’s previous response, the new protective orders will
only be available in those parts of the control order proceedings
that have not
yet occurred and where the NSI Act has been invoked. Accordingly, the provisions
will not operate retrospectively.
The existing Explanatory Memorandum already provides a description of the
operation of the amendments contained in Part 1 of Schedule
Committee response
The committee thanks the Attorney-General for this response.
The committee reiterates its request that the key information provided by
the Attorney-General be included in the explanatory memorandum,
importance of these documents as a point of access to understanding the law and,
if needed, as extrinsic material to assist
with interpretation (see
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
[1978] HCA 22
(1978) 141 CLR 54.
Section 138
See s 63 of the TIA Act.
See for example,
Immigration
and Refugee Protection Act
(Canada), section 83(1.2),
Telecommunications
(Interception Capability and Security) Act 2013
(New Zealand), subsection
Health and Safety at Work Act 2015
(New Zealand), subsection
6(2) of Schedule 4.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (192 KB)
PDF format (267 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter