URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJCHR/2025/40.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:08:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Commonwealth Workplace Protection Orders Bill 2025 - Concluded Matters [2025] AUPJCHR 40 (2 October 2025)
Commonwealth Workplace Protection Orders Bill 2025347
Impaired decision-making ability
Summary of initial assessment
Preliminary international human rights legal advice
Committee's initial view
Minister's response368
Concluding comments
International human rights legal advice
Committee view
Commonwealth Workplace
Protection Orders Bill
This bill seeks to establish a workplace protection orders scheme to
prevent personal violence against, or with respect to, Commonwealth
workers and
Commonwealth workplaces. It would permit a court to make interim orders in the
absence of the respondent, which may remain
in force up to 12 months, as well as
urgent interim orders, final orders and consent orders.
House of Representatives, 31 July 2025
Rights of persons with disability
committee requested a response from the minister in relation to the bill in
Impaired decision-making ability
2.31 This bill would establish a workplace protection orders scheme to
prevent personal violence against, or with respect to, Commonwealth
workers and
Commonwealth workplaces. A person would engage in personal violence if:
• they engage, or make a threat to engage, in conduct that directly or
indirectly causes harm or a reasonable fear of harm to
a Commonwealth worker or
an individual at a Commonwealth workplace; and
• the person engages in the conduct or makes the threat because of the
Commonwealth worker’s status as a Commonwealth
worker; and
• the conduct or threat directly or indirectly interferes with the
functioning of the executive government of the Commonwealth
(for example, it
interferes with the worker’s ability to perform their functions or
2.32 A Commonwealth workplace protection order may be an interim order, an
urgent order, a final order or a consent
An order may impose any
conditions that a court considers are necessary or desirable to prevent the
respondent from engaging in further
violence and to ensure the safety of a
worker or people at a workplace.
Either party may apply to the court to vary or revoke an order at any
The breach of an order
would be a criminal offence punishable by up to 2 years imprisonment,
120 penalty units (currently $39,600)
2.33 The bill would allow a court to make a consent order when an application
for a final order is made, the parties to the proceeding
have consented to its
terms and, if the court considers that the respondent has impaired
decision-making ability, the respondent
is represented by a lawyer, litigation
guardian or, for children, a parent or
A court may make a
consent order: without proof or admission that the respondent has engaged in
personal violence; whether or not
the court is satisfied of certain
and whether or not the
court considers that the conditions imposed on the respondent by the order are
necessary or desirable to prevent
the respondent from engaging in further
personal violence and ensure the safety of a Commonwealth worker or individuals
at a Commonwealth
Conditions of a workplace protection order may relate to a broad range of
matters, such as that the respondent not communicate or
associate with a
specified worker or class of workers, or that the respondent not be present at,
or within a specified distance of,
a specified Commonwealth
A person with
‘impaired decision-making ability’ is defined to mean a person who
is a party to a proceeding who cannot
make decisions in relation to the
proceeding or does not understand the nature and effect of the decisions the
person makes in relation
proceeding.
A person does not
have impaired decision‑making ability only because the person is under 18
years of age.
Summary of initial
Preliminary international human rights legal
Rights of persons with disability to equal recognition before the
2.34 By allowing consent orders to be made against individuals with
‘impaired decision‑making ability’, this measure
would almost
exclusively apply to people with disability and may engage the rights of persons
with disability to equal recognition
before the law. The right to equal
recognition before the law includes the right to enjoy legal capacity on an
equal basis with others
in all aspects of life and, in all measures that relate
to the exercise of legal capacity, there should be appropriate and effective
safeguards to prevent abuse.
Such safeguards must ensure that measures relating to the exercise of legal
capacity respect the rights, will and preferences of
the person, are free of
conflict of interest and undue influence, are proportional and tailored to the
person's circumstances, apply
for the shortest time possible and are subject to
regular review by an independent and impartial
The UN Committee on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities has confirmed that there can be no
derogation from article 12, which
describes the content of the general right to
equality before the law under the International Covenant on Civil and Political
In other words, 'there
are no permissible circumstances under international human rights law in which
this right may be limited'.
2.35 As people who are assessed to have ‘impaired decision-making
ability’ are invariably those with cognitive impairment,
the measure would
almost exclusively apply to people with
disability.
Thus, the key
question is whether the measure, in providing that an individual with impaired
decision-making ability have a representative
present, would facilitate a form
of substitute decision-making.
2.36 It is not clear whether a representative of a respondent would be
permitted to consent to a workplace protection order on behalf
of the respondent
rather than support a respondent to exercise their own legal capacity. If a
representative could consent on behalf
of a respondent and the
representative’s decision in effect substitutes the consent or decision of
the respondent, this may
amount to substitute decision-making.
2.37 The UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities has made
clear that practices that deny the right of people with
disabilities to legal
capacity in a discriminatory manner, such as substitute decision-making regimes,
are contrary to article 12
and must be 'abolished in order to ensure that full
legal capacity is restored to persons with disabilities on an equal basis with
decision-making should be replaced by supported decision-making, whereby
individuals are supported (such as through peer
support, advocacy, assistance
with communication or advance planning) to exercise their legal
Supports may include
peer support, advocacy, assistance with communication or advance planning,
whereby a person can state their
will and preferences in advance should they be
unable to do so at a later point in time. The UN Committee on the Rights of
with Disabilities has noted that 'where, after significant efforts have
been made, it is not practicable to determine the will and
preferences of an
individual, the "best interpretation of will and preferences" must replace the
"best interests"
determinations'.
Committee's initial view
2.38 The committee noted that this bill would establish a workplace
protection orders scheme to prevent personal violence against,
or with respect
to, Commonwealth workers and Commonwealth workplaces. The committee noted a
workplace protection order can be a consent
order, which may be made when an
application for a final order is made, the parties to the proceeding have
consented to its terms
and, if the court considers that the respondent has
impaired decision-making ability, when the respondent is represented by a
litigation guardian, or parent or guardian (in relation to
2.39 The committee noted that by providing for consent orders to be made
against individuals with impaired decision-making ability,
this measure engages
the rights of persons with disability to equal recognition before the law. The
committee considered further
information was required to assess the
compatibility of this measure with this right, and as such sought the minister's
full initial analysis is set out in
minister advised:
(a) How the court assesses whether a respondent has impaired
decision-making ability
The CWPO Bill does not prescribe exactly how a court must assess a
respondent's decision-making ability. Clause 22 of the CWPO Bill,
which relates
to consent orders and impaired decision-making ability, was modelled on
Personal Violence Act 2016
(ACT). It was drafted to provide
the Court with flexibility to determine whether a respondent has impaired
decision-making ability,
given a workplace protection order (WPO) matter can be
heard in a variety of courts and jurisdictions.
Subclause 22(4) of the CWPO Bill provides that a person is considered to have
impaired decision-making ability if the person either
cannot make decisions in
relation to the proceeding or does not understand the nature and effect of the
decisions the person makes
in relation to the proceeding. The Court has
discretion in making this assessment and would need to consider the respondent's
circumstances
and any other information it deems relevant to making the
assessment. This may include information within the WPO application (for
example, if the respondent is a client of the Commonwealth entity making the
application, there may be available information as to
whether the respondent is
a person with a disability and/or a person with impaired decision-making
The Court's assessment will also be guided by the relevant Rules and guidance
notes for the Court, as well as applicable frameworks
such as guardianship
legislation, in the relevant jurisdiction when determining whether a respondent
has impaired decision-making
ability. It is anticipated that most WPO matters
would be heard in either the Federal Court of Australia (FCA) or the Federal
and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (FCFCOA), followed by courts
in New South Wales (NSW) and Victoria as the most populous
FCA and FCFCOA, a court may determine whether a respondent requires a litigation
guardian or representative
by considering whether the respondent is already
subject to an administration, guardianship or similar order under a law of the
Commonwealth;
if they are a
(though, noting that a
WPO can only be made on persons over 14 years of
if the Court considers
that the person does not understand the nature and possible consequences of the
proceedings;
or if they are
incapable of managing their own affairs in a proceeding due to a mental
disability or illness.
Guardianship legislation in each state and territory may also guide the Court
in its assessment as to whether the respondent has impaired
decision-making
ability. In NSW and Victoria, a person is presumed to have decision-making
capacity unless there is evidence to the
contrary. In NSW, the Court may
consider a person under legal incapacity if they are a minor; an involuntary
patient, forensic patient
or correctional patient; a person under guardianship;
or a person with a disability who is unable to receive communications or express
their will with respect to their
In Victoria, a person
is deemed to not have decision-making capacity if they cannot understand the
information relevant to the decision
and the effect of the decision; retain that
information to make the decision; use or weigh that information as part of the
of making the decision; and communicate the decision and the person's
views about the decision in some way, including by speech,
gesture or other
In Victoria, when assessing someone's decision-making capacity, a court must
take reasonable steps to conduct the assessment at a
time and in an environment
during which their capacity can be assessed most accurately. Courts in Victoria
would therefore need to
rely on a variety of different methods to assess whether
a respondent has impaired decision-making capacity, which could include
to the respondent in plain language, observing a respondent in court,
considering medical or psychological reports and/or
evidence from family,
carers, or support workers.
(b) Whether, in practice, there is a risk that consent orders would be
made against people with disabilities on a discriminatory basis
The intention of the provision is to limit the risk that consent orders could
be made against people with disabilities, who may not
understand the order and
conditions they are agreeing to. The provision was included in the CWPO Bill as
a safeguard to ensure a
respondent with impaired decision-making ability is
appropriately represented when agreeing to a consent order. This was intended
prevent people with a disability from being disproportionately and negatively
affected by consent orders and to ensure their best
interests are upheld.
The CWPO Bill includes other safeguards to mitigate the risk that consent
orders would be made on a discriminatory basis towards people
with disability.
When deciding whether to make a consent order, the Court can consider whether
the order and its conditions are
necessary or desirable
them from engaging in further personal
To determine
whether the conditions are necessary or desirable, the Court may consider if the
conditions will result in any hardship
for any person and whether the conditions
achieve the objects of the Act while minimising restrictions on the rights and
of the respondent. The Court may also consider any other matter the
Court considers relevant, which may include an assessment of
how the conditions
would impact the respondent if they have a disability and whether they have the
capacity to comply.
Paragraph 22(1)(c) does provide a different requirement for people with
impaired decision-making capacity, however, this is a special
measure permitted
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
(Cth) (DDA). It is intended
to afford people with disability the services and opportunities to meet their
needs in relation to the
administration of Commonwealth laws and programs -
namely, the CWPO Bill - in accordance with section 45(1)(b)(iv) of the DDA.
Accordingly,
paragraph 22(1)(c) is intended to assist and recognise the needs of
persons with impaired decision-making ability by providing them
necessary support and representation. Such representation may be a litigation
guardian or representative, or it may be ensuring
that they have adequate legal
advice and/or representation before consenting to the terms of a WPO. This is
also in accordance with
Article 5 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities, which provides that people with disability are entitled to
both the equal benefit and equal protection of the law.
(c) Whether a representative of a respondent would be permitted to consent
to a workplace protection order on behalf of the respondent
and whether the
representative's consent to that order substitutes the consent of the respondent
(or in other words, the representative's
consent is taken to be the consent of
the respondent)
A representative may be permitted to consent to a WPO on behalf of the
respondent, depending on the type of representative and the
which the matter is heard. However, this would not prevent the Court from
considering the respondent's preferences
and remaining cognisant of their
decision-making ability,
determining whether to make a consent order.
Where a respondent is represented by a legal practitioner, that legal
practitioner would be guided by the instructions of the respondent,
their obligations to act in the best interests of their client.
Where a respondent is represented by a litigation guardian or representative,
the Rules of the relevant court in which the WPO matter
is heard may permit the
representative to consent to a WPO on behalf of the respondent. For example, the
Rules of the FCA and FCFCOA
provide that agreement by a litigation
representative is taken to be the agreement of the person under legal
incapacity.
However, the Rules
provide safeguards that the litigation guardian must apply to the Court for
approval of the agreement,
such an application must be accompanied by the opinion of an independent lawyer
certifying that the agreement is in the best
interests of the person under a
legal incapacity.
Paragraph 22(1)(c) of the CWPO Bill is not intended to override the ability
of a respondent to make a decision; and does not state
that the wishes of the
person with impaired decision-making ability will not be taken into
consideration. Instead, it is intended
to ensure that people with impaired
decision-making ability are provided with appropriate resources, representation
and assistance,
including by the provision of legal advice by a legal
representative, to ensure that they do not agree to a WPO when they may not
understand the repercussions. Noting the apparent power imbalance between the
applicant (a Commonwealth entity) and a respondent,
the provision aims to ensure
that people with disability are not unfairly disadvantaged as a result of their
disability.
(d) Whether the representative or the court are required to support a
respondent with impaired decision-making ability to make decisions
in relation
to the proceeding and understand the nature and effect of the decisions and if
so, what supports are provided
A legal representative of a respondent has a duty to ensure that their client
understands relevant legal issues and can make informed
choices. The Australian
Solicitors Conduct Rules 2021, which are replicated in state and territory
legislation, require a lawyer
to act in the best interests of their
and to 'provide clear
and timely advice to assist a client to understand relevant legal issues and to
make informed choices about
action to be taken during the course of a
This duty applies
regardless of whether their client has impaired decision-making ability or not.
The Law Society of the relevant
may have further guidance about how a lawyer may best represent clients with
decision-making ability. For example, the Capacity Guidelines published
by the Law Society of NSW provide techniques for legal representatives
enhance their client's mental capacity and support them to make decisions.
A litigation guardian or representative (however defined) has similar
obligations. For example, the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2019
(Vic) further provides that a person with impaired decision-making ability
should be provided with practicable and appropriate support
to enable them (as
much as possible) to make and participate in decisions affecting them; to
express their will and preferences;
and to develop their decision-making
Similarly, in NSW,
the general principles of the
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) requires the
welfare and interests of persons with disabilities to be the paramount
consideration; the freedom of decision and
freedom of action of such persons
should be limited as little as possible; and the views of persons with
disability should be taken
consideration.
(e) What safeguards exist to ensure the rights, will and preferences of a
respondent with impaired decision-making ability are protected
and people with
disability are not subject to abuse.
Paragraph 22(1)(c) was included in the CWPO Bill as a safeguard, to ensure
that people with disability and impaired decision-making
ability are not
subjected to consent orders they do not understand. A court would consider the
will and preferences of a respondent
with impaired decision-making ability when
determining whether to make a consent order.
Existing legislation governing litigation guardians (however described) often
explicitly require the representative to protect the
rights of respondents with
impaired decision-making ability, including protection from abuse. For example,
in Victoria, a guardian
has a duty to protect the respondent from neglect, abuse
or exploitation.
In NSW, the
welfare and interests of persons with disabilities should be given paramount
consideration when exercising functions
Guardianship Act 1987
and persons with
disabilities should be protected from neglect, abuse and exploitation.
The CWPO Bill provides that a consent order would not be able to be made
unless an application for a final order has been made against
respondent.
Such an application
for a final order must include
sufficient explanation as to why each of the conditions should be imposed on the
respondent; a statement of facts relating to why
the order should be made; and,
inter alia, a summary of the grounds on which the order should be made. The
application must also
include information about any hardship that is likely to
be caused if the conditions are imposed; whether the conditions achieve
objects of the Act while minimising restrictions on the rights and liberties of
the respondent; and any matters relevant, which
may include the personal
circumstances of the respondent, including any disability that they might have.
The applicant – namely,
the authorised person from the Commonwealth entity
- should not apply for an order where the conditions may disproportionately
a person with disability or result in further hardship. Instead, they
should consider alternative methods of providing important
government services,
whilst also balancing the need to protect their workers and workplaces from
harm. This is further supplemented
by the Commonwealth entity's obligation to
act as a model litigant, including to act honestly, fairly, and
Concluding comments
International human rights legal
2.42 As outlined in the preliminary analysis, allowing consent orders to be
made against individuals with impaired decision-making
ability may engage the
rights of persons with disability to equal recognition before the law. Further
information was sought to answer
the key question of whether the measure, in
providing that an individual with impaired decision-making ability must have a
representative
present, would facilitate a form of substitute
decision-making.
2.43 The minister advised that a court’s assessment as to whether a
person has impaired decision-making ability will be guided
by the relevant court
rules and guidance notes, as well as applicable frameworks such as guardianship
legislation in the relevant
for example, a court must take reasonable steps to conduct an assessment of
individual’s decision-making capacity at a time and in an environment
during which their capacity can be assessed most accurately.
This obligation,
however, is not part of the NSW guardianship legislation.
2.44 The minister also advised that the requirement for a person with
impaired decision-making ability to have a representative present
was included
in the bill as a safeguard, to ensure that people with disability and impaired
decision-making ability are not subjected
to consent orders they do not
understand. The minister further advised that a court would consider the will
and preferences of a
respondent with impaired decision-making ability when
determining whether to make a consent order. As to whether the representative
the court is required to support a respondent with impaired decision-making
ability to exercise their legal capacity, the minister
advised that a legal
representative has duties under the Australian Solicitor Conduct Rules 2021 to
ensure their client understands
relevant legal issues and can make informed
choices. The minister advised that a litigation guardian or representative has
obligations
under the relevant guardianship legislation. For example, in
Victoria, individuals with impaired decision-making ability should be
with practicable and appropriate support to enable them (as much as possible) to
make and participate in decisions affecting
them; to express their will and
preferences; and to develop their decision-making capacity. In NSW, the general
principles of the
relevant guardianship law require the welfare and
interests of persons with disabilities to be the paramount consideration; the
of decision and freedom of action of such persons should be limited as
little as possible; and the views of persons with disability
should be taken
into consideration.
2.45 This suggests that whether the measure would permit substitute
decision-making (contrary to the requirement under article 12
of the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, as elaborated by the UN Committee on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,
to replace such decision-making regimes
with supported decision-making) is dependent on the type of representative, the
the individual is located and the relevant court rules and other
relevant legislation such as guardianship legislation. Without a
assessment of guardianship legislation in all Australian jurisdictions, it is
therefore difficult to assess whether such
legislation contains adequate
supports for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the rights of people with
disability under international
human rights law. There is therefore a risk that
in certain circumstances, particularly where an individual is represented by a
guardian or other representative (in which case, the minister
advised, the relevant rules of court may allow that person to consent
order on behalf of the person with disability), the measure would facilitate a
form of substitute decision-making.
Committee view
2.46 The committee thanks the minister for this response.
2.47 The committee notes that this bill would establish a scheme for courts
to make Commonwealth workplace protection orders to prevent
personal violence
against Commonwealth workers or in Commonwealth workplaces, and this would allow
consent orders to be made against
individuals with impaired decision-making
ability where they are represented by a lawyer, litigation guardian or, for
children, a
parent or guardian.
2.48 The committee notes the minister’s advice that, depending on the
may be permitted
to consent to an order on behalf of the respondent. The committee considers that
there is therefore a risk that
the measure may facilitate a form of substitute
decision-making in certain circumstances, contrary to the requirement, under
international
human rights law, for substitute decision-making to be replaced
with supported decision-making regimes.
Suggested action
2.49 The committee considers the compatibility of this measure may be
assisted were the bill amended to provide an additional safeguard
decision-maker must be satisfied there are adequate supports in place to ensure
the will and preference of a respondent
with impaired decision-making ability is
respected when making a consent order under the scheme.
2.50 The committee recommends that the statement of compatibility be
updated to reflect the information provided by the minister.
2.51 The committee draws these human rights concerns to the attention of the
minister and the Parliament.
Ms Zaneta Mascarenhas MP
This entry can be cited as:
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights,
Commonwealth Workplace Protection
Orders Bill 2025
Report 5 of 2025
[2025] AUPJCHR 40.
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights,
(27 August 2025), pp. 48-53.
Subclause 6(1).
Clause 25(1).
Subclause 22(1).
Paragraph 22(2)(b) provides
that the court may make the consent order whether or not satisfied of the
matters in paragraph 20(c):
that the respondent has engaged in personal
violence; and there is a real risk the respondent will engage in further
personal violence
if the order is not made; and the order is necessary or
desirable to prevent the respondent from engaging in further personal
Subclause 22(2).
Subclause 25(2).
Subclause 22(4).
Subclause 22(5).
Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities, article 12.
Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities, article 12(4). See also article 17.
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1, Article 12: Equal
recognition before the law
(2014) [1], [5].
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1, Article 12: Equal
recognition before the law
(2014) [5].
In this way the measure
would also engage and limit the right to equality and non-discrimination. If the
measure were to be incompatible
with the right to equal recognition before the
law, as this is a threshold right, it would also likely be incompatible with
associated rights such as the right to equality and non-discrimination.
The UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
has also emphasised
that the denial of legal capacity to persons with disabilities often leads to
the deprivation of other fundamental
human rights. See Committee on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1, Article 12: Equal
recognition before the law
(2014) [8].
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1, Article 12: Equal
recognition before the law
(2014) [7]. For a discussion of the academic
debate regarding the interpretation and application of article 12, particularly
in relation
to substitute decision making, see, eg, Bernadette McSherry and Lisa
Waddington, 'Treat with care: the right to informed consent
for medical
treatment of persons with mental impairments in Australia',
Journal of Human Rights
, vol. 23, issue no. 1, pp. 109–129.
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1, Article 12: Equal
recognition before the law
(2014) [15]–[16], [21]. The features of a
supported decision-making regime are detailed in paragraph [29].
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1, Article 12: Equal
recognition before the law
(2014) [21].
The minister's response to
the committee's inquiries was received on 19 September 2025. This is an extract
of the response. The
response is available in full on the relevant webpage for
the legislation: see
assessments
and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2025
(Cth) r 9.25(1)(c).
Federal Circuit and
Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2025
(Cth) r 9.25(2);
Federal Court Rules 2011
(Cth) Sch 1.
Commonwealth Workplace
Protection Orders Bill 2025
(Cth) cl 32.
Federal Circuit and
Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2025
(Cth) r 9.25(1)(a).
Ibid r 9.25(1)(b).
Civil Procedure Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2019
Commonwealth Workplace
Protection Orders Bill 2025
(Cth) cl 22(2).
Ibid cl 25(3).
Commonwealth Workplace
Protection Orders Bill 2025
(Cth) cl 25(3) provides that a court may consider
any other matter it deems relevant when considering whether a condition of an
is necessary or desirable.
Federal Court Rules
(Cth) r 9.70(2);
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
(Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2025
(Cth) r 9.36.
Federal Court Rules
(Cth) r 9.70(1);
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
(Division 2)
(General Federal Law) Rules 2025
(Cth) r 9.36.
Ibid r 9.71.
Law Council of Australia,
Australian Solicitors' Conduct Rules 2021
Ibid r 7.1.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2019
Guardianship Act 1987
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2019
s 41(1)(d).
Guardianship Act 1987
Commonwealth Workplace
Protection Orders Bill 2025
(Cth) cl 22(1)(a).
Ibid cl 19(2).
Legal Services
Directions 2017
(Cth) Appendix B.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (198 KB)
PDF format (135 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter