URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBAD/2016/211.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:13:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Corporations Amendment (Professional Standards of Financial Advisers) Bill 2016 [2016] AUSStaCSBAD 211 (30 November 2016)
Corporations Amendment (Professional Standards of Financial Advisers) Bill 2016
Judicial review of decisions of the standards body
General comment
Delegation of legislative power—provisions allowing delegated legislation to modify the operation of primary legislation
Schedule 1, item 12, proposed new section 921U
Judicial review—consultation
Schedule 1, item 12, proposed new subsection 921U(8)
Parliamentary scrutiny—fees
Schedule 1, item 12, proposed new subsection 921U(9)
Reversal of evidential burden of proof
Schedule 1, items 16 and 17, subsections 922M(2) and 923C(3)–(6)
Corporations Amendment (Professional Standards of
Financial Advisers) Bill 2016
This bill seeks to amend the
Corporations Act 2001
(Corporations Act)
to raise the education, training and ethical
standards of financial advisers by:
• requiring relevant providers to hold a degree;
• undertake a professional year;
• pass an exam; and
• undertake continuous professional development and comply with a
Code of Ethics
House of Representatives on 23 November 2016
Judicial review of decisions of the standards
General comment
The bill provides for the establishment of a new standards body to develop
education standards and a Code of Ethics for financial
advisers. There is no
explanation in the explanatory materials as to whether decisions of the
standards body will be subject to judicial
review. The committee notes that the
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
does not apply to
decisions of a legislative nature and the corporate status of the standards body
(see proposed new section 921X)
may mean that it does not qualify as an
‘officer of the Commonwealth’ and therefore it may not be
susceptible to review
section 39B
Judiciary Act 1903
section 75(v)
Constitution
Noting the significance of decisions to be made by the standards body
(discussed below), the committee seeks the Minister’s
advice as to
whether, and under what jurisdiction, the standards body’s decisions,
including legislative instruments, will
be subject to judicial review.
Pending the Minister’s reply, the committee draws Senators’
attention to the provisions, as they may be considered to
make rights, liberties
or obligations unduly dependent upon non-reviewable decisions, in breach of
principle 1(a)(iii) of the committee’s
terms of reference.
Delegation of legislative power—provisions
allowing delegated legislation to modify the operation of primary
legislation
Schedule 1, item 12, proposed new
section 921U
Proposed new section 921U sets out the functions of the standards body. Among
other things, the functions of the standards body include
making legislative
instruments in relation to:
• education standards and a Code of Ethics for financial advisers
(proposed new subsection 921U(2));
• modifying the operation of the
Corporations Act
in relation to
requirements for financial advisers whose Continuing Professional Development
year changes (proposed new
subsections 921U(3)
and (4)); and
• the requirements for supervision of provisional providers (proposed
subsection 921U(5)).
The committee notes that proposed
section 921U
may be characterised as a
framework provision, in that it allows the proposed standards body to provide
for many important details
of the new regulatory scheme for financial advisers
to be set out in a legislative instrument, rather than on the face of the bill.
In relation to proposed new
subsection 921U(5)
the explanatory memorandum (at p.
20) states that ‘this approach ensures that specific technical
requirements are set by the
body with specialist knowledge and the requirements
can be more easily updated when practices change’.
In light of this explanation and the fact that that legislative
instruments made by the standards body will be subject to parliamentary
disallowance, the committee leaves the general question of whether the
delegation of legislative power in
subsection 921U(5)
is appropriate to the
Senate as a whole.
However, proposed new
subsections 921U(3)
and (4) may be characterised as
Henry VIII clauses as together they allow the operation of the
Corporations Act
to be modified by delegated legislation. The committee has consistently
commented on such provisions as they may subvert the appropriate
relationship
between the Parliament and the Executive branch of government. There does not
appear to be an explanation for this approach
in the explanatory materials.
The committee seeks the Minister’s advice as to the rationale for
allowing legislative instruments to modify the operation of
Corporations
, including examples of the circumstances in which it is envisaged that this
power may be used.
Pending the Minister’s reply, the committee draws Senators’
attention to the provision, as it may be considered to delegate
legislative
powers inappropriately, in breach of principle 1(a)(iv) of the committee’s
terms of reference.
review—consultation
Schedule 1, item 12,
proposed new subsection 921U(8)
Proposed new
subsection 921U(6)
provides that prior to making or reviewing a
legislative instrument the standards body must consult financial services
and providers, associations representing consumers of financial
services, professional associations, the Australian Security and
Commission (ASIC) and the Treasury, and any other person or body that the
standards body considers it appropriate to consult.
Proposed new
and the explanatory memorandum (at p. 66) confirm that the
standards body will satisfy this consultation requirement by making the
legislative instrument available on its website and inviting persons to comment
on it. However, proposed new
subsection 921U(8)
provides that if the standards
body fails to comply with the consultation requirement, the legislative
instrument nonetheless remains
valid and enforceable.
The effect of proposed new
subsection 921U(8)
is that judicial review for a
failure by the standards body to comply with the consultation obligations in
proposed new
subsection 921U(6)
will lack utility.
Noting this, and the
significance of the matters to be determined by the standards body by
legislative instrument, the committee seeks
the Minister’s advice as to
the rationale for including proposed new
subsection 921U(8)
and whether there is
an alternative mechanism (other than judicial review) through which the
consultation requirements will be enforced.
Pending the Minister’s reply, the committee draws Senators’
attention to the provision, as it may be considered to make
rights, liberties or
obligations unduly dependent upon non-reviewable decisions, in breach of
principle 1(a)(iii) of the committee’s
terms of reference.
Parliamentary
scrutiny—fees
Schedule 1, item 12,
proposed new subsection 921U(9)
Proposed new
subsection 921U(9)
provides that ‘the standards body may
charge fees for things done in performing its functions’. The explanatory
(at p. 66) suggests that the standards body may, for example, choose
to charge a fee for individuals to sit the proposed exam. Furthermore,
explanatory memorandum states that ‘the body is not required, or expected,
to recover all of its costs by charging a fee
for service’. However, the
legislation sets no limits on the amount of fee that could be charged by the
standards body.
The committee notes that the power provided to the standards body to
charge fees is broad and unconstrained and therefore seeks the
advice as to whether guidance or limitations in relation to charging of fees by
the standards body can be included
on the face of the bill.
Pending the Minister’s reply, the committee draws Senators’
attention to the provisions, as they may be considered to
insufficiently subject
the exercise of legislative power to parliamentary scrutiny, in breach of
principle 1(a)(v) of the committee’s
terms of reference.
Reversal of evidential burden of
Schedule 1, items 16 and 17, subsections
922M(2) and 923C(3)–(6)
subsection 922M(2)
introduces an exception
to an existing offence of failing to comply with an obligation to notify ASIC,
and proposed
subsections 923C(3)
–(6) introduce exceptions to the new
restrictions on the use of the terms ‘financial adviser’ and
planner’. Subsection 13.3(3) of the
Criminal Code Act
provides that a defendant who wishes to rely on any exception,
exemption, excuse, qualification or justification bears an evidential
relation to that matter.
While the defendant bears an evidential burden (requiring the defendant to
raise evidence about the matter), rather than a legal burden
(requiring the
defendant to positively prove the matter), the committee expects any such
reversal of the evidential burden of proof
to be justified. The
committee’s consideration of the appropriateness of a provision which
reverses the burden of proof is
assisted if it explicitly addresses relevant
principles as set out in the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences,
Infringement Notices and Enforcement Powers
(see in particular pp
As neither the statement of compatibility nor the explanatory memorandum
address this issue the committee seeks a justification from
the Minister as to
why the items propose to reverse the evidential burden of proof which addresses
the principles set out in the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences,
Infringement Notices and Enforcement Powers
(at pp 50–52).
Pending the Minister’s reply, the committee draws Senators’
attention to the provisions, as they may be considered to
trespass unduly on
personal rights and liberties, in breach of principle 1(a)(i) of the
committee’s terms of reference.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (76.6 KB)
PDF format (123 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter