URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJCHR/2025/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:08:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Annual Report 2024 [2025] AUPJCHR 23 (26 March 2025)
Current Members
Former Members
Secretariat in 2024
External Legal Adviser
Establishment of the committee
Role of the committee
Functions and powers of the committee
Definition of human rights and the Act
Committee membership
Structure of the annual report
Acknowledgments
The committee’s analytical framework
Statements of compatibility
The scrutiny dialogue model
Structure of the committee’s scrutiny reports
Report snapshot
New and continuing matters
Concluded matters
Legal advice
Committee publications and resources
Committee guidance notes
Guidance Note 1
– Expectations for statements of compatibility
Guidance Note 2
– Offence provisions, civil penalties and human rights
Guide to human rights
Scrutiny Update
Index of bills and legislative instruments
Scrutiny reports and databases
Interaction with other committees
Legislation considered
Figure: 3.1 Legislation considered during the reporting period
Reports tabled during the period
Commonly engaged rights
Timeliness of committee reports
Legislative instruments
Timeliness of responses
Inquiry into Australia’s Human Right’s Framework
Inquiry into Compulsory Income Management
Inquiry into Antisemitism in Australian Universities
Major themes
Rights of people with disability
Online safety
Committee impact
Liaison with departments
Stakeholder engagement
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights
Annual Report 2024
© Commonwealth of Australia
ISBN 978-1-76093-819-2 (Printed version)
ISBN 978-1-76093-819-2 (HTML version)
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International License.
The details of this licence are available on the Creative Commons website:
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
PO Box 6100
Parliament House
Canberra ACT 2600
Phone 02 6277 3823
Fax 02 6277 5767
Email: human.rights@aph.gov.au
http://www.aph.gov.au/joint_humanrights/
This report can be cited as: Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights,
Annual Report 2024, [2025] AUPJCHR 23.
This document was prepared by the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human
Rights and printed by the Senate Printing Unit, Department
of the Senate,
Parliament House, Canberra.
1—Introduction
Establishment of the committee
Role of the committee
Functions and powers of the
Definition of human rights and the
Committee membership
Structure of the annual report
Acknowledgments
Chapter 2—The committee's
mode of operation
The committee’s analytical framework
The scrutiny dialogue model
Structure of the committee’s scrutiny
Legal advice
Committee publications and resources
Chapter 3—Work of the
committee in 2024
Legislation considered
Reports tabled during the period
Commonly engaged rights
Inquiry into Australia’s Human
Right’s Framework
Inquiry into Compulsory Income
Inquiry into Antisemitism in Australian
Universities
Major themes
Committee impact
Current Members
Mr Josh Burns MP, Chair
Mr Henry Pike MP, Deputy Chair
Ms Jodie Belyea MP
Senator Ross Cadell
Senator Lisa Darmanin
Senator Matt O'Sullivan
Ms Alicia Payne MP
Mr Graham Perrett MP
Senator David Shoebridge
Senator Jana Stewart
Senator Lidia Thorpe
Ms Kylea Tink MP
Macnamara, Victoria, ALP
Bowman, Queensland, LNP
Dunkley, Victoria, ALP
New South Wales, NATS
Victoria, ALP
Western Australia, LP
Canberra, ACT, ALP
Moreton, Queensland, ALP
New South Wales, AG
Victoria, ALP
Victoria, IND
North Sydney, New South Wales, IND
Former Members
Senator Gerard Rennick Queensland, IND
(13.06.2023 – 09.09.2024)
Senator Karen Grogan South Australia, ALP
(28.07.2022 – 24.06.2024)
Secretariat in
Anita Coles, Committee Secretary
Charlotte Fletcher, Committee Secretary
Rebecca Preston, Principal Research Officer
Steph Lum, Principal Research Officer
Kate Gauthier, Principal Research Officer
Claire Gay, Senior Research Officer
Geoffrey Fricke, Senior Research Officer
Kieran Knox, Legislative Research Officer
Rashmi Chary, Legislative Research Officer
External Legal Adviser
Professor Jacqueline Mowbray
Introduction
Establishment of the
1.1 The committee was established under the
Human Rights (Parliamentary
Scrutiny) Act 2011
(the Act) in March 2012. The establishment of the
committee was a key element of Australia's Human Rights Framework, which was
on 21 April 2010.0F
Role of the
1.2 The establishment of the committee builds on the Parliament's established
traditions of legislative scrutiny. Accordingly, the
committee undertakes its
scrutiny function as a technical inquiry relating to Australia's international
human rights obligations.
The committee does not consider the broader policy
merits of legislation when performing its technical scrutiny function.
1.3 The committee's purpose is to enhance understanding of, and respect for,
human rights in Australia; and to ensure appropriate
recognition of human rights
issues in legislative and policy development.
Functions and powers of the
1.4 The committee has the following functions under the Act:
Ÿ to examine bills for Acts, and legislative instruments, that come
before either House of the Parliament for compatibility with
human rights, and
to report to both Houses of the Parliament on that issue;
Ÿ to examine Acts for compatibility with human rights, and to report to
both Houses of the Parliament on that issue; and
Ÿ to inquire into any matter relating to human rights which is referred
to it by the Attorney-General, and to report to both
Houses of the Parliament on
that matter.1F
1.5 The powers and proceedings of the committee are set out in the
committee's resolution of appointment and the
Definition of human rights
and the Act
1.6 Human rights are defined in the Act as those contained in the following
seven human rights treaties to which Australia is a party:
Ÿ International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR);
Ÿ International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
Ÿ International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination (ICERD);
Ÿ Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW);
Ÿ Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment (CAT);
Ÿ Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC); and
Ÿ Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD).
1.7 The committee's analysis of legislation is against the standards set out
in these seven human rights treaties. The ICCPR and the
ICESCR cover all the key
civil and political and economic, social and cultural rights. For the most part,
the five other treaties
expand or elaborate on these rights in a more detailed
way. This understanding is consistent with the approach the Attorney-General's
Department has adopted in providing support to executive departments and
1.8 The resolution of appointment governing the committee's operation during
the reporting period provided that the committee consist
of 12 members: 4
members of the House of Representatives nominated by the Government Whip; 2
members of the House of Representatives
nominated by the Opposition Whip or by
any minority group or independent member; 2 senators nominated by the Leader of
the Government
in the Senate; 2 senators nominated by the Leader of the
Opposition in the Senate; 1 senator nominated by the Leader of the Australian
Greens; and 1 senator nominated by any minority group or an independent
1.9 The committee elects as its Chair a government member from either the
House of Representatives or the Senate. The Deputy Chair
is elected from one of
the non-government members of the committee.
Structure of the annual
1.10 This report covers the period 1 January 2024 to 31 December 2024 (the
reporting period). Mr Josh Burns MP was Chair of the committee
reporting period in the 47
Parliament.
1.11 Chapter 2 sets out the committee’s mode of operation, its
analytical framework and the scrutiny dialogue model. Chapter
3 reports on the
work of the committee during the reporting period.
Acknowledgments
1.12 The committee wishes to acknowledge the work and assistance of its
external legal adviser during the reporting period, Professor
1.13 The committee also wishes to acknowledge the assistance of ministers and
associated departments and agencies during the reporting
period. The
responsiveness of ministers, departments and agencies to the committee's
inquiries is critical to ensuring that the committee
can perform its scrutiny
function effectively.
The committee's mode of operation
2.1 The committee examines and reports on the human rights compatibility of
all bills and legislative instruments that come before
the Parliament. In
keeping with the longstanding conventions of the Parliament's other scrutiny
committees,4F
the committee adopts
a technical approach to its scrutiny of legislation and does not consider the
policy merits of the legislation.
2.2 During the reporting period, the committee met via a mixture of in-person
meetings when both the House of Representatives and
the Senate sat, and via
videoconference when Parliament was not sitting. The approach of meeting out of
the sitting period initially
arose in 2020 in response to the impacts of the
COVID-19 pandemic on the parliamentary timetable. The committee continued to
this practice in 2024 to ensure the timeliness of its reports.
2.3 The committee seeks to conclude and report on its examination of bills
while they are still before the Parliament, so that its
findings may inform the
legislative deliberations of the Parliament. The committee's ability to do so,
however, is dependent on Parliament's
legislative program and the timeliness of
responses to the committee's requests. Where a bill is passed before the
committee has
been able to conclude its examination, the committee nevertheless
completes its examination of the legislation and reports its findings
Parliament.
2.4 The committee also examines all legislative instruments tabled in the
Parliament, including legislative instruments that are exempt
disallowance process.5F
committee seeks to conclude and report on its examination of legislative
instruments within the timeframe for disallowance prescribed
Legislation Act 2003
(generally 15 sitting days after
tabling).6F
The committee’s
analytical framework
2.5 Australia has voluntarily accepted obligations under the seven core
United Nations human rights treaties. It is a general principle
of international
human rights law that the rights protected by the human rights treaties are to
be interpreted generously and any
limitations on human rights are to be
interpreted narrowly. Accordingly, the primary focus of the committee's reports
is determining
whether any identified limitation of a human right is permissible
under international human rights law, and whether legislation could
in a way that may risk breaching human rights.
2.6 International human rights law recognises that permissible limits may be
placed on most rights and freedoms—there are few
absolute rights (that is,
rights which cannot be limited in any
circumstances).7F
All other rights
may be limited as long as the limitation meets certain standards. In general,
any measure that limits a human right
must comply with the following criteria
(the limitation criteria):
− be prescribed by law;
− be in pursuit of a legitimate objective;
− be rationally connected to (that is, effective to achieve) its stated
objective; and
− be a proportionate way to achieve that objective.
2.7 Where a bill or instrument limits a human right, the statement of
compatibility should provide a detailed and evidence-based assessment
measures against these limitation criteria.
2.8 Where relevant, the committee takes into account the views of human
rights treaty bodies, as well as international and comparative
human rights
jurisprudence. These sources are relevant to the interpretation of the human
rights against which the committee is required
to assess legislation.
Statements of compatibility
Human Rights (Parliamentary Scrutiny) Act 2011
requires that
each bill and disallowable legislative instrument be accompanied by a statement
of compatibility.8F
The statement
of compatibility serves as the starting point for the application of the
committee's analytical framework and sets
out the legislation proponent's
assessment of the extent to which the legislation engages human rights.
2.10 The committee sets out its guidance in relation to statements of
compatibility in its
Guidance Note
The scrutiny dialogue model
2.11 The committee’s main function of scrutinising legislation is
pursued through dialogue with ministers. Accordingly, where
legislation raises a
human rights concern which has not been adequately explained in the relevant
statement of compatibility, the
committee’s usual approach is to publish
an initial report setting out the human rights concerns it has in relation to
legislation and advising that it intends to seek further information from
the minister. Any response from the minister is subsequently
considered and
published alongside the committee’s concluding report on the matter. As
well as making concluding remarks on
the human rights compatibility of the
relevant legislation, the committee may make recommendations to strengthen the
compatibility
of the legislation with Australia’s human rights
obligations.
2.12 In some cases, ministers may undertake to address the committee’s
concerns in the future (for example, by amending legislation
or undertaking to
conduct a review of the legislation in due course) or may advise that amendments
have been made to address the
committee’s earlier concerns when
introducing a future iteration of a bill.
2.13 In addition, the committee resolved on its establishment in the
Parliament that its secretariat should, where it considered it
appropriate, engage directly with relevant departments immediately
legal adviser and secretariat have identified minor, technical human rights
concerns with legislation, in an attempt to
resolve the matter before involving
the minister or committee by reporting on the legislation publicly. Further,
where a statement
of compatibility is considered to be inadequate (but where it
nonetheless does not appear that the legislation raises human rights
the committee authorised the Committee Secretary to write to departmental
officials setting out the committee’s
expectations for future
Structure of the
committee’s scrutiny reports
2.14 The structure of the committee’s scrutiny reports reflects the
progress of the dialogue model described above, with matters
proceeding from an
initial report describing the human rights engaged by the bill, to a concluding
report that analyses any information
received by the legislation proponent in
response to the committee’s initial report. The committee may also provide
to parliament without first seeking a response from the minister,
including where it has previously considered similar legislation,
or where it
appears that the relevant legislation will pass through the Parliament quickly.
Report snapshot
2.15 The committee’s report structure continues to feature a summary
snapshot at the start of the report. This includes statistics
regarding the
number of bills and legislative instruments considered and commented on in the
report, and a summary of the committee’s
comments in the report. The
summary of the committee’s views is intended to make the reports more
accessible.
2.16 The summary snapshot also includes any minor comments the committee has
made with respect to legislation. The committee may make
a minor comment with
respect to private members’ or senators’ bills where a bill appears
to engage and limit human rights
and this has not been adequately explained in
the statement of compatibility. The committee will generally note that it may
further information with respect to the bill if it were to proceed to
further stages of debate. This approach assists in enabling
the committee to
manage its high workload and prioritise those bills which are more likely to
move to further stages of debate. For
example, the committee initially
considered the
Migration Amendment (Overseas Organ Transplant Disclosure and
Other Measures) Bill 2024
in its scrutiny
Report 8 of 2023
, noting that
if the bill proceeded further it may make a substantive comment. The bill
subsequently passed the Senate on 21 August
2024 and the committee substantively
commented on the bill in
Report 8 of
2.17 The committee may also make a minor comment in relation to legislation
that raises similar or related concerns to those which
the committee has
recently or repeatedly raised. For example, the committee made a minor comment
in relation to the 2024 Appropriation
Bills, reiterating its long-held view that
the appropriation of funds facilitates the taking of actions which may promote,
to fulfil, Australia's obligations under international human rights law,
and as such, the committee expects the statements of compatibility
accompanying
the bills to fully address the compatibility of the measures which directly
impact human rights.11F
New and continuing matters
2.18 Chapter 1 of the committee’s reports include new and continuing
matters. This generally includes all bills introduced during
the preceding
sitting week and legislative instruments tabled in the preceding period. Where
the committee considers that a bill
or instrument engages human rights and
further information is required in order for the committee to complete its
examination, these
bills and instruments are the subject of substantive report
entries describing the relevant measures, the human rights engaged and
by the measure, and the information that is required in order for the committee
to complete its assessment. Where the committee
has considered similar issues or
where it decides to draw its concerns or certain issues directly to the
Parliament, Chapter 1 may
also include entries that do not seek a response from
the relevant minister.
2.19 Chapter 1 also considers continuing matters (or further response
required matters), where the committee has received a response
legislation proponent, but requires further information in order to conclude its
examination of the matter. Where the committee
considers that legislation does
not engage, or only marginally engages, human rights; promotes human rights;
and/or permissibly limits
human rights, it lists these bills in a ‘no
comment’ section of the report, or in relation to instruments, states it
has no comment in relation to the remaining instruments registered in the
relevant period.12F
Concluded matters
2.20 Chapter 2 of the committee’s reports examine responses received in
relation to the committee’s requests for information,
on the basis of
which the committee has concluded its examination of the legislation in
question. Ministerial responses are published
in full alongside the report on
the committee’s
website.13F
These responses are
also extracted and analysed in Chapter 2 of the report. As noted above, the
committee’s concluding remarks
on legislation may include findings as to
the human rights compatibility of the legislation, and recommendations to
address any human
rights concerns.
Legal advice
2.21 The committee is assisted by an external legal adviser on a part-time
basis, who is appointed by the Presiding Officers of the
Parliament. The
committee’s legal adviser during the reporting period was Professor
Jacqueline Mowbray. Professor Mowbray has
extensive research and teaching
experience in international law and human rights. She has also published widely
on related matters,
including, as co-author, of a leading work on the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Professor Mowbray
previously served as co-director of the Sydney Centre for International Law and
as editor of the
Australian International Law Journal.
During her time as
legal adviser to the committee she remained employed by the University of
2.22 In addition to the external legal adviser, the human rights committee
secretariat also includes staff with expertise in international
human rights law
and legislative scrutiny.
Committee publications and
2.23 In addition to its regular reports on the human rights compatibility of
legislation, the committee has produced a number of publications
and resources
to assist ministers, departments and interested parties more generally in
engaging with the committee and its work.
Committee guidance notes
2.24 The committee has produced two guidance notes, which are available on
the committee’s
– Expectations for statements of compatibility
2.25 This note sets out the committee’s approach to human rights
assessments and provides guidance as to statements of compatibility.
primarily designed to assist in the preparation of statements of
compatibility.
– Offence provisions, civil penalties and human
2.26 This guidance note sets out some of the key human rights compatibility
issues in relation to provisions that create offences
and civil penalties. It is
not intended to be exhaustive, but to provide guidance on the approach in
relation to assessing the human
rights compatibility of such provisions.
Guide to human rights
2.27 The committee’s
to human rights
(the guide) provides an introduction to the key human rights
protected by the human rights treaties relevant to the committee’s
assessments of legislation.
2.28 The guide is intended to provide a brief and accessible overview of
Australia’s human rights obligations, the key human
rights considered by
the committee, and the manner in which human rights may be permissibly limited.
Case studies are provided to
illustrate how human rights may be engaged and
limited in practice. The guide also includes a references section for those
more comprehensive information about the rights listed in the guide. The
guide is available on the committee’s
Scrutiny Update
2.29 Following the tabling of a scrutiny report, the committee secretariat
Scrutiny Update
publication to all parliamentarians, Senate
committee office staff and individuals and organisations that have subscribed to
the publication. The
Scrutiny Update
provides a summary of the
legislation commented on by the committee as set out in full in its scrutiny
report. It includes information
that may be useful to parliamentarians when
debating legislation and also serves to raise awareness about the role and
of the committee.
Index of bills and legislative
instruments
of bills and legislative instruments
lists all the bills examined by the
committee, and those legislative instruments in relation to which the committee
has substantively
commented on. The index contains a shorthand description of
any rights engaged by the legislation and the action taken by the committee
(that is, whether the committee made no comment, an advice-only comment, or a
comment requiring a response from the minister); and
the relevant report(s) in
which the committee’s full comments may be found.
Scrutiny reports and databases
2.31 The committee’s scrutiny reports themselves are also a key
resource. These are available on the committee’s
They can be downloaded as single PDF documents or separate chapters. The
scrutiny reports are also available on the Australasian
Legal Information
Institute (AustLII)
where each report entry for legislation is available separately and is
individually searchable.
Interaction with other committees
2.32 The committee also assists the work of the Senate’s eight
legislative standing committees, and relevant select and joint
committees,15F
attention to comments it has made in its scrutiny reports to the relevant
committee secretariat about a bill in which
the other committee is currently
inquiring into.
Work of the committee in 2024
3.1 This chapter provides information about the work of the committee during
including statistics,
major themes arising from the legislation examined, and information as to the
committee’s impact during
the reporting period.
Legislation
3.2 During the reporting period, the committee assessed legislation for its
compatibility with Australia’s international human
rights obligations
Ÿ a total of 175 bills—of these bills, the committee made no
comment on 76.5 per cent
made a minor comment on
9.7 per cent (17);18F
on 9.7 per cent (17) to draw Parliament’s attention to the bill but did
not require a response; and sought ministerial
advice on 4 per cent
Ÿ a total of 1 352 legislative
instruments20F
legislative instruments, the committee did not comment on 97 per cent (1
made a minor comment on
1.6 percent (22); commented on 0.6 per cent (9) to draw Parliament’s
attention to the legislative instruments
but did not require a response; and
sought ministerial advice on 0.5 per cent (7) of the legislative
instruments.
Figure: 3.1 Legislation considered during the
reporting period
3.3 These proportions of bills and legislative instruments in relation to
which the committee made a substantive comment in 2024 broadly
reflect trends
observed in relation to the committee’s operation from
2012–2023.22F
Reports tabled during the
3.4 The committee tabled eleven scrutiny reports during the reporting period.
This is a usual number for a twelve-month period.
3.5 The committee tabled two inquiry reports relating to Australia’s
Human Rights Framework and Compulsory Income Management
during the reporting
These inquiries are
detailed below.
3.6 The committee also tabled its
Report 2023
on 21 August 2024.
Commonly engaged
3.7 The most commonly engaged human rights identified in legislation
substantively commented on during the reporting period included
both civil and
political rights and economic, social and cultural rights. These were, in order
of most commonly engaged, the:
(1) right to privacy;24F
(2) freedom of expression or
opinion;25F
(3) right to an effective
(4) right to a fair
hearing;27F
(5) right to health;28F
(6) right to equality and
non-discrimination;29F
(7) right to work;30F
(8) right to freedom of
movement;31F
(9) torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment;32F
(10) criminal process
(11) right to liberty;34F
(12) freedom of
association.35F
3.8 During the reporting period, the rights listed above accounted for 65.5
per cent of rights which the committee reported on substantively
within both
primary and delegated legislation. The right to privacy continued to be the most
frequently considered right on which
the committee commented.
Figure: 3.2 Human rights engaged by legislation commented on in
Timeliness of committee reports
3.9 The committee seeks to conclude its assessment of bills while they are
still before the Parliament, and its assessment of legislative
instruments
within the timeframe for disallowance (usually 15 sitting days after tabling).
In both cases, the committee’s approach
seeks to ensure that reports on
the human rights compatibility of legislation are available to inform
parliamentary deliberations.
3.10 During this reporting period, the committee concluded its consideration
on the vast majority of bills prior to their passage.
However, on some
occasions, bills were passed by the Parliament before the committee could
finalise its deliberations. During the
reporting period, seven per cent of bills
passed prior to the committee publishing, or on the same day as the committee
its comments on the bill (12 bills out of 175). As the
committee’s initial reports generally contain a detailed human rights
analysis, this means that a human rights analysis of 93 per cent of new bills
was available to inform members of parliament prior
to the passage of
legislation.36F
Further to this,
while the committee cannot direct governments to take up the committee’s
recommendations, the committee considers
that greater consideration could be
given to the committee’s comments.
Legislative instruments
3.11 Of the 1 352 legislative instruments assessed by the committee during
this reporting period, the committee substantively reported
on one per cent of
those instruments (16). Of those instruments subject to disallowance, the
committee concluded its examination
of 100 per cent of these legislative
instruments within the disallowance timeframe.
Timeliness of responses
3.12 The responsiveness of ministers to the committee’s requests for
information regarding human rights concerns is critical
to the effectiveness of
the scrutiny process.37F
Although the committee requests a response within a specified timeframe
(generally within two weeks), this request does not affect
the passage of the
legislation.38F
Further, there
is no legal or procedural requirement that a minister provide the response
within this period.
3.13 During 2024, the committee made 14 requests for additional information
from ministers, 12 of which were received during the 2024
Six of the responses
received in 2024 (43 per cent) were received within the requested time frame
(including where an extension had
been provided). The remaining six responses
were received after the requested due date and two responses requested during
the reporting
period remained
outstanding.40F
3.14 As detailed in the committee’s inquiry report into
Australia’s Human Rights Framework, once legislation is before
Parliament its concerns have, with some notable exceptions (such as the examples
set out below), largely been ignored or justified.
For this to change, there
needs to be a cultural shift within the public service, the executive and the
Parliament itself. The committee
hopes that such a shift will change the way the
public service and senior leadership view the committee’s comments –
away from something to be justified and towards a genuine commitment to
improving the rights compatibility of legislation. Ideally
parliamentarians
would reference relevant committee reports when debating legislation, table
amendments in response to specific committee
recommendations, consistently act
as parliamentarians, not politicians, when serving on the committee, and not
pass legislation before
the Parliament has had the benefit of the
committee’s advice.41F
Inquiry into
Australia’s Human Right’s Framework
3.15 On 15 March 2023, the Attorney-General referred to the committee the
following matters for inquiry and report by 31 March 2024:
Ÿ to review the scope and effectiveness of Australia’s 2010 Human
Rights Framework and the National Human Rights Action
Ÿ to consider whether the Framework should be re-established, as well as
the components of the Framework, and any improvements
that should be made;
Ÿ to consider developments since 2010 in Australian human rights law
(both at the Commonwealth and State and Territory levels)
and relevant case law;
Ÿ to consider any other relevant matters.
3.16 The committee received 335 public submissions, over 4,000 form or
campaign letters, and held six public hearings, during which
it heard evidence
from a range of community groups, religious organisations, government bodies and
experts. All 4,000 form letters
were in support of a Human Rights Act and of the
submissions, over 87 per cent were in favour and 4 per cent were opposed.
3.17 The committee tabled its report on 30 May 2024, which made 17 detailed
recommendations, including that the government re-establish
and significantly
improve Australia’s Human Rights Framework, which should include:
Ÿ comprehensive and effective protection of human rights in legislation,
through the establishment of a Human Rights Act;
Ÿ a significant and ongoing commitment to national human rights
Ÿ requirements for public servants to fully consider human rights in the
development of legislation and policies;
Ÿ enhancements to human rights parliamentary scrutiny;
Ÿ enhancements to the role of the Australian Human Rights
Commission;
Ÿ review of Australia’s legislation, policies and practices for
compliance with human rights; and
Ÿ measures to monitor progress on human rights.
3.18 As part of its report, the committee prepared an example draft Human
Rights Bill to promote an understanding of its proposed
model for a statutory
federal Human Rights Act.
3.19 The committee’s report received wide coverage, including in the
society,43F
academia.44F
The recommendations
made by the report were the subject of considerable discussion by a panel run
during the Australian Human Rights
Commission’s Free + Equal Human Rights
Conference.45F
3.20 The committee is yet to receive a formal government response to this
Inquiry into Compulsory
Income Management
3.21 In September 2023, the committee was given the function (under
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
) to review
compulsory enhanced income management and compulsory income management for
compatibility with human rights and report
to the Parliament.
3.22 The committee completed its first review during the reporting period,
tabling its report on 3 September 2024. The committee received
submissions, one confidential submission, and held two public hearings, in which
the committee heard evidence from a range
of community organisations, peak
bodies, academics, and the Department of Social Services.
3.23 The committee made seven recommendations, including that the government
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
to make income
management voluntary over a period of time, and to establish more pathways out
of compulsory income management.
3.24 The committee is yet to receive a formal government response to this
Inquiry into Antisemitism
in Australian Universities
3.25 On 29 October 2024, the Attorney-General requested that the committee
inquire into and report on antisemitism at Australian universities,
Ÿ the prevalence, nature and experiences of antisemitic activity at
universities;
Ÿ university frameworks for the prevention of, and response to,
antisemitism at universities, including rules, policies and other
introduced to ensure the safety and wellbeing of students, staff and
Ÿ the effectiveness and adequacy of those frameworks;
Ÿ the support provided to students, staff and academics experiencing
antisemitism at universities;
Ÿ international experiences and best practices in dealing with
antisemitic activity at universities;
Ÿ what policy or regulatory changes are required to better address and
prevent antisemitism at universities; and
Ÿ any other relevant matters.
3.26 The Attorney-General requested that the committee report by 31 March
3.27 During this reporting period, the committee received 47 public
submissions, two confidential submissions, and held two public
hearings, during
which the committee heard from a range of universities, community groups,
student peak bodies, academics, and several
government departments and agencies.
The committee continued work on this inquiry in the 2025 reporting
Major themes
3.28 In 2024, the committee continued to comment on a wide range of
legislation. The legislation considered across this period reflected
the major themes that the committee has observed since its establishment in
2012. These include legislation relating to
migration, the rights of people with
disability, and online safety.
3.29 The committee considered numerous bills and legislative instruments that
introduced, extended or amended various measures relating
migration.47F
These measures
frequently engaged and limited multiple human rights. In general, the committee
considered objectives such as protecting
national security, regulating
Australia’s migration system, and the safety of the Australian community
to be capable of constituting
legitimate objectives for the purposes of
international human rights law. However, questions often arose as to the
necessity of the
measures and whether they addressed a concern pressing and
substantial enough to warrant limiting rights. The committee raised significant
concerns regarding proportionality, particularly where measures involved
arbitrary detention and the exercise of coercive powers.
3.30 For example, the committee commented on legislation introduced in
anticipation of or in response to various decisions of the
High Court of
Australia (the High Court). This legislation generally formed part of the
Parliament’s continuing legislative
response to the 2023 High Court
decision in
NZYQ v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
, which found that the legislation authorising the detention of
non-citizens for whom there is no real prospect of removal from Australia
becoming practicable in the reasonably foreseeable future was constitutionally
invalid (and therefore
unlawful).48F
On 26 March 2024,
Migration Amendment (Removal and Other Measures) Bill 2024
was introduced
ahead of the High Court’s decision on appeal in
ASF17 v Commonwealth of
unanimously upheld the validity of the continued detention of an Iranian citizen
in immigration detention, known as ASF17 (on
the basis that the applicant could
be removed if they cooperated in seeking to obtain foreign travel documents,
meaning there remained
a real prospect of the applicant’s removal from
Australia in the reasonably foreseeable future). This bill (now Act) amended
Migration Act to provide for the removal of certain non-citizens from Australia
by giving the minister the power to make a direction
requiring a person to do
certain things to effect their removal. Failure to comply with a removal pathway
direction is an offence.
The committee commented on this bill in
Report 3 of
passed both Houses of Parliament on 29 November 2024, with no apparent
amendments in response to the committee’s concerns.
3.31 On 6 November 2024, the High Court handed down its majority decision in
YBFZ v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
The court found
that the imposition of each of the curfew and
monitoring conditions on the holder of a Subclass 070 (Bridging (Removal
Pending)) Visa
R (BVR), pursuant to the Migration Regulations
were prima facie
punitive and could not be justified. The High Court therefore held that the
monitoring and curfew conditions required
to be applied to BVR holders were
unconstitutional (as only the courts may impose punishments). On 7 November
2024, the Migration
Amendment (Bridging Visa Conditions) Regulations 2024 were
registered and commenced. These regulations sought to address the constitutional
invalidity of the relevant provisions by introducing a new community protection
test that the minister must apply before imposing
certain visa conditions,
including curfews or electronic monitoring, on a BVR holder. The
Amendment Bill 2024
(now Act) was also introduced on 7 November 2024 and passed
both Houses of Parliament on 28 November 2024. This bill amended the
Act to provide for the cessation of bridging visas, facilitate arrangements for
the removal of visa-holders to receiving
countries, permit the sharing of
criminal history information both domestically and with foreign countries,
provide for the reversal
of protection findings, and alter the test for where
the minister may remove certain BVR visa conditions. The committee commented
the Migration Amendment (Bridging Visa Conditions) Regulations 2024 and the
Migration Amendment Bill 2024
Report 10 of
3.32 In general, the committee considered that these various measures
introduced in response to the High Court decisions were capable
of pursuing the
legitimate objectives of protecting community safety and regulating
Australia’s migration system. However,
the committee considered that
questions remained as to whether the measures were aimed at addressing public or
social concerns that
were pressing and substantial enough to warrant limiting
rights and were accompanied by sufficient safeguards such that limitations
rights would be proportionate. The committee therefore considered that it had
not been established that the measures were compatible
with multiple human
rights, and made recommendations to assist with the compatibility of the
measures.54F
3.33 The committee also considered the
Migration Amendment (Prohibiting Items
in Immigration Detention Facilities) Bill 2024
(now Act), which sought to amend
the Migration Act to prohibit the possession of certain items by people in
immigration detention
facilities and detainees (whether or not they are in an
immigration detention
facility).55F
It also sought to
expand an authorised officer’s power to search, screen and seize
prohibited things in relation to immigration
detention facilities and detainees
without a warrant. The committee considered that it had not been established
that the broad scope
of the minister’s power to prohibit the possession of
certain items, including mobile phones, was proportionate to the legitimate
objective which the bill sought to achieve, and as such, there was a risk that
the minister’s powers could be exercised in
a manner not compatible with
the rights to privacy, freedom of expression and the right of detainees not to
be subjected to arbitrary
or unlawful interference with family. To assist with
proportionality, the committee recommended that the bill be amended to require
that detainees, who had a mobile phone or internet device seized, be given
access to digital communication facilities to enable them
to contact friends,
family and legal services in a timely and appropriate manner. The
committee’s consideration of the bill
was published on 27 November 2024
(four sitting days after its introduction). The bill passed the Parliament the
following day (28
November 2024) with no apparent amendments in response to the
committee’s concerns.
Rights of people with disability
3.34 The committee considered various measures relating to the rights of
people with disability, including measures relating to the
National Disability
Insurance Scheme (NDIS) and aged
For example, the
committee commented on the National Disability Insurance Scheme Amendment
(Getting the NDIS Back on Track No. 1)
Bill 2024 (now Act) which significantly
amended the
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
(NDIS Act) to
introduce new definitions of disability supports funded under the NDIS and
expand the NDIS rules to provide that a
support is an NDIS support if declared
as such by the rules.57F
general, the committee considered that to the extent that these measures would
have the effect of reducing the type of supports
funded by the NDIS and thus
available to participants, they would engage and limit the rights of people with
disability. However,
the committee considered there remained questions as to how
the bill and accompanying instruments would operate in practice. The
considered that whether limitations on the rights of people with disability
would be proportionate depended on the extent
to which these measures would
result in fewer disability supports being funded and thus available to
participants.
3.35 Subsequently to the committee's concluding comments in
Report 5 of
, there were numerous amendments to the bill, including amendments to
the definition of an NDIS support. These amendments responded
committee’s initial recommendation that the NDIS rules should allow the
National Disability Insurance Agency to exercise
discretion to approve
disability supports that are not declared to be NDIS
supports.58F
The committee also
considered that the National Disability Insurance Scheme (Getting the NDIS Back
on Track No. 1) (NDIS Supports)
Transitional Rules 2024, which commenced
subsequently to the bill, assisted with mitigating the risk that measures in the
constitute a retrogressive measure by ensuring that disability supports
that are currently funded under a participant’s plan
would continue to be
funded until the plan
expires.59F
3.36 The committee also considered the
Aged Care Bill 2024
(now Act), which
sought to replace existing aged care legislation with a simplified legislative
framework to establish and regulate
the Commonwealth aged care
In general, the
committee considered several measures in the bill would promote multiple rights,
including the right to an adequate
standard of living and the rights of people
with disability. However, the committee also found that some measures in the
engage and limit multiple human rights. In particular, the committee
considered that authorising the use of restrictive practices
without sufficient
safeguards and providing supporters with decision-making authority would engage
and limit the rights of people
with disability.
3.37 The committee has considered equivalent measures relating to the use of
restrictive practices in aged care settings on several
occasions, and has
consistently stated that such measures raise significant human rights
concerns.61F
Aged Care Bill
required that rules made regarding the use of restrictive practices in aged
care must include certain requirements. The committee
considered that to the
extent that the requirements would strengthen the responsibilities of providers
by enhancing safeguards around
the use of restrictive practices (such as, that a
restrictive practice only be used as a last resort to prevent harm), the measure
may assist to ensure that rights are not limited. However, the committee noted
that allowing for the requirements to not apply in
an emergency and authorising
substitute decision-makers to consent to a restrictive practice on behalf of an
individual who is considered
to lack capacity, likely weakened the safeguard
value of the requirements and may in practice increase the risk of human rights
violations.
The committee further considered that allowing substitute
decision-makers to consent to the use of restrictive practices and granting
complete immunity to persons who use restrictive practices in reliance of the
consent of substitute decision-makers risked being
incompatible with a range of
human rights. The committee made recommendations to assist with the human rights
compatibility of the
measure.62F
3.38 The committee also considered that, while the bill contained several key
elements of a supported decision-making regime and important
safeguards to
protect individuals in aged care from abuse, by allowing supporters with
decision-making authority to not act in accordance
with an individual’s
will and preferences, there was a real risk that the measure could still
constitute a form of substitute
decision-making under international human rights
law. The committee made recommendations to assist with the human rights
compatibility
of the measure, including that guidance be provided to supporters
so that they can support the individual to exercise legal capacity
in a way that
respects their rights, will and preferences and does not amount to substitute
decision-making.63F
Online safety
3.39 The committee considered various measures relating to online
For example, the
committee commented on the
Online Safety Amendment (Social Media Minimum Age)
(now Act) made pursuant to the
Online Safety Act 2021
introduced an obligation on certain social media platforms to take reasonable
steps to prevent children under 16 years of
age from having an account. The
committee considered that this measure pursued the legitimate, and important,
objective of protecting
children from exposure to harms online. To the extent
that this measure may be effective in achieving that, the committee considered
that it would likely promote several human rights relating to children. However,
the committee also considered that it was not clear
that the measures would
constitute a proportionate limit on multiple rights, in that the measure did not
appear to be sufficiently
circumscribed, there were minimal safeguards in the
bill with respect to the right to privacy, and it was not clear that the measure
would be subject to sufficient oversight and review. The committee further
considered that if the measure did result in an impermissible
person’s human rights (including the right to privacy or freedom of
expression), it was not clear that the person
would have access to an effective
remedy. As such, the committee considered there to be a risk that the bill
would constitute an
impermissible limit on multiple rights and made
recommendations to amend the bill to assist with
proportionality.65F
3.40 The committee’s consideration of the bill was published on 27
November 2024 (four sitting days after its introduction).
The bill passed the
Parliament on 29 November 2024 with no apparent amendments in response to the
committee’s concerns.
Committee impact
3.41 The full extent of the committee's impact can sometimes be difficult to
quantify, as it is likely that the committee has an unseen
influence in relation
to the development of legislation before its introduction into the Parliament
and on consideration of future
legislation. In addition, it can routinely be
challenging to track the influence of the committee on legislative amendments
very close consideration of the committee's recommendations and
consequent changes (particularly where amendments are made that reflect
committee's suggestions but the committee's role is not noted). For example, the
committee was concerned that some visa conditions
imposed by the
Amendment (Bridging Visa Conditions) Regulations 2023
were drafted using broad
and imprecise terms, and as such, did not meet the quality of law
Following the
committee’s initial report entry, the regulations were amended,
alleviating the committee’s concerns as
to the preciseness of some visa
conditions, but without acknowledging or referencing the committee’s
comments.67F
3.42 There were other instances, however, where the legislation proponent
explicitly acknowledged that legislative amendments were
in response to
committee’s recommendations. For example, in relation to the National
Disability Insurance Scheme Amendment
(Getting the NDIS Back on Track No. 1)
Bill 2024, the committee recommended that future NDIS rules made for the
purposes of defining
what supports are NDIS supports and what supports are
NDIS supports, contain sufficient flexibility such that where a
support is either not declared to be an NDIS support or is declared
be an NDIS support, the NDIA may nevertheless exercise discretion to
approve the provision of that support through the NDIS if the
participant has
demonstrated a need for the support as a result of their disability.
Subsequently to the tabling of the committee’s
report (and publication of
the committee’s recommendation), the particular provision in the bill was
amended to provide some
flexibility to consider the individual needs of
participants. The Revised Supplementary Explanatory Memorandum accompanying the
referenced the committee's recommendation that the NDIS rules should allow
the NDIA to exercise discretion regarding supports that
are declared to not be
NDIS supports
3.43 More generally, during the reporting period there was specific evidence
that the committee continues to have an impact in relation
to the consideration
of human rights in the legislation making process. For instance, during this
reporting period the committee’s
reports continued to inform
Parliamentarian’s consideration of legislation, evidenced through the
numerous references to the
committee’s reports during parliamentary
debates. For example, in moving to disallow three legislative instruments made
Social Security (Administration) Act
Senator Rice
referred to the committee’s comments regarding those instruments (relating
to cashless welfare), stating:
... There were other significant issues that were raised through the [Compulsory
Income Management] inquiry about these legislative
instruments. These were the
lack of relevant and adequate explanatory material, which restricts the
parliament’s and the public’s
ability to properly scrutinise their
impact, and the failure to address years of documented human rights concerns
that have been
raised by the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human
3.44 The committee’s reports also informed the work of
other parliamentary committees. For example, the Senate Legal and Constitutional
Affairs Legislation Committee referenced the committee’s consideration of
Migration Amendment (Removal and Other Measures) Bill 2024
in its inquiry
report in relation to that bill, including referring the committee’s
recommendations to the Senate for
consideration.71F
3.45 Further, during the reporting period, explanatory materials with respect
to several bills were updated directly in response to
concerns raised by the
committee.72F
For example, the
supplementary explanatory memorandum to the
Migration Amendment (Strengthening
Employer Compliance) Bill 2023
noted that it included proposed government
amendments in response to the committee’s comments in
Report 9 of
Liaison with departments
3.46 The committee resolved on its establishment in the 47
Parliament that its secretariat should, where it considered it appropriate,
engage directly with relevant departments immediately
after the legal adviser
and secretariat have identified minor, technical human rights concerns with
legislation, in an attempt to
resolve the matter before involving the minister
or committee by reporting on the legislation publicly. This is intended to help
departmental officials understand the type of information that should be
included in a statement of compatibility. Further, where
a statement of
compatibility is considered to be inadequate (but where it nonetheless does not
appear that the legislation raises
human rights concerns), the committee
authorised the Committee Secretary to write to departmental officials setting
out the committee’s
expectations for future reference.
3.47 In 2024, the secretariat wrote to departments on 31 occasions in
relation to 33 legislative instruments and 7 bills to provide
content of statements of compatibility. Providing feedback in this manner in
relation to legislation facilitates
the committee's educative function,
providing departments with information to inform future legislative drafting. In
relation to
legislative instruments (and their explanatory materials), this
legislative instruments can often be amended and updated by departmental
officers or other delegates directly.
3.48 For example, the committee wrote to the Department of Infrastructure,
Transport, Regional Development, Communications and the
Arts outlining its
concerns with the quality of the statement of compatibility accompanying the
Jervis Bay Territory Rural Fires Rules 2024
. The committee set out its
expectations regarding statements of compatibility, to which the Department made
an undertaking to consider
the committee’s advice in drafting future
statements of compatibility and brought the committee’s concerns to the
of the Attorney-General’s Department.
Stakeholder engagement
3.49 The committee and its secretariat engaged with a number of stakeholders
during the reporting period. Such engagement allows the
committee to exchange
ideas and promote understanding of the role and work of the committee. For
example, in January 2024, the committee
and secretariat met with the United
Kingdom’s Joint Committee on Human Rights to discuss its inquiry into
Australia’s
human rights framework and the functions and work of both
committees. In August 2024, the committee and secretariat were briefed
Independent National Security Legislation Monitor on their functions, current
projects and recent publications. In October
2024, the committee and secretariat
met with leaders from the Australian Council of Human Rights Authorities, and
representatives
from the Australian Human Rights Commission. The meeting
provided an opportunity for the committee to hear updates from the different
Human Rights Commissioners across all states and territories.
Mr Josh Burns MP
See, the then
Attorney-General’s second reading speech on the
Human Rights
(Parliamentary Scrutiny) Bill 2010
: The Hon. Robert McClelland MP,
Attorney-General,
of Representatives Hansard, 30 September 2010, p. 271
Human Rights (Parliamentary
Scrutiny) Act 2011
Additionally, in September 2023, the
committee was given the function (under
section 243AA
Social Security
(Administration) Act 1999
) to review compulsory enhanced income management
and compulsory income management for compatibility with human rights and report
to the Parliament.
The committee’s
resolution of appointment is available on its
Attorney-General’s
Portfolio Miscellaneous Measures Act 2023
(which finally passed both Houses
on 28 May 2024) expanded membership of the PJCHR (from 10 to 12 members). See
also, Parliamentary
Joint Committee on Human Rights,
of appointment
(as made on 26 July 2022 and amended on 4 July 2024).
The three scrutiny committees
in the Parliament are the Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills;
the Senate Standing
Committee for the Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation
(formerly the Senate Standing Committee on Regulations and Ordinances); and the
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights.
Legislative instruments may be
exempt from disallowance as a result of exemptions in its enabling legislation,
Legislation Act 2003
also provides that certain legislative
instruments are exempt from disallowance (see
section 44).
In the event that the
committee's concerns cannot be resolved before the expiry of this period, the
committee retains the option
to give a 'protective' notice of motion to disallow
the instrument, extending the disallowance period by a further 15 sitting days,
to ensure that the ability of the Parliament to disallow the instrument is not
lost pending the conclusion of the committee's examination.
Absolute rights include: the
right not to be subjected to torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment (including
the prohibition on non-refoulement); the right not to be
subjected to slavery; the right not to be imprisoned for inability to fulfil
contract; the right not to be subject to retrospective criminal laws; and the
right to equal recognition as a person before the
Human Rights
(Parliamentary Scrutiny) Act 2011
See Guidance Note 1,
Expectations for statements of compatibility, available on the committee's
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(11 September 2024) pp. 37–40.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(26 June 2024) p. 1. See also the minor comments in
relation to the Nature Positive Bills (pp. 5–6) and the Commission of
into Antisemitism at Australian Universities Bill 2024 (p. 2).
Each report states that the
committee examines the legislative instruments registered on the Federal
Register of Legislation during
a specified period. Due to the very high volume
of legislative instruments examined by the committee, instruments on which no
substantive
comment is made are not listed in the report itself. All legislative
instruments scrutinised by the committee during the stated period
can be viewed
on the Federal Register of Legislation using its
advanced search function
Ministerial responses are
available on the committee’s
Ben Saul, David Kinley and
Jacqueline Mowbray,
The International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights
(Oxford University Press, 2014).
Such as the Senate Standing
Committees on Community Affairs, Economics, Education and Employment, Legal and
Constitutional Affairs;
the Select Committee on Workforce Australia Employment
Services; and the Joint Committee on Electoral Matters and the Joint Committee
on Intelligence and Security.
The reporting period covers 1
January 2024 to 31 December 2024. The committee’s first scrutiny report of
the reporting period,
, was tabled on 7 February 2024 and its final scrutiny report of
was tabled on 27 November 2024.
Bills included in the list
‘Advice Only Private Bills’ (AOPBs) were treated as bills with no
committee comment for statistical
purposes. There were 14 AOPBs and 120 no
The committee may make a
minor comment in relation to legislation that raises similar or related concerns
to those which the committee
has recently or repeatedly raised, or where the
committee (or secretariat with the authority of the committee) has written to
legislation proponent regarding an inadequate statement of
compatibility.
The committee also indicated,
in relation to 14 private member’s and senator’s bills (8 per cent
of all bills considered),
that the bill appeared to engage human rights and if
the bill did proceed to further stages of debate then it may request further
information. These are treated as a ‘no comment’ for the purposes of
the pie chart below.
(7 February 2024)
reported on legislative
instruments registered between 8 December 2023–8 January 2024, and
(27 November 2024) reported on legislative instruments registered
up to 21 October 2024. This is because legislative instruments
are continuously
being registered on the Federal Register of Legislation and are not reported on
immediately.
This number includes
instruments that impose sanctions on individuals. Where a legislative instrument
imposes sanctions on individuals
who do not appear to be currently within
Australia's jurisdiction, the committee does not comment on those instruments
its broader scrutiny concerns with the human rights compatibility of
the sanctions regime generally. See, for example,
(27 November 2024) p. 8.
From 2012–2022, the
committee examined a total of 2 254 bills and commented on 602 (27 per cent),
and examined more than 18
000 legislative instruments, commenting on 466 (an
average of 3 per cent overall). See further,
Reflections
on the 10th anniversary of the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights
(August 2022).
into Australia’s Human Rights Framework
(30 May 2024) and
into Compulsory Income Management
(2 September 2024).
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 17.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, articles 19 and 20.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 2(3).
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 14(1).
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, article 12.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, articles 2 and 26; International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, article 2(2).
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, article 6, 7, and 8.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 12.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 7; Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 14(2)-(7).
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 9.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 22.
For further information on
the committee’s scrutiny process see Chapter 2, ‘The scrutiny
dialogue model’. By contrast,
in 2023, a human rights analysis of 94 per
cent of new bills was available to inform members of parliament prior to the
legislation.
For further information on
the committee’s scrutiny process see Chapter 2, ‘The scrutiny
dialogue model’.
In contrast, if bills are
referred to a standing or select committee they cannot be considered in a
committee of the whole until
that committee reports, see Senate standing order
115. This does not apply to the consideration of bills by the scrutiny
committees,
such as the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights or the
Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills.
There were four responses
received from various ministers following concluded comments and no further
requests of information.
The committee requested
information from the minister in relation to the
Electoral Legislation Amendment
(Electoral Communications) Bill 2024
Electoral Legislation Amendment
(Electoral Reform) Bill 2024
. The responses were due 11 December 2024 and were
received on 20 January 2025. For an in-depth analysis of the trend of increased
timeliness in ministerial responses from 2012 to 2022, see
Reflections on the
10th anniversary of the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights
See generally Parliamentary
Joint Committee on Human Rights,
into Australia’s Human Rights Framework
(30 May 2024) pp.
See, for example: Paul
Karp, ‘Federal Human Rights Act could help prevent policy failures like
robodebt, parliamentary inquiry
The Guardian,
30 May 2024,
Human Rights Act could help prevent policy failures like robodebt, parliamentary
inquiry says | Australian politics | The
; Andrew Brown,
‘Report backs call for federal human rights act’,
The Canberra
30 May 2024,
backs call for federal human rights act | The Canberra Times | Canberra,
; Olivia Ireland, ‘MPs call for human rights act’,
30 May 2024,
call for human rights act
; Paula Gerber and Melissa Castan, ‘An
inquiry has recommended Australia legislate a Human Rights Act. Here’s why
The Conversation,
31 May 2024,
inquiry has recommended Australia legislate a Human Rights Act. Here’s why
we need one
; Bruce Chen, Julie Debeljak and Pamela Tate, ‘Report finds
“clear need” for an Australian Human Rights Act. What
would it make’?’,
The Conversation,
31 May 2024,
finds 'clear need' for an Australian Human Rights Act. What difference would it
See, for example:
‘Government must seize the moment for a National Human Rights Act’,
Australian Human Rights Act,
30 May 2024,
must seize the moment for a National Human Rights Act
Human Rights Act after inquiry
recommendation’,
Human Rights Law Centre,
30 May 2024,
Human Rights Act
after inquiry recommendation
; ‘A federal Human Rights Act is just
Law Council of Australia,
30 May 2024,
federal Human Rights Act is just right
; ‘Calls Intensify for Govt to
Enact Human Rights Inquiry Suggestions’,
Australian Lawyers Alliance,
30 May 2024,
Intensify for Govt to Enact Human Rights Inquiry Suggestions
‘Statement on the PJCHR’s Report’,
Castan Centre for Human
Rights Law,
30 May 2024,
on the PJCHR's Report
; Daniela Gavshon, ‘Australia Needs a Human
Rights Act’,
Human Rights Watch,
2 June 2024,
Needs a Human Rights Act
See, for example: Amy Tan,
‘A federal Huaman Right Act: Turning over a new leaf on climate
litigation?’,
Australian Public Law,
29 April 2024,
federal Human Rights Act: Turning over a new leaf on climate litigation? —
Australian Public Law
; Wendy Yang, ‘Parliamentary report recommends
federal Human Rights Act’,
Law Society Journal,
4 June 2024,
Parliamentary
report recommends federal Human Rights Act
‘A Successful Free +
Equal Conference in Sydney’,
Law Council of Australia,
Successful Free + Equal Conference in Sydney
The committee undertook a
further two public hearings on 22 January 20215 and 5 February 2025, and tabled
its final report on 12
February 2025.
See, for example,
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights,
Migration Amendment Bill 2024
(20 November 2024) pp. 12-53;
Migration Amendment
(Bridging Visa Conditions) Bill 2023
(7 February 2024) pp. 43-93;
Migration Amendment (Overseas Organ
Transplant Disclosure and Other Measures) Bill 2024
(11 September 2024) pp. 37-40;
Migration Amendment
(Prohibiting Items in Immigration Detention Facilities) Bill 2024
(27 November 2024) pp. 31-52;
Migration Amendment (Removal
and Other Measures) Bill 2024
(17 April 2024) pp. 16-43; Migration Amendment and Other
Legislation (Bridging Visas, Serious Offenders and Other Measures) Bill 2023,
(7 February 2024) pp. 43-93;
Migration Amendment (Bridging Visa
Conditions) Regulations 2023
(7 February 2024) pp. 43-93; Migration Amendment (Bridging Visa
Conditions) Regulations 2024,
(20 November 2024) pp. 12-53; Migration (Critical
Technology – Kinds of Technology) Specification (LIN 24/010) 2024,
(17 April 2024) pp. 44-51; Migration (Code of Behaviour for Public
Interest Criterion 4022) Instrument (LIN 24/031) 2024,
(15 May 2024) pp. 55-65 and
(24 July 2024) pp. 25-44; Migration (Daily Maintenance Amount for
Persons in Detention) Determination (LIN 24/017) 2024,
(21 August 2024) p. 4; Migration (Designated Migration
Law–Visa Condition 8208) Determination (LIN 24/009) 2024,
(17 April 2024) pp. 44-51; Migration (Granting of Contributory
Parent Visas, Parent Visas and Other Family Visas During Financial
2023-2024) Instrument (LIN 24/004) 2024,
(15 May 2024) p. 8;
Migration Amendment (Bridging Visas)
Regulations 2024
(15 May 2024) p. 8.
NZYQ v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs & Anor
HCATrans 154
(8 November 2023);
NZYQ v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship
and Multicultural Affairs
[2023] HCA 37
(28 November 2023). The
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights raised numerous human rights
concerns with legislation introduced
in response to this High Court decision in
the previous reporting period. See Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human
Report 2023
(21 August 2024), pp. 19–21.
ASF17 v Commonwealth of
[2024] HCA.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
Migration Amendment Bill 2024
Migration Amendment
(Removal and Other Measures) Bill 2024
(17 April 2024) pp. 16-43. The Senate Legal and Constitutional
Affairs Legislation Committee also inquired into this bill, reporting
2024. The committee recommended that the bill be passed, with dissenting reports
prepared by Coalition Senators, the Australian
Greens and Senator David Pocock.
See Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee,
Amendment (Removal and Other Measures) Bill 2024
(7 May 2024).
YBFZ v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 40.
On 18 November 2023, the
Migration Amendment (Bridging Visa Conditions) Act 2023
provided for the
granting of bridging visas to non-citizens in the ‘NZYQ-affected cohort
with certain monitoring conditions
placed on them. On 8 December 2023, the
Migration and Other Legislation Amendment (Bridging Visas, Serious Offenders
and Other Measures) Act 2023
commenced, which provided for new and amended
conditions for holders of BVR.
See Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(20 November 2024) pp. 12-53.
See Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
Migration Amendment (Removal and Other Measures) Bill
(17 April 2024) pp. 16-43;
Migration Amendment Bill 2024
Migration Amendment (Bridging Visa Conditions) Regulations 2024,
(20 November 2024) pp. 12-53. The committee concluded on
the latter legislation in
(5 February 2025) pp. 74–150.
See Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
Migration Amendment (Prohibiting Items in Immigration
Detention Facilities) Bill 2024
(27 November 2024) pp. 31-52.
See Parliament Joint
Committee on Human Rights, National Disability Insurance Scheme Amendment
(Getting the NDIS Back on Track No.
1) Bill 2024,
(17 April 2024) p. 5,
(15 May 2024) pp. 24-45 and
(26 June 2024) pp. 15-42; National Disability Insurance Scheme
(Getting the NDIS Back on Track No. 1) (NDIS Supports) Transitional
Rules 2024,
(20 November 2024) pp. 8-9; National Disability Insurance
Scheme (NDIS Worker Screening Law) Amendment Determination 2024,
(11 September 2024) p. 6; National Disability Insurance
Scheme (Old Framework Plans) Determination 2024,
(20 November 2024) p. 9;
Aged Care Bill 2024
(10 October 2024) pp. 19-65 and
(20 November 2024) pp. 55-70.
National Disability
Insurance Scheme Amendment (Getting the NDIS Back on Track No. 1) Bill 2024,
schedule 1, item 14, proposed section
10. To note, on 5 June 2025 government
amendments to this bill were agreed to in the House of Representatives
substituting proposed
section 10 with a revised definition of NDIS support to
provide that a support is an NDIS support if declared as such by the NDIS
The committee’s
concluding comments in Report 5 of 2024 were tabled on 26 June 2024 and 70
amendments to the bill were agreed
to on 22 August 2024. The Revised
Supplementary Explanatory Memorandum accompanying the bill referenced the
committee's recommendation
that the NDIS rules should allow the NDIA to exercise
discretion regarding supports that are declared to not be NDIS supports
See Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights, National Disability
Insurance Scheme (Getting the NDIS Back on Track No. 1) (NDIS
Transitional Rules 2024,
(20 November 2024) pp. 8-9.
With some exceptions in
relation to sexual services, alcohol and unlawful drugs.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
Aged Care Bill 2024
(10 October 2024) pp. 19-65 and
(20 November 2024) pp. 55-70.
See most recently
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights, Quality of Care Amendment
(Restrictive Practices) Principles 2022,
(15 March 2023) pp. 1-23. See also
Other Legislation Amendment (Royal Commission Response No. 1) Bill 2021
Aged Care Legislation Amendment (Royal Commission Response No. 1) Principles
(25 August 2021) pp. 63– 90.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
Aged Care Bill 2024
(10 October 2024) pp. 43-45.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
Aged Care Bill 2024
(10 October 2024) pp. 52-53.
See Parliament Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
Online Safety Amendment (Social Media Minimum Age)
(27 November 2024) pp. 53-69; Online Safety (Basic Online
Safety Expectations) Amendment Determination 2024,
(24 July 2024) p. 8; Online Safety (Designated Internet Services
– Class 1A and Class 1B Material) Industry Standard 2024,
(21 August 2024) pp. 17-43 and
(10 October 2024) pp. 172-211; Online Safety (Relevant
Electronic Services – Class 1A and Class 1B Material) Industry Standard
(21 August 2024) pp. 17-43 and
(10 October 2024) pp. 172-211.
Parliament Joint Committee
on Human Rights,
Online Safety Amendment (Social Media Minimum Age) Bill
(27 November 2024) pp. 53-69.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(29 November 2023) pp. 21, 22 and 34.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(7 February 2024) pp. 61 and 78.
Supplementary Explanatory Memorandum SK118
Social Security
(Administration) (Declared Child Protection State – New South Wales,
Queensland, South Australia and Victoria)
Determination 2023; Social Security
(Administration) (Recognised State or Territory–Northern Territory)
Determination 2023;
and Social Security (Administration) (Specified Income
Management Territory–Northern Territory) Instrument 2023.
Senator Rice,
28 February 2024, p. 665.
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee,
Migration Amendment (Removal
and Other Measures) Bill 2024
(7 May 2024) p. 42.
Updates were made by way of
addendums or supplementary explanatory memorandums. See, for example, National
Disability Insurance
Scheme Amendment (Getting the NDIS Back on Track
No. 1) Bill 2024; National Disability Insurance Scheme Amendment (Getting
Back on Track No. 1) Bill 2024;
Family Law Amendment Bill 2024
Care Bill 2024
Crimes Amendment (Strengthening the Criminal Justice Response to
Sexual Violence) Bill 2024
Migration Amendment
(Strengthening Employer Compliance) Bill 2023
supplementary
statement of compatibility
, pp. 2-18.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (317 MB)
PDF format (462 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter