URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJCHR/2025/35.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:08:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1) 2025; Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 2025 - New and Ongoing Matters [2025] AUPJCHR 35 (2 October 2025)
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1) 2025
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 2025104
ASIO compulsory questioning powers framework and adult questioning matters
Summary of initial assessment
Preliminary international human rights legal advice
Committee’s initial view
Minister's response144
Comments on minister’s response
International human rights legal advice
Committee view
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1)
Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2)
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1)
seeks to amend the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act
to extend, by 18 months, Division 3 of Part III of the Act, which
provides for the compulsory questioning powers framework.
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2)
seeks to amend the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act
• make the compulsory questioning powers framework permanent;
• expand the scope of adult questioning warrants;
• amend the eligibility and termination provisions for prescribed
authorities;
• impose additional reporting requirements to ensure that the
Attorney-General is made aware of any relevant information regarding
the conduct
of questioning under a compulsory questioning warrant;
• require that post-charge questioning occur only before a prescribed
authority who is a retired judge; and
• amend the
Intelligence Services Act 2001
a further review of the compulsory questioning powers framework by the
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and
House of Representatives, 23 July 2025
Children's rights; fair trial; freedom of expression; freedom of movement;
liberty; privacy; rights of persons with disability
committee requested a response from the minister in relation to these bills in
Following the tabling of
Report 4 of 2025
, the Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1) 2025 (ASIO Amendment No. 1
bill) finally passed both Houses
on 4 September 2025. The Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 2025 (ASIO Amendment No. 2
referred to the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and
Security on 27 August 2025.
1.89 The Minister for Home Affairs provided a response to the ASIO Amendment
No. 1 bill on 3 September 2025. As the ASIO Amendment
No. 2 bill is still
before the Parliament, the minister requested and the committee agreed to
receive a response from the minister
in relation to the ASIO Amendment No. 2
bill by 28 November 2025.
ASIO compulsory questioning powers framework and
adult questioning matters
1.90 The Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1)
2025 (ASIO Amendment No. 1 bill) seeks to amend section
34JF of the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
(ASIO Act) to
extend the repeal of Division 3 Part III from 7 September 2025 to 7 March
The effect of this would be
that the compulsory questioning powers framework is extended for an additional
1.91 The Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2)
2025 (ASIO Amendment No. 2 bill) seeks to repeal section
34JF of the ASIO Act,
with the effect that the compulsory questioning powers framework would become
1.92 ASIO’s compulsory questioning powers framework provides that the
Director‑General may apply to the Attorney-General
for a questioning
warrant in order to question a person about certain
Currently, for adults, a
warrant may be issued in relation to an ‘adult questioning
that is, matters
which relate to protecting Australia from
acts of foreign
interference
and politically
motivated violence
(which would
include acts of terrorism, as well as financing terrorism and offences relating
to control orders, preventative detention
orders and continuing detention
The ASIO Amendment No.
2 bill seeks to amend the definition of ‘adult questioning matter’
to expand the matters in which
a warrant may be issued to include: espionage;
sabotage; politically motivated violence; promotion of communal violence;
on Australia’s defence system; acts of foreign interference; or
the protection of Australia’s territorial and border
integrity from
serious threats.
1.93 The Attorney-General may issue a warrant in relation to an adult where
they are satisfied that:
• the person is at least 18 years old;
• there are reasonable grounds for believing that a warrant will
substantially assist the collection of intelligence that is
important in
relation to an adult questioning matter;
• having regard to other methods (if any) of collecting the
intelligence that are likely to be as effective, it is reasonable
circumstances for the warrant to be issued;
• if the warrant is a post‑charge, or post‑confiscation
application, questioning warrant—it is necessary,
for the purposes of
collecting the intelligence, for the warrant to be issued even though the person
has been charged or the confiscation
proceeding has commenced, or that charge or
proceeding is imminent; and
• there is in force under section 34AF a written statement of
procedures to be followed in the exercise of authority under a
questioning
1.94 For children aged between 14 to 18 years of age, a warrant may be issued
in relation to matters that relate to the protection
of Australia from
politically motivated violence.
Different criteria apply in relation to the issuing of a minor questioning
1.95 On receiving notice of a questioning warrant, a subject may contact a
lawyer for legal advice about the warrant, subject to a
number of limitations,
including restrictions on the role of lawyers giving advice to subjects of a
questioning warrant.
questioning warrant may require the subject to appear at a particular time for
questioning, or to appear
immediately.
It may also
authorise that a subject be apprehended and searched in order to ensure that
they comply with the warrant.
subject may be questioned for up to 24 hours, or 40 hours where an interpreter
is being used.
Questioning
warrants may operate for up to 28
and subjects are
prevented from travelling outside Australia during the warrant period without
written permission from the Director‑General,
and may be required to
surrender their travel
1.96 There are a range of offence provisions regarding a failure to answer
questions or the provision of false or misleading
information.
A person subject
to a warrant is not excused from providing information or producing a record or
thing on the basis that it may incriminate
Although anything said or
produced by them is not generally admissible in criminal proceedings against
them (which provides a 'use
immunity'), this immunity does not extend to
information derived from questioning materials (meaning there is no 'derivative
immunity').
1.97 A subject (including a minor) would be prohibited from disclosing
information related to a questioning warrant, including the
fact that the
warrant had itself been issued, as well as being prohibited from disclosing any
operational information associated
with the warrant for a period of two
Summary of initial assessment
Preliminary international human rights legal
Rights to privacy; liberty; freedom of movement; fair trial; freedom of
expression; rights of persons with disability; children’s
1.98 The committee previously commented on the
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill 2020
which introduced the current
compulsory questioning powers framework in
The committee
considered that the compulsory questioning powers framework engaged a
significant number of human rights, including
the rights to privacy, liberty,
freedom of movement, protection of the family, fair trial, freedom of
expression, as well as the
rights of persons with disability and the rights of
1.99 In particular, by compelling a person to provide information, or produce
a thing or record; permitting the search of a person;
permitting a police
officer to enter premises in order to apprehend a person; and prohibiting a
subject from overseas travel in some
circumstances, these measures engage and
limit the right to privacy. The right to privacy prohibits arbitrary and
unlawful interferences
with an individual's privacy, family, correspondence or
This includes a
requirement that the state does not arbitrarily interfere with a person's
private and home life. A private life is
linked to notions of personal autonomy
and human dignity. It includes the idea that individuals should have an area of
development; a 'private sphere' free from government intervention and
excessive unsolicited intervention by others. Further, the
right to privacy also
includes the right to personal autonomy and physical integrity.
1.100 By providing for the physical apprehension of an individual in relation
to a questioning warrant, and effectively prohibiting
a person from leaving
until the questioning is complete, the measure engages and may limit the rights
to liberty and freedom of movement.
The right to liberty prohibits the arbitrary
and unlawful deprivation of
The notion of
'arbitrariness' includes elements of inappropriateness, injustice and lack of
predictability. Accordingly, any detention
must be lawful as well as reasonable,
necessary and proportionate in all of the circumstances. The right to freedom of
movement includes
the right to freely move within a
1.101 In limiting the ability of a person who is the subject of a warrant
(which may or may not have been issued) to leave Australia,
this measure engages
and limits the right to freedom of movement. For persons with family members
overseas, restricting their ability
to leave the country may also engage and
limit the right to protection of the family. The right to respect for the family
the state not to arbitrarily or unlawfully interfere in family life and
to adopt measures to protect the
An important element of
protection of the family is to ensure family members are not involuntarily
separated from one another.
1.102 Abrogating the privilege against self-incrimination, allowing
information derived from the questioning to be used against the
evidence, and allowing the information to be provided to the prosecution in
certain circumstances, engages and appears
to limit the right to a fair
The right to a fair
trial provides that in the determination of any criminal charge against a
person, that person shall be entitled
to certain minimum guarantees, including
that they must not be compelled to testify against
themselves.
Further, limiting
the role of lawyers giving advice to the subjects of a questioning warrant,
where a questioning warrant has been
issued post-charge (or questioning takes
place post-charge), engages and limits the right to a fair trial, which provides
person should be able to be represented by a lawyer of their
1.103 Additionally, the secrecy provisions under the framework, which limit
the capacity of persons to communicate with others that
they have been
apprehended and questioned in relation to a warrant, or to discuss the fact that
a warrant has been issued, engage
and limit the right to freedom of expression.
The right to freedom of expression includes the freedom to seek, receive and
information and ideas of all kinds, either orally, in writing or print,
or through any other media of an individual's
Further, it is not
clear that subjects who are particularly vulnerable would be able to seek
assistance in relation to the issue
of a warrant, or after the fact. While
children will be able to disclose to their parents, guardian or sibling that
they are the
subject of a warrant, there does not appear to be any provision for
other vulnerable persons, such as persons with cognitive impairment,
to contact an advocate or other specialist representative in relation to the
1.104 As the compulsory questioning warrant framework applies to children it
engages and may limit the same human rights noted above
in relation to adult
questioning warrants. Children have special rights under international human
rights law taking into account
their particular
vulnerabilities.
international human rights law and Australian criminal law recognise that
children have different levels of emotional, mental
and intellectual maturity
than adults, and so are less culpable for their
The detention of a
child, for example, should only be used as a measure of last resort, and for the
shortest appropriate period of
Further, every child
deprived of liberty has the right to maintain contact with their family, and
this should only be limited in
exceptional circumstances and in a manner which
is clearly described in law and is not left to the discretion of
authorities.
In addition,
Australia is required to ensure that, in all actions concerning children, the
best interests of the child shall be a
primary consideration. That is, a child's
best interests are not just one consideration to be taken into account among
other considerations.
1.105 These rights may be permissibly limited, but only where a limitation
seeks to achieve a legitimate objective, is rationally
connected to that
objective, and is proportionate.
Committee’s initial view
1.106 The committee noted that by expanding the Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation (ASIO) adult questioning matters and
extending and
ultimately making permanent the compulsory questioning powers framework, the
measures engage and limit multiple human
rights, including the rights to
liberty, freedom of movement, privacy, fair trial and freedom of expression, as
well as the rights
of the child and the rights of persons with disability.
1.107 The committee noted that it previously considered ASIO’s
compulsory questioning powers framework when the powers were
first introduced in
. At that time, the committee considered the framework engaged a
significant number of human rights and that, while there were important
safeguards in relation to a number of the measures, questions remained as to
whether the safeguards were sufficient such that the
measures would, in all
instances, constitute a proportionate limitation on various rights.
1.108 The committee noted that the human rights concerns previously raised in
relation to the compulsory questioning powers framework
remain relevant and are
likely exacerbated by the measures in these bills. The committee therefore
sought the minister's advice in
relation to:
(a) the necessity of extending the sunsetting of, and ultimately repealing,
section 34JF of the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act
(ASIO Act) and therefore making permanent the compulsory questioning
powers framework;
(b) how many warrants have been issued under the compulsory questioning
powers framework and, in such instances, were there other
rights-restrictive ASIO powers that could have been used instead;
(c) the impact of using the compulsory questioning powers on protecting
Australia’s national security;
(d) whether there is a heightened national security risk since the compulsory
questioning powers framework was first introduced;
(e) why it is considered necessary for additional matters to be added to the
definition of ‘adult questioning matters’,
and specifically why it
is considered necessary to align the proposed definition with the definition of
‘security’ in
the ASIO Act;
(f) what is meant by the term ‘the protection of Australia’s
territorial and border integrity from serious threats’
and why it is not
defined in the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No.
(g) given the extent of interference with human rights that being subject to
an adult questioning warrant entails, how the breadth
of matters proposed to be
included in ‘adult questioning matters’ is considered proportionate.
1.109 The full initial
analysis is set out in
1.110 The minister advised:
In Report 4 of 2025, the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights (the
Committee) sought further information from the Minister
in relation to the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1) 2025 (the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2)
(Bill 2). In particular, the Committee sought the Minister’s advice
on the necessity of extending the sunsetting period applying
to Division 3 of
Part III of the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
(ASIO Act).
The Bill was introduced into the House of Representatives on 23 July 2025 and
was subsequently referred to the Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Intelligence
and Security (PJCIS) for review and report pursuant to subparagraph 29(1)(b)(i)
Intelligence Services Act 2001
. The Bill was introduced alongside
Bill 2, which contains more detailed reforms to the compulsory questioning
framework and was also
referred to the PJCIS for review and report.
The Bill is currently before the Senate, awaiting debate. The Bill would, if
passed and enacted, amend the ASIO Act to extend the
operation of the Australian
Security Intelligence Organisation’s (ASIO) compulsory questioning
framework in Division 3 of Part
III of the ASIO Act, for a further 18 months
from 7 September 2025 to 7 March 2027.
The Government is seeking to pass the Bill ahead of the current 7 September
2025 sunsetting date. As a result, this response is focused
Committee’s questions in relation to the Bill to support the
Committee’s consideration of the Bill prior to debate.
A further response to the Committee’s questions on Bill 2 and the
broader framework will be provided separately. Bill 2 is currently
House of Representatives and is the subject of review by the PJCIS.
The necessity of extending the sunsetting of section 34JF of the ASIO
It is necessary to extend the imminent sunsetting date for ASIO’s
compulsory questioning framework, to ensure that ASIO continues
to have access
to its compulsory questioning powers, while the PJCIS and Parliament consider
the proposed amendments contained in
Bill 2 and the operation and effectiveness
of the framework more broadly. This will assist to ensure that ASIO can continue
on its mission to protect Australia and Australians from threats to
ASIO’s role is to identify and investigate threats to security,
wherever they arise, and to provide advice to protect Australia,
its people and
its interests. Security threats, including espionage, politically motivated
violence and acts of foreign interference
are among ASIO’s principal
security concerns, and a dynamic security environment is presenting an
unprecedented number of challenges,
and an unprecedented cumulative level of
potential harm.
The framework provides ASIO with a necessary tool for investigating the
significant security threats confronting Australia, in particular
intelligence is peculiarly within the knowledge of the person being questioned.
Compulsory questioning powers have proven
valuable, yielding high-value
intelligence relevant to security over the years, particularly in circumstances
where ASIO’s
other powers were not appropriate.
Extending the sunsetting date by 18 months will ensure that the PJCIS and the
Parliament have sufficient time to consider:
• the proposed amendments to ASIO’s compulsory questioning
framework contained in Bill 2
• the operation and effectiveness of ASIO’s compulsory
questioning framework more broadly, noting that the PJCIS commenced
a review of
the framework on 7 September 2023, however that review lapsed at the dissolution
of the House of Representatives on 28
March 2025, prior to the 2025 Federal
Election, and
• a request from the Minister, that the PJCIS consider the legislated
thresholds applying to ASIO’s questioning framework—including
whether a statutory requirement to assess necessity and proportionality in the
issuing criteria for questioning warrants should be
implemented as a further
safeguard, noting the proactive oversight of the powers by the Inspector-General
of Intelligence and Security
(IGIS) and the requirements contained in the
Guidelines to be observed by ASIO in the
performance of its functions
and exercise of its powers
(Minister’s Guidelines), issued under
section 8A of the ASIO Act.
It is also appropriate that ASIO’s compulsory questioning framework be
continued in force, while the PJCIS and Parliament consider
As noted above, ASIO’s compulsory questioning powers are a necessary
and important tool to enable ASIO to collect intelligence
concerning espionage,
foreign interference and politically motivated violence. These powers are also
subject to strict legal controls
and safeguards, which have ensured—and
which would continue to ensure—that these powers are used in a targeted
and judicious
ASIO has used its compulsory questioning powers 19 times since they were
introduced in 2003, reflecting that these are carefully targeted
powers, with
bespoke utility, and the safeguards that apply to the use of such warrants, and
to ASIO’s special powers more
broadly, including:
• When considering whether to request a questioning warrant, and when
exercising the authority of such warrants, the Director-General
of Security and
ASIO are required to comply with the information collection principles set out
in the Minister’s Guidelines.
The Minister’s Guidelines were most
recently re-issued on 4 March 2025 by the then Attorney-General, the Hon Mark
MP, and require that, among other
any means used for obtaining and analysing information must be
appropriate and proportionate to the gravity of the threat posed and
likelihood of its occurrence, including by having regard to potential impacts on
other parties
inquiries and investigations into individuals and groups must be
undertaken using as little intrusion into the privacy of affected
individuals as
is reasonably required, consistent with the performance of ASIO’s
functions, and
where possible, the least intrusive techniques or methods for
collecting information should be used before more intrusive techniques
• The Attorney-General may only issue questioning warrants if satisfied
that, among other things, there are reasonable grounds
for believing that the
warrant will substantially assist the collection of intelligence that is
important in relation to the questioning
matter, and having regard to other
methods (if any) of collecting the intelligence that are likely to be as
effective, it is reasonable
in all the circumstances for the warrant to be
Since its introduction, the framework has been subject to a number of
parliamentary and independent
leading the Parliament
to extend the sunset date five times. The outcomes of these reviews over the
past 20 years demonstrate a consistent
assessment that ASIO’s compulsory
questioning framework remains necessary and provides ASIO with a vital tool for
investigating
security threats to Australia.
An extended framework would continue to be subject to extensive safeguards,
oversight mechanisms and accountability measures that
strike a sound balance
between the need for ASIO to be able to compel subjects to participate in
questioning, with the protection
of the human rights of those subjects. This
includes the following:
• All questioning under a warrant is overseen by an independent
prescribed authority who can make directions during questioning
to ensure it is
conducted appropriately and humanely. The framework also expressly provides that
an official from the IGIS may be
present during questioning.
• The subject of the warrant has the right to contact a lawyer and to
have a lawyer present during questioning.
• The Attorney-General can only issue a questioning warrant in respect
of a minor if satisfied that there are reasonable grounds
for believing the
minor has likely engaged in, is likely engaged or is likely to engage in
activities prejudicial to the protection
of, and of the people of, the
Commonwealth from politically motivated violence, and must also consider the
best interests of the
minor as a primary consideration. Minors also have the
right to contact a minor’s representative, being a parent or guardian
the subject, or another person who is able to represent their interests.
• The subject of a warrant has the right to make a complaint in
relation to ASIO, the Australian Federal Police (AFP) or state
and territory
police at any point, and a right to seek a remedy from a federal court in
relation to the warrant or treatment under
the warrant.
• There are limitations around the use and disclosure of questioning
material, including an obligation on the prescribed authority
directions necessary to uphold the subject’s fair trial and safety, and
the Court’s power to consider fair
trial and the interests of justice.
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation (Statement of
Procedures) Instrument 2025
is a written document prepared by the
Director-General and approved by the Attorney-General under section 34AF of the
ASIO Act that
is to be followed in the exercise of authority under a questioning
warrant. This includes arrangements for liaison with the AFP and
particulars of the conduct of questioning, and provisions to ensure the health
and welfare of the subject during the questioning
Extending the sunset date of the framework by 18 months will ensure the PJCIS
and Parliament has sufficient time to consider the proposed
ASIO’s compulsory questioning framework contained in Bill 2. It would also
provide the PJCIS with the opportunity
to continue to consider issues that were
before the PJCIS in its previous 2023 review, and the broader operation and
effectiveness
of the framework. Extending the sunset date is appropriate, to
ensure that ASIO maintains its existing powers, in the current more
diverse and degraded security environment, and subject to the existing
safeguards, while the Parliament considers these
On 28 August 2025, the PJCIS presented its advisory report on the Bill to
Parliament and recommended that the Bill be passed as soon
as practicable. The
PJCIS also observed that the 18-month extension of sunsetting proposed in the
Bill would allow the PJCIS to complete
its in-depth review of ASIO’s
compulsory questioning powers, drawing on evidence given in the lapsed review
and inviting new
evidence to its inquiry into Bill 2.
Comments on minister’s response
International human rights legal
1.111 As to the necessity of the measure and therefore whether it seeks a
legitimate objective, the minister stated that it is necessary
to extend the
sunsetting date by 18 months to ensure that the PJCIS and the Parliament have
sufficient time to consider the proposed
amendments in ASIO Amendment No. 2
bill, the operation and effectiveness of the compulsory question framework more
broadly and a
request from the minister that the PJCIS consider the legislated
thresholds applying to the framework. The minister further stated
that ASIO has
used its compulsory questioning powers 19 times since they were introduced in
1.112 The additional information provided is useful to consider the context
in which the compulsory questioning powers are being used.
Nevertheless, it
remains unclear whether other less rights-restricting powers could be used
instead of the compulsory questioning
powers and what impact the questioning
powers have had on protecting Australia’s national security.
1.113 While it may be desirable to extend the current operation of the
framework by 18 months while further reviews are underway,
as noted in the
minister’s response, numerous reviews have been undertaken since 2003 when
the powers were first introduced.
It remains unclear whether there is a
heightened national security risk since these powers were first introduced and
therefore whether
extending the operation of the current framework for a further
18 months addresses an issue of public or social concern that is pressing
substantial enough to warrant limiting multiple human rights.
1.114 The minister also provided useful information in relation to the
various safeguards. Nevertheless, as set out in the preliminary
analysis, it
remains unclear whether these safeguards will be sufficient in all instances.
Committee view
1.115 The committee thanks the minister for this
1.116 The committee notes the minister’s advice that the
Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1) 2025
seeks to amend
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
to extend, by
18 months, ASIO’s compulsory questioning powers framework in order to
ensure that the Parliamentary Joint Committee
on Intelligence and Security can
inquire into the bill and for Parliament to further consider the proposed
amendments in the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill
(No. 2) 2025
1.117 The committee notes that the minister has provided useful information
as to the number of times the compulsory questioning powers
have been used since
first introduced in 2003. However, the committee retains its concerns as to the
necessity of extending the framework,
noting that the measures engage and limit
multiple human rights, including the rights to liberty, freedom of movement,
trial and freedom of expression, as well as the rights of the
child and the rights of persons with disability.
1.118 The committee considers further information is still required to assess
the compatibility of the measures with these rights,
and awaits the further
response from the minister in relation to:
(a) the necessity of repealing section 34JF of the
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
(ASIO Act) and therefore making permanent
the compulsory questioning powers framework;
(b) in instances where compulsory questioning warrants were issued, whether
there were other less rights-restrictive ASIO powers that
could have been used
(c) the impact of using the compulsory questioning powers on protecting
Australia’s national security;
(d) whether there is a heightened national security risk since the compulsory
questioning powers framework was first introduced;
(e) why it is considered necessary for additional matters to be added to the
definition of ‘adult questioning matters’,
and specifically why it
is considered necessary to align the proposed definition with the definition of
‘security’ in
the ASIO Act;
(f) what is meant by the term ‘the protection of Australia’s
territorial and border integrity from serious threats’
and why it is not
defined in the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No.
(g) given the extent of interference with human rights that being subject to
an adult questioning warrant entails, how the breadth
of matters proposed to be
included in ‘adult questioning matters’ is considered
proportionate.
This entry can be cited as:
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights,
Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1) 2025
Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 2025
Report 4 of 2025
AUPJCHR 35.
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights,
Report 4 of 2025
(27 August 2025), pp. 35-47.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1) 2025
, schedule 1, item 1.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 2025
, schedule 1, item 1.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
section 34B.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
section 34A.
Offences related to
espionage are set out at Part 5.2 of the
Criminal Code Act 1995
Offences relating to foreign
interference are set out in Division 92 of the
Criminal Code Act
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
Offences related to
terrorism are set out at Part 5.3 of the
Criminal Code Act 1995
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 2025
, schedule 1, item 3,
proposed section 34A.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
section 34BA.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
section 34BB.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
subsection 34BB(1):
the Attorney-General
may issue a warrant where satisfied that the person is at least 14 years old;
there are reasonable grounds for
believing that the person has likely engaged
in, is likely engaged in, or is likely to engage in activities prejudicial to
the protection
of Australia from politically motivated violence; there are
reasonable grounds for believing that the warrant will substantially
the collection of intelligence that is important in relation to a minor
questioning matter; and having regard to other
methods (if any) of collecting
the intelligence that are likely to be as effective, it is reasonable in all the
circumstances for
the warrant to be issued.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
section 34F:
for example, if the
prescribed authority is satisfied that an adult subject has had reasonable
opportunity to contact a lawyer, and
no lawyer is present during questioning,
they may prevent the subject from contacting a lawyer at all; a subject may be
from contacting an alternative lawyer; and a subject may be prevented
from contacting a particular lawyer on certain grounds. Further,
lawyer’s role during questioning is also restricted in that they cannot
intervene in questioning or request a break in questioning
except to request
clarification of an ambiguous question or provide advice on the subject and may
be removed from the place of questioning
if their conduct is considered unduly
disruptive.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
subsection 34BD(1).
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
subsection 34BE(2)
section 34CC.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
subsections 34DJ(5)
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
subsection 34BF(4).
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
sections 34GA
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
section 34GD.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
subsection 34GD(5).
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
subsection 34GD(6).
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
section 34GF.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(17 June 2020) pp. 32-68;
(18 August 2020) pp. 1-114.
The committee also raised
concerns with respect to the right to humane treatment in detention and the
prohibition against torture
or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment and
punishment. Since then, the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation
of Procedures) Instrument 2020 was registered and now replaced by the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation (Statement of
Procedures)
Instrument 2025, which includes safeguards that go towards providing for the
humane treatment of people subject to questioning
warrants. See, for example,
subsections 9(1)
which provide that the manner of
questioning must be humane and courteous, that people be offered breaks in
questioning after every
4 hours of continuous questioning for adults and
requirements for the health and welfare of people while in custody. If
questioning
were to occur in accordance with the statement of procedures, it
appears likely that the measures would not be incompatible with
the right to
humane treatment in detention and the prohibition against torture or cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment and punishment.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 17.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 9.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 12.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, articles 17 and 23; International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, article 10.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 14;
Convention on the Rights of the Child
article 40.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 14;
Convention on the Rights of the Child
article 40.
UN Human Rights Committee,
General Comment No. 32, Article 14: Right to equality before courts and
tribunals and right to fair trial
(2007) [37].
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 19(2).
UN Human Rights Committee,
General Comment No. 17: Article 24
(1989) [1].
UN General Assembly,
United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile
Justice (The Beijing Rules)
, UNGA Res. 40/33 (1985).
UN Committee on the Rights
of the Child,
General Comment No. 24 on children’s rights in the child
justice system
(2019) [85].
UN Committee on the Rights
of the Child,
General Comment No. 24 on children’s rights in the child
justice system
(2019) [94].
UN Committee on the Rights
of the Child,
General Comment No. 14 on the right of the child to have his or
her best interests taken as a primary consideration
(2013); see also
, UN Committee on the Rights of the Child Communication No. 3/2016
(2018) [11.8].
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
Report 4 of 2025
(27 August 2025), pp.
The minister's response to
the committee's inquiries was received on 3 September 2025. This is an extract
of the response.
Guidelines, paragraph 3.4.
Subsections 34BA(1) and
The Parliamentary Joint
Committee on ASIO, ASIS and DSD’s (PJCAAD) and the Senate Legal and
Constitutional References Committee’s
reviews of the
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Legislation Amendment (Terrorism) Bill 2002
PJCAAD’s review pursuant to paragraph 29(1)(bb) of the
Intelligence
Services Act 2001
(IS Act); the former Independent National Security
Legislation Monitor (INSLM) Mr Brett Walker SC, in his 2011 and 2012 Annual
the PJCIS and the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights, in the
context of their review of the
Counter-Terrorism Legislation Amendment (Foreign
Fighters) Bill 2014
; the former INSLM the Hon Roger Gyles AO QC, in his report
on Certain Questioning and Detention Powers in Relation to Terrorism;
PJCIS’ review pursuant to paragraph 29(1)(bb) of the IS Act; the
PJCIS’ review of the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation
Amendment Bill 2020
; and the 2023 PJCIS’ review pursuant to paragraph
29(1)(ce) of the IS Act. This review lapsed with the prorogation of Parliament
in March 2025.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (228 KB)
PDF format (152 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter