URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBRp/2016/55.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:13:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Tax and Superannuation Laws Amendment (2016 Measures No 2) Bill 2016 [2016] AUSStaCSBRp 55 (9 November 2016)
Tax and Superannuation Laws Amendment (2016 Measures No. 2) Bill 2016
Delegation of legislative power—Commissioner of Taxation’s remedial power
Tax and Superannuation Laws Amendment (2016 Measures
No. 2) Bill 2016
This bill amends various Acts relating to taxation, superannuation and
• establish a remedial power for the Commissioner of Taxation in
relation to certain unforeseen or unintended outcomes in taxation
superannuation laws;
• allow primary producers to access income tax averaging ten income
years after choosing to opt out, instead of that choice
being permanent;
• provide relief from the luxury car tax to certain public
institutions that import or acquire luxury cars for the sole purpose
display; and
• make a number of minor amendments
House of Representatives on 14 September 2016
This bill is identical to a bill introduced in the previous
The committee dealt with this bill in
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016
Minister responded to the committee’s comments in a letter received on
27 October 2016. A copy of the letter is attached
to this report.
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
Delegation of legislative power—Commissioner of
Taxation’s remedial power
Schedule 1 to this bill proposes to confer on the Commissioner of Taxation a
new and significant ‘remedial power’ to modify,
by a disallowable
legislative instrument, the operation of a taxation law. Although the remedial
power does not empower the Commissioner
to make a textual amendment to the
relevant taxation law, it is akin to a so-called Henry VIII law as it enables a
legislative instrument
to modify the operation of primary legislation. As
applied, the power therefore clearly enables the content of the law to be
The remedial power (see schedule 1, item 3, proposed section 370-5) gives the
Commissioner a discretion to determine a modification
of the operation of a
taxation law where:
• the ‘modification is not is not inconsistent with the intended
purpose or object of the provision’; and
• the 'Commissioner considers the modification to be reasonable, having
regard to: (i) the intended purpose or object of the
provision; and (ii) whether
the cost of complying with the provision is disproportionate to that intended
purpose or object’;
• the Commissioner is advised, by a specified person, that ‘any
impact of the modification on the Commonwealth budget
negligible’.
The remedial power is an extraordinary power. It confers legislative power on
an unelected official to modify the operation of significant
legislation. Although it only arises in the limited circumstances outlined
above, it nevertheless has a very broad application
as it applies to any
taxation law which is defined broadly in the
Income Tax Assessment Act
to include an Act or parts of an Act of which the Commissioner has the
general administration (and legislative instruments made under
such Acts).
The explanatory materials provide a detailed and useful justification for the
introduction of the remedial power. The following features
of the approach
taken, or the context in which the power will be exercised, were given
• Proposed subsection 370-5(4) provides that an entity must treat a
modification made under the power as not applying to it
and any other entity if
the modification would produce a result for the first entity that is ‘less
favourable’ than would
have been the case absent the modification (see
explanatory memorandum, pp 11 and 25–28). Furthermore, proposed subsection
370-5(5) provides that a determination made under the remedial power will not
apply to an entity where it would affect a right or
liability of that entity
under an order made by a court before the commencement of the determination.
(explanatory memorandum, p.
• The ‘jurisdictional limits’ on the exercise of the
remedial power will be subject to judicial review (as is the
case with any
statutory power to make a legislative instrument).
Legislation Act 2003
(the LA) provides, in
effect, that before exercising the power the Commissioner must be satisfied that
any appropriate and reasonably
practicable consultation has been undertaken (see
explanatory memorandum, pp 11 and 23–24).
• The explanatory memorandum (at p. 11) states that the remedial power
will, in practice, only be used as a last resort, where
other options (such as
applying a purposive approach or the Commissioner’s general powers of
administration) cannot provide
a suitable solution. Further, in some cases it
may be more appropriate for the Commissioner to seek a Parliamentary amendment
than to use the power.
• The explanatory materials also emphasise that a determination is, as
a disallowable instrument, subject to parliamentary accountability
and that the
ordinary rules in the LA apply. Thus, for example, any instrument made under
this power would not be enforceable if
it had not been registered on the Federal
Register of Legislation.
• Item 4 of Schedule 1 confers a discretionary power on the Minister to
seek a review of the remedial power provisions within
3–5 years of their
commencement. If such a review is commissioned it must be tabled in each House
of Parliament within 15 sitting
days of the Minister receiving the report.
The explanatory memorandum also sets out in detail the reasons why the
remedial power is considered necessary (see p. 14). In principle,
the committee
agrees that the complexity of taxation laws may give rise to unintended
outcomes. It is also accepted that where the
only response available is to amend
the primary legislation this may (properly) involve a lengthy process. In light
of these reasons
and points offered in justification of the overall approach
noted above, the committee considers that the remedial power may have
potential to be a plausible policy response to a practical problem encountered
in the administration of taxation laws.
Nevertheless the committee has a number of questions and concerns.
First, the committee questions whether the full breadth of the power is
necessary. The explanatory materials do not consider whether
it would be
possible to limit the application of the remedial power to those areas of
taxation law and administration where the problem
of unintended consequences
regularly arises. Relatedly, from a scrutiny perspective, it would be preferable
if the discretion to
invoke the remedial power is limited or structured by the
inclusion of legislative guidance as to the circumstances where parliamentary
amendment of the primary legislation will be required (rather than use of the
remedial power). The explanatory memorandum acknowledges
(at p. 11) that there
will be some circumstances where change to primary legislation is more
appropriate but it does not expressly
address whether the bill could include
guidance about those circumstances. Nor are examples that illustrate such
circumstances provided.
The committee is concerned that there is nothing in the
proposed amendments to ensure that the remedial power will be used in practice
to complement rather than substitute ordinary processes to modify primary
legislation.
The committee seeks the Assistant Treasurer’s advice in
relation to the above points.
Minister's response - extract
The Committee noted that the Bill amends various Acts relating to taxation,
superannuation and grants to:
• establish a remedial power for the Commissioner of Taxation (the
Commissioner) in relation to certain unforeseen or unintended
outcomes in
taxation and superannuation Jaws;
• allow primary producers to access income tax averaging ten income
years after choosing to opt out, instead of that choice
being permanent;
• provide relief from the luxury car tax to certain public institutions
that import or acquire luxury cars for the sole purpose
of public displays;
• make a number of minor amendments.
Schedule l to the Bill proposes to confer on the Commissioner of Taxation a
remedial power to modify, by disallowable legislative
instrument, the operation
of a taxation law. The Committee sought my advice on six areas of the Bill.
Breadth of power
The Committee queried whether the full breadth of the power is necessary and
whether the remedial power could be limited to those
areas of the law where
unintended consequences generally arise. The Committee also queries whether the
power should provide guidance
as to when parliamentary amendment would be more
appropriate. The Committee also was concerned that there appeared nothing in the
proposed amendment to ensure that the remedial power will be used in practice to
complement rather than substitute ordinary processes
to modify primary
legislation.
The proposed remedial power should apply to any taxation or superannuation
law administered by the Commissioner as it is not known
where unintended
consequences would arise. As a result, the proposed legislation is subject to
strict limitations:
• the modification must not be inconsistent with the intended purpose
or object of the provision;
• the modification must be considered reasonable, having regard to both
the intended purpose or object of the relevant provision
and whether the costs
of complying with the provision are disproportionate to achieving the intended
purpose or object; and
• the Secretary of the Department of the Treasury, Secretary of the
Department of Finance or an authorised APS employee of either
department advises
the Commissioner that any impact on the Commonwealth budget would be
negligible.
In addition, a modification will not apply to an entity if it would produce a
less favourable outcome for the entity.
As unintended outcomes could arise from across the full range of taxation
laws, the remedial power applies generally to all taxation
law administered by
the Commissioner. Limiting the remedial power to a specific set of taxation laws
only would reduce the coverage
of the power and its ability to resolve
unintended issues.
There will be situations where the remedial power would not be appropriate to
use to resolve an issue. Systemic problems and issues
that evoke differing views
would be more appropriately resolved through primary law change (as paragraphs
1.43-1.44 of the Explanatory
Memorandum foreshadow).
Prior to the Commissioner contemplating using this proposed power, he would
have had to exhaust his current powers, such as, applying
a purposive approach
or his general powers of administration. Subsequent to this process, the
Commissioner could only use the proposed
powers if addressing the problem met
the strict limitations listed above.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Minister for this response.
The committee notes the Minister’s advice that unintended consequences
could arise across the full range of taxation laws, and
as such, it is necessary
that the proposed remedial power should apply to any taxation or superannuation
law administered by the
Commissioner.
The committee notes that the Minister’s response did not directly
address the committee’s query as to whether the bill
could include
guidance as to the type of circumstances in which it would be more appropriate
to seek changes to the primary legislation
rather than using the remedial power.
It also gave no examples that could illustrate when it would be more appropriate
to amend the
primary legislation, referring back to the explanatory memorandum
and simply stating ‘[s]ystemic problems and issues that evoke
views would be more appropriately resolved through primary law
In light of the Minister’s reply, the committee remains concerned
that the full breadth of the remedial power may not be necessary
and that there
is scope for further legislative guidance as to the use of these powers.
The committee draws its concerns to the attention of Senators and leaves
the appropriateness of the proposed approach to the breadth
Commissioner’s remedial power to amend the operation of a taxation law to
the consideration of the Senate as a whole.
The committee also draws this matter to the attention of the Senate
Standing Committee on Regulations and Ordinances for information.
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
Second, although it is accepted that the satisfaction of the jurisdictional
limits (proposed subsection 370-5(1)) for the making of
a determination under
the remedial power could be determined in judicial review proceedings, the
committee notes that the question
of the reasonableness of the modification is a
question which would only be reviewable on limited grounds (that is, courts
not be able to review the merits of these determinations).
context, the committee seeks the Minister’s advice as to whether a breach
of the budget notification requirement (in
proposed paragraph 370-5(1)(c)) is
intended to result in the invalidity of the determination.
Minister's response - extract
Budget notification
The Committee sought advice as to whether a breach of the budget notification
requirement (in proposed paragraph 370-5(1)(c) is intended
to result in the
invalidity of the determination.
Proposed paragraph 370-5(1)(c) provides that the Commissioner can only create
a legislative instrument modifying the operation of
a taxation law if he had
been advised by the Secretary of the Department of the Treasury or the Finance
Secretary that any impact
of the modification on the Commonwealth budget would
be negligible.
It follows that if the Commissioner acts without this advice, the exercise of
the power would be invalid. However, if the Commissioner
acts on advice given
under the paragraph that is for some reason incorrect, the incorrectness of the
advice would not invalidate
and is not intended to invalidate the exercise of
Committee response
The committee thanks the Minister for this response which confirms that the
exercise of the remedial modification power would be invalid
if the Commissioner
acts without advice that any impact of the modification on the Commonwealth
budget would be negligible.
The committee requests that the key information be included in the
explanatory memorandum, noting the importance of these documents
as a point of
access to understanding the law and, if needed, as extrinsic material to assist
with interpretation (see
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act
The committee reiterates the fact that the question of the reasonableness
of any modification to a taxation law made by the Commissioner
proposed remedial power would only be reviewable on limited grounds (that is,
courts would not be able to review the merits
of these modifications). The
committee draws this issue to the attention of Senators and makes no further
comment in relation to
this matter.
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
Third, it is noted that the ‘less favourable result’ test (see
proposed subsection 370-5(4)) involves some complexity
and may generate
uncertainty in its application. The committee recognises (and welcomes) the need
to ensure that changes to the operation
of taxation laws made by use of this
extraordinary remedial power do not adversely affect taxpayers. The committee
also acknowledges
the detailed explanation as to the rationale for adopting the
‘less favourable result’ test outlined in the explanatory
(see pp 25–28).
However, the committee seeks the Minister’s
advice as to whether uncertainty in the application of the remedial power,
the ‘less favourable result’ test, may be considered to
negate any potential benefits of the proposed regime (for example,
rationale for the proposed power is to increase certainty in the administration
of taxation laws—see explanatory
memorandum, p. 14).
Minister's response - extract
'Less favourable result' test
The Committee sought advice as to whether uncertainty in the application of
the remedial power, including the 'less favourable result'
test, may be
considered to negate any potential benefits of the proposed regime.
On balance, the power is expected to create benefits for taxpayers that
outweigh any costs of learning and understanding as well as
the alternative of
over or under complying with unintended tax outcomes.
The remedial power itself will require some effort to learn and understand,
as will any modifications resulting from the use of the
proposed power. While a
modification to the operation of the law could create some complexity, that
would need to be weighed up against
the uncertainty of complying with an
unintended provision, or by applying the provision as intended and potentially
facing the consequences
of failing to comply with the law.
Moreover, in circumstances where the less favourable test created onerous
requirements on an entity to assess the initial outcomes
of a modification on
itself, as well as complicated consequential impacts, the remedial power would
most likely not be appropriate
Committee response
The committee thanks the Minister for this response.
The committee notes the Minister’s advice that, on balance, the power
is expected to create benefits for taxpayers that outweigh
any potential
uncertainty.
The committee requests that the key information be included in the
explanatory memorandum, noting the importance of these documents
as a point of
access to understanding the law and, if needed, as extrinsic material to assist
with interpretation (see
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act
In light of the explanation provided, the committee leaves the
appropriateness of the proposed approach relating to the application
‘less favourable result’ test to the consideration of the Senate as
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
Fourth, although the LA does include
consultation
requirements, the committee would be assisted by more information about what
consultation is, in practice, to be undertaken
prior to the exercise of the
remedial power.
In particular, the committee seeks the Minister’s
advice as to whether affected taxpayer(s) in each instance will be
Noting the extraordinary nature of this proposed remedial power and the fact
that breach of the LA consultation requirements does
not result in the
invalidity of a legislative instrument,
the committee also seeks the
Minister’s advice as whether consideration has been given to:
including more specific consultation requirements in the bill (for
example, to provide that all relevant stakeholders must be consulted,
period of consultation, and/or minimum advertising requirements, such as a
requirement for including information about
consultations on the ATO’s
website); and
making compliance with these requirements a condition of the
validity of the determination.
Minister's response - extract
Consultation requirements
The Committee sought advice as to whether affected taxpayer(s) would be
consulted. The remedial power's use would be informed by any
appropriate and
reasonably practicable consultation. This is consistent with
Legislation Act 2003
(LA). Consultation would be undertaken routinely as
part of the ordinary administrative processes to support the use of the remedial
power. This consultation would engage interested stakeholders and be expected to
include those directly affected by the remedial
power's use, their
representatives or industry bodies. The ATO would use its ordinary processes to
ensure the right people are aware
of the potential use of the remedial power and
are consulted at the right time.
In addition, the ATO would consult with a technical advisory group (which
will include private sector experts) and the Board of Taxation
prior to any
exercise of the power. This will provide further opportunities for affected
entities to address particular problems
prior to use of the remedial power.
Thorough consideration was given to the consultation arrangements for the use
of the power and, on balance, the favoured approach
was to rely on the
requirements of the LA; ensure appropriate administrative arrangements to
support consultation were part of the
ordinary use of the remedial power; and
engage with a technical advisory group and the Board of Taxation on the exercise
of the power.
Creating a formal legislative requirement to consult, that extends beyond the
requirements of the LA and which must be complied with
in order for a
modification to be validly made, would be inconsistent with wider processes for
resolving tax law issues. This would
also create a requirement that could be
used to challenge the legality of the remedial power's use, creating the
opportunity for
disputes on issues of process to impede the remedial power's use
to resolve substantive issues.
The remedial power is also given effect through legislative instruments that
do not enter into effect until after the 15 sitting day
disallowance period has
ended. During this period Parliament can disallow a legislative instrument prior
to it taking effect. This
period presents a further opportunity for the
community to respond to the actual instruments created to give effect to
modifications
under the power.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Minister for this response.
The committee notes the Minister’s advice that creating a formal
legislative requirement to consult would be inconsistent with
processes for resolving tax law issues and would create the opportunity for
disputes on issues of process.
However, the committee restates its view that the remedial power is an
extraordinary power; conferring legislative power on an unelected
official to
modify the operation of significant primary legislation. While the committee
welcomes the Minister’s advice that
it is expected that consultation would
include those directly affected by the remedial power’s use, their
representatives or
industry bodies, given the breadth of the power,
committee considers it would be appropriate to include more specific
consultation requirements in the bill and make compliance
requirements a condition of the validity of the determination.
The committee draws its concerns to the attention of Senators and leaves
the appropriateness of the proposed approach to consultation
requirements to the
consideration of the Senate as a whole.
The committee also draws this matter to the attention of the Senate
Standing Committee on Regulations and Ordinances for information.
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
Fifth, it appears that a determination modifying a taxation law may be given
retrospective application (see explanatory memorandum,
p. 49). Retrospective
changes to the law may undermine public confidence in the legal system even if
there are strong reasons to
justify a particular change being applied from a
date prior to commencement. In light of the fact that, in this instance, it is
determination of a non-elected official that may generate retrospective
application,
the committee seeks the Minister’s advice as to whether
consideration has been given to including limits in the bill on the
retrospectivity allowed in determinations made under the remedial power (for
example, that laws as modified may only be
given retrospective operation for a
limited time).
Minister's response - extract
Retrospective application
The Committee sought advice as to whether consideration was given to
including limits in the Bill on the extent of retrospectivity
determinations made under the remedial power.
Legislative instruments created to give effect to modifications made under
the remedial power are subject to the limits in section
12 of the LA. These
ensure any retrospective application of the legislative instrument cannot affect
a person's rights so as to disadvantage
them, nor can liabilities be imposed on
a person in relation to anything that occurred prior to the instruments
registration.
In addition, the remedial power itself does not apply to an entity if a
modification would produce a less favourable result for that
In this context, the restrictions on any retrospective application are
considered suitable in that they protect the community from
adverse impacts,
while also providing the opportunity for unintended outcomes with detrimental
impacts on entities to be resolved
retrospectively.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Minister for this response, and in particular his
advice in relation to the limits on retrospectivity of
instruments as set out in
Legislation Act 2003
In light of the explanation provided, the committee leaves the
appropriateness of allowing the retrospective application of modifications
the taxation law to the consideration of the Senate as a whole.
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
the committee seeks the Minister’s advice as to why the
Minister’s power to cause a review to be undertaken of the operation
the remedial power provisions within three to five years of them commencing is
discretionary rather than mandatory. Given the
extraordinary delegation of
legislative power involved the committee considers that there should be a
mandatory report provided to
the Parliament within three years.
Minister's response - extract
Review of operation of the power
Finally, the Committee sought advice as to why the Minister's power to cause
a review to be undertaken of the operation of the remedial
power provisions is
discretionary rather than mandatory.
The remedial power is a new power that warrants review following an initial
period of experience with its use. This is reflected in
provisions of the
amending Bill (Schedule 1, item 4) which go beyond what would normally accompany
a change to the taxation law.
Under these provisions I can request a post
implementation review of the power during the two years following the third
anniversary
of the remedial power's commencement. There is a balance to be
achieved between reflecting the determination to conduct a post implementation
review, providing flexibility to allow the review to take place at the most
suitable time and only including necessary detail in
the legislation.
The permissive provision creates the expectation a post implementation review
should take place. Including a permissive rather than
mandatory requirement to
conduct the review provides flexibility to ensure the review takes place at a
sensible time, whether that
is earlier or later than contemplated in the
It should also be noted the Bill introduces changes to the
Administration Act 1953
(Schedule 1, item 2, paragraph 3B(1AA)(e)) that
would require the ATO Annual Report to include information on the exercise of
remedial power during the relevant year. This would include information
regarding decisions on whether to use the power, as well
as consultation
undertaken prior to the power's use.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Minister for this response.
The committee notes the Minister’s advice that there is a need for
flexibility as to the appropriate timing for the review and
welcomes the
provision which would require the ATO Annual Report to include information on
the exercise of the remedial power during
the relevant year.
However, the
committee remains of the view that there should be a mandatory report
within three to five years of the commencement of the remedial
power provisions. Such a provision would not preclude other reviews
undertaken either prior to or after this period has elapsed if this is
considered necessary.
The committee draws its concerns to the attention of Senators and leaves
the appropriateness of the discretionary nature of a review
of the operation of
the remedial power provisions to the consideration of the Senate as a
Senator Helen Polley
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (119 KB)
PDF format (227 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter