URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJCHR/2025/28.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:08:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Commonwealth Workplace Protection Orders Bill 2025 - New and Ongoing Matters [2025] AUPJCHR 28 (27 August 2025)
Commonwealth Workplace Protection Orders Bill 2025138
Impaired decision-making ability
Preliminary international human rights legal advice
Rights of persons with disability to equal recognition before the law
Committee view
Commonwealth Workplace
Protection Orders Bill
This bill seeks to establish a workplace protection orders scheme to
prevent personal violence against, or with respect to, Commonwealth
workers and
Commonwealth workplaces. It would permit a court to make interim orders in the
absence of the respondent, which may remain
in force for up to 12 months, as
well as urgent interim orders, final orders and consent orders.
House of Representatives, 31 July 2025
Rights of persons with disability
Impaired decision-making ability
1.1 This bill would establish a workplace protection orders scheme to prevent
personal violence against, or with respect to, Commonwealth
workers and
Commonwealth workplaces. A person would engage in personal violence if:
• they engage, or make a threat to engage, in conduct that directly or
indirectly causes harm or a reasonable fear of harm to
a Commonwealth worker or
an individual at a Commonwealth workplace; and
• the person engages in the conduct or makes the threat because of the
Commonwealth worker’s status as a Commonwealth
worker; and
• the conduct or threat directly or indirectly interferes with the
functioning of the executive government of the Commonwealth
(for example, it
interferes with the worker’s ability to perform their functions or
1.2 A Commonwealth workplace protection order may be an interim order, an
urgent order, a final order or a consent
An order may impose any
conditions that a court considers are necessary or desirable to prevent the
respondent from engaging in further
violence and to ensure the safety of a
worker or people at a workplace.
Either party may apply to the court to vary or revoke an order at any
The breach of an order
would be a criminal offence punishable by up to 2 years imprisonment,
120 penalty units (currently $39,600)
1.3 The bill would allow a court to make a consent order when an application
for a final order is made, the parties to the proceeding
have consented to its
terms and, if the court considers that the respondent has impaired
decision-making ability, when the respondent
is represented by a lawyer,
litigation guardian or, for children, a parent or
A court may make a
consent order: without proof or admission that the respondent has engaged in
personal violence; whether or not
the court is satisfied of certain
and whether or not the
court considers that the conditions imposed on the respondent by the order are
necessary or desirable to prevent
the respondent from engaging in further
personal violence and ensure the safety of a Commonwealth worker or individuals
at a Commonwealth
Conditions of a workplace protection order may relate to a broad range of
matters, such as that the respondent not communicate or
associate with a
specified worker or class of workers, or that the respondent not be present at,
or within a specified distance of,
a specified Commonwealth
A person with
‘impaired decision-making ability’ is defined to mean a person who
is a party to a proceeding who cannot
make decisions in relation to the
proceeding or does not understand the nature and effect of the decisions the
person makes in relation
proceeding.
A person does not
have impaired decision‑making ability only because the person is under 18
years of age.
Preliminary international human rights legal
Rights of persons with disability to equal
recognition before the law
1.4 By allowing consent orders to be made against individuals with impaired
decision‑making ability, this measure may engage
the rights of persons
with disability to equal recognition before the law. The right to equal
recognition before the law includes
the right to enjoy legal capacity on an
equal basis with others in all aspects of life and, in all measures that relate
to the exercise
of legal capacity, there should be appropriate and effective
safeguards to prevent abuse.
Such safeguards must ensure that measures relating to the exercise of legal
capacity respect the rights, will and preferences of
the person, are free of
conflict of interest and undue influence, are proportional and tailored to the
person's circumstances, apply
for the shortest time possible and are subject to
regular review by an independent and impartial
The UN Committee on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities has confirmed that there can be no
derogation from article 12, which
describes the content of the general right to
equality before the law under the International Covenant on Civil and Political
In other words, 'there
are no permissible circumstances under international human rights law in which
this right may be limited'.
1.5 As people who are assessed to have ‘impaired decision-making
ability’ are invariably those with cognitive impairment,
the measure would
almost exclusively apply to people with
disability.
Thus, the key
question is whether the measure, in providing that an individual with impaired
decision-making ability have a representative
present, would facilitate a form
of substitute decision-making.
1.6 It is not clear whether a representative of a respondent would be
permitted to consent to a workplace protection order on behalf
of the respondent
rather than support a respondent to exercise their own legal capacity. If a
representative could consent on behalf
of a respondent and the
representative’s decision in effect substitutes the consent or decision of
the respondent, this may
amount to substitute decision-making.
1.7 The UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities has made
clear that practices that deny the right of people with disabilities
capacity in a discriminatory manner, such as substitute decision-making regimes,
are contrary to article 12 and must be
'abolished in order to ensure that full
legal capacity is restored to persons with disabilities on an equal basis with
decision-making should be replaced by supported decision-making, whereby
individuals are supported to exercise their legal
Supports may include
peer support, advocacy, assistance with communication or advance planning,
whereby a person can state their
will and preferences in advance should they be
unable to do so at a later point in time. The UN Committee on the Rights of
with Disabilities has noted that 'where, after significant efforts have
been made, it is not practicable to determine the will and
preferences of an
individual, the "best interpretation of will and preferences" must replace the
"best interests"
determinations'.
1.8 The definition of impaired decision-making ability in the bill does not
explicitly provide for supported decision-making and it
is unclear what role a
representative or the court are expected to undertake in relation to providing
supports to a person with impaired
decision-making ability in the making of
consent orders. As noted above, it is not clear whether a representative could
a workplace protection order that the respondent may not otherwise
have consented to. This could have significant consequences for
a respondent
considered to have impaired decision-making ability given the court may make the
consent order without proof or admission
that the respondent has engaged in
personal violence or will engage in personal violence, and as breach of an order
is a criminal
offence of up to two years imprisonment. However, if in practice a
representative is required to support a respondent in proceedings,
serve as a safeguard to ensure a person with disability has legal representation
or support to engage with the process.
1.9 While the statement of compatibility states that the bill engages
multiple human rights,
not identify that the measure may engage the rights of persons with disability
and so provides no assessment as to the compatibility
of the measure with the
right to equal recognition before the law. The explanatory memorandum does not
explain the operation of the
making of consent orders in practice with respect
to people with impaired decision-making ability. Further information is
required to assess how this measure would likely operate in
Committee view
1.10 The committee notes that the bill would establish a workplace protection
orders scheme to prevent personal violence against,
or with respect to,
Commonwealth workers and Commonwealth workplaces. The committee notes a
workplace protection order can be a consent
order, which may be made when an
application for a final order is made, the parties to the proceeding have
consented to its terms
and, if the court considers that the respondent has
impaired decision-making ability, when the respondent is represented by a
litigation guardian, or parent or guardian (in relation to
1.11 The committee notes that it commented on a previous version of this bill
that lapsed at the end of the 47
Parliament. The
committee considered that the bill engaged multiple human rights and contacted
the department in relation to the
adequacy of its statement of compatibility,
specifically in relation to the rights of the child and the right to a fair
The committee welcomes
the more fulsome assessment provided in the current statement of compatibility
in relation to these human
rights, and considers that its concerns with respect
to this matter have been addressed.
1.12 The committee notes that by providing for consent orders to be made
against individuals with impaired decision-making ability,
this measure engages
the rights of persons with disability to equal recognition before the law. The
committee considers further information
is required to assess the compatibility
of this measure with this right, and as such seeks the minister's advice in
relation to:
(a) how the court assesses whether a respondent has impaired decision-making
(b) whether, in practice, there is a risk that consent orders would be made
against people with disabilities on a discriminatory basis;
(c) whether a representative of a respondent would be permitted to consent to
a workplace protection order on behalf of the respondent
and whether the
representative’s consent to that order substitutes the consent of the
respondent (or in other words, the representative’s
consent is taken to be
the consent of the respondent);
(d) whether the representative or the court are required to support a
respondent with impaired decision-making ability to make decisions
in relation
to the proceeding and understand the nature and effect of the decisions and if
so, what supports are provided; and
(e) what safeguards exist to ensure the rights, will and preferences of a
respondent with impaired decision-making ability are protected
and people with
disability are not subject to abuse.
This entry can be cited as:
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights,
Commonwealth Workplace Protection
Orders Bill 2025
Report 4 of 2025
[2025] AUPJCHR 28.
Subclause 6(1).
Subclause 22(1).
Paragraph 22(2)(b) provides
that the court may make the consent order whether or not satisfied of the
matters in paragraph 20(c):
that the respondent has engaged in personal
violence; and there is a real risk the respondent will engage in further
personal violence
if the order is not made; and the order is necessary or
desirable to prevent the respondent from engaging in further personal
Subclause 22(2).
Subclause 25(2). When a
court makes an order, the court may impose any conditions on the respondent that
the court considers necessary
or desirable to prevent the respondent from
engaging in further personal violence; and ensure the safety of a Commonwealth
or of individuals present at a Commonwealth place: subclause 25(1).
Subclause 22(4).
Subclause 22(5).
Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities, article 12.
Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities, article 12(4). See also article 17.
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1, Article 12: Equal
recognition before the law
(2014) [1], [5].
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1, Article 12: Equal
recognition before the law
(2014) [5].
In this way the measure
would also engage and limit the right to equality and non-discrimination. If the
measure were to be incompatible
with the right to equal recognition before the
law, as this is a threshold right, it would also likely be incompatible with
associated rights such as the right to equality and non-discrimination.
The UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
has also emphasised
that the denial of legal capacity to persons with disabilities often leads to
the deprivation of other fundamental
human rights. See Committee on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1, Article 12: Equal
recognition before the law
(2014) [8].
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1, Article 12: Equal
recognition before the law
(2014) [7]. For a discussion of the academic
debate regarding the interpretation and application of article 12, particularly
in relation
to substitute decision making, see, eg, Bernadette McSherry and Lisa
Waddington, 'Treat with care: the right to informed consent
for medical
treatment of persons with mental impairments in Australia',
Journal of Human Rights
, vol. 23, issue no. 1, pp. 109–129.
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1, Article 12: Equal
recognition before the law
(2014) [15]–[16], [21]. The features of a
supported decision-making regime are detailed in paragraph [29].
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1, Article 12: Equal
recognition before the law
(2014) [21].
Statement of
compatibility, p. 41: including the right to a fair hearing, freedom of
movement, privacy and reputation, rights of
parents and children, freedom of
opinion and expression, right to social security, right to take part in public
affairs and elections,
and the right to work. The committee previously commented
on an earlier version of this bill and wrote to the department regarding
adequacy of its statement of compatibility, particularly in relation to the
rights of the child and the right to a fair trial,
see Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(5 February 2025) p. 2.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(5 February 2025) p. 2.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (111 KB)
PDF format (113 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter