URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBSD/2025/70.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:14:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Education Legislation Amendment (Integrity and Other Measures) Bill 2025 - Initial Scrutiny [2025] AUSStaCSBSD 70 (29 October 2025)
Education Legislation Amendment (Integrity and Other Measures) Bill 2025146
Exemption from disallowance
Incorporation of external materials as existing from time to time147
No-invalidity clause156
Education Legislation
Amendment (Integrity and Other Measures) Bill
This bill amends various Acts within the Education portfolio, including the
Education Services for Overseas Students Act 2000
Education Support Act 2003
Tertiary Education Quality and
Standards Agency Act 2011
A New Tax System (Family
Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
House of Representatives on 9 October 2025
Bill status
Before the House of Representatives
Exemption from
disallowance
Incorporation of external
materials as existing from time to
1.175 Schedule 1, item 32, proposed subsections 14C(1) and 14C(3) provide
that the minister may make a legislative instrument, determining
Education Services for Overseas Students (ESOS)
is not required to, or
must not, deal with applications for registration to provide courses to overseas
students at one or more
The amendment would
thereby provide a mechanism for the minister to pause the processing of all, or
certain kinds of, registration
applications received by ESOS agencies under
section 9 of the
Education Services for Overseas Students Act 2000
1.176 Proposed subsection 14C(7) provides that an instrument made by the
minister under proposed subsections 14C(1) or 14(3) may apply,
incorporate, with or without modification, any matter contained in an instrument
or other writing as in force or existing
from time to time. The explanatory
memorandum indicates that:
This subsection provides a contrary intention to the requirements in
subsection 14(2)
Legislation Act 2003
so that an instrument made
by the Minister can flexibly refer to external documents. The ability to refer
to external documents is
important as the Minister may need to consider whether
an instrument should not apply to applications for registration of new courses
by providers delivering courses identified as essential for addressing new
fields or emerging areas of critical skills needs. In
such a scenario, it may be
necessary for the instrument to refer to an independent analysis of skills needs
identifying those critical
areas. This purpose will benefit some providers
seeking to apply for registration as they will be exempt from the application of
the instrument, by reference to an external document identifying critical skills
While generally, the external documents will apply at the time of
commencement of an instrument, it may be necessary to have the flexibility
apply documents as existing from time to time to ensure that the instrument
responds to Australia’s skills needs so that
providers can be registered
to deliver relevant courses in respect of required skills. Any external
documents incorporated into the
instrument will be freely available and the
explanatory material accompanying the making of an instrument will identify
where providers
can find the external document
1.177 Proposed subsection 14C(8) in turn provides that instruments made under
proposed subsections 14C(1) and (3) are not subject
to disallowance under
Legislation Act 2003
. The explanatory memorandum
provides that:
It is not appropriate for an instrument made under sections 14C or 14D to be
subject to disallowance as it may cause uncertainty for
the operations and
functions of ESOS agencies, and for providers, as the instrument is to be relied
upon from the date it takes effect.
As explained above, the Minister will only
exercise this power in limited circumstances – for example, where the
Minister has
concerns relating to the integrity or sustainability of the
international education sector and urgent, decisive action is required.
out in new section 14G, the Minister is required to consult before making
legislative instruments under this Division.
Subjecting the legislative instrument to the disallowance process may result
in further uncertainty in this period of change for the
international sector, in
respect of affording providers with commercial and business certainty once an
instrument has been made.
The matters covered by an instrument should also be
under Executive control, given the primary purpose of the instrument will go
the functioning and operations of ESOS agencies and their role in regulating
providers where integrity risks are present.
1.178 The bill would also provide, in proposed section 14D, an equivalent
power for the minister to determine, by legislative instrument,
to suspend the
processing of applications by providers to add one or more courses at one or
more locations to their ESOS registration.
Further, proposed sections 14E and
14F would enable the minister to suspend for up to 12 months a providers’
ability to submit
applications under sections 9 and 10H of the ESOS Act. Each of
the proposed sections 14D, 14E, and 14F include similar subsections
proposed section 14C to provide for incorporation of external documents within
the instrument and exemption from
disallowance.
The information
provided in the explanatory memorandum explaining the basis for these provisions
is substantively similar to that
set out above with respect to proposed section
1.179 Disallowance is the primary means by which the Parliament exercises
control over the legislative power that it has delegated
to the executive.
Exempting an instrument from disallowance therefore has significant implications
for parliamentary scrutiny. In
June 2021, the Senate acknowledged these
implications and resolved that delegated legislation should be subject to
disallowance unless
exceptional circumstances can be shown which would justify
an exemption. In addition, the Senate resolved that any claim that circumstances
justify such an exemption will be subject to rigorous scrutiny, with the
expectation that the claim will only be justified in rare
1.180 In light of the resolution of the Senate, the committee expects that
any exemption of delegated legislation from the usual disallowance
should be fully justified in the explanatory memorandum. This justification
should include an explanation of the exceptional
circumstances that are said to
justify the exemption and how they apply to the circumstances of the provision
in question.
1.181 In this instance, the explanatory memorandum relies on the uncertainty
that may arise from such instruments being subject to
disallowance, and the
flow-on effects this uncertainty may produce for regulatory agencies and the
commercial operations of international
education providers. In relation to this
justification, the committee reiterates its view that concerns raising
commercial and other
uncertainty associated with instruments do not alone merit
exemption from disallowance. The committee has previously noted that legislative
instruments may commence immediately after they are registered and that the
disallowance of an instrument does not invalidate actions
that were taken under
that instrument prior to the time of any disallowance. Accordingly, the
committee does not consider that the
explanatory statement has identified an
exceptional circumstance that sufficiently justifies the proposed exemption from
disallowance process.
1.182 At a general level, the committee is concerned where provisions in a
bill allow the incorporation of legislative provisions
by reference to other
documents as such an approach:
• raises the prospect of changes being made to the law in the absence
of parliamentary scrutiny, (for example, where an external
document is
incorporated as in force 'from time to time' this would mean that any future
changes to that document would operate to
change the law without any involvement
from the Parliament);
• can create uncertainty in the law; and
• means that those obliged to obey the law may have inadequate access
to its terms (in particular, the committee will be concerned
where relevant
information, including standards, accounting principles or industry databases,
is not publicly available or is available
only if a fee is paid).
1.183 As a matter of general principle, any member of the public should be
able to freely and readily access the terms of the law.
The committee
acknowledges the reference in the explanatory memorandum outlining that where
material is to be incorporated by reference
into the proposed legislative
instruments, it will be freely and readily available to all those who may be
interested in the law.
1.184 The committee notes that, in this instance, the proposed facility to
incorporate external materials from time to time is broadly
premised on ensuring
the minister can flexibly refer to documents and a general example of an
independent skills analysis that may
inform critical skills needs. The committee
notes that the maximum period for which each kind of legislative instrument made
the bill can operate would be 12
which may moderate the
committee’s scrutiny concerns in this regard by limiting the period during
which incorporated materials
might be updated without parliamentary oversight.
The committee also welcomes the commitment in the explanatory memorandum that
incorporated
external information would be made freely available and that the
explanatory material accompanying the instrument would identify
where providers
could access that information online.
1.185 In light of the above, the committee requests the minister’s
detailed advice as to:
the exceptional circumstances that justify the exemption of
legislative instruments to be made under Schedule 1, item 32, proposed
subsections 14C(1), 14C(3), 14D(1), 14D(3),14E(1) and 14F(1) from the usual
disallowance process, including why it is necessary;
whether the bill could be amended to provide that these directions
are subject to disallowance to ensure that they are subject to
appropriate
parliamentary oversight.
1.186 The committee otherwise draws its scrutiny concerns to the attention
of senators and leaves to the Senate as a whole the appropriateness
incorporation of external material (as in force from time to time) in
legislative instruments under proposed subsections 14C(7),
14D(7), 14E(5) and
1.187 The committee also draws this matter to the attention of the Senate
Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation.
No-invalidity
1.188 Schedule 1, item 32, proposed section 14G would require the minister to
consult with specified entities before making any of
the legislative instruments
contemplated in proposed sections 14C, 14D, 14E, or 14F. This would include
consultation with the TEQSA,
the National VET Regulator, the Secretary and any
entities that the Minister has determined is an ESOS agency for a provider or
these provisions, a failure to undertake such consultation would not affect the
validity of any such instrument that is made
1.189 A legislative provision that indicates that an instrument issued in
breach of a particular statutory requirement does not result
in the invalidity
of that instrument may be described as a ‘no-invalidity’ clause.
There are significant scrutiny concerns
with no-invalidity clauses, as these
clauses may limit the practical efficacy of judicial review to provide a remedy
for legal errors
in the making of a legislative instrument. For example, as the
conclusion that the instrument is not invalid is set out in statute,
the ability for a person whose interests are affected by the instrument from
challenging whether the minister had satisfied
the requirements to enliven the
power to make the instrument at the time it was made before a court.
Consequently, the committee
expects a sound justification for the use of a
no-invalidity clause to be provided in the explanatory memorandum.
1.190 Regarding this no-invalidity clause, the explanatory memorandum
This is in order to ensure that any instrument made under these sections can
be relied upon in all circumstances, to provide commercial
business certainty to
providers in the international education sector once an instrument has been
1.191 The committee considers that the limited information in the explanatory
memorandum does not adequately address the necessity
and appropriateness of
including a no-invalidity clause. In particular, the committee does not consider
that the maintenance of commercial
business certainty provides sufficient
justification for limiting the scope of legal error in the making of a
legislative instrument
that may be subject to judicial review.
1.192 The committee draws its scrutiny concerns to the attention of
senators and leaves to the Senate as a whole the appropriateness
of Schedule 1,
item 32, proposed section 14G applying a no-invalidity clause to the requirement
to consult with certain bodies before
issuing a legislative instrument under
sections 14C, 14D, 14E and 14F.
This entry can be cited as:
Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills, Education Legislation
Amendment (Integrity and
Other Measures) Bill 2025,
Scrutiny Digest 6 of
; [2025] AUSStaCSBSD 70.
Schedule 1, item 32,
proposed subsections 14C(1), 14C(3), 14D(1), 14D(3),14E(1) and 14F(1). The
committee draws senators’
attention to these provisions pursuant to Senate
standing orders 24(1)(a)(iv) and 24(1)(a)(v).
Section 6C of the
Education Services for Overseas Students Act 2000
(ESOS Act) defines the
relevant ESOS agencies which oversee a provider or registered provider.
Section 9 of the ESOS
Act states that a provider (defined in section 6E to include registered
higher education or VET providers etc.) may apply to an ESOS
registration to provide courses for overseas students.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, pp.
Schedule 1, item 31,
proposed subsections 14D(7)–(8), 14E(5)–(6) and 14F(5)–(6)
Explanatory memorandum, pp.
Senate resolution 53B. See
Journals of the Senate
, No. 101, 16 June 2021, pp. 3581–3582.
Proposed subsections
14C(5), 14D(5), 14E(3), and 14F(3).
Schedule 1, item 32,
proposed section 14G. The committee draws senators’ attention to this
provision pursuant to Senate standing
orders 24(1)(a)(iii).
Schedule 1, item 32,
proposed subsection 14G(1).
Schedule 1, item 32,
proposed subsection 14G(2).
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (114 KB)
PDF format (113 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter