URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJCHR/2025/29.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:08:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Early Childhood Education and Care (Strengthening Regulation of Early Education) Bill 2025 - New and Ongoing Matters [2025] AUPJCHR 29 (27 August 2025)
Early Childhood Education and Care (Strengthening Regulation of Early Education) Bill 2025160
Publication of a register of actions taken against providers
Preliminary international human rights legal advice
Children's rights and right to privacy
Committee view
Powers of entry
Preliminary international human rights legal advice
Children's rights and the right to privacy
Committee view
Early Childhood Education
and Care (Strengthening Regulation of Early Education) Bill
This bill (now Act) amends the
New Tax System (Family Assistance)
(Administration) Act 1999
to insert new quality and safety considerations
for approval of child care providers, expand the Secretary’s powers to
information about child care provider compliance, and expand powers of
entry in relation to child care centres.
House of Representatives, 23 July 2025
Received Royal Assent 2 August 2025
Children's rights; privacy
Publication of a register of actions taken against
1.95 The bill (now Act) amends the
New Tax System (Family Assistance)
(Administration) Act 1999
(the Act) to expand the events and information
that the Secretary may publicise in relation to sanctions and suspensions
early childhood education and care
In practice, this
information is publicised on the enforcement action register, which is a public
register that contains an electronic
summary of enforcement actions taken
against early childhood education and care providers by the Department of
Education under the
1.96 Specifically, the bill expands the Secretary’s discretionary power
to publicise enforcement events to include where the
Secretary refuses to
approve a provider;
condition for continued approval on an approved
refuses to vary an
approved provider’s approval by adding a service to the
or where an
infringement notice has been issued under Part 5 of the
Regulatory Powers
(Standard Provisions) Act 2014
(Regulatory Powers Act) in relation to an
alleged contravention of a civil penalty provision of the
The bill also expands the
Secretary’s discretionary power to publicise information to include the
condition or details of a
condition imposed on a
the details of
non-compliance by a provider with an imposed
or details of an
infringement notice.
Preliminary international human rights legal
Children's rights and right to
1.97 Insofar as the register helps to ensure that child care providers and
services provide high quality and safe care to children,
this measure promotes
the rights of the child. Children have special rights under international human
rights law taking into account
their particular
vulnerabilities.
The rights of
the child require that, in all actions concerning children, the best interests
of the child are a primary
consideration.
This requires
legislative, administrative and judicial bodies and institutions to
systematically consider how children's rights and
interests are or will be
affected directly or indirectly by their decisions and actions. Further, the
United Nations (UN) Committee
on the Rights of the Child has explained that
‘the expression "primary consideration" means that the child's best
may not be considered on the same level as all other considerations.
This strong position is justified by the special situation of
1.98 However, by expanding the scope of information the Secretary may
publicise on a public register, which appears to include personal
information
relating to individuals, the bill engages and limits the right to privacy. The
right to privacy includes respect for
informational privacy, including the right
to respect for private and confidential information, particularly the storing,
sharing of such
information.
It also includes
the right to control the dissemination of information about one’s private
1.99 The right to privacy may be subject to permissible limitations which are
provided by law and are not arbitrary. In order for
limitations not to be
arbitrary, the measure must pursue a legitimate objective and be rationally
connected to (that is, effective
to achieve) and proportionate to achieving that
1.100 The statement of compatibility states that the objective of the measure
is to increase transparency within the child care sector,
which will provide the
community with further information on the outcomes of compliance activities
enabling families to be better
informed about their child care
The general
objective of protecting the safety of children is a legitimate objective for the
purposes of international human rights
law. Making information about actions
taken in relation to provider approval and compliance accessible to the persons
making decisions
stated objective.
1.101 The key question is therefore whether the measure is proportionate. In
order to be proportionate, a limitation on the right
to privacy should only be
as extensive as is strictly necessary to achieve its legitimate objective and
must be accompanied by appropriate
safeguards.
1.102 The scope of personal information published on the register is relevant
in considering whether the limitation on the right to
extensive as is strictly necessary. Information that can be included on the
register mostly relates to information
include personal information relating to individuals where the provider is an
individual.
The Secretary has a
broad discretion as to what information is included on the register. The
explanatory memorandum notes:
It is a matter for the Secretary whether and what information about an event
listed in subsection 199B(1) [of the Act] should be published
on a case by case
basis and the level of detail. Factors relevant to that decision may include the
seriousness of the breach, the
service’s past record of compliance with
its responsibilities and the consequences of the Secretary’s decision for
such as parents and
1.103 While the Secretary’s discretion to determine what information is
publicised provides flexibility to consider the individual
circumstances of the
case, and in this way may serve as a safeguard, the breadth of the discretion
also means that there is a risk
that a large amount of personal information may
be published.
1.104 In relation to the publication of an infringement notice issued to a
person, the explanatory memorandum notes:
Section 104 of the Regulatory Powers Act prescribes the details of what must
be included in an infringement notice. Amongst other
details, the notice must
include the name of the person, brief details of the alleged contravention, the
amount payable under the
notice and that payment of the amount is not an
admission of guilt or liability. It is anticipated that if the Secretary were to
publicise the issuing of an infringement notice under s 199B(1) that similar
details would be included in the
publication.
1.105 If the above details are published on the register, it is likely to
have a considerable effect on an individual’s right
to privacy and
reputation, as it includes details of the alleged contravention – which,
while not a finding of guilt or liability,
is likely to nonetheless adversely
impact a person’s reputation.
1.106 In terms of safeguards, the statement of compatibility states that the
measure is a proportionate limit on the right to privacy
as it promotes provider
compliance and the best interests of children, however, it does not specifically
identify any safeguards
that would operate to protect information that has been
collected and published on the
There also appear to
be minimal safeguards contained in the Act. For example, there does not appear
to be a requirement that the
Secretary correct information that is wrong,
misleading or out of date, or that the Secretary remove information from the
after a certain period of time after a provider (or individual) has
complied with a condition, sanction, penalty or infringement
notice. There also
does not appear to be any access to review of a decision to publicise
information under section 199B of the
The availability of
oversight and review ordinarily serve as important safeguards with respect to
measures that limit human rights.
1.107 In considering whether the limitation on the right to privacy is no
more than is strictly necessary, it is not clear if other,
rights-restrictive alternatives to a public register have been considered. For
example, a private register that is only accessible
to people seeking to make a
child care decision (as opposed to a public register) may be sufficient to
enable families to be better
informed about their child care decisions. In the
absence of adequate safeguards, and given that there may be less
rights-restrictive
approaches available, it is not clear that the measure
constitutes a proportionate limitation on the right to privacy.
Committee view
1.108 The committee notes that this bill (now Act) amends the
System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
to expand the events
and information that the Secretary may publicise in relation to sanctions and
suspensions against early childhood
education and care providers. In practice,
this information is publicised on the enforcement action register, which is a
public register
that contains an electronic summary of enforcement actions taken
against early childhood education and care providers.
1.109 The committee considers insofar as the register helps to ensure that
child care providers and services provide high quality
and safe care to
children, this measure promotes the rights of the child. However, the committee
notes that expanding the information
that may be published on a public register
also engages and limits the right to privacy. The committee notes that the right
may be permissibly limited. In this regard, the committee considers
that this bill more broadly serves the important purpose of enhancing
Commonwealth’s ability to support the actions of State and Territory
regulators and respond to serious concerns about the
safety and quality of parts
of the early childhood education and care sector in Australia. The committee
considers that the specific
objective of the measure – protecting the
safety of children – is a legitimate objective for the purposes of
international
human rights law, and the measure is likely to be effective to
achieve the stated objective. However, in regard to proportionality,
committee notes the absence of adequate safeguards accompanying the measure,
including access to review, and that there may be
less rights restrictive
approaches available. As such, the committee considers that it is not clear that
the measure constitutes
a proportionate limitation on the right to privacy.
1.110 Further, the committee notes that as the
New Tax System (Family
Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
was legislated prior to the
establishment of the committee, the Act has not been subject to a foundational
review for its human rights
compatibility in accordance with the terms of the
Human Rights (Parliamentary Scrutiny) Act 2011
. Noting the
committee’s concerns with respect to the right to privacy, it would be of
considerable assistance if the Act was
subject to a foundational human rights
assessment.
Suggested action
1.111 The committee recommends that the Government consider undertaking a
foundational review of the
New Tax System (Family Assistance)
(Administration) Act 1999
for its human rights compatibility in accordance
with the terms of the
Human Rights (Parliamentary Scrutiny) Act 2011
Such a review should consider whether the Act contains adequate safeguards to
ensure that any limitation on the right to privacy
is permissible.
1.112 As the bill has now passed, the committee makes no further comment in
relation to this measure.
Powers of entry
1.113 The bill inserts new section 219UCA into the Act, which modifies Part 2
Regulatory Powers (Standard Provisions) Act 2014
(Regulatory
Powers Act) to enable an authorised person to enter the premises of a child care
service without consent of the occupier
of the premises and without a monitoring
warrant, and to require the occupier of the premises to provide reasonable
facilities and
assistance for the effective exercise of an authorised
person’s powers.
monitoring powers under Part 2 of the Regulatory Powers Act ordinarily may only
be exercised where consent is given by the occupier
of the premises or where a
monitoring warrant has been issued authorising entry to the premises. New
section 219UCA therefore departs
from these rules.
1.114 There are certain conditions that apply if entry to the premises is
without a monitoring warrant and without the consent of
the occupier of the
premises, including that entry must be during operating hours of the service or
ordinary business hours; the
authorised person must announce their entry and
show their identity card; and the Secretary must have authorised the
The Secretary may
authorise an authorised person to enter the premises in these circumstances if
satisfied that entry is necessary
for the purposes of exercising monitoring
powers or powers to ask questions and seek production of documents (within the
of the Regulatory Powers Act). If an in home care service is operated at
the premises, the Secretary must be satisfied that the consent
of the occupier
to the entry cannot reasonably be
1.115 If consent is not obtained from the occupier of the premises for the
authorised person’s entry (and this new section does
not require consent
to be obtained), the authorised person must not exercise powers under section 22
of the Regulatory Powers Act.
Section 22 of the Regulatory Powers Act allows an authorised person to secure
evidence of a contravention of a provision for a 24
hour period.
1.116 New section 219UCA would also require the occupier of the premises to
provide the authorised person entering the premises with
all reasonable
facilities and assistance for the effective exercise of their
Failure to provide
reasonable facilities and assistance is a fault-based offence and a civil
penalty provision.
Preliminary international human rights legal
Children's rights and the right to
1.117 Insofar as the measure helps to ensure that child care providers comply
with the Act and provide high quality and safe child
care, this measure would
promote the rights of the child, as set out above.
1.118 However, in relation to in home care services, which are typically
provided from the home of the
by allowing authorised
persons to enter the premises of these services without a warrant and without
the consent of the occupier
of the premises, the measure also engages and may
limit the right to privacy. This is acknowledged in the statement of
compatibility.
The right to
individual’s privacy and attacks on reputation.
It prohibits arbitrary and
unlawful interferences with an individual's privacy, family, correspondence or
The UN Human Rights
Committee has stated that ‘home’ in the context of this right is to
be ‘understood to indicate
the place where a person resides or carries out
[their] usual
occupation’.
1.119 The right to privacy may be permissibly limited where a limitation is
directed towards achieving a legitimate objective, rationally
connected to (that
is, capable of achieving) the objective, and a proportionate means of achieving
1.120 As to the objective pursued by the measure, the statement of
compatibility states that the measure is necessary to ensure authorised
are better equipped to monitor compliance with the Act, motivate providers to
improve their compliance and better support
child safety and
well-being.
The explanatory
memorandum states that the unpredictability of unannounced visits serves as a
powerful deterrent and knowing inspections
can occur at any time will encourage
providers to maintain consistent compliance with regulatory standards. This in
turn may reduce
the likelihood of deliberate non-compliance or attempts to
conceal breaches ahead of scheduled
Further, the
explanatory memorandum states that departure from the Regulatory Powers Act is
considered appropriate and proportionate
having regard to the overriding public
interest in needing to monitor the financial integrity of the child care subsidy
and enhancing
the safety and quality of child care
1.121 Ensuring compliance with the Act and enhancing the safety and quality
of child care services may be capable of constituting
a legitimate objective.
However, it is not clear that this objective is, in the context of this specific
measure, a legitimate one
for the purposes of international human rights law, as
it has not been demonstrated that the measure is necessary or that the current
laws are insufficient to achieve the stated objective. It is not clear that the
measure is aimed at achieving a particular objective
that could not otherwise be
achieved through a monitoring warrant issued under the Regulatory Powers Act. It
is therefore not clear
that the measure pursues a legitimate objective or that
the measure is rationally connected to (that is, likely to be effective to
achieve) the stated objective.
1.122 In relation to proportionality, in considering whether the interference
with privacy is only as extensive as is strictly necessary,
it is noted that the
UN Human Rights Committee has observed that ‘[s]earches of a
person’s home should be restricted
to a search for necessary evidence and
should not amount to
harassment’.
Noting that
an authorised person is not permitted to obtain evidence of a contravention if
consent is not obtained, the interference
with privacy appears to be more
restricted than that in relation to which the UN Human Rights Committee
expressed concerns. However,
the inability to obtain evidence raises questions
as to the value of these new monitoring powers in practice.
1.123 As to safeguards, new section 219UCA contains conditions that must be
satisfied (as outlined above). For example, an authorised
officer must only
enter a premises during operating or ordinary business hours, and they must
announce they are authorised to enter
the premises and show identification. The
explanatory memorandum states that these conditions are in recognition that this
intrusive power that may significantly impact on personal rights and
The statement of
compatibility further notes that in recognition that there is a greater risk of
interference with the privacy rights
of persons operating in home care services,
which as noted above typically operate from the home of the child, new section
also requires that before entry into these premises, the Secretary must
be satisfied that the consent of the occupier to the premises
cannot reasonably
be obtained.
However, the
statement of compatibility does not elaborate on what ‘cannot reasonably
be obtained’ means in practice
and what steps must be undertaken by an
authorised officer to obtain consent before this threshold is considered to have
These conditions may offer some safeguard value by reducing the extent
of the interference with privacy, such as requiring entry
to a premise only
during business hours (rather than late in the evening). However, it is not
clear that these safeguards alone would
be sufficient to ensure that the
potential limit on privacy is proportionate in all circumstances.
1.124 As to oversight mechanisms, the explanatory memorandum clarifies that
the Secretary’s power to authorise entry without
consent is not subject to
external oversight.
availability of oversight and review ordinarily serve as important safeguards
with respect to measures that limit human rights.
1.125 Consequently, it is not clear that the measure pursues a legitimate
objective (and in turn is rationally connected to the stated
objective) or is
accompanied by sufficient safeguards such that it is likely to constitute a
proportionate limit on the right to
therefore a risk that the measure may not be compatible with the right to
Committee view
1.126 The committee notes that this bill (now Act) allows an authorised
person to enter the premises of a child care service without
consent of the
occupier of the premises and without a monitoring warrant, and requires the
occupier of the premises to provide reasonable
facilities and assistance for the
effective exercise of an authorised person’s powers.
1.127 The committee considers that insofar as the measure helps to ensure
that child care providers comply with the law and provide
high quality and safe
child care, it promotes the rights of the child. However, the committee notes
that these powers apply to in
from the home of the child. In relation to these in home care services, the
notes that by allowing authorised persons to enter the premises of
these services without a warrant and without the consent of the
occupier of the
premises, the measure also engages and may limit the right to privacy.
1.128 The committee notes the importance of the broader objective of this
bill – namely, to respond to serious concerns about
the safety and quality
of parts of the early childhood education and care sector in Australia. However,
the committee notes that
it is unclear whether this particular measure pursues a
legitimate objective for the purpose of international human rights law, noting
that it has not been clearly demonstrated why the measure is necessary and why
the current laws are insufficient to achieve the stated
objective. Regarding
proportionality, the committee notes that there are some safeguards accompanying
the measure but it is not clear
these are sufficient to ensure that any
limitation on the right to privacy would be proportionate in all circumstances.
The committee
therefore considers that there is a risk that the measure may not
be compatible with the right to privacy.
1.129 The committee reiterates its recommendation above with respect to a
foundational human rights assessment of the
New Tax System (Family
Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
1.130 As the bill has now passed, the committee makes no further comment in
relation to this measure.
This entry can be cited as:
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights, Early Childhood Education and
Care (Strengthening Regulation
of Early Education) Bill 2025,
Report 4 of
[2025] AUPJCHR 29.
Items 4–6 add events
that the Secretary may publicise under section 199B(1) of the
New Tax System
(Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
and items 7–9 add
information that the Secretary may publicise under section 199B(2) of the
Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
Enforcement
action register
Convention on the Rights
of the Child. See also, UN Human Rights Committee,
General Comment No.
17: Article 24
(1989) [1].
Convention on the Rights
of the Child
, article 3(1).
UN Committee on the Rights
of the Child,
General Comment No. 14 on the right of the child to have
his or her best interests taken as a primary consideration
(2013); see
IAM v Denmark
, UN Committee on the Rights of the Child
Communication No. 3/2016 (2018) [11.8].
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 17.
Statement of
compatibility, p. 13.
It is noted that the
current register includes personal information relating to individuals,
including identifying individuals who
have been convicted and sentenced under
certain provisions in the Criminal Code.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Statement of
compatibility, p. 13.
New Tax System (Family
Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
, paragraph 108(2)(f) excludes a
decision made under section 199B to publicise information from review under
section 109A of the Act.
Item 12, new subsection
Item 12, new subsection
Item 12, new subsection
Item 12, new subsection
Item 12, new subsection
219UCA(6) and (7).
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Statement of
compatibility, p. 13; see also explanatory memorandum, p. 22.
UN Human Rights
General Comment No. 16: Article 17
UN Human Rights
General Comment No. 16: Article 17
(1988) [5].
Statement of
compatibility, pp. 13-14.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
UN Human Rights
General Comment No. 16: Article 17
(1988) [8].
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Statement of
compatibility, p. 14.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (166 KB)
PDF format (119 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter