URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBSD/2025/69.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:14:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Defence Amendment (Parliamentary Joint Committee on Defence) Bill 2025 - Initial Scrutiny [2025] AUSStaCSBSD 69 (29 October 2025)
Defence Amendment (Parliamentary Joint Committee on Defence) Bill 2025136
Defence Amendment
(Parliamentary Joint Committee on Defence) Bill
The bill seeks to amend the
Defence Act 1903
to establish
the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Defence to have general oversight of
Australian defence agencies, other than the
Australian Geospatial-Intelligence
Organisation, the Australian Signals Directorate and the Defence Intelligence
Organisation.
House of Representatives on 8 October 2025
Bill status
Before the House of Representatives
1.159 The committee previously considered the Defence Amendment
(Parliamentary Joint Committee on Defence) Bill 2024 and its explanatory
memorandum, which are largely identical to this bill, during the previous
parliament in
Scrutiny Digest 7 of 2024
Scrutiny Digest 9 of
As the bill was
negatived in the House of Representatives and did not proceed, the committee
concluded its examination of the bill
without making further comment. The
committee reiterates its previous concerns in relation to the bill currently
before the Parliament
Insufficient parliamentary
1.160 Schedule 1 to the bill seeks to introduce Part VIIIAB into the
Defence Act 1903
, to establish the Parliamentary Joint Committee on
Defence (PJCD). Proposed Division 3 of
Part VIIIAB
seeks to introduce provisions
relating to the procedures that apply to the PJCD, including how it obtains
information, takes evidence
and publishes or discloses reports. The provisions
include measures to consider ‘protected
information’
by providing
for circumstances in which a minister can limit or restrict how the PJCD
conducts itself. For example:
• proposed section 110ACA—the PJCD can only require the
production of some types of ‘protected information’
if the Minister
responsible for the Commonwealth entity from which the information originates
authorises its disclosure;
• proposed section 110ACE—the minister can give a certificate to
the presiding committee member stating that a person
should not give evidence or
produce documents to the committee in relation to particular matters;
• proposed section 110ACG—limits when the committee may disclose
or publish evidence or documents in relation to proceedings
conducted in private
and evidence that involves protected information;
• proposed section 110ACH—restricts the committee from disclosing
protected information in a report to a House of Parliament
by requiring the
committee to obtain ministerial advice and authorisation; and
• proposed subsection 110AEH(2)—the committee must not conduct
proceedings in public without the minister’s approval.
1.161 The explanatory memorandum notes that these processes are in addition
to processes associated with public interest immunity
in parliamentary
committees which will continue to apply. In relation to ministerial
certificates, the explanatory memorandum explains
in section 110ACE:
It is appropriate that a decision to issue a certificate under this section
cannot be questioned in a court and tribunal, noting:
a. Ministers are accountable to the Parliament for a decision to issue a
certificate, noting that they must provide a copy of the
certificate to the
President of the Senate and Speaker of the House of Representatives (subsection
110ACE(7)).
b. It is not appropriate for a court or tribunal to intervene in this way
with processes of parliamentary committees.
c. There is a strong public interest in certainty when a certificate is
issued, to protect the operationally sensitive and other damaging
information
from uncontrolled disclosure.
1.162 These provisions are largely modelled on the
Intelligence Services
which established the Parliamentary Joint Committee on
Intelligence and Security.
1.163 The committee considers that these provisions provide for the executive
to restrict the ability of this parliamentary committee
to operate as it sees
fit. By controlling the kinds of information and evidence that the PJCD can
receive and restricting what the
PJCD may disclose or publish, this limits the
ability of the PJCD and the parliament to oversee and scrutinise information
1.164 The committee considers that while there are valid national security
reasons for introducing these limitations on the procedures
of the committee, it
is unclear why these cannot be managed with the existing public interest
immunity processes. Nevertheless, the
committee notes that this bill seeks to
establish these limitations in relation to a particular parliamentary committee
and not committees
more broadly. The committee also notes that the Senate
Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade committee will continue to have oversight
over the defence portfolio and can inquire into matters in the Defence and
Foreign Affairs and Trade portfolios in the usual manner.
1.165 The committee draws this matter to the attention of senators and
leaves to the Senate as a whole the appropriateness of establishing
parliamentary committee with powers to conduct itself limited by the
Significant penalties
1.166 Division 4 of
of Schedule 1 to the bill sets out a number of
offences that apply in relation to the PJCD, including offences for the
of evidence, documents and information in certain circumstances,
failure to attend or produce documents when required, giving false
evidence, and
threatening or improperly influencing witnesses. These offences can only be
prosecuted with the consent of the
Attorney-General.
Generally, the
offences and penalties closely align with the
Intelligence Services Act
in relation to the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and
Security (PJCIS).
1.167 Subsection 110ADG(1) provides that it is an offence if a current or
former committee member, or staff member of the committee
or committee member,
directly or indirectly makes a record of, or disclosure or communicates to, a
person any information acquired
because of holding that office or employment, or
produces to a person a document provided to the committee for the purposes of
the committee to perform its functions, and does so not for the
purposes of enabling the committee to perform its functions. The
penalty for
this offence is five years imprisonment, 300 penalty units, or both.
1.168 The committee considers that, where significant penalties are imposed,
the rationale should be fully outlined in the explanatory
memorandum, and should
be justified by reference to similar offences in Commonwealth legislation or if
not, why not. This promotes
consistency and guards against the risk that a
person's liberty is unduly limited through the application of disproportionate
1.169 In this case, the explanatory memorandum explains:
The maximum penalty for this offence is five years imprisonment or 300
penalty units, or both. This penalty reflects the gravity of
the responsibility
of Committee members and their staff, who are provided with, or may come into
the possession of in the course
of their work, sensitive information in order to
allow close scrutiny by the Committee of defence operations and other
1.170 While acknowledging this explanation, the committee notes that a
similar secrecy offence in the
Intelligence Services Act 2001
in relation
to the PJCIS is subject to a smaller penalty of two years imprisonment, 120
penalty units, or both.
therefore unclear to the committee why the proposed penalty amount is considered
appropriate. The committee’s concerns
are further heightened in this
instance as the offence appears not to be limited to ‘protected
information’ but ‘any
information’, and this is not explained
further in the explanatory memorandum.
1.171 The committee also notes that it has previously raised scrutiny
concerns concerning significant penalties with respect to identical
in the Defence Amendment (Parliamentary Joint Committee on Defence) Bill 2024,
which was negatived in the Senate on 4
July 2024. At this time, the Minister
for Defence’s response to the committee stated:
Should the bill be reintroduced by the Government in the future, the
Department would consider the committee’s scrutiny concerns
as part of any
future drafting processes and would also furnish the committee with a response
to its existing concerns through the
1.172 It is of some concern to the committee that, notwithstanding the
undertaking provided, neither the bill nor the explanatory
memorandum appears to
have been amended to address the committee’s earlier concerns.
1.173 In light of the above, the committee requests the minister’s
advice as to the appropriateness of the penalty proposed
in subsection
1.174 The committee's consideration of the appropriateness of this
provision would be assisted if the minister’s response explicitly
addresses relevant principles as set out in the Attorney-General’s
Department’s
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences, Infringement
Notices and Enforcement Powers
This entry can be cited as:
Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills, Defence Amendment
(Parliamentary Joint Committee
on Defence) Bill 2025,
Scrutiny Digest 6 of
; [2025] AUSStaCSBSD 69.
Senate Standing Committee
for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Digest 7 of 2024
(26 June 2024), pp. 24-27; Senate Standing Committee for
the Scrutiny of Bills,
Digest 9 of 2024
(14 August 2025), pp. 55-57.
Schedule 1, item 2, proposed
Part VIIIAB. The committee draws senators’ attention to these provisions
pursuant to Senate standing
order 24(1)(a)(v).
Proposed subsection 4(1)
seeks to define ‘protected information’ to mean: operationally
sensitive information; information
that would or might prejudice
Australia’s national security or foreign relations; information that would
or might prejudice
the performance by an Australian defence agency or agency in
the national intelligence community of its functions; naval nuclear
information; and information relating to an inquiry or investigation by the
Inspector-General Australian Defence Force
that is being conducted.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Schedule 1, proposed
subsection 110ADG(1). The committee draws senators’ attention to this
provision pursuant to Senate standing
order 24(1)(a)(i).
Proposed section 110ADH.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Intelligence Services Act
section 12.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (104 KB)
PDF format (128 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter