URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBSD/2025/74.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:14:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Social Security and Other Legislation Amendment (Technical Changes No. 2) Bill 2025 - Initial Scrutiny [2025] AUSStaCSBSD 74 (29 October 2025)
Social Security and Other Legislation Amendment (Technical Changes No. 2) Bill 2025247
Overview and background
Retrospective validation256
Significant matters in delegated legislation
Availability of merits review266
Standing appropriations284
Social Security and Other
Legislation Amendment (Technical Changes No. 2) Bill
This bill seeks to amend the
Social Security Act 1991
to provide a
legal basis for the method of apportioning employment income that was applied to
determine a person’s entitlement
to social security benefits from 1 July
1991 to 6 December 2020 and clarify the methods for apportioning employment
income from 1
July 1991 to 6 December 2020 to determine a debt or rate of
payment following the commencement of the bill.
This bill seeks to amend the
Social Security Act 1991
System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
Student Assistance
Paid Parental Leave Act 2010
to expand when a
special circumstances waiver may be applied to waive debts incurrent under each
of those Acts and increase the threshold
for waiving small debts.
The bill seeks to establish an Income Apportionment Resolution
Social Services
House of Representatives on 4 September 2025
Bill status
Before the House of Representatives
Overview and background
1.283 This bill seeks to insert a new Part into the
Social Security Act
to provide express legislative authority for the income apportionment
method used to determine income for the purpose of means-tested
social security
payments between 1 July 1991 and 6 December
The bill also seeks to
retrospectively validate the income apportionment methods applied during this
period and any flow-on effects
of these methods on other benefits and payments,
including, the youth training allowance (YTA) and former farm household subsidy
1.284 Income apportionment is a method of calculating the rate of a
means-tested social security payment by averaging income over
the days or time
period that an individual worked and then apportioning it to the relevant
entitlement period where the available
evidence did not permit Services
Australia to ascertain the exact amount earned by the person in each entitlement
period. This may
arise, for example, where payslips did not show the amount
earned per working day or where payslip periods did not align with the
entitlement periods.
1.285 Income apportionment was previously used between 1 July 1991 and 6
December 2020. On 7 December 2020, amendments in the
Social Services and
Other Legislation Amendment (Simplifying Income Reporting and Other Measures)
took effect to simplify income reporting for the purposes of means
tested social security payments. Due to concerns about the use
apportionment, Services Australia ceased raising and reviewing debts for
entitlements dating from before 7 December 2020
The Commonwealth
Ombudsman subsequently conducted two own-motion investigations about income
apportionment in August 2023 and December
2023. The recovery of debts
potentially affected by income apportionment were paused in October 2023, with
more affected debts being
identified and paused in April
1.286 The bill seeks to provide a lawful method to be used to determine the
amount of employment income that should be allocated to
an entitlement period
when making a decision after commencement about relevant social security
benefits received between 1 July 1991
and 6 December
The bill would also provide
a lawful method for determining employment income for decisions about affected
YTA or FHS payments for
entitlement periods before 1 July 1998 and 1 July 2014
respectively.
The bill would also
establish an Income Apportionment Resolution Scheme to provide for compensation
to persons affected by debts
calculated based on income
apportionment.
Retrospective
1.287 Schedule 1, item 2, proposed section 1117 seeks to provide that
anything having been done or still occurring is taken not to
be, nor to ever
have been, invalid or ineffective merely because a person’s work income
over a payroll period was treated,
for the purposes of social security law as
having been first earned, derived or received using an income apportionment
method. That
is, the proposed section retrospectively validates any historical
calculation of the ordinary income of an employee for the purposes
security law that were based on income apportionment. Schedule 1, item 2,
proposed sections 1117A and 1117B seek to similarly
validate calculations of
employment income that were subject to income apportionment for the purposes of
YTA and FHS payments respectively.
1.288 The committee understands that the bill seeks to address any invalidity
in the income apportionment method and regularise any
associated debts, the
enforcement of which have been
The proposed
amendments would therefore have the effect of making debts affected by income
apportionment enforceable and recoverable
by the Commonwealth. The provisions
also apply with respect to any action indirectly affected by income
apportionment to address
any possible flow-on impacts on the lawfulness of other
1.289 Underlying the basic rule of law principle that all government action
must be legally authorised, is the importance of protecting
those affected by
government decisions from arbitrary decision-making and enabling affected
persons to rely on the law as it currently
exists. Retrospective validation has
the potential to undermine these values. The committee considers that where the
Parliament acts
to retrospectively validate decisions which are put at risk it
is necessary for the Parliament to consider:
• whether affected persons will suffer any detriment by reason of the
retrospective changes to the law and, if so, whether this
would lead to
unfairness; and
• that too frequent resort to retrospective legislation may work to sap
confidence that the Parliament is respecting basic norms
associated with the
rule of law.
1.290 The committee recognises that there are some circumstances in which the
retrospective application of laws may be appropriate
to correct significant
unintended consequences that have arisen from the purported exercise of legal
powers in good faith. However,
where a bill seeks to retrospectively validate
prior actions the committee expects that the explanatory materials will set out
reasons for this, whether any persons are likely to be adversely affected
and the extent to which their interests are likely to be
affected. If an
individual's interests will, or may, be affected by the retrospective
validation, the explanatory memorandum should
set out the exceptional
circumstances that nevertheless justify the use of retrospectivity. Where any
detrimental impact may fall
on disadvantaged or vulnerable persons, the
committee expects the justification of retrospective validation should be
detailed and robust.
1.291 In this regard, the committee notes that although Services Australia,
and its predecessors, appear to have attempted in good
faith to apply income
apportionment methods these have since been identified as inconsistent with
legal requirements.
1.292 In this instance, the committee considers that the explanatory
memorandum does not provide sufficient information that would
committee to consider whether exceptional circumstances warrant the use of
retrospectivity, especially given the possible
vulnerability of the affected
persons. Further, although the explanatory memorandum notes that around 3
million individuals have
incurred debts that may be affected by income
apportionment, with approximately 148,000 outstanding debts potentially affected
the practice,
it does not
directly address how many people will be adversely affected and the likely
extent of adverse impacts. While the committee
accepts that it would not be
possible to re-calculate all cases, the extent of adverse impact is an issue
which could and should
be approximated or modelled.
1.293 The committee acknowledges that the bill seeks to moderate any
potential impacts on affected individuals, including by providing
in Schedule 3
for an Income Apportionment Resolution Scheme to provide compensation to those
impacted by income apportionment
Under the proposed
scheme, a person would be eligible for compensation where they owe a debt to the
Commonwealth under the social
security or family assistance legislation that was
raised because of income apportionment between 20 September 2003 and
amendments are discussed below in greater detail in relation to separate
scrutiny concerns.
1.294 In addition, proposed section 1117C seeks to preserve a person’s
ability to commence legal proceedings in reliance on
any general law rights they
had accrued in relation to income apportionment prior to the commencement of the
The explanatory
memorandum states:
Following commencement of this Schedule, any legal proceeding or remedy in
respect of a cause of action in respect of an accrued general
law right that
would, apart from the operation of subsection (1), be affected by the enactment
of the Bill may be instituted, continued
or enforced as if the Bill had not been
enacted. The Federal Court will have jurisdiction over such
The provision would therefore appear to guarantee that a person could
continue to rely on their accrued general law rights in proceedings
against the
Commonwealth for a debt that was calculated using the income apportionment
method. However, it is unclear to the committee
the kinds of accrued general law
rights that this provision might preserve with respect to an income
apportionment method that has
been retrospectively validated by operation of
proposed sections 1117, 1117A and 1117B. Accordingly, the committee would be
by further clarification regarding the specific legal rights envisaged
as being available to individuals in connection with such
1.295 The committee also requests further information regarding the extent to
which compensation under the scheme is likely to offset
any detriment arising
from errors affecting social security entitlements due to the use of income
apportionment. Although, again,
the committee acknowledges that the accuracy of
such information would depend on recalculating individual debts, which may be
infeasible,
it considers that
further information should be provided (by way of sampling or some other
appropriate method) to assist Senators
to assess the likely magnitude of any
adverse impacts that may be created by the proposed retrospective validation.
Such information
would support the committee’s examination of the
appropriateness of the proposed retrospective validation of income apportionment
effected by the bill.
1.296 In light of the above, the committee requests the minister’s
advice as to:
the specific kinds of accrued general law rights of those who have
incurred a debt that would be preserved by proposed section 1117C,
retrospective validation of debts affected by income apportionment in Schedule
1, item 2, proposed sections 1117, 1117A
and 1117B of the bill; and
the extent to which the amounts of compensation to be offered
under the Income Resolution Scheme proposed in Schedule 3 of the bill
expected to offset any detriment arising from the use of income apportionment,
including any information or estimates of the extent
to which individuals have
been adversely affected.
Significant matters in delegated legislation
Availability of merits
1.297 As referenced above, Schedule 3 of the bill establishes an Income
Apportionment Resolution Scheme, which would require the Commonwealth
amount of compensation to a person who owes a debt to the Commonwealth under
social security laws, where the debt was raised
as a result of an overpayment,
relates to a period between 20 September 2003 and 6 December 2020, and arose
because the person’s
income was calculated using the income apportionment
methods validated by the bill.
The scheme would apply to debts raised under the Social Security law, the
Family Household Support Act 1992
, the family assistance law or
any other Acts determined by the
1.298 The explanatory memorandum indicates that the scheme is intended to be
time-limited, with applications open for a period of
The acceptance of an
offer of compensation would also be contingent on the debtor’s agreement
to release the Commonwealth from
liability for any claim that may arise from the
use of income apportionment for the relevant debt
1.299 Subitem 3(1) seeks to grant the minister power to determine various
features of the scheme by legislative instrument. These
include, for
• other Acts under which debts may also be eligible for
compensation;
• circumstances relating to a person who owes or owed a debt to the
Commonwealth that affect their
eligibility;
• the criteria for a person to be eligible to apply for a resolution
• the amount of a resolution payment that a person is entitled to be
• who may make a decision on an application under the scheme, and how
(including as automated by a
• the matters a decision-maker may take into
• the review processes that apply to any decision under the
1.300 The committee's view is that significant matters should be included in
primary legislation unless a sound justification for
the use of delegated
legislation is provided. These include such matters as those set out above,
including the scheme’s scope
of operation, eligibility criteria,
considerations relevant to any decision, and provision for review. In this
instance, the explanatory
memorandum states:
Significant matters such as entitlement and effect of effective acceptance to
the Resolution Scheme are included at item 2 in the
primary legislation.
However, it is appropriate to include the relevant matters outlined above in
delegated legislation, through
the Determination, because it deals with the
actual details for the operationalisation of the scheme. It is appropriate for
the details
entitlement criteria, amount of the resolution payment, decision-making
and requirements for making an offer, accepting an offer and making a resolution
payment to be included in a legislative
instrument.
The matters listed in item 3 which the Minister may deal with in the
legislative instrument provides guidance on the face of the primary
legislation
legislation is required to deal with a
variety of circumstances to allow for
entitlement in certain situations and to ensure that the intent of the scheme is
1.301 The committee notes that a legislative instrument, made by the
executive, is not subject to the full range of parliamentary
scrutiny inherent
in bringing proposed changes in the form of an amending bill. While noting
the explanation provided in the explanatory
memorandum and the stated intention
that the scheme would be
time-limited,
the committee has
generally not accepted a desire for administrative flexibility alone to be a
sufficient justification for leaving
significant matters to delegated
legislation. Further, despite the stated intention that the scheme operate for a
fixed period, it
is noted that this constraint does not appear on the face of
1.302 The committee notes that allowing a determination to address matters
like eligibility, decision-making processes and criteria,
the amount of
compensation to be paid and provision for review provides the minister with a
broad power to prescribe the essential
procedural matters that address the
fundamental policy of the scheme. The committee considers these matters could be
provided on
the face of the bill. The committee’s concern is heightened
insofar as such matters are essential to determining whether the
retrospective
validation of the use of income apportionment methods in Schedule 1 is
adequately justified.
1.303 Subitem 3(2) provides that a determination by the minister must address
review of any decision under the resolution scheme.
As review of decisions made
under the resolution scheme would therefore be governed by the determination,
Schedule 3, proposed subitem
6(2) seeks to disapply the existing merits review
pathways that apply to other administrative decisions made under the social
legislation.
1.304 The committee expects any justification for excluding merits review to
be set out clearly within the explanatory materials to
the bill. The committee's
consideration of such explanations is assisted if the explanation refers to the
Administrative Review Council's
guidance document,
What decisions should be
subject to merits
1.305 In this instance the explanatory memorandum states:
However, subitem 6(2) excludes Parts 4 and 4A of the Administration Act in
relation to a decision under the Resolution Scheme. The
Determination must
specify how decisions under the scheme are reviewed as explained above. The
exclusion of review rights under Parts
4 and 4A of the Administration Act is
reasonable and appropriate because there is a mandatory requirement at subitem
3(2) for the
Minister to determine a process for the review of decisions in the
Determination. Given the standalone and time-limited nature of
scheme, it is
appropriate that the Determination sets out a bespoke mechanism for the review
of decisions under the scheme rather
than relying on existing review processes
in the Administration Act.
1.306 The explanatory memorandum further contemplates that decisions made
under the scheme would be subject to one level of internal
1.307 The committee acknowledges that the temporary nature of the scheme may
provide an adequate justification for its implementation
through delegated
legislation in this instance. However, while noting that the bill does not
include a sunset clause or otherwise
appear to contemplate operation for a fixed
period of time, it is also unclear to the committee whether any review processes
by the minister would conform with existing merits review processes
provided for in
Social Security (Administration) Act
1.308 In light of the above, the committee requests the minister’s
detailed advice as to whether:
the bill can be amended to include on the face of the primary
legislation high-level guidance on the additional eligibility requirements
apply for compensation, the matters that may be considered when deciding the
application, and the review rights for any decisions
made under the
the review process to be determined under Schedule 3, item 3,
proposed subitem 3(1) would replicate the review rights that are available
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
committee’s consideration of this information would be assisted if the
response made reference to the Administrative Review
Council guidance document,
What decisions should be subject to merits review?
1.309 The committee draws these matters to the attention of the Senate
Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation.
appropriations
1.310 Schedule 4, item 1 in the bill seeks to authorise amounts to be
appropriated from the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the purposes
of making a
payment under the resolution scheme or for amounts payable as a result of
working out the Division 3 work income of a
person under
Security Act
; that being certain defined income earned, derived or received on
or after 20 September 2003.
1.311 This provision seeks to establish a standing appropriation which would
enable entities to spend money from the Consolidated
Revenue Fund on an ongoing
basis, usually for indefinite amounts and duration. Unlike annual appropriations
which require the executive
to periodically request the Parliament to
appropriate money for a particular purpose, once a standing appropriation is
enacted any
expenditure under it does not require regular parliamentary approval
and therefore escapes direct parliamentary control. The amount
of expenditure
authorised by a standing appropriation may grow significantly over time, but
without any mechanism for review included
in the bill alongside the
appropriation it is difficult for the Parliament to assess whether a standing
appropriation remains appropriate.
1.312 Given the difficulty of ongoing parliamentary oversight over enacted
standing appropriations, the committee expects a robust
justification for why a
standing appropriation should be established or expanded in the first place. To
this end, the committee expects
the explanatory memorandum to a bill that
establishes or expands a standing appropriation to explain why it is appropriate
a standing appropriation (rather than providing for the relevant
appropriations in the annual appropriation bills) and provide details
mechanisms that enable reporting to the Parliament.
1.313 In this case, the committee is concerned that the explanatory
memorandum does not provide sufficient justification. It states:
There may be an overlap between the appropriation in this Schedule and
existing appropriations. For example, for the purpose of working
individual’s Division 3 work income under
Social Security
, the appropriation in section 242 of the Administration Act may also be
relied on. Where more than one special appropriation is available
to support the
same expenditure, practically the appropriation that the funds leave the
Consolidated Revenue Fund through will be
the appropriation which is drawn down
in the Central Budget Management System and reflected in the entity’s
accounts and records.
1.314 The committee acknowledges the importance of ensuring ongoing funding
for the scheme but notes that, once established as a standing
appropriation, the
Parliament retains limited oversight of this expenditure. Further, the committee
notes that it is unclear whether
any other mechanisms have been considered to
afford appropriate parliamentary oversight of the amounts that may be expended
this appropriation, such as limiting the amount of funds that may be
provided from the appropriation or providing a sunset clause
into the bill to
repeal the appropriation at a specified time.
1.315 Notwithstanding the information in the explanatory memorandum, the
committee’s concerns are heightened in circumstances
where the proposed
standing appropriation is likely to overlap with other existing standing
appropriations.
1.316 Accordingly, the committee requests the minister’s detailed
advice as to:
why it is appropriate to include a standing appropriation (rather
than providing for the relevant appropriations in the annual appropriation
what mechanisms are in place to report to the Parliament on any
expenditure authorised by the standing appropriation; and
whether consideration has been provided to include guidance on the
face of the bill as to the amount of funds that may be appropriated.
This entry can be cited as:
Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills, Social Security and Other
Legislation Amendment
(Technical Changes No. 2) Bill 2025,
Scrutiny Digest 6
; [2025] AUSStaCSBSD 74.
Schedule 1, item 2 defines
‘entitlement period’ as ‘(a) in relation to a specified
pension for a period ending
before 1 July 1999–a period starting on a
pension payday and ending on the day before the next pension payday; or (b)
otherwise–a
period determined by the relevant Secretary in relation to
which an instalment of a social security benefit or social security pension
paid and that ends before 7 December 2020.’
Schedule 1, item 2, proposed
sections 1117A and 1117B.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Schedule 1, item 2, division
Schedule 1, item 2, proposed
sections 1117E and 1117F.
Schedule 3, item 2.
Schedule 1, item 2,
proposed subsections 1117(1),(3) and (5), 1117A(1)(3)-(5); 117B(1) and
(3)–(5). The committee draws senators’
attention to these provisions
pursuant to Senate standing order 24(1)(a)(i).
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Lessons in Lawfulness – Own motion investigation into Services
Australia’s and the Department of Social Services’
response to the
question of the lawfulness of income apportionment before 7 December 2020
(August 2023), p. 9.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Schedule 3, subitems
Schedule 1, item 2,
proposed section 1117C.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
See explanatory
memorandum, p. 3, ‘Recalculating all affected debts could have negative
impacts on individuals, including
causing distress and protracted uncertainty.
It recognises income apportionment was a genuine, technical misunderstanding of
social security law, and a reasonable attempt at determining a
person’s need for support, which in most instances had a modest
impact on individual debts.’
Schedule 3, proposed
subitems 3(1) and 6(2). The committee draws senators’ attention to these
provisions pursuant to Senate
standing orders 24(1)(a)(iii) and
24(1)(a)(iv).
Schedule 3, item 2.
Schedule 3, item 2,
proposed paragraph 2(2)(a).
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Schedule 3, item 3,
proposed paragraph 3(1)(a).
Schedule 3, item 3,
proposed paragraph 3(1)(b).
Schedule 3, item 3,
proposed paragraph 3(2)(c).
Schedule 3, item 3,
proposed subparagraph 3(1)(h)(ii).
Schedule 3, item 3,
proposed subparagraph 3(1)(h)(iii).
Schedule 3, item 3,
proposed paragraph 3(1)(n).
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Schedule 1, item 2,
proposed subsections 117, 117A and 117B.
Social Security
(Administration) Act 1999
Administrative Review
decisions should be subject to merits review?
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Schedule 4, item 1. The
committee draws senators’ attention to these provisions pursuant to Senate
standing orders 24(1)(a)(v).
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (161 KB)
PDF format (147 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter