URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBRp/2016/67.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:14:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Law Enforcement Legislation Amendment (State Bodies and Other Measures) Bill 2016 [2016] AUSStaCSBRp 67 (30 November 2016)
Law Enforcement Legislation Amendment (State Bodies and Other Measures) Bill 2016
Trespass on personal rights and liberties—retrospective application
Schedule 3, item 2
Exposing vulnerabilities within the Act
Practical difficulties in enforcement
Law Enforcement Legislation Amendment (State Bodies
and Other Measures) Bill 2016
This bill seeks to amend various Acts relating to law enforcement to:
• support the establishment of the NSW Law Enforcement Conduct
Commission and its Inspector;
• align the Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption Commission of
Victoria’s investigative powers with those available
to other state
anti-corruption bodies; and
• amend the definition of ‘lawfully acquired’ in the
Proceeds of Crime Act 2002
in response to issues raised in a recent court
House of Representatives on 19 October 2016
Passed both Houses on 24 November 2016
The committee dealt with this bill in
Alert Digest No. 8 of 2016
Minister responded to the committee’s comments in a letter dated
22 November 2016. A copy of the letter is attached to
this report.
Alert Digest No. 8 of 2016 - extract
Trespass on personal rights and
liberties—retrospective
application
Schedule 3, item 2
This item provides that the amendments made in item 1 to
section 336A
Proceeds of Crime Act 2002
(the POC Act) apply in relation to property or
wealth acquired
, on or after the commencement of this Schedule.
The effect of the amendment to section 336A is to provide that property or
wealth is not to be considered as ‘lawfully acquired’
where it has
been subject to a security or liability that has been wholly or partially
discharged using property that is not ‘lawfully
(explanatory memorandum, p. 3). The amendment has been prompted by a
decision of the Supreme Court of Western Australia
Commissioner of the
Australian Federal Police v Huang
[2016] WASC 5
which held that the court
could not consider the source of funds used to satisfy a mortgage over a
residential property in determining
whether this property was ‘lawfully
acquired’, despite the possibility that unlawfully acquired funds had been
make mortgage repayments. The Court was therefore bound to exclude the
residential property from forfeiture.
The explanatory memorandum (at pp 3–4) states that the decision in
was ‘contrary to the intended meaning and the objects of the
POC Act’ and that the amendments are intended to clarify
that, where
illegitimate funds are used to discharge a legitimately obtained security (such
as a mortgage), property or wealth obtained
using this security does not
constitute ‘lawfully acquired’ property under section 336A.
Although the justification provided is sufficient to justify amending the law
with prospective application, the fact that a court
has interpreted a law
contrary to the executive government’s understanding of the original
provisions ‘intended meaning’
is not a sufficient justification to
apply the law retrospectively. A central purpose of the rule of law is to enable
people to guide
their decision-making and actions by reference to the law that
applies at the time of those decisions and actions. In general, this
applies to all persons regardless of their motivation in taking the action
(unless acting on a particular motivation itself
contravenes a legal
obligation).
The statement of compatibility (at p. 9) notes that the international human
rights law prohibition on the retrospective operation
of criminal laws is not
applicable as orders under the POC Act are civil in character. The explanatory
memorandum (at pp 33-34) states
that the retrospective application of the
amendment is necessary:
...to ensure that relevant orders are not frustrated by requiring law
enforcement agencies to obtain evidence of, and prove, the precise
point in time
at which certain property or wealth was acquired. Such a requirement would be
unnecessarily onerous and would be contrary
to the objects of the
The committee considers the way in which the retrospective application of a
law can impact on personal rights and liberties in the
context of civil as well
as criminal proceedings. Although the committee accepts that the retrospective
application of laws is justifiable
in limited instances, it expects to see the
case for that conclusion fully articulated. Relying on the fact that it would be
for law enforcement agencies to have to prove elements of the case
against a person is not generally sufficient to justify the retrospective
application of laws. It is also unclear how requiring proof of when property or
wealth was acquired would be contrary to the objects
of the POC Act. Noting
this, the committee seeks the Minister’s more detailed justification for
applying this amendment to
property or wealth acquired before the commencement
of the Schedule.
Minister’s response - extract
Exposing vulnerabilities within the Act
Item 1 must apply retrospectively to ensure the continued effective operation
of the POC Act. If item 1 is only applied prospectively,
this would severely
undermine the effectiveness of the Act, allowing criminal entities to launder
proceeds of crime through seemingly
legitimate legal structures while
undermining law enforcement’s ability to effectively restrain and seize
proceeds of crime.
If the amendments in item 1 are not applied retrospectively, the Supreme
Court of Western Australia’s decision in
Commissioner of the Australian
Federal Police v Huang
[2016] WASC 5
will continue to apply
to property or wealth acquired before the commencement of the Bill.
The Court in
in considering monthly mortgage repayments used to
purchase a residential property, provided (from 149) that:
How he (the second respondent) met the monthly repayments does not as a
matter of law, bear upon the earlier temporal question concerning
whether or not
the Girrawheen land was lawfully acquired in 2005. Nor does it bear upon whether
his interest as a registered proprietor
in fee simple can be said to be the
proceeds of unlawful activity
The implications of the decision are significant. In determining whether
property is ‘lawfully acquired’, a court will
focus solely on how
property was initially purchased, even where illicit funds have been used to pay
off a loan in relation to that
property. The Court’s decision currently
allows individuals to launder proceeds of crime through mortgage repayments as,
if the Australian Federal Police proves that proceeds of crime were used to
make these payments, this fact would remain irrelevant
in determining whether
the property was ‘lawfully acquired’.
The scope of the decision is concerning as the Court ultimately confined its
analysis to payments made to directly acquire property
(i.e. the deposit on the
property) and disregarded payments made to retain the interest in the property
(i.e. mortgage repayments).
This may suggest that payments made to retain
interest in property, such as lease repayments, are also not to be considered in
determining
whether a proprietary interest is ‘lawfully
Under the POC Act, a person can rely on the fact that property or wealth is
‘lawfully acquired’ to resist preliminary
unexplained wealth orders
(section 179B) and unexplained wealth restraining orders (section 20A), and to
assist them in excluding
property from forfeiture (s 94) and transferring
forfeited property to themselves (s 102).
decision continues to apply to property or wealth
acquired prior to the commencement of the Bill, this vulnerability will be
by criminal entities, which could launder large sums of money through
multiple mortgage repayments and related legal instruments.
This behaviour is
relatively common within criminal organisations, which regularly take steps to
disguise their unlawful income through
structured transfers, hiding it behind
seemingly legitimate enterprises and intermingling it with legitimately derived
Further, a failure to make these provisions retrospective, would create an
effective avoidance mechanism for established criminals
and their networks. For
example, a criminal could continuously remortgage an existing property and repay
that mortgage with the proceeds
of criminal activity, without the value held in
this property ever being treated as being unlawfully acquired.
This would be contrary to the objects of the POC Act under section 5, as it
would actively contribute to the profitability of criminal
enterprises and
prevent authorities from depriving persons of the proceeds of offences.
Practical difficulties in enforcement
If item 1 is only applied prospectively, this would significantly undermine
law enforcement’s ability to effectively restrain
and seize proceeds of
crime by requiring authorities to prove the date that wealth or property was
lawfully acquired.
A court may only be bound to make preliminary unexplained wealth orders
(section 179B) and unexplained wealth restraining orders (section
example, if satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to suspect that a
person’s total wealth exceeds the value
of the person’s wealth that
was ‘lawfully acquired’. If item 1 only applies prospectively, a
proceeds of crime
authority would need to prove the date that the wealth was
acquired to avoid the application of
This will be practically
impossible in cases where a person has accumulated significant wealth over
decades and has no apparent source
of legitimate income, especially in relation
to property that is portable and not subject to registration requirements.
If the amendments apply prospectively and a proceeds of crime authority
cannot establish the date that wealth was acquired, a court
may rely on
in holding that evidence which proves that a liability or security on this
wealth was discharged using unlawfully obtained funds is
irrelevant in
determining whether this wealth was ‘lawfully acquired’. This may
allow persons to dispose of unexplained
wealth before an order can be made or
potentially prevent an unexplained wealth order being made at all.
It is important that item 1 applies retrospectively to ensure the continued
effective operation of the POC Act. The decision in
has created a
loophole in the operation of the law and, if item 1 is only applied
prospectively, this could be exploited until the
commencement of the Schedule,
with effects well into the future.
I also note that previous amendments to unexplained wealth orders and
restraining orders have been applied retrospectively to property
acquired before the amendments commenced (see item 34 of the
Legislation Amendment (Unexplained Wealth and other Measures Bill)
Committee response
The committee thanks the Minister for this response.
The committee notes the Minister’s advice in relation to the practical
issues that may arise if the amendments in item 1 to
section 336A
Proceeds of Crime Act 2002
are not applied retrospectively.
The committee notes that it would have been useful had this information
been included in the explanatory memorandum.
In light of the fact that the bill has already passed both Houses of
Parliament the committee makes no further comment in relation
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (79.9 KB)
PDF format (144 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter