URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJCHR/2025/39.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:08:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Appropriation Bills 2025-2026 - Concluded Matters [2025] AUPJCHR 39 (2 October 2025)
Chapter 2 :
Concluded matters
Appropriation Bills 2025-2026327
Appropriation of money
Summary of initial assessment
Preliminary international human rights legal advice
Committee's initial view
Minister's response333
Concluding comments
International human rights legal advice
Committee view
Concluded matters
2.1 The committee considers a response to matters raised previously by the
2.2 Correspondence relating to these matters is available on the committee's
Appropriation Bills
These three bills
appropriate money from the Consolidated Revenue Fund for services
House of Representatives, 30 July 2025
Multiple rights
committee requested a response from the minister in relation to the bills in
Appropriation of money
2.4 These bills appropriate money from the Consolidated Revenue Fund for a
range of services. The portfolios, budget outcomes and
entities for which these
appropriations would be made, are set out in the schedules to each bill.
Summary of initial
Preliminary international human rights legal
Multiple rights
2.5 Proposed government expenditure to give effect to particular policies may
engage and limit, or promote, a range of human rights,
including civil and
political rights and economic, social and cultural rights (such as the rights to
housing, health, education and
The rights of people
with disability, children and women and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people may also be engaged where
policies have a particular impact on vulnerable
2.6 Australia has obligations to respect, protect and fulfil human rights,
including specific obligations to progressively realise
economic, social and
cultural rights using the maximum of resources available; and a corresponding
duty to refrain from taking retrogressive
measures (or backwards steps) in
relation to the realisation of these
2.7 Economic, social and cultural rights may be particularly affected by
appropriation bills, because any increase in funding would
likely promote such
rights. Any reduction in funding for measures which realise such rights, such as
specific health and education
services, may be considered to be retrogressive
with respect to the attainment of such rights. Retrogressive measures must be
for the purposes of international human rights law.
2.8 The statements of compatibility accompanying these bills did not identify
that any rights are engaged by the bills.
Committee's initial view
2.9 The committee considered that the allocation of funds via appropriation
bills is susceptible to a human rights assessment that
is directed at broader
questions of compatibility, namely, the impact on progressive realisation
obligations and on vulnerable minorities
or specific groups. The committee also
considered that the statements of compatibility with human rights should assess
the compatibility
of measures which directly impact human rights and which are
not addressed elsewhere in legislation, as the appropriation bills may
opportunity for the Parliament to consider the compatibility of these measures
with human rights.
2.10 The committee sought the advice of the Minister for Finance as to
whether the appropriation bills are compatible with Australia's
human rights
obligations, and particularly:
(a) whether and how the bills are compatible with Australia's obligations of
progressive realisation with respect to economic, social
and cultural
(a) if there are any reductions in the allocation of funding that affect
human rights obligations, whether these are compatible with
Australia's
obligations not to unjustifiably take backward steps (a retrogressive measure)
in the realisation of economic, social
and cultural rights; and
(b) whether and how the allocations are compatible with the rights of
vulnerable groups (such as children; women; Aboriginal and Torres
Islander Peoples; people with disabilities; children and ethnic minorities).
full initial analysis is set out in
minister advised:
I note that a similar question was raised by your predecessor regarding the
2023-24 Appropriation Bills and the 2022-23 Additional
Estimates Appropriation
Bills in Report 6 of 2023. I maintain that the Appropriation Bills, given their
limited legal effect, do
not engage or otherwise affect the rights or freedoms
relevant to the
Human Rights (Parliamentary Scrutiny) Act 2011
remains impracticable and inappropriate to include broad human rights
assessments, such as impacts on vulnerable groups, in explanatory
memoranda for
these bills. Details of Government expenditure are available through information
sources such as the Budget Papers
and Portfolio Budget Statements. Existing
legislative scrutiny processes also provide extensive opportunities to assess
rights impacts of proposed Commonwealth expenditure.
Concluding comments
International human rights legal
2.13 The minister stated that appropriation bills do not engage or affect
human rights and it is not practical or appropriate for
the explanatory
memoranda to the appropriation bills to include an assessment of human rights,
including impacts on vulnerable groups.
However, as set out in the initial
analysis, without an assessment of the human rights compatibility of
appropriation bills, it is
difficult to assess whether, and to what extent,
Australia is promoting human rights and realising its human rights obligations
respect of the measures proposed in the relevant budget. For example, a
retrogressive measure in an individual bill may not, in fact,
be retrogressive
when understood within the budgetary context. Further, where appropriation
measures may engage and limit human rights,
an assessment of the human rights
compatibility of the measure would provide an explanation as to whether that
limitation would be
permissible under international human rights law.
2.14 Further, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights emphasises the close relationship between public
budgets and human
rights, and highlights instances in which international human rights oversight
bodies have identified the importance
of state budgets in their assessment of
compliance with human rights
obligations.
It states that:
If governments are to use the budget to effectively realize people’s
rights, they need to understand the relationship of the
budget to the human
rights guarantees in their country’s constitution and laws, and in
the...international human rights treaties
the government has ratified. They need
to understand in detailed and concrete terms how they can meet their human
rights obligations
in the way they raise revenue, allocate, spend and audit the
appropriation of any funds, or more funds in comparison with earlier amounts,
may promote human rights. The provision of
no funds, or a reduction in funding
in comparison with earlier appropriated sums, may limit human rights. Such a
limit will not necessarily
be impermissible, but it would require that the limit
be identified, and explanation given as to whether the limitation is reasonable,
necessary and proportionate.
2.16 The minister stated that the details of proposed government expenditure
are available in the Budget Papers and the Portfolio
Budget Statements. However,
these documents do not identify whether specific measures promote or limit human
2.17 For example, the 2025-26 Department of Social Services Portfolio Budget
Statement indicates a reduction in funding in relation
to the affordable housing
program pursuant to Appropriation Bill (No. 1) and Supply Bill (No. 1) in
comparison to the prior financial
year, and does not provide a forward estimate
for funding in the 2026-27 financial
In relation to the
housing and homelessness program, the forward estimate for funding indicates a
substantial decrease each financial
year from 2026 to
The Budget Statement does
not explain whether a greater or lesser amount is being budgeted for this
particular outcome overall, nor
does it explain why the budgeted expenditure
relating to affordable housing is intended to end or why the budgeted
expenditure relating
to housing and homelessness is intended to substantially
decrease, and how this is compatible with the right to housing (as an aspect
the right to an adequate standard of
2.18 The minister also stated the existing legislative scrutiny processes
provide extensive opportunities to assess the human rights
impacts of proposed
Commonwealth expenditure. However, because individual bills and legislative
instruments facilitate the spending
of already appropriated money on specific
activities, the statements of compatibility with human rights accompanying
legislation
do not typically consider the individual measures within their
broader budgetary context. As such, if there is a reduction in spending
lower amount of appropriation), this will typically not be reflected in the
statement of compatibility that accompanies the
bill or legislative instrument
that allocates the funding that is available.
2.19 For example, statements of compatibility with human rights accompanying
instruments made under the
Financial Framework (Supplementary Powers) Act
, which establish legislative authority for the funding of specified
services, often state that the instruments promote several human
rights. For
instance, the
Financial Framework (Supplementary Powers) Amendment (Social
Services Measures No. 3) Regulations 2024
establishes the legislative authority
for the funding of the Community-led Economic Development
The statement of
compatibility states that the item was originally created to support grants
funding for infrastructure projects
in Cashless Debit Card (CDC) program areas,
with a focus on employment and training opportunities for CDC participants, and
the amended
item ‘will continue to support funding activities under the
CDC program and include a significant package of supports for key
communities.’
concludes that the measure promotes the right to
However, the explanatory
materials do not explain whether, viewed in its broader context, this specific
funding constitutes a real
increase, decrease, or maintenance in funding.
Consequently, in this example, it is not clear at what stage consideration of
level of funding given to these specific services would have identified a
real increase or reduction over time. This raises questions
sufficiency of the assessment of the impact of proposed Commonwealth expenditure
on human rights in legislation authorising
the expenditure, post
appropriation.
2.20 It follows from the fact that appropriations
may engage human rights for the purposes of international human rights law, that
in order to assess such bills for compatibility with human rights, the
statements of compatibility accompanying such bills should
include an assessment
of the budget measures contained in the bill, including an assessment of:
• overall trends in the progressive realisation of economic, social and
cultural rights (including any retrogressive trends
• the impact of budget measures (such as spending or reduction in
spending) on vulnerable groups (including women, Aboriginal
and Torres Strait
Islander people, people with disability, children and ethnic
minorities);
• key individual measures which engage human rights, including a brief
assessment of their human rights compatibility.
2.21 In relation to the impact of spending or
reduction in spending on vulnerable groups, relevant considerations may
• whether there are any specific budget measures that may
disproportionately impact on particular groups (either directly or
indirectly);
• whether there are any budget measures or trends in spending over time
that seek to fulfil the right to equality and non-discrimination
for particular
2.22 The UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights as well as human
rights commissions in other countries have prepared
useful guidance on the
importance of undertaking human rights assessments of government budgets and
methodologies for monitoring
and analysing
The UN Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights has emphasised:
The legislature and national human rights institution should be provided with
the resources and authority to review the government’s
budget to ensure
that it has been developed and implemented in a way that complies with the
government’s human rights
obligations.
Committee view
2.23 The committee thanks the minister for this response. As the committee
has consistently stated since
the appropriation of
funds facilitates the taking of actions which may affect the progressive
realisation of, or failure to fulfil,
Australia's obligations under
international human rights law. The committee considers that appropriations may,
therefore, engage
human rights for the purposes of international human rights
law, because increased appropriation for particular areas may promote
rights (such as housing, welfare, health or education) while reduced
appropriations for particular areas may be regarded
as retrogressive – a
2.24 The committee acknowledges that appropriation bills may present
particular difficulties given their technical and high-level
nature as they
generally include appropriations for a wide range of programs and activities
across many portfolios. The committee
notes the minister's advice that further
information about expenditure can be found in Budget Papers and Portfolio Budget
Statements.
However, as the budget itself is not legislation liable to this
committee's scrutiny, and because individual legislation may not
whether funding for specific measures is being increased or decreased over time,
the committee considers that these are
not sufficient alternatives.
2.25 The committee notes that it may not be appropriate to assess human
rights compatibility for each individual measure in appropriation
However, the committee considers that the allocation of funds via appropriation
bills is susceptible to a human rights assessment
that is directed at broader
questions of compatibility, namely, their impact on progressive realisation
obligations and on vulnerable
minorities or specific groups. The committee
considers that appropriation bills are a key opportunity for the Parliament (and
this committee) to consider the compatibility of these measures with human
rights within the overall budgetary context.
2.26 The committee's expectation is that statements of compatibility with
human rights accompanying appropriations bills should address
the compatibility
of measures which directly impact human rights and which are not addressed
elsewhere in legislation. The committee
notes that there are a range of
resources available to assist in the preparation of human rights assessments of
Suggested action
2.27 The committee considers that statements of compatibility for future
appropriations bills should contain an assessment of human
rights compatibility
which meets the standards outlined in the committee's
and addresses the following matters:
• overall trends in the progressive realisation of economic, social
and cultural rights (including any retrogressive trends
or measures);
• the impact of budget measures (such as spending or reduction in
spending) on vulnerable groups (including women, Aboriginal
and Torres Strait
Islander people, people with disability, children and ethnic minorities);
• key individual measures which engage human rights, including a
brief assessment of their human rights compatibility.
2.28 In particular, the committee expects that where the appropriations
bills propose a real reduction in funds available for expenditure
portfolios or activities that may impact human rights, the statement of
compatibility should identify this and explain
why this is a permissible
2.29 The committee draws these human rights
concerns to the attention of the minister and the Parliament for consideration
of statements
of compatibility prepared for future appropriations bills.
To find the relevant
legislation, search for the name on either the
assessments
assessments
This entry can be cited as:
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights,
Appropriation Bill (No. 1)
Report 5 of 2025
[2025] AUPJCHR 39.
Appropriation Bill (No. 1)
Appropriation Bill (No. 2) 2025-2026
Appropriation
(Parliamentary Departments) Bill (No. 1) 2025-2026
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights,
(27 August 2025) p. 28-34.
Under the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
Under the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities; Convention on the Rights of the Child;
Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women; and
the Universal Declaration of the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.
See International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
The minister's response to
the committee's inquiries was received on 10 September 2025. This is an extract
of the response. The
response is available in full on the relevant webpage for
the legislation: see
assessments
UN Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights,
Human Rights through Government Budgets
(2017) p. 7.
UN Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights,
Human Rights through Government Budgets
(2017) p. 12.
Portfolio Budget
Statements 2025-26,
Related Paper No. 1.14, Social Services Portfolio
(2025) pp. 64 and 66.
Portfolio Budget
Statements 2025-26,
Related Paper No. 1.14, Social Services Portfolio
(2025) pp. 64 and 66.
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, article 11.
Financial Framework
(Supplementary Powers) Amendment (Social Services Measures No. 3) Regulations
F2024L01369
Statement of
compatibility, p. 1.
Statement of
compatibility, p. 3.
This could include an
assessment of any trends indicating the progressive realisation of rights using
the maximum of resources available;
any increase in funding over time in real
terms; any trends that increase expenditure in a way which would benefit
vulnerable groups;
and any trends that result in a reduction in the allocation
of funding which may impact on the realisation of human rights and, if
analysis of whether this would be permissible under international human rights
Spending, or reduction of
spending, may have disproportionate impacts on such groups and accordingly, may
engage the right to equality
and non-discrimination.
There are a range of
resources to assist in the preparation of human rights assessments of budgets.
See, e.g. UN Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights,
Human Rights through Government Budgets
(2017); Scottish Human Rights
Commission,
Rights Budget Work: What, Why, How? Collected Briefing Papers
30–40; South African
Rights Commission, Budget Analysis for Advancing Socio-Economic Rights
(2016); Ann Blyberg and Helena Hofbauer,
2 and Governments' Budgets
(2014); Diane Elson,
Budgeting for Women's
Government Budgets for Compliance with CEDAW
(2006); Rory O'Connell, Aoife
Nolan, Colin Harvey, Mira Dutschke and Eoin Rooney
, Applying an International
Human Rights Framework to State Budget Allocations: Rights and Resources
(Routledge, 2014).
UN Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights,
Human Rights through Government Budgets
(2017), p. 143.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(13 March 2013) pp. 65-67;
(5 June 2013) pp. 21-27;
(4 March 2014) pp. 3-6;
(24 June 2014) pp. 5-8;
(18 March 2015) pp. 5-10;
(18 June 2015) pp. 13-17;
(23 February 2016) p. 2;
(22 November 2016) pp. 30-33;
(21 March 2017) pp. 44-46;
(14 June 2017) pp. 42-44;
(27 March 2018) pp. 97-100;
(19 June 2018) pp. 49-52;
(2 April 2019) pp. 106-111;
(10 September 2019) pp. 11-17;
(2 April 2020) pp. 15-18;
(15 October 2020) pp. 20-23;
(16 June 2021) pp. 11-15;
(25 March 2022) pp. 3-7;
(24 November 2022) pp. 11-15;
(14 June 2023) pp. 8-15;
(2 August 2023) pp. 101-108;
(26 June 2024) p.1;
(3 March 2025) p. 1; and
(27 August 2025) pp. 28-34.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (167 KB)
PDF format (128 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter