URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJCHR/2025/37.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:08:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Social Security and Other Legislation Amendment (Technical Changes No. 2) Bill 2025 - New and Ongoing Matters [2025] AUPJCHR 37 (2 October 2025)
Social Security and Other Legislation Amendment (Technical Changes No. 2) Bill 2025218
Validation of income apportionment method
Preliminary international human rights legal advice
Right to social security
Right to effective remedy
Committee view
Social Security and Other
Legislation Amendment (Technical Changes No. 2) Bill
This bill seeks to amend the
Social Security Act 1991
to provide a
legal basis for the method of apportioning employment income that was applied to
entitlement periods between 1 July 1991
and 6 December 2020 and clarify methods
for apportioning employment income in entitlement periods from 1 July 1991 to 6
2020 to determine a debt or rate of payment following the commencement
of the bill.
This bill also seeks to amend the
Social Security Act 1991
New Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
Assistance Act 1973
Parental Leave Act 2010
instances in which the special circumstances waiver may be applied to waive
debts incurred under each respective Act and
increase the threshold for waiving
a small debt.
This bill also seeks to establish the Income Apportionment Resolution
Social Services
House of Representatives, 4 September 2025
Social security; effective remedy
Validation of income apportionment method
1.147 The bill seeks to insert a new Part into the
Social Security Act
to provide express legislative authority for the income apportionment
method used to determine income during entitlement periods
between 1 July 1991
and 6 December 2020.
As a result,
debts incurred that were calculated using the income apportionment method during
that time will be validated and recoverable
by the Commonwealth.
1.148 Income apportionment is a method of calculating the rate of a
means-tested social security payment by averaging income over
the days or time
period that an individual worked and then apportioning it to the relevant
entitlement period where the evidence
available did not allow Services Australia
to work out the exact amount earned by a person in each entitlement period. This
for example, where payslips did not show the amount earned per
working day or where payslip periods did not align with the dates
of entitlement
1.149 By way of background, income apportionment was used during the period
from 1 July 1991 to 6 December 2020. On 7 December 2020,
amendments under the
Social Services and Other Legislation Amendment (Simplifying Income Reporting
and Other Measures) Act 2020
came into effect and simplified income
1.150 In mid-2021, Services Australia stopped raising and reviewing debts for
entitlements pre-7 December 2020 ‘due to concerns
raised about the use of
income apportionment.’
Commonwealth Ombudsman conducted two own-motion investigations into income
apportionment in August 2023 and December 2023. Recovery
of debts potentially
affected by income apportionment were paused in October 2023, and more affected
debts were identified and paused
1.151 The bill seeks to rectify the invalidity of the income apportionment
method that has resulted in the ‘pausing’ of
certain debts. The bill
also seeks to validate the flow-on effects of income apportionment to other
benefits and payments, including
the youth training allowance (YTA) and the
former farm household support
1.152 The bill also seeks to provide a lawful method to determine the amount
of employment income that should be allocated to an entitlement
period when
making a decision after the commencement of this bill in respect of relevant
social security benefits received during
1 July 1991 to 6 December
The explanatory material
sets out that this may be necessary, for example, where a debt decision has been
on hold, a past debt decision
is subject to merits review on another basis than
the use of income apportionment, or where the Secretary obtains evidence after
this bill is enacted that a person may have incurred an
overpayment.
The bill also seeks
to provide for a lawful method of determining employment income for decisions
made after the commencement of
this bill for YTA and former FHS payments for
entitlement periods before 1 July 1998 and 1 July 2014
respectively.
1.153 The bill also establishes the Income Apportionment Resolution Scheme
(the Resolution Scheme) which would require the Commonwealth
to pay an amount of
reparation to a person who owes a debt to the Commonwealth under social security
laws, where the debt was raised
as a result of an overpayment, relates to a
period between 20 September 2003 and 6 December 2020, and arose because the
income was calculated using the apportionment methods set out in
An eligible person
would need to apply for a resolution payment. If a person was offered a
resolution payment and accepted the payment
under the Resolution Scheme, they
would release and forever discharge the Commonwealth from all liability in
relation to any claim
against the Commonwealth that arises as a result of the
person’s income being worked out using the apportionment
The Minister may
determine matters for and in relation to the Resolution Scheme through a
legislative instrument, and the determination
must provide for the review of any
decision under the scheme.
Preliminary international human rights legal
Right to social security
1.154 To the extent that the bill validates debt decisions that limited a
person’s entitlement to social security benefits,
the measure engages and
may limit the right to social security. The right to social security recognises
the importance of adequate
social benefits in reducing the effects of poverty
and plays an important role in realising many other economic, social and
rights, in particular the right to an adequate standard of living and
the right to health.
security benefits must be adequate in both amount and duration. Public
authorities are responsible for ensuring the effective
administration or
supervision of a social security
States must also have
regard to the principles of human dignity and non-discrimination to avoid any
adverse effect on the levels
of benefits and the form in which they are
provided, and must guarantee the equal enjoyment by all of minimum and adequate
protection.
The right also includes the right not to be subject to arbitrary and
unreasonable restrictions of existing social security coverage.
1.155 Other related human rights may also be engaged by the measure, such as
the rights to an adequate standard of living and health
(if it resulted in a
person being unable to afford basic necessities such as food, housing and
healthcare and the debt recovery process
adversely affected an
individual’s health). The right to an adequate standard of living requires
that the State party take
steps to ensure the availability, adequacy and
accessibility of food, clothing, water and housing for all people in its
The right to
health is the right to enjoy the highest attainable standard of physical and
mental health.
1.156 Australia has obligations under international human rights law to
progressively realise the right to social security (and other
economic rights) using the maximum of resources available. Australia has a
corresponding duty to refrain from taking retrogressive
measures, or backwards
steps, in relation to the realisation of this
Retrogressive measures,
a type of limitation, may be permissible under international human rights law
providing that they address
a legitimate objective, are rationally connected to
that objective and are a proportionate way to achieve that objective. In this
context, the United Nations (UN) Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights has stated that there is a ‘strong presumption
of impermissibility
of any retrogressive measures taken’ in relation to economic, social and
cultural rights. If deliberate
retrogressive measures are taken, the state:
has the burden of proving that they have been introduced after the most
careful consideration of all alternatives and that they are
fully justified by
reference to the totality of the rights provided for in the Covenant and in the
context of the full use of the
State party’s maximum available
1.157 The limitation on the right to social security is acknowledged in the
statement of compatibility. It states that:
[t]he Bill validates historical social security debt decisions affected by
income apportionment, confirming that they remain recoverable.
The Bill also
confirms the lawful method for assessing employment income as part of future
decisions to raise and recover debts relating
to the period of 1 July 1991 to 6
December 2020, with those debt decisions imposing limitations on a
person’s entitlement to
social security, including reducing a
person’s social security entitlement in some circumstances.
1.158 The right to social security may be subject to permissible limitations
where the limitation pursues a legitimate objective,
is rationally connected to
that objective and is a proportionate means of achieving that objective. With
respect to a legitimate
objective, the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights establishes a specific restriction on the reasons
and the manner in which, economic, social and cultural rights may be
limited. The Covenant establishes that states may limit economic,
cultural rights only insofar as this may be compatible with the nature of those
rights, and 'solely for the purpose of
promoting the general welfare in a
democratic society'.
the effect that when applying the general limitation test, the only legitimate
objective in the context of economic, social
and cultural rights is a limitation
for the 'promotion of general welfare'. In addition, the UN Committee on
Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights has advised that:
the benefits of the limitation in promoting the general welfare must outweigh
the impacts on the enjoyment of the right being limited.
The more serious the
impact on the [individual's] Covenant rights, the greater the scrutiny that must
be given to the grounds invoked
limitation.
1.159 As to when a limitation will be compatible with the nature of economic,
social and cultural rights, the UN Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural
Rights has stated that there exists ‘a minimum core obligation to ensure
the satisfaction of, at the very
least, minimum essential levels of each of the
That is, even if
a limitation were for the promotion of general welfare, if it was regarded as
constituting a non-fulfilment of the
minimum core obligations associated with
economic, social and cultural rights, then it would go against the nature of
those rights.
The term 'general
welfare' is to be interpreted restrictively in this context, and should not be
taken to impliedly include reference
to public order, public morality and
respect for the rights and freedoms of
Rather, 'general
welfare' refers primarily to the economic and social well-being of the people
and the community as a whole, meaning
that a limitation on a right which
disproportionately impacts a vulnerable group may not meet the definition of
promoting 'general
this regard, the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights has
indicated that references to broad concepts like 'economic
development' cannot
easily justify limitations of economic, social and cultural rights, particularly
noting that policies directed
towards economic development often limit the
rights of certain individuals or groups without 'promoting general
1.160 The stated objective of the measure is to ‘ensure that public
money which has been incorrectly paid is able to be
and to avoid
recalculation as ‘[t]he significant cost and effort that would be involved
in recalculating all affected debts
would detract from the resources required to
ensure that Australia’s social security system continues to provide
benefits to individuals and
justification for the validation of income apportionment appears to be directed
towards fiscal management and administrative
convenience, rather than promoting
general welfare. As debt activities are currently paused and ‘around 97
per cent of potentially
affected debts have been fully
it is not clear
that the measure promotes the economic and social well-being of the community as
a whole. Further, noting the small
number of debts sought to be recovered, it is
not clear that the measure would, in a significant way, be effective in
achieving the
broader objective of ensuring the social security system provides
essential benefits to individuals. Based on the information provided
explanatory materials, it is not clear that the measure pursues a legitimate
objective for the purposes of international human
rights law or is rationally
connected to that objective.
1.161 A key aspect of whether any limitation on rights can be justified is
whether the limitation is proportionate to the objective
being sought. In this
respect, it is necessary to consider a number of factors, including whether the
measure provides sufficient
flexibility to treat different cases differently.
The measure appears to apply to all remaining, paused debts that were calculated
using the apportionment method and incurred in the relevant time period without
regard to the merits of an individual case.
1.162 Another consideration is whether the measure is accompanied by
sufficient safeguards. The bill preserves the ability to bring
a cause of action
in respect of general law rights accrued prior to the commencement of this
It appears that this
would preserve the ability to bring a cause of action against the Commonwealth
for a debt that was calculated
using the income apportionment method. The
statement of compatibility states that the limitation on the right to social
is ‘ameliorated’ by this provision:
[w]hile the Bill validates historical social security debt decisions affected
by income apportionment, it includes a preservation
clause that expressly
preserves any cause of action in respect of an accrued general law right in
respect of an affected debt decision.
Individuals are not prevented from
initiating any legal proceeding in respect of such a cause of
1.163 These provisions may operate as a safeguard. However, the value of this
safeguard will depend on how it operates in practice,
including whether the
validation of income apportionment limits the basis and likely success of a
challenge to the debt decision.
1.164 A further consideration is the extent of any interference with human
rights. The greater the interference, the less likely the
measure is to be
considered proportionate. In the context of this measure, if a person’s
recoverable debt is substantial, the
potential interference with their rights
could be significant, including other related rights such as the right to an
adequate standard
of living if it resulted in a person being unable to afford
adequate food, clothing, water and housing. The explanatory materials
that the average debt amount of those potentially affected by the bill is
It is difficult, however,
to assess whether a debt would be considered substantial for each individual, as
this is dependent on various
1.165 In regards to whether there are any less restrictive options, the
Impact Analysis contained in the explanatory memorandum stipulates
a number of
alternatives that could reasonably be considered less rights restrictive. In
particular, these include waiving all potentially
affected debts, identifying
and recalculating all affected debts, and retrospective validation and a partial
waiver of paused debts.
options are not assessed for human rights compatibility in the explanatory
materials so it is difficult to assess why these
alternatives are not
appropriate from a human rights perspective.
1.166 Consequently, it is not clear whether the measure pursues a legitimate
objective or is accompanied by sufficient safeguards
such that it is likely to
constitute a proportionate limit on the right to social security.
Right to effective remedy
1.167 Insofar as the validation of the apportionment method limits the right
to social security, as set out above, effective remedies
should be available to
individuals. The right to an effective remedy requires the availability of a
remedy which is effective with
respect to violations of rights and freedoms
recognised by the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights. The
UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights provides
guidance as to the duty to give effect to the rights contained in the
It explains that:
[by] requiring Governments to do so "by all appropriate means", the Covenant
adopts a broad and flexible approach which enables the
particularities of the
legal and administrative systems of each State, as well as other relevant
considerations, to be taken into
1.168 However, the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights goes
on to explain that this flexibility 'coexists with the
obligation upon each
State party to use all the means at its disposal to give effect to the rights
recognized in the Covenant'. As
such, the UN Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights advises that 'appropriate means of redress, or remedies, must be
to any aggrieved individual or group, and appropriate means of
ensuring governmental accountability must be put in
The UN Committee
further advises that:
a State party seeking to justify its failure to provide any domestic legal
remedies for violations of economic, social and cultural
rights would need to
show either that such remedies are not "appropriate means" within the terms of
article 2.1 of the Covenant or
that, in view of the other means used, they are
unnecessary. It will be difficult to show this and the Committee considers that,
in many cases, the other "means" used could be rendered ineffective if they are
not reinforced or complemented by judicial
1.169 The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights does
not require the provision of judicial remedies for violations
of the right to
social security, but it does require effective remedies to be available.
Effective remedies will be absent where
a primary administrative decision about
a person’s right to social security is final and no provision is made for
either review
by a court or a (well-designed and sufficiently fair and
independent) administrative
The UN Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights provides the following guidance with
respect to the right to social security:
[a]ny persons or groups who have experienced violations of their right to
social security should have access to effective judicial
or other appropriate
remedies at both national and international levels. All victims of violations of
the right to social security
should be entitled to adequate reparation,
including restitution, compensation, satisfaction or guarantees of
non-repetition. National
ombudspersons, human rights commissions, and similar
national human rights institutions should be permitted to address violations
the right. Legal assistance for obtaining remedies should be provided within
maximum available
1.170 The bill includes provision for some remedies, including that
individuals can still bring a cause of action in respect of an
accrued general
law right in relation to affected debt
the waiving of small
debts less than $250,
creation of the Resolution Scheme for people affected by income
apportionment.
1.171 The statement of compatibility does not acknowledge that the Resolution
Scheme has implications for the right to effective remedy.
It does, however,
identify that the Resolution Scheme provides:
a mechanism for people to obtain a resolution payment as a form of reparation
if eligible under the scheme. If an offer of a resolution
payment is made to an
applicant, that person will be informed of the effect of effective acceptance
and will have the opportunity
to consider and obtain any independent advice
before deciding whether to accept a resolution
1.172 In particular, the determination will determine the amount of
resolution payment that a person is entitled to be paid. The explanatory
memorandum states that it is proposed that the amount of resolution payment will
range from $200 to $600 depending on the original
amount of the affected
The minister’s
second reading speech sets out that:
[t]he instrument will prescribe the amount of resolution payments. For debts
under $200, the full debt amount would be repaid. For
debts between $200 and
$2000, the payment would be $200. For debts between $2000 and $5000, the payment
would be $400. And for debts
above $5000, the payment would be
1.173 The Impact Analysis that forms part of the explanatory memorandum
states that the average potentially affected debt amount is
$810, and the median
amount is $330.
It is not clear
that a reparation payment that may be substantially less than the amount of debt
incurred and does not take into
account other impacts of the debt on an
individual, such as adverse impacts on an individual’s mental health as
addressed in
would be considered
an effective remedy for the purposes of international human rights law.
1.174 The ability to not accept a payment under the Resolution Scheme and
therefore retain the ability to bring an action or claim
against the
Commonwealth acts as an important safeguard. However, the effectiveness of this
safeguard may be diminished in practice
depending on the particular
vulnerability of some social security recipients. The Resolution Scheme does not
appear to account for
vulnerable individuals in accessing and understanding the
Resolution Scheme. In this regard, on the release of the Commonwealth from
future liability in relation to income apportionment, the statement of
compatibility states that the waiver of liability is reasonable
proportionate because it is up to the individual to elect to either accept a
resolution payment or reject an offer (and retain
any existing
However, access to
this remedy depends on the individual being adequately informed of the remedy
and its effect. It is not clear
what supports would be offered to the individual
to ensure they are able to make an informed decision regarding acceptance of a
payment. This is particularly important given that a person’s
acceptance of the resolution payment would release the Commonwealth
liability to any claim arising as a result of income apportionment in respect of
that person. The only remedies available
therefore appear to be accepting the
Resolution Scheme payment or bringing an action against the Commonwealth. It is
therefore not
clear whether the available remedies would necessarily be
effective in practice.
Committee view
1.175 The committee notes that this bill retrospectively validates income
apportionment as a lawful method of assessing employment
income during the
period from 1 July 1998 to 6 December 2020 for the purposes of certain social
security entitlements. The committee
considers that by enforcing debts owed to
the Commonwealth that were made without a legal basis, the bill engages and
right to social security. The committee also notes that as the
validation of the income apportionment method may limit the right
security, effective remedies should be available.
1.176 The committee notes that the statement of compatibility identifies the
engagement of the right to social security but not the
right to an effective
remedy. The committee considers further information is required to assess the
compatibility of this measure
with the right to social security and the right to
an effective remedy, and as such seeks the minister's advice in relation to:
(a) what is the cost to the Commonwealth in recovering the
‘paused’ debts;
(b) whether the decision to pursue recovery of a debt calculated using the
income apportionment method would take account of the merits
of an individual
(c) whether the validation of income apportionment limits the basis, or the
likelihood of success, to challenge affected debt decisions;
(d) whether the validation of the income apportionment method is consistent
with the right to an effective remedy; and
(e) what remedies are available to persons where the validation of income
apportionment results in a violation of their right to social
security, and in
particular, what actions may be brought against the Commonwealth.
This entry can be cited as:
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights, Social Security and Other
Legislation Amendment (Technical
Changes No. 2) Bill 2025,
Report 5 of
[2025] AUPJCHR 37.
Social Security and Other
Legislation Amendment (Technical Changes No. 2) Bill 2025, Schedule 1, item 2
defines ‘entitlement
period’ as (a) in relation to a specified
pension for a period ending before 1 July 1999–a period starting on a
payday and ending on the day before the next pension payday; or (b)
otherwise–a period determined by the relevant Secretary
in relation to
which an instalment of a social security benefit or social security pension is
paid and that ends before 7 December
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Schedule 1, item 2, division
2, proposed sections 1117A and 1117B.
Schedule 1, item 2, division
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Schedule 1, item 2,
division 3, proposed sections 1117E and 1117F.
Schedule 3, item 2.
Schedule 3, item 2.
Schedule 3, item 3.
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, article 9. See also, UN Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural
General Comment No. 19: The Right to
Social Security
UN Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,
General Comment No. 19: The Right to Social
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, article 11.
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, article 12(1).
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, article 2.
UN Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,
General Comment 13: the Right to education
(1999) [45].
Statement of
compatibility, p. 3.
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, article 4.
Pardo v Spain
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Communication No. 52/2018,
E/C.12/67/D/52/2018 [9.4].
UN Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,
General Comment No. 3: the nature of states
parties' obligations
(14 December 1990) E/1991/23(Supp) [10].
For further discussion
see, Amrei Muller, 'Limitations to and derogations from economic, social and
cultural rights',
Human Rights Law Review
, vol. 9, no. 4, 2009, pp.
Amrei Muller, 'Limitations
to and derogations from economic, social and cultural rights',
Human Rights
, vol. 9, no. 4, 2009, p. 573. See also, Phillip Alston and Gerard
Quinn, 'The Nature and Scope of States Parties' Obligations under
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights',
Human Rights
, vol. 9 no. 2, 1987, pp. 201–202.
Limburg Principles on the
Implementation of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, June 1986 [52].
See also, Amrei Muller, 'Limitations to and derogations
from economic, social and cultural rights',
Human Rights Law Review
9, no. 4, 2009, p. 573; Erica-Irene A Daes, The Individual's Duties to the
Community and the Limitations on Human Rights and
Freedoms under Article 29 of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Study of the Special Rapporteur of
the Sub-Commission on the Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
, E/CN.4/Sub.2/432/Rev.2 (1983), pp. 123–4.
See, for example, UN
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
Concluding observations:
(23 May 2000) E/C.12/1/Add.44 [10]; and
Concluding observations:
(1 September 2000) E/C.12/1/Add.49 [29]. In addition, comparative
jurisprudence from the European Court of Human Rights would appear
to indicate
that where a limitation relates to a right which is vital for a person's
immediate survival (such as the right to an
adequate standard of living), the
more a state will be required to demonstrate that there is a pressing social
need justifying that
interference. See, for example,
Dudgeon v United
, European Court of Human Rights (1981) [52].
Statement of
compatibility, p. 3.
Statement of
compatibility, p. 2.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Schedule 1, item 2,
division 2, proposed section 1117C.
Statement of
compatibility, p. 3.
Department of Social
Services, Resolution Approach to Income Apportionment: Impact Analysis (attached
to the explanatory memorandum),
Department of Social
Services, Resolution Approach to Income Apportionment: Impact Analysis (attached
to the explanatory memorandum,
UN Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,
General Comment No. 9: the domestic application
of the covenant
(1998) [1].
UN Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,
General Comment No. 9: the domestic application
of the covenant
(1998) [2].
UN Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,
General Comment No. 9: the domestic application
of the covenant
(1998) [3].
Ben Saul, David Kinley and
Jacqueline Mowbray,
The International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights: Commentary, cases and materials
, Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 2014, p. 719.
UN Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,
General Comment No. 19: The Right to Social
(2008) [77].
Schedule 1, item 2,
division 2, proposed section 1117C.
Schedule 2.
Schedule 3.
Statement of
compatibility, p. 3.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Second reading speech, p.
Department of Social
Services, Resolution Approach to Income Apportionment: Impact Analysis (attached
to the explanatory memorandum,
Department of Social
Services, Resolution Approach to Income Apportionment: Impact Analysis (attached
to the explanatory memorandum,
Statement of
compatibility, p. 3.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (159 KB)
PDF format (126 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter