URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJStaCNCET/2017/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:09:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Parliamentary Joint Committee on the National Capital and External Territories (45th Parliament) --- "The strategic importance of Australia's Indian Ocean Territories - PP 296/2017" [2017] AUPJStaCNCET 3 (11 September 2017)
Deputy Chair
Committee secretariat
Overview of strategic importance
Referral of the inquiry
Scope of the inquiry
Conduct of the inquiry
Committee visit to the Indian Ocean territories
Report structure
Historical overview of the Indian Ocean Territories
Australia’s engagement in the Indian Ocean region
Potential strategic uses of the Indian Ocean Territories
Changing dynamics in the Indian Ocean region
Security challenges in the Indian Ocean region
Committee comment
Introduction
Australia’s current engagement with Indo-Pacific partners
International forums and treaties
Humanitarian and search and rescue assistance
Regional security and military cooperation
Future engagement opportunities with regional partners
The Cocos (Keeling) Islands Airport runway
Australia’s relationship with the United States
Australia’s relationship with Indonesia
Australia’s relationship with India
Committee comment
Introduction
Defence capability and infrastructure development
Reservist capability
Multi-purpose infrastructure development
Australian Government’s financial commitments
Costs and challenges of transporting goods and labour
Service delivery arrangements
The Cocos (Keeling) Islands runway
The need for a runway upgrade and benefits to local communities
Ancillary issues
Fuel supplies and storage
Water supplies
Christmas Island port facilities
Reliability of telecommunications
Christmas Island Immigration Detention Centre
Committee comment
Strategic presence and activities
Infrastructure development
The Cocos (Keeling) Islands airport runway
Ancillary issues
Christmas Island wharf and port facilities
Telecommunications issues
Future of Christmas Island Immigration Detention Centre
Importance of local culture
Economic drivers in the community
Managing impacts on the local communities
Defence and border protection activities
Infrastructure development
The Cocos (Keeling) Islands Golf Club
Importance of consultation with local communities
Committee comment
Submissions
Friday, 17 February 2017—Canberra
Air Power Australia
Strategic Forum Ltd
National Security College, Australian National University
Department of Defence
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development
Department of Immigration and Border Protection
Private capacity
Thursday, 23 March 2017—Canberra
Future Directions International
Tuesday, 4 April 2017—Christmas Island
Administrator of the Indian Ocean Territories
Australian Federal Police
Chinese Literary Association of Christmas Island
Christmas Island Casino Resort
Christmas Island Tourism Association
Indian Ocean Group Training Association
Islamic Council of Christmas Island
Parks Australia
Phosphate Resources Ltd
Shire of Christmas Island
Private capacity
Wednesday, 5 April 2017—West Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Cocos Islands Cooperative Society Limited
Cocos (Keeling) Islands Community Resources Centre
Cocos (Keeling) Islands Tourism Association
Island Petroleum Services
Shire of Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Wednesday, 5 April 2017—Home Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Cocos Islands Cooperative
Persatuan Islam Pulu Cocos- Cocos Islands Islamic Association
Oceania House
Shire of the Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Private capacity
PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
The strategic importance of Australia's Indian Ocean Territories
Joint Standing Committee on the National Capital and External Territories
© Commonwealth of Australia
ISBN 978-1-74366-685-2 (Printed Version)
ISBN 978-1-74366-686-9 (HTML Version)
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 3.0 Australia License.
The details of this licence are available on the Creative Commons website:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/au/
Chair's Foreword
Executive summary
Membership of the Committee
Terms of Reference
Abbreviations
Recommendations
1 Introduction
Overview of strategic importance
Referral of the inquiry
Scope of the inquiry
Conduct of the inquiry
Committee visit to the Indian Ocean
territories
Report structure
2 Changing regional security environment
and contingencies
Historical overview of the Indian Ocean
Territories
Australia’s engagement in the Indian
Ocean region
Potential strategic uses of the Indian
Ocean Territories
Changing dynamics in the Indian Ocean
Security challenges in the Indian Ocean
Committee comment
3 Regional cooperation
Introduction
Australia’s current engagement with
Indo-Pacific partners
International forums and
Humanitarian and search and rescue
Regional security and military
cooperation
Future engagement opportunities with
regional partners
The Cocos (Keeling) Islands Airport
Australia’s relationship with the
United States
Australia’s relationship with
Australia’s relationship with
Committee comment
4 Defence capability and infrastructure
development
Introduction
Defence capability and infrastructure
development
Reservist capability
Multi-purpose infrastructure development
The Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Christmas Island port
Reliability of
telecommunications
Christmas Island Immigration Detention
Committee comment
Strategic presence and
Infrastructure development
The Cocos (Keeling) Islands airport
Christmas Island wharf and port
Telecommunications issues
Future of Christmas Island Immigration
Detention Centre
5 Impacts on local
communities
Importance of local culture
Economic drivers in the
Managing impacts on the local
communities
Defence and border protection
Infrastructure development
The Cocos (Keeling) Islands Golf
Importance of consultation with local
communities
Committee comment
Appendix A. Submissions and
Appendix B. Public hearings and
Chair's Foreword
It may be a common perception that Australia’s western boundary runs
along the beautiful, majestic West Australian coast. In
actual fact, the
westernmost reaches of Australia are the boundaries created by the Indian Ocean
Territories, and are closer to Jakarta
than they are to Perth.
Despite their distance from the mainland, the small sun-drenched communities
of Christmas Island and the Cocos (Keeling) Islands remain
uniquely Australian.
The deep connection of the local communities to their diverse ethnic and
cultural heritage complements their
Australian way of life.
The present inquiry and report is markedly different to those carried out
previously by this Committee. While several previous inquiries
have examined
economic and governance issues in the Indian Ocean Territories, the purpose of
our inquiry has been to take a step
back and consider these territories from a
broader, strategic perspective. In the process of doing so, the Committee has
that the recommendations of previous reports remain as relevant as
ever. Rather than wishing to detract from or displace the conclusions
our predecessors, the present inquiry instead seeks to reinforce and build on
the work of earlier committees.
As part of the inquiry, I was fortunate to join Committee colleagues in
meeting with local communities on Christmas Island, West Island
and Home Island
to see first-hand this beautiful corner of our nation. While many Australians
may associate the region as a key plank
of Australia’s defence and border
protection activities, the Committee’s inquiry also highlighted vibrant
communities,
deeply committed to Australian values.
This report charts the inquiry’s considerations, commencing with an
examination of the strategic and geopolitical context that
underpin the
strategic importance of these small islands for Australia. Our nation finds
itself in the unique position of balancing
its historic and emerging military
and strategic partnerships in the region with the fact that the Indian Ocean sea
lanes are vital
to our economic and trade security.
The Committee considered Australia’s strategic infrastructure assets on
the islands, particularly those that further Australia’s
capabilities and border protection commitments. While the Australian Government
might wish to extend these capabilities in
the islands, it must actively
consider that Australia’s Indian Ocean Territories are also home to
vibrant communities and businesses.
There is a need to ensure appropriate
consultation with these communities regarding the Australian Government’s
future plans
for the region and, where possible, positively contributing to the
community through infrastructure projects and by engaging local
businesses and
service providers.
Through its inquiry, the Committee has the opportunity to hear from a wide
variety of stakeholders including representatives of Australian
agencies with interests in the Indian Ocean Territories and strategic analysts
with a deep understanding of the defence
and strategic considerations that
underpin Australia’s commitment to the Indian Ocean Territories and these
island communities.
Finally, and most importantly, the Committee thanks the residents of the
Indian Ocean Territories who provided an important local
perspective to this
inquiry. Their warm hospitality and candour provided the Committee with a vital
understanding of the region along
with the challenges and opportunities that it
presents. The Committee now has a renewed understanding of community
perspectives and
aspirations, which we hope to convey to the Australian
Government through this report.
Mr Ben Morton MP
Executive summary
Australia’s Indian Ocean Territories of Christmas Island and the Cocos
(Keeling) Islands are strategically important to Australia,
particularly in
relation to Australia’s defence and border protection interests.
The Committee’s inquiry considered the current and future geopolitical
environment in the Indian Ocean region. Witnesses highlighted
cooperation between Australia and its partners in the region and how the Indian
Ocean Territories could enhance Australia’s
defence and civilian
relationships with strategic partners, ensuring regional security. Evidence also
focussed on the development
of both defence and multi-purpose infrastructure
development in the islands to maintain Australia’s defence capability and
to provide economic and social benefits for local residents.
The Committee’s recommendations seek to enhance Australia’s
engagement with its Indian Ocean Territories and the broader
region. The
Committee recommended that Australia strengthen multilateral engagement with its
Indo-Pacific partners through existing
regional mechanisms and through increased
defence activities in the Indian Ocean Territories. The Committee noted the
receptiveness
of local communities to enhanced defence engagement and
recommended that the Australian Government further pursue this area, while
considering how such activities could provide more local engagement.
One of the key concerns highlighted to the Committee by local residents was
the redevelopment of the Cocos (Keeling) Islands airport
runway and associated
facilities. The Committee recommends that extensive community consultation be
undertaken to ensure that a variety
of concerns are carefully assessed and
considered to reduce community impacts.
Another major concern was the impact of the occasional inoperability of
infrastructure at the Christmas Island wharf. While the Committee
acknowledges
that some solutions were presented during the course of the inquiry, there is
nevertheless scope to consult further
and develop genuine medium and long term
The Committee also recommended that in further developing infrastructure,
planning and funding proposals within the islands, that
the Australian
Government ensure that appropriate consultation is undertaken and that the local
supply chain is drawn upon, where
possible, to further these initiatives. The
need to engage constructively applies equally to Australian Government agencies
to do work in the territories and they should do so in a spirit of
genuine partnership with local communities and residents.
In supporting these recommendations, ensuring Australia’s strategic
engagement in the region responds to changing dynamics,
and continuing
meaningful dialogue with of local communities, the Committee has recommended
that the Australian Government refer
an inquiry into the Indian Ocean
Territories to the Joint Standing Committee of the National Capital and External
Territories every
five years.
Membership of the Committee
Mr Ben Morton MP (from 9/2/2017)
Mr Andrew Hastie MP (to 9/2/2017)
Deputy Chair
Ms Gai Brodtmann MP
Mr Mark Coulton MP
Senator Jonathon Duniam
Senator Katy Gallagher
Mr Julian Leeser MP
The Hon. Sussan Ley MP (from 9/2/2017)
Senator Sue Lines
Senator Malarndirri McCarthy
Senator James Paterson
Senator Lee Rhiannon
The Hon. Warren Snowdon MP
The Hon. Michael Sukkar MP (to 24/1/2017)
secretariat
Ms Peggy Danaee, Committee Secretary (from 20/2/2017)
Dr Alison Clegg, Committee Secretary (to 17/2/2017)
Mr Muzammil Ali, Inquiry Secretary (from 2/6/2017)
Ms Sara Edson, Inquiry Secretary (to 2/6/2017)
Ms Stephanie Lee, Research Officer (from 3/7/2017)
Mr Dylan Raymond, Research Officer (from 15/5/2017)
Ms Kathleen Blunden, Office Manager (from 17/7/2017)
Ms Sarah Brasser, Office Manager (to 11/8/2017)
Terms of Reference
The Committee will inquire into and report on the strategic importance of the
Indian Ocean Territories, with regard to:
§ the changing regional security environment and security
contingencies;
§ defence capability in the territories and associated infrastructure
development;
§ the scope of maritime, air and other cooperation with Indo-Pacific
partners; and
§ impacts on local communities.
Abbreviations
Australian Border Force
Australian Defence Force
National Broadband Network
Recommendations
Recommendation 1
2.48 In light of the changing dynamics in the Indian Ocean region, the
Committee recommends that the Australian Government refer an
inquiry that
considers Australia’s Indian Ocean Territories and its engagement in the
broader Indian Ocean region to this Committee,
at least every five years.
Recommendation 2
3.42 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government strengthen its
engagement with Australia’s Indo-Pacific partners,
through existing
regional forums and alliances that Australia currently participates in,
particularly through pursuing opportunities
for bilateral and multilateral
defence activities and training exercises in the Indian Ocean region.
Recommendation 3
4.66 Noting the receptiveness and support of local communities, the Committee
recommends that the Australian Government consider increased
Defence and Border
Protection activities, such as surveillance, naval patrols, a military reserve
or cadet unit, and potential training
exercises on Christmas Island and the
Cocos (Keeling) Islands to demonstrate Australia’s commitment to the
islands. Consideration
should also be given to how locally engaged employment
opportunities can be provided as part of these activities.
Recommendation 4
4.75 The Committee recommends that, as part of the project to upgrade the
Cocos (Keeling) Islands Airport runway, the Australian Government
ensure that
extensive consultation is undertaken with all stakeholders, including Australian
Government agencies, commercial partners,
and the local communities. Care should
be taken to fully assess and manage concerns relating to water catchment and
storage issues,
including for firefighting purposes near the airport.
Recommendation 5
4.79 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government consult with
relevant stakeholders including Australian Government agencies,
Christmas Island
businesses and the local community in developing medium and long term solutions
for the Christmas Island wharf to
ensure that strategic, economic and social
objectives can be met.
Recommendation 6
5.41 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government engage with
local communities to ensure that any proposals for works,
funding and planning
in the Indian Ocean Territories result in direct benefits to the local
communities and, where possible, draw
on local suppliers of goods and services.
Recommendation 7
5.45 The Committee recommends any Australian Government departments wishing
to do work in the Indian Ocean Territories should do so
in genuine partnership
with local communities. Departments should undertake extensive consultation
processes and respond to the needs
of the local community. Government
departments should discuss their proposed consultation methods with key
stakeholders on the islands
to ensure those processes are effective and
genuinely inclusive.
1. Introduction
Overview of strategic
1.1 Christmas Island and the Cocos (Keeling) Islands (an archipelago with
population centres in Home Island and West Island) are located
strategically in
the Indian Ocean and are much closer to Asia than they are to mainland
Australia. Christmas Island is 2,650 kilometres
northwest of Perth and 494
kilometres south of Jakarta, Indonesia—Australia’s largest neighbour
and an important strategic
partner. The Cocos Islands are located 2,950 km
northwest of Perth and 1,274 km west-southwest of
Singapore is just 1,680
kilometres from the Cocos
1.2 The Indian Ocean Territories are a part of Australia’s interests in
the Indian Ocean and Indo-Pacific
This is increasingly
important because the region can be described as a ‘dynamic strategic
theatre’. In addition to being
a crucial conduit for Australian and global
trade, and host to some of the fastest growing economies and populations, there
strategic competition in the region, particularly between China and
1.3 Australia’s Indian Ocean Territories are close to significant
geographical features, including the Malacca, Sunda and Lombok
Straits and vital
sea lanes, including primary export routes between Western Australia and North
and East Asia. Maritime threats
originating from Southwest and Southeast Asia,
including illegal fishing, people smuggling and other forms of transnational
all rely on sea routes that pass near Christmas Island and the Cocos
1.4 Despite their relatively small size, the island territories have full
maritime entitlements under the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea;
that is, a 12 nautical mile Territorial Sea and 200 mile exclusive economic
zone. Australia’s rights
extend to the airspace above and resources in the
seabed below this area.
Referral of the
1.5 On 10 November 2016 the Joint Standing Committee on the National Capital
and External Territories (the Committee) agreed to inquire
into and report on
the strategic importance of the Indian Ocean Territories (Christmas Island and
the Cocos Islands) in accordance
with the terms of reference referred by Senator
the Hon. Fiona Nash, Minister for Local Government and Territories. The
was asked to focus on:
§ the changing regional security environment and security contingencies;
§ defence capability in the territories and associated infrastructure
development;
§ the scope of maritime, air and other cooperation with Indo-Pacific
partners; and
§ impacts on local communities.
Scope of the inquiry
1.6 This inquiry is a departure from some of the previous inquiries the
Committee has undertaken into the Indian Ocean Territories,
namely into
governance, administrative arrangements, infrastructure, and economic
development. The present inquiry does not seek
to replace the good work done by
the current Committee’s predecessor, and the Committee endorses the
previous findings. Instead,
the current Committee aims to build on previous
conclusions and recommendations and consider the Indian Ocean Territories from a
more strategic perspective.
1.7 The previous Committee tabled its comprehensive report into governance
matters in March 2016
Australian Government provided a response to that report in March
While there is some overlap
between that inquiry and the present inquiry—particularly in relation to
the need for enhanced
community consultation, improved service delivery
arrangements, and development of the tourism industry—the present report
will consider these areas again only insofar as they are relevant to the current
1.8 It is worth restating that the governance and administrative arrangements
in the Indian Ocean territories are unique. Namely,
that the Australian
Government, through the Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development,
is responsible for managing Commonwealth
infrastructure assets and the delivery
of state-type services to residents. This includes port, airport, air-service
and water contracts
with the private sector, service delivery arrangements with
the Western Australian Government, and directly by federal government
and the locally-based Indian Ocean Territory
Administration.
The Shires of
Christmas Island and the Cocos Islands provide additional local government
1.9 The 2016 Committee report summarised the various views about the
governance and administrative arrangements in the Indian Ocean
Territories,
ranging from unclear delineations of responsibility and layers of bureaucracy,
to inadequate community
consultation.
That report also
made clear that the Committee recognised the challenging situation that the
Department of Infrastructure and Regional
Development finds itself in trying to
deliver on all fronts—managing strategic and policy direction in Canberra,
running schools,
hospitals and utilities on the ground in a remote location, and
being responsible for asset management, all with limited
1.10 The 2016 Committee report explored the reasons why it has been and is
difficult to grow tourism. Despite some real difficulties,
there remains
potential for development. The Indian Ocean Territories have extraordinary
natural offerings, including national parks
with rich flora and fauna, Christmas
Island’s red crab population and annual migration, and the Cocos
Islands’ pristine
coral atolls and diverse sea life. These assets
contribute significantly to the territories’ value.
1.11 The same could be said of the unique resident population mixes on the
Cocos Islands and Christmas
The population figures
have fluctuated over the years, particularly on Christmas Island, but generation
after generation of communities
on Christmas Island and the Cocos Islands
continue to want to live in these special places.
1.12 Given the changing nature of the region, its strategic importance to
Australia’s defence, and the importance of ensuring
the evolving needs of
local communities can be adequately assessed, this Committee’s review into
Australia’s relationship
with the Indian Ocean Territories is timely.
Conduct of the
1.13 The inquiry was advertised by media release and on the Committee’s
website on 17 November 2016. Submissions were invited
from individuals and
organisations addressing the terms of reference, initially by 20 January 2017,
but extended on a rolling basis
through May 2017.
1.14 The Committee also advertised the inquiry in the Indian Ocean
Territories Administration Community Bulletin (A31/2016) on 17
2016, and the two local newsletters,
The Islander
, on Christmas Island and the Cocos Islands respectively.
Further notices were placed in these same publications in March 2017, ahead
the Committee’s visit in April 2017. The notices were advertised in
English, Chinese and Malaysian for Christmas Island,
and English and Cocos Malay
for the Cocos Islands.
1.15 The Committee received 17 submissions and 3 exhibits. A list of
submissions and exhibits is at Appendix A.
1.16 The Committee held five public roundtable-style hearings, two in
Canberra and three in the Indian Ocean Territories. The Canberra
involved senior government departmental officials, subject matter experts and
academics, and focused on the first three
terms of reference. The hearings on
Christmas Island and the Cocos Islands focused on the fourth term of
reference—the local
impacts—and included opportunities for community
statements. The hearings and witnesses are listed at Appendix B.
1.17 The Committee also received private briefings from the Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development and the Department
of Defence.
Committee visit to the Indian
Ocean territories
1.18 The Committee visited Christmas Island from 3 to 4 April 2017 and the
Cocos Islands from 4 to 6 April 2017.
1.19 In addition to the public hearings and community statement sessions, the
Committee undertook extensive inspections of Commonwealth
infrastructure and
1.20 On Christmas Island the visit program included the airport, port and
crane, the Australian Federal Police Response Centre, contingency
centre facilities, health services, communications tower, power service, and
fuel tank farm. The Committee met with members
of the Christmas Island
Inter-agency Coordination Committee comprising representatives from the Islands
major stakeholders (the Administrator
and Indian Ocean Territories
Administration, Indian Ocean Territories Health Service, Shire of Christmas
Island, Australian Federal
Police, Australian Border Force, Department of
Agriculture, Australian Navy, Parks Australia,
and the Indian Ocean
Territories Regional Development
Organisation).
The Committee
also toured the disused Christmas Island Casino Resort and visited teachers and
students at an after-school program
at the Christmas Island mosque.
1.21 On the Cocos Islands the Committee similarly inspected Commonwealth
infrastructure and assets on West Island and Home Island,
visiting the port
facility, health service and school as well as the former quarantine facility,
housing, light industrial area,
waste management transfer station and erosion
control measures.
1.22 The Committee met with members of the Regional Development Organisation
on West Island and had an opportunity for informal discussions
Councillors on Home Island during an evening reception hosted by the
1.23 On both Christmas Island and the Cocos Islands the Committee hosted
morning and afternoon teas to meet with the local communities.
1.24 The Committee was pleased to be able to participate in
self-determination day celebrations with the local community on Home Island
the morning of 6 April 2017.
Report structure
1.25 The remainder of this report consists of four chapters that deal with
each of the inquiry terms of reference in turn. Chapter
2 focuses on the
changing regional security environment and contingencies, chapter 3 on regional
partnerships, chapter 4 looks at
defence capability and associated
infrastructure development in the Indian Ocean Territories, and chapter 5
examines the impacts
of all of the above on the local communities.
2. Changing regional security environment and
contingencies
2.1 The Indian Ocean Territories—Christmas Island and the Cocos
(Keeling) Islands—hold important strategic value for Australia,
particularly as Australia’s exclusive economic zone and search and rescue
areas extend significantly into the Indian
The strategic environment
within the Indian Ocean region is changing, presenting new opportunities and
challenges for Australia.
The Indian Ocean Territories are vital strategic
points, acting as staging points for Australia to extend its reach and build
defence ties with regional
2.2 This chapter begins with a historical overview of the Indian Ocean
Territories, illustrating the strategic relevance of Christmas
Island and the
Cocos Islands over the years. The islands’ role in advancing
Australia’s interests and strengthening multilateral
security in the
region is explored, followed by an examination of the complex changing dynamics
of countries undertaking activities
in the Indian Ocean region. The chapter
concludes by considering the regional security challenges pertinent to
Historical overview of the
Indian Ocean Territories
2.3 The Indian Ocean Territories have advanced the strategic interests of
various nations over the last century. The islands served
as a post for
military operations during World War I and World War II, and were subsequently
used for phosphate resources. More recently,
Christmas Island hosted Australian
immigration detention facilities.
2.4 The British Government annexed Christmas Island in 1888 following the
discovery of phosphate deposits. The Cocos Islands were
also a British Dominion,
although largely run by the Clunies-Ross family who were gifted land by Queen
Victoria in 1866.
2.5 In a private capacity, Mr Julian Yates submitted in that the strategic
importance of the Cocos Islands first became significant
to Australia in World
The airfield at West
Island in the Cocos Islands was developed as a strategic operating base by the
British Royal Air Force and the
Royal Australian Air Force for attacks on
Japanese forces in Burma, Sumatra, Java and
2.6 Australia also had its first naval victory in the Cocos Islands, in the
November 1914 battle between HMAS Sydney and Germany’s
The SMS Emden sought to
destroy the wireless station on Direction Island (part of the Cocos Islands),
which was a vital communication
link between Britain and Australia. Before the
station was attacked the operators managed to send an SOS, which was received by
2.7 The Cocos Islands were subject to a Japanese attack during World War II.
The Japanese valued Christmas Island as a prime staging
post and source of
phosphate for Japanese industry.
Following World War II, phosphate became important to the expansion of
super-phosphate enriched agriculture in Australia and New
2.8 Australia went on to acquire the Indian Ocean Territories in the 1950s.
The formal transfer of the Cocos Islands from the British
Colony of Singapore
took place in 1955. Christmas Island was transferred to Australia in 1958 by
the British Government.
Shire of Christmas Island states the Australian Government’s interest in
the island was two-fold: phosphate; and exerting
Australian influence and
maintaining Australian security in the
2.9 Mr Yates informed the Committee that the growth of air transport led to
Australia utilising the Cocos Islands as a refuelling
point for civilian and
military aircraft.
2.10 In their submission, Dr David Brewster and Professor Rory Medcalf from
the National Security College at the Australian National
University informed the
Committee that in the 1970s Australia began to integrate itself with the United
States’ military activities,
and undertook joint patrols with the United
States in and through the Cocos
In subsequent decades
Christmas Island has been considered useful for a range of
2.11 From the early 2000s onwards the Indian Ocean Territories hosted
immigration detention reception and processing centres as part
of the Australian
Government’s border protection activities.
2.12 The Indian Ocean Territories are important strategic points for access
to the Indian Ocean. Historically, the islands were used
by the British for
military operations during World War I and World War II, subsequently they were
utilised for their natural resource
of phosphate. The Committee heard evidence
that at present, the islands are a good staging point for Australian activity in
Ocean region.
Australia’s engagement
in the Indian Ocean region
2.13 The Committee received evidence from the Department of Foreign Affairs
and Trade that a secure and stable Indian Ocean region
is crucial for
Australia’s national security and
prosperity;
especially since
Australia has vital economic interests in the area in the form of shipping
routes for exports and imports.
Furthermore, in its submission the Department also advised that Australia has an
interest in strengthening strategic and defence
cooperation with traditional and
emerging partners.
2016 Defence White Paper
notes that the Indian Ocean region,
at present, has half of the world’s container traffic and one-third of
bulk cargo travelling
through it. In the next 20 years the region will see a
substantial increase in intra-regional maritime trade, including food and,
natural resources and energy.
Supporting this, Major General John Hartley AO (Retired) from Future Directions
International, told the Committee:
... the Indian Ocean will remain and in fact, if anything, will become an even
more critical global trade, food and energy security
area ... I think that, as
the 21st century comes about, this area will emerge as a leading strategic
theatre. It will once again
be the crossroads for global trade, [and] economic
2.15 Future
Directions International informed the Committee that over one-third of
Australia’s coastline borders the Indian
The Department of Foreign
Affairs submitted that approximately half of Australia’s naval fleet is
located along the Indian
Australia’s offshore oil and gas resources are concentrated in the Indian
Ocean waters.
2.16 The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade notes in its submission that
Australia’s imports and exports are transported
over shipping routes in
the Indian Ocean, which are vital to Australia’s economic interests.
Freight shipments departing from
the Australian coast on the Indian Ocean
accounts for over 50 per cent of Australian sea
This includes a large
proportion of Australia’s resource exports and almost all (99 per
cent) shipments of iron ore, which
is Australia’s top export commodity.
Any disruption of these shipping routes for both imports and exports would have
significant
consequences for
2.17 In its submission, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade informed
the Committee that Australia’s exclusive economic
zone applies to its
territories. This extends Australia’s marine interests beyond the
continental shelf of the Australian mainland,
to the 12 nautical miles of ocean
and seabed around each of the Indian Ocean
Territories.
Within this area,
Australia has rights to explore and utilise the living and non-living natural
resources of the waters and seabed,
including fish, minerals and petroleum
resources. The Department informed the Committee that these ‘resources are
worth billions
of dollars each
2.18 The Department also advised the Committee that under international
conventions Australia is obligated to provide assistance to
any individuals or
ships in distress within the Australian search and rescue
Australia’s search
and rescue region covers a large proportion of the Indian Ocean and borders the
of six other Indian Ocean rim countries. A recent
example of the significance of Australia’s search and rescue region in an
international context was Australia’s role in coordinating the search for
MH370 in the Indian Ocean, in support of the Malaysian
investigation.
2.19 Dr Brewster and Professor Medcalf informed the Committee of
Australia’s multilateral view towards actions in the Indian
Ocean region,
observing that Australia’s actions in the Indian Ocean are done in
conjunction with the United States and Australia’s
Southeast Asian Defence
Supporting this view,
the Department of Defence submitted that Australia participates in a range of
cooperative bilateral and multilateral
activities with regional
Regarding regional
partners, Dr Anthony Bergin appearing before the Committee in a private
capacity, highlighted the importance of
collaborating with Australia’s
closest neighbour, Indonesia, telling the Committee ‘it is absolutely
critical that we
[Australia] draw Indonesia into any Defence infrastructure
developments in our Indian Ocean
Territories.’
Potential strategic uses of
the Indian Ocean Territories
2.20 The Indian Ocean Territories are strategically important to Australia.
As Dr Malcolm Davis, appearing in a private capacity,
[There] is broad a consensus that the Cocos and Christmas Islands are
strategically important. They have a role to play in Australia’s
that is probably greater now than what was the case five or even 10 years
2.21 Similarly,
the strategic importance of the Indian Ocean Territories was also recognised by
Mr Barry Haase, the Administrator
of the Indian Ocean Territories, who told the
Committee that local communities agree that there is great strategic importance
the Indian Ocean
Territories.
2.22 The Department of Defence’s submission notified the Committee that
Christmas Island is a valuable location for supporting
border protection
operations through the replenishment of Royal Australian Navy vessels and
staging maritime patrol aircraft, as
well as providing situational awareness of
Australia’s northern
approaches.
Dr Brewster and
Professor Medcalf further informed the Committee that Christmas Island may be
useful for supporting air operations
in Northeast Asia and further north, and
intelligence collection, including surveillance of submarines transiting the
Java Trench.
2.23 Further, the Department identified the Cocos Islands as having strategic
value as a staging location for maritime air patrol
and surveillance activities
to monitor Australia’s approaches from the north-west and
Similarly, Dr Brewster and
Professor Medcalf submitted that the Cocos Islands are a potential mid-ocean
staging point for refuelling
and extending the range of Australian
2.24 Further, Dr Brewster and Professor Medcalf submitted that the Cocos
Islands would also be useful in supporting air operations
westwards in the Bay
Their submission
also stated that if the Indonesian archipelago were to become obstructed, the
Cocos Islands could be used for increased
surveillance for greater shipping
They also indicated
the Cocos Islands may lend themselves to other purposes, such as intelligence
gathering through a satellite ground
station, as part of an over-the-horizon
radar system or for conventional
2.25 Mr Peter Jennings, appearing before the Committee in a private capacity
identified criminal activity as a potential threat to
the territories:
I would not rule out the possibility that you might see some sort of organised
criminal activity come ashore [on the territories].
The people-movement issue is
clearly one that is live ... [This would] cause Australia difficulty, [and]
Jennings further told the inquiry that Australia needs to exercise a military
presence on Christmas and the Cocos Islands
to defend and maintain its interest
in the territories.
Mr Jennings said to the Committee that ‘the occasional visit of a
patrol boat or something of that nature for an exercise to
demonstrate
sovereignty is a useful and cost-effective thing to
To also demonstrate
Australia’s commitment to and strategic interest in the islands, Dr Ross
Babbage, the Chief Executive Officer
of the Strategic Forum and Non-resident
Senior Fellow at the Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments in
Washington DC, noted
the possibility of placing a local reserve unit on
Christmas and/or the Cocos
This idea is explored
further in chapter 4.
2.27 Dr Babbage observed that Australia has very important relationships with
Indian Ocean countries—including Indonesia and
India—and other
countries with a presence in the region, such as the United States and France.
Dr Babbage noted that it would
beneficial having exploratory discussions with
those and other countries before Australia contemplated doing anything in the
Dr Brewster informed the Committee that Australia needs to factor in the
value of its strategic partnerships with Indian
Ocean rim countries and regional
allies before pursuing any developments on either Christmas or the Cocos
2.28 Regarding infrastructure, Dr Anthony Bergin, appearing in a private
capacity informed the Committee that Christmas Island and
the Cocos Islands do
not have the necessary size, geographic conditions and stability to develop and
house a major Australian naval
base, similar to the United States’ base of
Diego Garcia.
Further, Dr
Babbage told the Committee that any infrastructure constructed on the
territories will require Australia to give serious
consideration as to how to
2.29 Mr Stephen Clay, appearing in a private capacity, told the Committee
that Australia’s commitment to the Indian Ocean Territories
demonstrated by ensuring that Christmas Island and the Cocos Islands have secure
and vibrant economies.
Brewster told the Committee that Australia’s actions on Christmas and the
Cocos Islands are a statement of strategic intent
by Australia, and this intent
is a positive opportunity to signal much greater aspirations in the
Dr Babbage concluded his
comments to the Committee by noting there may be potential benefits and future
strategic uses of the Indian
Ocean Territories which may have not yet been
Changing dynamics in the
Indian Ocean region
2.30 A clear theme which emerged from the evidence is that the Indian Ocean
region is undergoing significant changes with new and
emerging major powers
pursuing new interests. For example, the Department of Defence submitted that
due to the expanding strategic
importance of the region, the region is
witnessing growing competition among major powers, with India, the US and China
their levels of activity in the
Mr Jennings stated
that the Indian Ocean region is becoming more contested, with more competition
between states.
Dr Sam Bateman AM, Professorial Research Fellow at the Australian
National Centre for Ocean Resources and Security at the University
Wollongong, and Dr Anthony Bergin, Senior Analyst at the Australian
Strategic Policy Institute, submitted that the Indian Ocean
region has become
the focus of increased strategic attention and growing competition between
2.31 In its submission, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade also
commented that other powers such as Indonesia are rising
in strategic weight and
are expanding their presence and activity in the Indian Ocean
2.32 However, the National Security College’s submission informed the
Committee that the United States’ military predominance
in the Indian
Ocean region has ‘never been in serious doubt’ since the 1970s. This
can be attributed to the United States’
large strategic footprint in
region, through its major naval base, Diego
2.33 Commenting on the regional changes, Dr Babbage noted that in the 1980s,
the ‘... centre of global power and global competition
was in Eastern
This has now
shifted, meaning that East Asia is now the ‘centre of global conflict,
tension and competition.’
This shift, Dr Babbage informed the Committee, means that the Indian Ocean
Territories find themselves ‘in a completely different
environment’
‘significantly altered the equation in terms of evaluating their strategic
importance.’
Security challenges in the
Indian Ocean region
2.34 The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade in its submission informed
the Committee of a series of security challenges in the
Indian Ocean region
including transnational crime especially drug trafficking, piracy and armed
robbery at sea, large movement of
irregular migrants, and irregular maritime
migration, illegal fishing and
2.35 The Department noted that the region is becoming a growing conduit for
drug trafficking, with the Royal Australian Navy intercepting
large quantities
of drugs transiting the Indian Ocean region from East
Heroin in particular is
trafficked through the Indian Ocean from Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iran to
Africa, then to the European and
2.36 The Department also noted that piracy and armed robbery is a concern in
areas connecting to the Indian Ocean region. Since 2011,
piracy has abated in
the Gulf of Aden, which carries 30 per cent of Australia’s trade.
However, the underlying causes
of piracy—lack of economic opportunities and governance in
Somalia—remain in the Gulf.
Furthermore, piracy in the Malacca Strait has
increased and includes instances of petty theft to complex operations, such as
oil tankers, siphoning its oil, and selling the oil on the black
2.37 The Department further advised that the region is susceptible to large
movements of irregular migrants, given the large, dense
populations, and
potential for displacement caused by factors including conflict and political
unrest, human rights issues, environmental
degradation, and natural
The Department of
Immigration and Border Protection submitted that the Indian Ocean Territories in
particular have been consistently
targeted by people smugglers and used for
landing points for import and export of prohibited goods and illegal, unreported
and unregulated
2.38 The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade also noted in the future the
region may be indirectly affected by factors which may
threaten stability and
security, such as the effects of climate change, and social change brought about
by development of technology
globalisation.
Furthermore,
Major General Hartley AO (Retired) told the Committee that some of the outcomes
of climate change could be quite significant
for the region, and commented that
the demand for food and water within the region will
The Committee heard
that, at present, it was uncertain whether Australia and other regional nations
had the capacity to meet the
Committee comment
2.39 Australia has a long history of engagement with both Christmas Island
and the Cocos Islands. Throughout the last century, the
Indian Ocean Territories
have contributed to Australia’s strategic interests in a number of
ways—including for military,
border-protection, and humanitarian
purposes—and the territories remain an important platform for
Australia’s engagement
in the Indian Ocean region.
2.40 The Committee notes the importance of the Indian Ocean region in
protecting Australia’s national security, as a conduit
for Australian and
global trade and economic activity, and as a source of a valuable natural
2.41 Within this context, the Committee appreciates the ongoing strategic
role for the Indian Ocean Territories. Both Christmas Island
and Cocos Islands
provide Australia with a strategic interest in the Indian Ocean and the broader
Indo-Pacific region, and extend
Australia’s strategic reach beyond the
2.42 However, the Committee acknowledges the view that the strategic value of
the Indian Ocean Territories depends, to some extent,
on Australia’s
engagement in the region. Evidence relating to Defence operations and capability
are considered in chapters
2.43 The Committee also notes the view that Australia’s commitment to
the Indian Ocean Territories is, in part, demonstrated
by the presence of
vibrant communities and sustainable economies on the islands. Evidence relating
to the local communities is discussed
in further detail in chapter 5.
2.44 More broadly, as noted above, the Indian Ocean Territories support
Australia’s engagement in the Indian Ocean region. The
Committee notes
that Australia works closely with a number of bilateral partners and as a member
of regional organisations to enhance
international cooperation, security, and
advocacy in the region. These efforts are discussed in further detail in chapter
2.45 The Committee accepts the view that the Indian Ocean region is an
increasingly dynamic environment. The region is host to a number
growing economies and populations, and the role of the region in facilitating
global trade is expected to become even
more critical. Moreover, the evolving
nature of the geopolitical environment introduces a further degree of
uncertainty in the region.
2.46 As the region continues to evolve, Australia’s engagement with the
region will also evolve. Over time, this may alter the
strategic importance to
Australia of the Indian Ocean Territories and present new opportunities. The
Committee therefore encourages
the Australian Government to consider a more
regular assessment of the broader Indian Ocean region, and the strategic
of Indian Ocean Territories in particular. Regular consideration of
these issues will ensure that Australia is well placed to be
able to respond to
changes in the region.
2.47 In line with the Committee’s oversight over the external
territories and in recognition of the importance of the Indian
Territories, the Committee is committed to inquiring into the Indian Ocean
territories, including their strategic contributions,
at least every five years.
The Committee is well placed to consider the importance and strategic issues of
the Indian Ocean Territories,
drawing on the expertise of relevant stakeholders.
Recommendation 1
2.48 In light of the changing dynamics in the Indian Ocean region, the
Committee recommends that the Australian Government refer an
inquiry that
considers Australia’s Indian Ocean Territories and its engagement in the
broader Indian Ocean region to this Committee,
at least every five
2.49 The Committee notes the evidence received about a range of security
challenges in the region, including transnational crime,
irregular maritime
migration, and terrorism. The Committee supports Australia’s ongoing
engagement with partners in the region
to address these security challenges.
3. Regional cooperation
Introduction
3.1 The Indian Ocean is one of the fastest growing regions on the planet. It
is a melting pot of nations and cultures with populations
that are becoming
increasingly engaged within the global landscape. The region is also home to a
number of rapidly developing economies
with emerging economic and security
3.2 As outlined in chapter 2, Australia’s interests in the Indian Ocean
are broad and include economic and security interests,
as well as a significant
exclusive economic zone, and search and rescue
3.3 Australia has a number of strategic partners in the Indian Ocean region.
Evidence to the Committee supports the view that Australia
should continue to
nurture these relationships, while also developing new relationships with
emerging partners in the region. Benefits
of further engagement in the region
may include improved maritime trade and energy security.
3.4 Previous chapters have highlighted broadly the changing nature of the
security environment in the Indo-Pacific region. While this
presents some
challenges, there may also be increased opportunities for further engagement
with those in the region. This chapter
will consider evidence relating to
Australia’s current engagement with partners, as well as the significant
opportunities that
may emerge due to the changing dynamics in the region.
Australia’s current
engagement with Indo-Pacific partners
3.5 The inquiry provided an opportunity for key stakeholders to provide
evidence to the Committee about Australia’s current
engagement with its
partners in the Indian Ocean region, with a particular focus on the role played
by Australia’s Indian Ocean
Territories.
3.6 The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade submitted that Australia
works closely with partners in the region, both bilaterally
and through regional
forums, ‘to enhance maritime security and promote habits of
cooperation.’
participants considered Australia’s engagement through international
forums and treaties, humanitarian assistance,
and military cooperation.
International forums and
3.7 Australia is involved in a variety of international forums focusing on
the Indian Ocean region. These forums provide an opportunity
for diplomatic
engagement, the establishment of common interests, increased understanding of
different regional perspectives and
partnerships, and the ability to influence
the strategic decisions undertaken by partners in the region.
3.8 In its submission to the inquiry, the Department of Defence outlined
Australia’s participation in a number of forums in
the Indian Ocean
region. For example, Australia is one of 23 member states of the Indian Ocean
Naval Symposium, which aims to enhance
‘maritime cooperation between
littoral states, with a view to building effective maritime security
architecture in the
As Chair of the
Symposium in 2014-15, Australia oversaw the creation of three working groups
which considered issues relating to
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief,
maritime security and information sharing and
interoperability.
The Department
also noted Australia’s involvement in the Indian Ocean Rim Association and
the Indian Ocean Forum on Maritime
3.9 Australia is also an active party to other regional agreements that
consider matters including people smuggling, human trafficking
and irregular
migration, transnational crime, piracy, drug trafficking and the
‘conservation and management of straddling and
highly migratory fish
3.10 For example, the Department of Defence noted the 2005 treaty between
Australia and France to combat illegal fishing operations
and promote scientific
research on marine living resources in territories administered by the
respective nations in the Southern
Indian Ocean and Southern
The Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade also noted Australia’s international advocacy for
measures to combat illegal, unreported
and unregulated fishing, including
through active participation in relevant fisheries management organisations,
such as membership
of the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission and the Commission on the
Conservation of Southern Blue Fin
Humanitarian and search and
rescue assistance
3.11 Evidence to the Committee indicated that, as well as diplomatic forums
and international agreements, Australia engages with its
Indian Ocean partners
through the provision of humanitarian assistance.
3.12 The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade advised that
‘Australia also has obligations under international conventions
assistance to any person(s) or ship(s) in distress within the Australian Search
and Rescue Region.’
of example, the Department of Defence highlighted Australia’s lead role in
the search for missing Malaysia Airlines
flight MH370 in the Indian Ocean
region. The Department advised that the search was coordinated by the Australian
Maritime Safety
Authority with the assistance of 22 military aircraft and 19
ships provided by the Department of Defence and international partners
Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, the Republic of Korea, the United Kingdom and the
United States.
3.13 The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade referred to
Australia’s provision of assistance to support the maritime safety
The Department also
noted that Australia provides support to countries in the Indian Ocean region to
better prepare for disasters,
and also humanitarian assistance and protection in
response to rapid and slow onset
Regional security and
military cooperation
3.14 Regional security and military cooperation are also key planks in
Australia’s engagement with its partners in the region.
The Department of
Foreign Affairs and Trade suggested that advancing:
... regional security and prosperity, and contributing to shaping and running
regional institutions which reinforce the rule of law
and international norms of
behaviour, is at the heart of Australia’s foreign
Department advised the Committee that Australia was committed to
‘comprehensive maritime security engagement in the
Indo-Pacific based on
the principles of respect for international law, freedom of navigation and
overflight and open sea lines of
communication,’ which ‘facilitate
the movement of a significant proportion of global energy and maritime trade,
particularly
trade to and from North and East
Any blockage or
threat to these trade routes could lead to instability and potentially
substantial increases in energy
3.16 While it is imperative that Australia carefully consider its military
engagement, the Committee was told that military cooperation,
including joint
exercises, provide an opportunity to develop important partnerships in the
region. In its submission to the inquiry,
the Department of Defence referred to
Australia’s participation in the United States-led Combined Maritime
Forces exercise,
which comprises deployments from 31 countries in the Middle
East region and Western Indian Ocean. The focus of these operations is
defeating terrorism, preventing piracy, encouraging regional cooperation and
promoting a safe maritime
environment.
3.17 Major General Gus Gilmore of the Department of Defence highlighted
Australia’s participation in Exercise Kakadu, which
was hosted by the
Royal Australian Navy and the Royal Australian Air Force and involved 19 ships,
18 aircraft, and approximately
3000 people from around 20
Major General
Gilmore also highlighted that, since 1990, the Royal Australian Navy has
conducted a range of maritime security exercises
including Operation Manitou in
the western Indian Ocean region and the Middle East, and also Exercise Northern
Shield, last held
Future engagement
opportunities with regional partners
3.18 As discussed in chapter 2, the economic and security environment in the
Indian Ocean region is evolving, with rapidly growing
economies seeking greater
engagement in the region alongside established regional powers. In some cases, a
number of regional powers
are increasing their strategic capabilities, including
naval operations.
Ocean region is becoming an increasingly important trade route for Australia,
with key seaborne trade markets including:
China, Japan, South East Asia and
3.19 Inquiry participants gave evidence on a range of opportunities for
Australia to further develop its strategic partnerships in
the region. While it
was suggested that Australia needed to have different types of relationships
with its strategic partners,
evidence also highlighted opportunities for further engagement with existing
partners, such as the United States, India and Indonesia.
Opportunities to
expand Australia’s strategic relationships with other countries in the
region including Japan,
Singapore, and
Malaysia were also
3.20 This section discusses evidence relating to Australia’s
relationships with the United States, India, and Indonesia, as
well as evidence
relating to reciprocal access to Australian facilities for strategic partners in
Australia’s Indian Ocean
Territories, such as the Cocos (Keeling) Islands
airport runway.
The Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Airport runway
3.21 As discussed in chapter 3, an upgrade of the Cocos Islands airport
runway has been proposed. Some inquiry participants suggested
that, under the
right conditions, Australia may wish to grant reciprocal access to that facility
to strategic partners as part of
collaborative efforts in the Indian Ocean
3.22 Dr Malcolm Davis raised one possible arrangement, noting that India
is operating aircraft similar to the Australian Navy’s
soon to be acquired
P-8A Poseidon surveillance
Dr Davis suggested
that Australia may wish to consider whether reciprocal access to the Cocos
Islands airport runway could be granted
in the spirit of increased cooperation
with India.
3.23 However, Dr Anthony Bergin stated that Australia must exercise caution
in the manner in which access to Australia’s strategic
Jennings suggested that Australia should consider how any such arrangement may
be perceived by other regional
Australia’s
relationship with the United States
3.24 Australia’s most important and enduring strategic alliance in the
Indian Ocean is its relationship with the United States.
It is a relationship
that will remain important for
3.25 Several inquiry participants raised the issue of enhanced cooperation
between Australia and the United States with respect to
access to Australian
defence infrastructure, particularly in relation to HMAS Stirling in Western
Australia. While HMAS Stirling
is closer to Perth than Australia’s Indian
Ocean Territories, it nonetheless remains an important strategic capability for
Australia’s security in the broader Indian Ocean region.
3.26 Mr Jennings noted that there had been discussions between the previous
Australian and United States governments about several
phases of cooperation,
including ‘more American warships operating out of HMAS
He suggested
that ‘the possibility for us to offer cooperation out of HMAS Stirling in
the west is a real
3.27 However, Major General John Hartley of Future Directions International
suggested that in the short term the United States was
unlikely to base major
military capability in Western Australia. Major General Hartley noted that the
United States now practiced
rotating crews between their existing naval
infrastructures, rather than rotating ships as had been the case
previously.
He added that,
while it was possible that ‘US ships will occasionally pass through
Fremantle ... 10 years ago there was a much
greater naval presence in this part
of the world than there is
3.28 Dr Ross Babbage suggested that, given its proximity to the United States
base on the island of Diego Garcia, Australia may wish
to consider granting some
degree of reciprocal access to the Cocos Islands
Australia’s
relationship with Indonesia
3.29 Indonesia is Australia’s nearest neighbour and the two countries
share a strong relationship. This includes joint efforts
relating to law
enforcement and people smuggling
activities.
3.30 Inquiry participants submitted that Australia should seek to further
strengthen its relationship with Indonesia through further
cooperation such as
joint naval patrols in the Indian Ocean
3.31 Dr Davis suggested that Australia should seek to develop defence-related
capabilities together with Indonesia. In particular,
he suggested that Australia
should work with Indonesia ‘to develop common capabilities for Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles, data links,
[and] space
capabilities.’
benefits of such cooperation, Dr Davis suggested, includes boosting the capacity
of the Indonesian defence industry, information
sharing, and the development of
common platforms, sensors, and networks to further enhance
cooperation.
3.32 Future Directions International suggested that there are benefits to the
inclusion of Indonesian military personnel in future
joint military exercises in
the Indian Ocean region. It was suggested that this would improve the
relationship between the two countries
and provide a better understanding of
joint and individual strategic
philosophies.
Australia’s
relationship with India
3.33 Evidence to the inquiry suggested that India, and South Asia more
generally, are of growing importance to Australia, particularly
in relation to
the trade in merchandise.
number of witnesses submitted that Australia’s relationship with India
could be developed through increased cooperation between
While it was noted
that the nurturing of this relationship would take
the signing of the 2014
whole-of-government security framework is an example of Australia’s
increasing cooperation with
3.34 In developing the relationship between Australia and India, the
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade suggested that the Australian
hoped that talks between Australian and Indian Ministerial and foreign agencies
in late 2017 would encourage a high-level
More broadly, the
Department suggested that Australia’s strategic capabilities in parts of
the Indian Ocean region and its
close relationship with the United States meant
that India viewed Australia as ‘a much more relevant actor and as a
3.35 According to Dr David Brewster of the National Security College at the
Australian National University, Australia has the capacity
to assist India in
building its own maritime awareness capabilities in the Indian
Dr Davis also
advised the Committee that a strong case could be made for joint anti-submarine
warfare patrols should India be granted
joint access to the Cocos Islands
Committee comment
3.36 The Indian Ocean region is home to a diverse range of national and
economic interests, including those of Australia. Australia’s
interests in
the region are centred in the islands of the Indian Ocean Territories,
strategically located and utilised as part of
Australia’s defence, border
protection and humanitarian activities in the region.
3.37 Australia has the right to protect its interests in the region and in
the Committee’s view has an obligation to contribute
to regional
stability. The Committee is pleased that evidence to the inquiry highlights the
regional engagement activities that Australia
undertakes with a variety of
partners in the region including in the areas of trade, humanitarian relief,
deterrence of transnational
crimes, border protection and regional security. The
Committee encourages the Australian Government to continue to expand these
as appropriate.
3.38 As demonstrated by Australia’s pivotal role in coordinating the
well-established leader in the region. The Committee understands that this
process generated significant goodwill and extensive
cooperation with many
regional partners.
3.39 The Committee’s inquiry has highlighted the opportunities that
exist for Australia to further engage in the region. In
particular there exist
opportunities for Australia to strengthen ties with its Indo-Pacific partners
through regionally-focussed
forums and bilateral and multilateral exercises in
the Indian Ocean region. The Committee notes there may be local community
regarding the presence of foreign militaries in the Indian Ocean
Territories; this is examined in chapter 5.
3.40 In the Committee’s view, access to its strategic infrastructure
should only be granted once the Australian Government has
fully considered
regional dynamics, its own security interests, and the potential impacts on
local communities. Such consideration
will allow the Australian Government to
pursue an inclusive strategy promoting cooperation, stability and security
within the region
while it is beyond the scope of this inquiry for the Committee
to comment on the details of any potential arrangements, it is clear
significant strategic opportunities exist and may be available for the
Australian Government to pursue if appropriate.
3.41 Overall, the Committee is convinced of the benefits of the Australian
Government conducting additional exercises and carrying
out activities in the
Indian Ocean region, in cooperation with its Indo-Pacific partners. While noting
concerns raised by local communities
islands, as detailed in chapter 5, the Committee considers that cooperative
exercises can
be carried out in a way that benefits the local communities, and
that potential negative impacts can be carefully managed.
Recommendation 2
3.42 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government strengthen
its engagement with Australia’s Indo-Pacific partners,
through existing
regional forums and alliances that Australia currently participates in,
particularly through pursuing opportunities
for bilateral and multilateral
defence activities and training exercises in the Indian Ocean region.
4. Defence capability and infrastructure
development
Introduction
4.1 The strategic location of Australia’s Indian Ocean Territories
provides agencies, particularly the Australian Government
Departments of Defence
and Immigration and Border Protection, with a unique staging point for the
protection of Australian Government
interests in the region. These interests
include military, border protection and humanitarian purposes as well as
ensuring the security
of Australia’s vital trade and energy supply routes.
This chapter will consider a range of matters covering defence capability,
infrastructure development, and the development of multi-purpose community
Defence capability and
infrastructure development
4.2 As outlined in chapter 2, Australia’s interests in the Indian Ocean
region are broad and spread across the third largest
exclusive economic zone in
the world. Through its role in the Indian Ocean region, Australia is also
responsible for one of the world’s
biggest search and rescue areas. In
addition, the dynamic geopolitical nature of the region has highlighted the
importance of the
Australian Government ensuring that it has adequate
capabilities and assets in the region.
4.3 While the prospect of conflict in the region is unlikely, a number of
contributors to the inquiry suggested that, from a capability
perspective,
Australia must be prepared and able to defend its significant investment and
interests in the Indian Ocean
Territories.
4.4 The Department of Defence advised the Committee that Australia’s
Indian Ocean Territories ‘also provide effective
locations from which to
deploy and support Australian Defence Force capability in the
This provides
the opportunity for Australia to contribute to humanitarian and disaster relief
operations as well as provide the capacity
to respond ‘to security
contingencies that threaten Australian interests, including in relation to
maritime trade.’
4.5 The Department of Defence maintains a range of capabilities in the Indian
Ocean region to protect Australia’s interests.
Evidence to the inquiry
noted that much of this capability was stationed along Australia’s west
coast, including within the
Indian Ocean Territories
themselves.
The Department
outlined Australia’s current and future Defence capabilities and assets in
the Indian Ocean Territories including
manned and unmanned maritime surveillance
and response aircraft, offshore patrol vessels, destroyers, frigates, support
small patrol boats, watercraft, and naval combat helicopters.
The Australian Government
has also acquired a new large-hulled multi-purpose patrol vessel,
. These capabilities are supported by the Department’s
communication, navigation, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance
capabilities based on Australia’s
4.6 The Committee heard from Dr Malcolm Davis that the Indian Ocean
Territories are well placed ‘as critical assets in the theatre
anti-submarine
Rory Medcalf of the National Security College at the Australian National
University suggested that Australia’s ability
to monitor foreign submarine
fleets in Australia’s approaches is
He noted that there
may be the potential for Christmas Island to contribute to undersea detection
activities in the future.
Malcolm Davis, appearing in a private capacity, suggested that there is a need
to monitor the maritime approaches coming out of
the Lombok-Makassar Strait as
it is a key deep-water entry point into the Indian
4.7 In increasing its capabilities, the Department of Defence has also stated
its intention to continue with further infrastructure
investment in the Indian
Ocean region. In particular, the Department advised the Committee that there
were proposed upgrades to the
runway facilities on the Cocos (Keeling) Islands
to support the introduction of Australia’s P-8A Poseidon maritime patrol
These aircraft will enhance Australia’s border security and
capabilities.
4.8 The National Security College at the Australian National University
commented on the benefits of increased Defence-related capabilities
Indian Ocean Territories, emphasising that the further development of
Defence-related infrastructure in the Indian Ocean has
benefits including
supporting Australia’s alliance with the United States and in time,
alliances with other emerging partners
4.9 Some inquiry contributors however advised that the Australian Government
take a more cautious approach to the development of Defence-related
infrastructure in the Indian Ocean
Territories.
Bergin, appearing in a private capacity, suggested that any investment should
account for the value of our strategic partnerships
Strategic Forum
added that the cost-effectiveness of significant investment in Defence
infrastructure in the islands should be weighed
up against the relative
strategic importance of the
Dr Ross Babbage,
appearing in a private capacity, suggested that in constructing any
infrastructure on the islands, Australia must
also consider its capacity to
Reservist capability
4.10 The Department of Defence, together with other Australian Government
agencies, shares responsibility for the protection of Australia’s
borders in the Indian Ocean. While the defence and border protection activities
undertaken in the region are broad, some
inquiry participants suggested that an
increased presence of Defence-related personnel in the Indian Ocean Territories
might support
Australia’s engagement with the
4.11 Suggestions for how this could be achieved included more frequent
military exercises,
occasional naval patrol
activities,
improved Defence
liaison activities,
presence of a unit of reservists from the local
This latter
suggestion was discussed by contributors who considered whether an Australian
Defence Force reservist presence would
be appropriate for the Indian Ocean
Territories.
A range of views
4.12 Strategic Forum, for example, submitted that such a presence on both
Christmas Island and the Cocos Islands would ‘be primarily
defend critical facilities, protect the local community and secure key areas so
as to facilitate the rapid arrival of
reinforcements from the
that a priority should be placed on recruiting and training members of the
resident communities.
4.13 Dr Ross Babbage of Strategic Forum told the Committee that any reservist
force would likely be employed on a part-time basis.
The benefits of raising
such a force on the islands would include the introduction of new skills,
training opportunities and enhanced
engagement with local communities.
Importantly, Dr Babbage noted that it would change the way external actors see
these territories
as Australian
4.14 Residents of the islands also suggested that the development of a
reservist force in the islands would be positive. Mr Balmut
Pirus, President of
the Shire of the Cocos (Keeling) Islands, expressed support for the proposal,
noting that it could include the
Similarly, Mrs
Seriwait Iku from the Cocos Islands Cooperative told the Committee that the
islands’ younger generation of females
would be interested in being part
of a reserve unit.
4.15 Mr Stephen Clay, appearing in private capacity, expressed concerns about
reservists being based in the Cocos Islands, contending
that many on West Island
‘are fairly well employed, with two or three
He suggested
that any reservist recruitment on Home Island would need to consider both
religious and cultural requirements.
By contrast, Mr Gregory
McIntosh, Chairman of the Islamic Council of Christmas Island, indicated that
that the Islamic community
was open to being involved in a reservist presence on
Christmas Island, and saw it as a positive move for the island’s
4.16 The Department of Defence submitted that reserve units ‘are
regionally based but they do not operate in isolation from
the wider Australian
Defence Force nor are they allocated local defence
responsibilities.’
Department’s submission notes that the only exception to this is Regional
Force Surveillance Units which play a role in
protection against illegal
smuggling and fishing which may have defined roles relating to border security.
Such units rely on support
from the ‘wider Army and on larger nearby
regional centres to provide management, logistics and
Department advised that an additional reserve group would require resources that
are beyond the Department’s current resource
allocation.
Multi-purpose infrastructure
development
4.17 While some of the infrastructure development in the Indian Ocean
Territories centres around the Australian Government’s
defence and border
protection capabilities, some current and future infrastructure developments
could be considered ‘multi-purpose’—that
is, infrastructure
that is also available to local communities.
4.18 As noted previously, a 2016 report of this Committee examined the issue
of infrastructure in some detail. While the present report
seeks to avoid
duplication, the following section considers some of the concerns the Committee
heard relating to strategic assets
in the Indian Ocean Territories that might be
utilised for strategic purposes but also deliver benefits to local
communities.
4.19 The Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development’s
submission to the inquiry highlights the nature of infrastructure
in the Indian
Ocean Territories. The Department notes that the Australian Government has
invested in long-term strategic infrastructure
to support the provision of
local- and state-type government services in the region, including in water,
wastewater, power, fuel
supply and storage, airports, ports, health services,
roads, community buildings, and
4.20 Concerns were raised by members of the local communities on the islands
and associated
facilities, access to water on West Island, the crane and mooring facilities on
Christmas Island, telecommunications
infrastructure, and the future of the
Christmas Island immigration detention centre.
4.21 The isolated nature of the Indian Ocean Territories means that key
infrastructure is challenging to build and maintain. Considerations
raised with
the Committee included the adequacy of the Australian Government’s budget
allocation and the costs and challenges
associated with transporting goods and
labour. A view was expressed that any infrastructure development that would also
local communities should be planned with a long term
Government’s financial commitments
4.22 The Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development highlighted
the scope of the Australian Government’s commitment
to the Indian Ocean
Territories, noting that the insured value of the Department’s
administered assets in external territories
including the Jervis Bay Territory
is some $1.188 billion.
For 2016-17, the Department’s budget for ‘rolling out
activities’ in the external territories including the Jervis
Bay Territory
was $109.1 million and included funding for:
... community policing, health and power services and the provision of all
services—ports, airports and education—local
government, including
the equivalent of financial assistance grants type payments, and management of
the facilities and community
infrastructure.
Australian Government’s administered capital budget for works in the
external territories including the Jervis Bay
Territory will be $8.4 million in
2016-17. The Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development advised the
Committee that this
figure is ‘below industry standards which see capital
funding provided annually at approximately three to four per cent of
This figure
does not include additional funding for a range of one-off, large scale
infrastructure works, such as jetty upgrades
on Christmas Island and Cocos
Islands that have been conducted since
4.24 Mr Julian Yates, who previously worked for the Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development, advised the Committee that
of funding for capital works in the Indian Ocean Territories had diminished,
meaning that there is now a backlog of infrastructure
maintenance that is
required in the region.
4.25 Examples of the types of infrastructure needed on Christmas Island
provided to the Committee included improved and reliable telecommunications,
reliable port facilities, the sealing of some roads, a new airport terminal,
improved drainage, the improved security of fuel supplies,
a waste management
plan for recycling, and an extension of the renewable energy scheme which
currently sees many residential homes
with rooftop solar
Some of the
infrastructure that is required in the Cocos Islands is discussed later in this
Costs and challenges of
transporting goods and labour
4.26 The Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development notes that
costs for infrastructure development in the Indian Ocean
Territories are several
times higher than on mainland Australia simply because of the geographically
remote nature of the assets.
Costs escalate as projects are reliant on sea freight and require the temporary
relocation of labour from the mainland. The Department
also notes that weather
events such as cyclones and extreme rainfall can also affect assets and capital
The Committee received
evidence that local businesses on the islands did have the capacity to provide
some goods and services to
Australian Government
including the
provision of some fresh fruit and vegetables from the market garden on Christmas
4.27 The Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development advised that,
given the limited scope of the funding, infrastructure
project proposals are
assessed on a priority basis, based on criteria including ‘supporting
safety, service delivery and community
The submission
notes that certain assets, such as the Christmas Island port crane, are
earmarked for replacement or
Service delivery
arrangements
4.28 The Australian Government holds primary responsibility for providing
services to the Indian Ocean Territories such as ‘quarantine
biosecurity
immigration and border protection, and national parks management
Australian Government has however entered into a Memorandum of Understanding
with the Western Australian Government with respect
to some 42 service delivery
arrangements.
Middleton of the Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development advised
the Committee that these agreements cover
justice, agriculture, fishing,
education and environment services, public housing, health and
In addition,
Ms Middleton noted that the Department had ‘contractual arrangements
for commercial entities, including managing
the airport, and the port, and
providing cleaning and maintenance
4.29 Ms Middleton also advised the Committee of the roles played by the shire
councils in the Indian Ocean Territories. She noted
that the shire councils
provide services such as road maintenance, waste management, playgrounds, and
activities for senior
The Cocos (Keeling) Islands
4.30 One of the projects that received significant commentary was the need
for an upgrade of the Cocos Islands airport runway. The
runway is a key asset
that sustains the work of Australian Government entities in the Indian Ocean
Territories and also ensures access
for supplies and tourism opportunities for
the local community.
4.31 A number of issues were raised in relation to the proposed upgrade
including the need for it to be able to cater for an upgraded
fleet of Defence
aircraft. Inquiry contributors pointed to the benefits the runway upgrade would
bring to both the Australian Government
and local communities alike. Several
inquiry contributors also raised concerns about the upgrade, including the need
to ensure an
adequate supply of water for firefighting purposes and fuel storage
capacity at the airfield. The unique issue of access for locals
to the Cocos
Islands Golf Club, which is linked to the airport, was also raised, and is
discussed in detail in chapter 5.
The need for a runway
upgrade and benefits to local communities
4.32 The runway at Cocos Islands airport, located on West Island, has
contributed to Australia achieving its strategic interests in
the region,
however, evidence to the Committee points to the need to both strengthen and
lengthen the runway to cater for larger
aircraft acquired by the Department of
4.33 The need for an upgrade to the runway is well established and has been
part of the Australian Government’s considerations
for some time. Mr Peter
Jennings noted that the concept of upgrading the runway was floated
in 2009-10, during his time as Deputy
Secretary for Strategy of the
Department of Defence.
Inquiry contributors also noted that the issue of the runway upgrade had
previously been raised as part of the
2012 Defence Force Posture
Defence White Paper
was also raised in the
2016 Defence White Paper
. The Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development’s submission states that the
Australian Government has committed
to upgrading the Cocos Islands airport
runway and associated infrastructure at a cost of approximately $200
2016 Defence White Paper
commitment to upgrade the runway was
supported by many inquiry
contributors.
highlighted the benefits to the Australian Government of the runway upgrade. In
particular, the runway would facilitate
an increase in Australia’s ability
to extend its air power in the Indian Ocean region through the replacement of
Orion with the P-8A Poseidon
Mr Jennings advised
the Committee that the P-8A is bigger and heavier than its predecessor and
requires a longer and strengthened
Runway upgrades would
also enable the support of other larger aircraft or those carrying larger
4.35 The Committee also heard about benefits to local communities as a result
of an upgraded runway. Ms Vicki Middleton of the Department
of Infrastructure
and Regional Development told the Committee that, as administrators of the
airport, the Department sought to work
closely with the community to ensure that
the runway upgrade project is conducted ‘sensitively and
appropriately.’
Department would look to get ‘the best possible benefits that flow from
that project’, particularly in relation to
land use and other commercial
possibilities such as
4.36 Plans to upgrade the runway are in the early stages of consultation and
the project is due for completion in approximately
The Department of
Defence is developing a detailed proposal in consultation with other Australian
Government agencies,
including the Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development. The
Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development advised
the Committee that
the runway upgrade would ‘increase local economic activity and support
local service
providers.’
Ancillary issues
4.37 During the course of the Committee’s inquiry, a number of issues
related to the Cocos Islands airport runway were raised.
In particular, inquiry
contributors raised concerns about the availability of fuel and water and access
for residents to the Cocos
Islands Golf Club, which forms part of the airport
precinct. The issues of fuel and water are discussed below, while access to the
Cocos Islands Golf Club is discussed in chapter 5 in the context of impacts on
local communities.
Fuel supplies and
4.38 Evidence to the Committee was that supplies of fuel and storage capacity
at the airport required assessment and upgrade. Dr Sam
Bateman and Dr Anthony
Bergin cited the
2012 Defence Force Posture Review
, which stated that
fuel stocks and other facilities such as accommodation on the islands are
limited and more intensive use of the
airfield would require major
4.39 Dr Bateman and Dr Bergin advised the Committee that increased fuel
storage at the airport would cater for a range of needs including
aviation fuel,
marine diesel, and the refuelling of patrol boats. Their submission to the
inquiry cited, for example, that the Australian
Navy’s soon-to-be acquired
P8-A Poseidon aircraft ‘carries about 34 tonnes of fuel so the daily fuel
requirement for
continuous maritime surveillance and patrol flights using these
aircraft from Cocos Islands could be in the order of 100 tonnes or
Water supplies
4.40 Another issue that was raised in relation to the Cocos Island airport
was the supply of water on the island, particularly for
firefighting. Mr Greg
Cahill, a member of the community who worked with the fire brigade, advised the
Committee that if there were
to be an incident on either end of the runway, it
could prove problematic.
noted that the fire truck used by the local fire brigade ‘only has three
minutes of water for firefighting purposes’
and that this supply was drawn
from the side of the
4.41 In relation to other sources of water, West Island has a number of water
galleries from which water could be drawn. However,
it was suggested that these
could not be expanded unless a desalination facility were installed, which was
the case on Home Island.
Stephen Clay noted that the limited water supply was due to the water lens
underneath the island.’
Mr John Clunies-Ross noted that the there is a ‘massive resource’ of
fresh water on nearby South Island but that to draw
water from it to West Island
would have a significant environmental
Christmas Island port
4.42 Given their remote location, the ability for the islands to receive
freight by sea is crucial for the sustainment of life, business
and Australian
Government operations.
4.43 The Committee was told that the crane at the Christmas Island wharf had
significant issues, compounded by the fact that the wharf
itself is ‘fully
exposed to north-westerly winds’, meaning that there can be long periods
where ships are unable to unload
4.44 The Shire of Christmas Island advised the Committee that ‘the
wharf crane has failed completely and the mooring system
is in the process of
decline that will result in total failure.’
The Shire noted that the
phosphate mine company operating in Christmas Island, Phosphate Resources
Limited, had provided use of its
only crane to load and unload food, business
supplies and other goods-- including those utilised by the Department of Defence
in the absence of a dedicated piece of
infrastructure.
The Committee
was informed that the crane was ‘not fit for purpose’ due to its
4.45 Mr Barry Haase, Administrator of the Indian Ocean Territories, noted
that the lack of an operational crane at the wharf would
impact the phosphate
mine’s operations and that, longer term, a dedicated crane at the wharf
would be a boost to the development
of the tourism
4.46 The Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development advised the
Committee in its submission that the Christmas Island wharf
crane was due for
replacement or upgrade.
June 2017, the Department advised through its regular community bulletin that a
part for the Christmas Island wharf crane had
been ordered and was due to arrive
in mid-August 2017. The Department advised that the crane would resume
operations once the part
4.47 In addition, the Department advised that the Australian Government
‘has provided $3.3 million for the purchase, refurbishment,
delivery, and
commissioning of a second-hand 350 tonne mobile crawler
crane, which was expected to arrive at Christmas Island in early to mid-August
2017, would provide back-up to the wharf
crane once commissioning, testing and
training had been
Reliability of
telecommunications
4.48 Given the remote nature of the Indian Ocean Territories, access to
reliable telecommunications services is an important link
for local communities.
Evidence to the Committee suggests that the reliability of the existing services
for residents on Christmas
Island is an
4.49 Mr Cliff Tindall, a local resident, advised the Committee that Christmas
Island had previously been serviced by a satellite internet
provider, however,
without ongoing Commonwealth financial assistance, the service was not
This service, run by
the Christmas Island Internet Administrator, was due to end in June 2017 when
‘the Commonwealth ends its
subsidy of the temporary
4.50 Currently, the interim internet service provision, as part of the
National Broadband Network (NBN) on the island, was inadequate
and was affected
or unavailable, particularly when it
Mr Tindall suggested
that there is limited scope for the current NBN service on Christmas Island to
be improved or for internet speeds
4.51 The Shire of Christmas Island advised the Committee that around 30 per
cent of the Christmas Island Community may not be able
to access the NBN’s
‘Skymuster’ satellite internet service because ‘the cliffs of
the Island stand between
them and the
satellite.’
suggested that the installation of the wrong technology and equipment had made
the satellite internet service difficult
for local businesses to
4.52 The Shire of Christmas Island suggested that the Commonwealth may wish
to consider the investment ‘in the branch line cable
that is on offer from
Australia Singapore Cable, for a short time’, which it suggests would
... secure infinite communications capacity for defence that satellites cannot,
and state of the art internet communications for
the whole community including
business needs that the NBN service cannot
Tindall suggested that this alternative fibre network appeared to be more
reliable than the NBN services currently on offer
on Christmas
The Committee was
advised that the developer would require an immediate commitment by the
Australian Government for Christmas Island
to be included in the
with cost of
estimates ranging between $7 million and $15
4.54 Mr Tindall also raised the issue of mobile coverage on Christmas Island.
He noted that the 4G mobile network was not supported
by the existing services
on Christmas Island.
Christmas Island Immigration
Detention Centre
4.55 The Department of Immigration and Border Protection operates the
Christmas Island Immigration Detention Centre, which plays a
‘maintaining the integrity of Australia’s migration framework and
ensuring our international obligations are
4.56 As part of the 2015 Federal Budget, the Australian Government announced
that the immigration detention facilities on Christmas
Island would
However the Department
has assessed, in consultation with its Australian Government partners that, as a
result of ‘the enduring
and credible threat to Australia from organised
illegal maritime ventures’, that it would ‘retain priority access to
relevant facilities, infrastructure, services and support capabilities’ on
the island.
4.57 The Shire of Christmas Island informed the Committee that the Minister
for Local Government and Territories, Senator the Hon.
Fiona Nash, had
‘offered to work with our community to plan the future post-IDC
advised the Committee that it wished to cooperate with the government in
relation to developing a future plan, however,
it notes in its submission to the
inquiry that the:
... Australian government has a lot to answer for in not having a strategy or
plan for diversity on Christmas Island to soak up the
employees who will have no
job to go to when the Government shuts down the detention centre on Christmas
concern was echoed by Shire President Mr Gordon Thompson, who advised the
Committee that he believed the Centre would be
placed into a
‘contingency’ mode and would only employ a limited number of local
At present, the
Centre employs approximately 70 local
Evidence relating to
the future of the Centre were consistent with the messages received during the
Committee’s meetings during
its visit to Christmas Island. The Committee
was also advised that, despite the negative sentiment associated with the Centre
the past, the tourism outlook for Christmas Island had recently
Committee comment
Strategic presence and
4.59 Australia’s Indian Ocean Territories are of strategic importance
to Australia and provide strategic advantage for Australian
defence and border
protection activities. The Committee appreciates the efforts by the Australian
Government and its agencies to
ensure that Australia’s interests in the
Indian Ocean region are protected now and into the future.
4.60 The Committee sees the Indian Ocean Territories as vitally important to
Australia’s defence and border protection capabilities.
The Committee
considers that the Australian Government’s defence capability commitments
through successive Defence White Papers,
border protection initiatives, and
participation in various international forums and military exercises in the
Indian Ocean region,
are all avenues for the demonstration of our defence
commitment. However, the Committee sees a need for further investment in some
4.61 One area that would benefit from further investment is in increased
Australian Government exercises in the Indian Ocean region.
Together with
increased bilateral and multilateral activities in the region, this would
highlight the strategic importance of the
Indian Ocean Territories and
demonstrate Australia’s commitment to the islands.
4.62 The Committee accepts that the key guiding strategy for defence
infrastructure in the Indian Ocean Territories are those commitments
made in the
2016 Defence White Paper
. Consideration should also be given to how these
commitments support partnerships with key allies in the region, as outlined in
previous chapter.
4.63 With any development of Defence-related infrastructure, however, the
Committee believes that the Australian Government must assess
not only its
strategic position but also weigh these against the proposed financial costs and
capability enhancements, ensuring that
a full analysis is carried out and a
complete consultation process with all stakeholders is undertaken.
4.64 The Committee notes the views of a range of contributors to the inquiry
that some form of reservist capability engaged in the
islands would be of
benefit to the local communities and to Australia more broadly. With respect to
reservist capability, the Committee
acknowledges Department of Defence views
that the commission of such a capability is not practicable given the
geographical constraints.
4.65 Nevertheless, the Committee considers that further investigation of
possibilities to engage local residents of the Indian Ocean
Territories in
activities endorsed by the Australian Defence Force is warranted. Consideration
should be given to the benefits to
both the Department of Defence and local
communities alike.
Recommendation 3
4.66 Noting the receptiveness and support of local communities, the
Committee recommends that the Australian Government consider increased
and Border Protection activities, such as surveillance, naval patrols, a
military reserve or cadet unit, and potential training
exercises on Christmas
Island and the Cocos (Keeling) Islands to demonstrate Australia’s
commitment to the islands. Consideration
should also be given to how locally
engaged employment opportunities can be provided as part of these
activities.
Infrastructure development
4.67 The development of infrastructure in the Indian Ocean Territories has
come at a significant cost to the Commonwealth, particularly
additional costs relating to operating in these remote locations. In the
Committee’s view, however, and in light
of the strategic importance of the
Indian Ocean Territories, these costs are justified and are a means of providing
effective support
to local communities.
4.68 At a local level, the Committee acknowledges that the Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development plays a significant
role in the
development of community infrastructure and the delivery of services. However,
by the Department’s own measure,
this funding appears to fall below
community and industry standards and expectations.
4.69 While the Department retains discretion over the allocation of funding,
it is apparent that additional capital works and infrastructure
are required to
service the needs of both Australian Government entities and the local
communities, such as the Cocos Islands airport
runway and associated
infrastructure, Christmas Island port facilities and telecommunications
infrastructure. In examining how costs
may be reduced and to ensure that some
expertise can be retained in the islands, the Committee encourages the
Australian Government
to consider whether increased use can be made of existing
goods and services supplied by local businesses in the Indian Ocean
Territories.
The Cocos (Keeling) Islands
airport runway
4.70 The issue of the upgrade of the Cocos Islands airport runway has been
raised regularly for a number of years. The benefits of
the upgrade, in
particular to strengthen and lengthen the runway to service the Australian
Navy’s soon-to-be acquired fleet
of P-8A Orion surveillance aircraft, were
raised with the Committee from many participants including Australian Government
departments,
strategic analysts, and residents of the local communities.
4.71 The Committee supports the Australian Government’s commitment to
the upgrade expressed via the
2016 Defence White Paper
. The Committee is
pleased to note the evidence provided by various Australian Government agencies
of the plans underway to undertake
the project.
Ancillary issues
4.72 Evidence to the Committee’s inquiry highlighted a number of
ancillary issues in connection with the Cocos Islands airport
upgrade. These
included the need for enhanced fuel supplies and storage, water for firefighting
purposes at the airport, and the
impact of the runway upgrade on the Cocos
Islands Golf Club.
4.73 The Committee notes evidence from contributors that highlight the vital
role that fuel supplies play in the Indian Ocean Territories
communities. The
fuel is used for many defence and civil purposes and, given the strategic nature
of the Indian Ocean Territories
to Australia; the Committee considers that the
security and supply of fuel for these endeavours is of paramount importance. The
Government should consider how secure fuel supplies and storage
capacity can be improved, particularly at the Cocos Islands airport.
4.74 The limited availability of water on West Island, particularly for
firefighting purposes at the Cocos Islands airport, is worth
exploring. Of
particular concern were comments that suggested that the local fire brigade
would not have the capacity to manage a
significant fire should one occur. The
Committee acknowledges that water resources generally on West Island are also an
concern may be less significant on Home Island given the presence of
a desalination plant. These are issues that the Australian Government
assess and address in any proposal to upgrade the Cocos Island runway. In doing
so, the Committee encourages the Australian
Government to consult with key
stakeholders so that appropriate measures can be developed.
Recommendation 4
4.75 The Committee recommends that, as part of the project to upgrade the
Cocos (Keeling) Islands Airport runway, the Australian Government
ensure that
extensive consultation is undertaken with all stakeholders, including Australian
Government agencies, commercial partners,
and the local communities. Care should
be taken to fully assess and manage concerns relating to water catchment and
storage issues,
including for firefighting purposes near the airport.
Christmas Island wharf and
port facilities
4.76 The Christmas Island wharf crane is a piece of infrastructure that
benefits the entire island. The Committee acknowledges that
in recent times,
there have been significant issues with the operation of the crane which has
impacted a range of Australian Government
and local activitieson the island.
4.77 The Committee appreciates that Christmas Island’s private mine
operator, Phosphate Resources Limited, have generously allowed
use of their
crane and understands that the diversion of this infrastructure may have
impacted the company’s own operations.
The Committee notes that the use of
this crane is not a long term solution. The Committee therefore welcomes the
recent announcement
by the Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development
that replacement parts have been ordered and, once these are installed,
crane will resume operations. The Committee is also pleased to note the
Department’s announcement that funding for a back-up
crane has been
secured and that this crane will become available once installation, testing and
training has been completed.
4.78 The Committee also acknowledges the comments by inquiry participants
regarding mooring, navigational upgrades, and erosion control
measures at the
Christmas Island wharf. The Committee considers that these facilities are vital
not only to the Australian Government’s
longer term strategic priorities
for Christmas Island, but also for sustaining the local economy and wellbeing of
residents. The
Australian Government should consider medium and long term
solutions for upgrade of these facilities as a matter of priority.
Recommendation 5
4.79 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government consult with
relevant stakeholders including Australian Government agencies,
Christmas Island
businesses and the local community in developing medium and long term solutions
for the Christmas Island wharf to
ensure that strategic, economic and social
objectives can be met.
Telecommunications
4.80 Evidence to the Committee highlighted the deficiencies of
telecommunications infrastructure in the Indian Ocean Territories.
nature of the islands means that reliable telecommunications infrastructure is
required to service both Australian Government
operations and civilian needs,
however, this is challenging to achieve.
4.81 Inquiry participants highlighted that since the private satellite
internet provider ceased operations early in 2017, Indian Ocean
communities have
been reliant on services provided by the National Broadband Network. The
Committee was informed of a proposal by
a private provider to include
Australia’s Indian Ocean Territories in a project that would provide more
stable internet provision
to the islands. While the Committee understands the
attraction of this proposal, the proposed costs and timeframe may not allow the
Australian Government to engage fully with the proposal.
4.82 Nevertheless, the Committee encourages the Australian Government to
consider options available to improve the reliability of
the existing National
Broadband Network internet services. The Australian Government should consult
with all affected stakeholders
to develop acceptable, cost-effective
improvements.
Future of Christmas Island
Immigration Detention Centre
4.83 The Committee notes the Australian Government’s future plans for
the Christmas Island Immigration Detention Centre, which
is expected to close in
early 2018. The Committee understands the importance of this facility to the
local community, particularly
relating to the employment that it generates and
the flow-on effects for the local economy.
4.84 It has been suggested that the Australian Government will place the
facility in a ‘contingency mode’ so that it may
be available for
future border protection activities.
4.85 The Committee accepts that the Australian Government may also need to
reassess its requirements for this facility on an ongoing
basis. Nevertheless,
the Committee considers that the Australian Government should outline its plans
for the facility in a timely
manner, particularly so that it has minimal impact
on current locally engaged staff and affected businesses.
5. Impacts on local communities
5.1 The communities that comprise Australia’s Indian Ocean Territories
are unique, with many possessing either Malay or Chinese
heritage. As part of
the inquiry, Members of the Committee visited communities on Christmas Island
and in the Cocos (Keeling) Islands
to hear directly from residents about the
strategic role of the islands and the impacts on local communities.
5.2 The Committee is immensely grateful to the communities on Christmas
Island and in the Cocos Islands for their warm welcome, openness
and hospitality
during its the visit in April 2016. The visit provided the Committee with
invaluable insights into the local communities,
their way of life, and their
perceptions on the inquiry’s terms of reference.
5.3 This chapter will consider the characteristics of these local
communities, the economic and social drivers underpinning life on
the islands,
and how the Australian Government can better manage its defence and border
protection activities in the region in a
manner which has minimal impacts on
local communities.
Importance of local
5.4 The communities of Australia’s Indian Ocean Territories are proudly
multicultural whilst remaining staunchly Australian.
The Committee’s visit
allowed Members to speak with locals and see first-hand the lives of communities
on Christmas Island
and the Cocos Islands’ communities of Home Island and
West Island.
5.5 Christmas Island has a unique multicultural
with an ethnic
composition of the community comprising approximately 60 per cent Chinese, 25
per cent Malay, and 15 per cent
Mr Gregory McIntosh
from the Islamic Council of Christmas Island told the Committee that a lot of
younger people on Christmas Island
identify as
Australian.
However, there
are diverse views within the
5.6 The Cocos Islands communities are also diverse, consisting of 80 per cent
Cocos Malay living on Home Island, and 20 per cent mostly
government workers,
contractors and families living on West Island. The population of Home Island
mainly comprises Cocos Malays who
descend from people who came to the island in
the 19th century from East Africa, China, Java, India and Sri
Meanwhile, the
majority of the population of West Island are of European heritage. Despite
their diverse backgrounds, the Committee
heard that the residents of the Cocos
Islands generally identify as Australian. Mr Mohammed Minkom from Home
Island told the Committee
that community members have their shared background
and history, and also identify as
Australians.
This sentiment
was echoed by Mr John Clunies-Ross, a resident from West Island who told
the Committee that ‘we are islanders
first, but we are
Australians.’
5.7 Given the significant presence of the Australian Government’s
civilian and Defence personnel in the Indian Ocean Territories,
communities encourage visitors to engage meaningfully with residents as part of
their work. Ms Kelly Edwards, from Cocos (Keeling)
Islands Tourism, told the
Committee of the importance of visiting Australian Government personnel taking
part in community events,
such as fundraising for local initiatives,
participating in beach clean ups and other community
Similarly, Mr Clunies-Ross commented on the importance of Australian
Defence Force personnel mixing with the community, noting that
it makes island
life for both the community and personnel a ‘workable
5.8 The Committee heard from several members of the Cocos Islands community,
including during its visit to the islands, that some
elements of Australian
Government agencies are more successful than others in engaging meaningfully
with the local communities. For
example, it was noted that Royal Australian Air
Force personnel are particularly successful in this regard, and that this helps
build a sense of mutual trust and respect with the local
communities.
5.9 The Committee heard that Indian Ocean Territories have the capacity to
bring people into the community and teach them the island
way of life.
Mr Clunies-Ross concluded his comments to the Committee by noting that
‘[a]nyone who comes here [to the Cocos
Islands] will be inoculated by the
island factor, and they leave here better people. So that is what we can offer
to the people who
Economic drivers in the
5.10 The Committee has previously reported on the territories’
economies in its 2016 report on economic development in the Indian
Territories.
Some of these
themes were raised again in the context of the present inquiry. This section
considers some of the economic drivers
in the context of the strategic role of
the islands.
5.11 Much of the economic health of the Indian Ocean Territories’
economies is linked to Australia’s defence and border
activities. Mr Clive Brown, Chairman of Phosphate Resources Limited, told the
Committee that, if Australia truly values
the islands as strategically
important, it needs to undertake ‘overt action to entrench its national
authority’, and
this is best done by promoting, facilitating and
encouraging a vibrant local community and
In order for the
Indian Ocean Territories to remain strategically secure, Mr Stephen Clay,
appearing in a private capacity, submitted
to the Committee that it is important
for the islands to have long-term economic
5.12 The Committee received evidence that one of the main drivers of
Christmas Island’s private sector economy is phosphate
mining. The largest
private sector employer is Phosphate Resources, which employs approximately 200
people in mining and subsidiary
businesses.
The Committee
heard that the poor condition of the local port’s infrastructure is a
major impediment to the operation of the
There is concern among
local residents about the mine’s uncertain future, partly due to the
port’s infrastructure.
During the Committee’s visit, concerns about the longer-term economic
security of the island were expressed by local residents
and the business
5.13 The Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development submitted that
the Cocos Island’s primary economic driver is
government activity, and the
Cocos Co-operative Society is the main private employer in those
5.14 Economic growth is welcomed by the local communities in the Indian Ocean
Territories but the Committee heard that social impacts
of this growth need to
be carefully managed. Mr Michael Asims from the Christmas Island Casino
Resort agreed with Mr Clay’s
submission to the
which suggested that
the community was not prepared for the local impact of the detention centre
during its construction and years
of significant
Likewise, Mr
McIntosh expressed concerns about the extent to which previous large influxes of
personnel from the government and private
sectors had had a ‘negative
impact ... [due to] ... alcohol, drugs and
emphasised the need for economic benefits to flow to all communities on the
islands and for government to consult with locals
to avoid unnecessary social
5.15 Ms Lisa Preston, from Christmas Island Tourism Association, submitted to
the Committee that tourism is an important part of the
local economy and there
is potential for substantial growth and greater economic contribution from
Accommodation and
transport were identified as requirements for the success of the tourism
Mr Asims stated
that the frequency and costs of flights severely affect tourism, and that the
success of the industry is ‘underpinned’
5.16 The Committee was informed that Australia’s Defence presence on
Christmas Island positively contributes to the island’s
economy. Ms
Preston commented that Defence activities such as flights, refuelling and
resupplying of vessels, and local spending
by personnel increase economic
activity on Christmas Island.
Similarly, Mr Barry Haase, the Administrator of the Indian Ocean Territories,
told the Committee there are two horticultural entities
on Christmas Island that
are providing fresh vegetables for Defence
5.17 Commenting on the character of the community and the nature of work, Mr
Clunies-Ross said that the Cocos Islands residents are
multi-skilled, flexible
and capable, and he expressed his disappointment that the residents are seldom
approached to undertake projects
5.18 The employment profiles and opportunities differ in both communities.
Mr Daniel Becker told the Committee that the Cocos Islands
have a lot of
underemployment, since employment is dependent on intermittent
activities—for example, there is a surge in employment
when ships dock on
the island to unload cargo.
By contrast, a lot of jobseekers on Christmas Island are older and on the fringe
of retirement age, so the number of unemployed young
people is very
However, Ms Gee Foo from
the Chinese Literary Association stated that most young people from Christmas
Island leave for mainland
Australia due to lack of employment
opportunities.
Managing impacts on the
local communities
5.19 Given the Australian Government’s broad defence and border
protection activities in the Indian Ocean region, the Committee
heard about the
impacts that this has had on the local communities or may have in the future.
Concerns were raised about a number
of issues including the impact of defence
and border protection activities, the development of infrastructure, and the
of local communities being consulted about such matters.
Defence and border
protection activities
5.20 There is broad support from the Indian Ocean Territories’
communities for the Australian Defence Force and Australian Border
Force to use
the islands, provided their presence also benefits local communities. The Cocos
Islands Cooperative Society submitted
to the Committee that local residents have
positive relationships with the personnel stationed on the Cocos
Mr Barry Haase
commented that the Royal Australian Air Force, the Australian Border Force and
the Navy contribute to Christmas Island’s
economy by creating jobs and
supporting businesses through the supply
5.21 The Cocos Islands Cooperative Society advised that there was a concern
among some Cocos Malay that an increased Defence presence
may lead to a
depopulation of the Cocos
Mr McIntosh told the Committee that some residents of Christmas Island have
a long family history on the island, and that
sections of the community would
not support the depopulation of the
5.22 The Committee heard evidence that perceptions of the Indian Ocean
Territories’ security are enhanced by Defence
Mr Barry Haase
told the Committee that the Indian Ocean Territories ‘greatly benefit from
the presence of the ADF [Australian
Defence Force] and the ABF [Australian
Border Force] on our islands and in our surrounding
Pirus told the Committee that the Cocos Islands welcome Australian Defence Force
personnel as ‘they are the guys
looking after the islands
security-wise.’
5.23 However, the Committee heard that some cultural sensitivities still
existed for residents of the islands regarding the deployment
of military
personnel. Mrs Seriwait Iku from the Cocos Islands Cooperative told the
Committee, for example, that the community would
still be ‘cautious’
of an Australian military presence on the Cocos
Ms Jeanette Young from the Cocos Islands told the Committee at times she
felt there was ‘wariness’ from some
Australian Defence personnel
when interacting with her due to the fact she wore a
Mr McIntosh from
the Islamic Council of Christmas Island supported the suggestion of a reservist
presence on Christmas Island, as
discussed previously in this report, but also
noted his concern in regards to the potential cultural impacts associated with
increases in Defence personal on the
5.24 The Committee heard residents’ concerns about possible negative
economic impacts due to increased Defence activity. Ms
Avril Whyte, the manager
of the tourist resort Oceania House on the Cocos Islands, noted regular
shortages of food and other supplies
on the island, and suggested that an
increase in Defence personnel could lead to a further drain on
Ms Whyte also
stated that an increased Defence presence could lead to the Cocos Islands being
viewed as a military base by mainland
Australians, which may negatively impact
Similarly, Ms Young,
a health professional on the Cocos Islands, told the Committee that the
healthcare services were currently stretched
by the current needs of Defence
personnel alongside the healthcare needs of
5.25 The community also expressed concerns about the presence of foreign
military personnel on the islands as part of any future joint
exercises. Mr Haase told the Committee that joint training exercises between
Australian and foreign militaries are perceived
to be ‘something of a
bogeyman’ for many members of the Christmas Island community, with
community members holding the
view that the island would be overrun with
military personnel and that their community values would be
Infrastructure
development
5.26 Communities expressed the view that Defence capacities will almost
always provide the most compelling justification for infrastructure
in the territories.
stated that the infrastructure on both territories is of strategic importance,
in particular that refuelling facilities on
Christmas Island along with the port
infrastructure on both islands are important
5.27 Ageing infrastructure is a contributor to the lack of economic activity
in the Indian Ocean Territories. Mr Brown from Phosphate
Resources Limited told
the Committee that poor and unreliable infrastructure on Christmas Island adds
to the costs and hardships
facing local residents and
businesses.
5.28 However, the Committee also heard that there are significant costs
involved in constructing infrastructure in the Indian Ocean
Territories. Mr
Julian Yates submitted to the Committee that, since the territories are small
and isolated from mainland Australia,
it would be very expensive to construct
Defence specific infrastructure on the
Mr Yates also stated
that, due to the amount of land needed for this, there would be
‘significant adverse impacts on local
communities for comparatively little
gain in defence
capability.’
5.29 However communities view that infrastructure should benefit their
residents by having dual-use
capabilities.
Mr Geoffrey
Bennett from West Island told the Committee that infrastructure for fuel supply
to the Cocos Islands is vital for private
Similarly, Mr Haase
also noted that infrastructure is vital to boost tourism activities in the
territories.
Mr Balmut Pirus
commented that if the airstrip on West Island could be further developed it
could create opportunities for more airlines
to set routes to the islands,
leading to increased tourism and employment for
5.30 From an economic viewpoint, Mr Bennett raised the issue of contractor
buy-in to the community, noting that whilst economic growth
infrastructure projects on the island is good, it must be balanced with ensuring
the community remains cohesive and retains
The Cocos (Keeling) Islands
5.31 The Cocos Islands Golf Club is an important part of the social fabric of
West Island in the Cocos Islands. As part of the upgrade
to the Cocos Islands
Airport runway, it was assumed by the local community that the upgrade could
include a perimeter fence being
placed around the runway. The local community
raised concerns that this would have a significant impact on residents’
to the golf course.
5.32 The seven hole golf course is unique, as six holes are located on the
lagoon side of the airport runway, while a seventh is located
on the other side
of the runway.
around the runway would restrict access to the seventh hole. Commenting on the
golf course, Ms Kelly Anne Edwards, Coordinator
of the Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Community Resource Centre, told the Committee that the club had a large
membership base and provided
a social avenue for local communities. Ms Edwards
told the Committee that visitors and members of the golf club had permission to
cross the runway at a particular place in order to play each hole of the golf
course. This crossing was strictly enforced by the
5.33 Mr Geoffrey Bennett, Manager of Island Petroleum Services, advised that
he had been a member of the club for some 14 years. He
advised the Committee
that the golf club was important to the community and access should not be
restricted as there were limited
recreational opportunities available to the
local community. He said that the golf course was one of the ‘best assets
we have on our island to get people up, active, walking around, getting
out, getting a bit of stress relief, hitting a little white
Importance of consultation
with local communities
5.34 Local communities noted the importance of consultation as part of the
development of infrastructure and policy relating to the
islands. Mr Thomson,
from the Shire of Christmas Island and the Union of Christmas Island Workers,
told the Committee that people
feel the Australian Government will do whatever
it wants with the territories without consultation, since it is the
Government’s
many other examples of local residents expressing dissatisfaction with
inadequate consultation on government decisions
affecting local
communities.
In relation to
the lack of future planning Mr McIntosh told the Committee there are ‘many
examples from modern, recent history
with regard to how the community is left to
basically deal with the aftermath’ of policies for Christmas
5.35 This desire for greater and more effective consultation was apparent to
the Committee during its visit to the Indian Ocean Territories.
It was clear
that local communities on both Christmas Island and the Cocos Islands were
interested in being active participants in
decision-making around the Australian
Government’s activities on the islands, and the potential impacts on the
local communities.
Committee comment
5.36 The Committee is grateful for all members of Christmas and the Cocos
Islands communities who appeared before the inquiry to submit
evidence. The
evidence was extremely beneficial in learning about strategic uses of the Indian
Ocean Territories, understanding how
the economic and general wellbeing of the
residents of Christmas and the Cocos Islands can be improved. Hearing directly
residents and service providers contributed to the richness of the
Committee’s understanding of local impacts.
5.37 The Committee recognises the strategic importance of the Indian Ocean
Territories, which have a long and important history in
Australia’s
security and defence. It is clear that, given the changing dynamics in the
Indian Ocean region, Christmas and the
Cocos Islands will continue to play a
strategic role in years to come.
5.38 To continue relying on these islands for strategic purposes, the
Australian Government must ensure suitable infrastructure and
opportunities for local communities. The Committee notes that government
activity is a key driver of both islands’
economies, and considers that
ensuring and advancing the islands’ economies demonstrates the importance
Australia places on
its commitment to Christmas Island and the Cocos Islands. To
that end, the Committee is of the view that the Government should further
facilitate commercial opportunities on the islands, including those relating to
phosphate mining activities and progressing developments
relating to the
Christmas Island casino.
5.39 The Committee also notes community concerns about the proposal to
upgrade the Cocos Islands airport runway and considers it important
Australian Government give certainty to the community about the detail and
timing of the project.
5.40 Noting previous instances of fly in-fly out personnel associated with
infrastructure projects accessing limited accommodation
options at the expense
of the tourism industry, the Committee strongly urges the Australian Government
ensure that accommodation
for construction personnel be carefully considered to
minimise the impact on tourism. This might involve building new accommodation,
or repurposing existing accommodation that is not currently being used. The
Committee also considers that there would be benefit
in infrastructure or
service delivery on these islands being drawn from local providers where
Recommendation 6
5.41 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government engage with
local communities to ensure that any proposals for works,
funding and planning
in the Indian Ocean Territories result in direct benefits to the local
communities and, where possible, draw
on local suppliers of goods and services.
5.42 The Committee notes that there exists a range of opportunities for the
Australian Government to further demonstrate its interest
in and commitment to
the Indian Ocean Territories. While this might include additional Defence
infrastructure or presence as previously
discussed in this report, what is clear
to the Committee is that local communities must be consulted about potential
impacts of any
such changes. The Committee notes the importance of consultation
with communities of the Indian Ocean Territories regarding proposed
polices on the territories. In particular, the Committee believes any proposals
which may impede access to the Cocos Islands
golf course should only be
considered following consultation with the community and consideration of
alternative measures. The Committee
recognises that these communities also want
regular communication with the Australian Government so that they are informed
of deliberations
and decisions that will affect
5.43 The Committee acknowledges community concerns regarding potential
impacts that visiting foreign militaries may have on Indian
Ocean Territory
residents. The Committee anticipates that any exercises would be carried out in
a way that ensures the islands are
not significantly impacted. Nevertheless, the
Committee is firmly of the view that local communities must be consulted about
impacts of any such changes including joint training exercises with
Australia’s Indo-Pacific partners.
5.44 The Committee views that as far as possible, infrastructure projects
undertaken by the Australian Government should give consideration
to the use of
locally engaged staff. The Committee believes that this will provide a host of
long term benefits such as transferrable
skills and employment opportunities for
locals as part of the private economy.
Recommendation 7
5.45 The Committee recommends any Australian Government departments
wishing to do work in the Indian Ocean Territories should do so
partnership with local communities. Departments should undertake extensive
consultation processes and respond to the needs
of the local community.
Government departments should discuss their proposed consultation methods with
key stakeholders on the islands
to ensure those processes are effective and
genuinely inclusive.
5.46 Finally, the Committee would like to thank the communities of Christmas
Island, West Island, and Home Island for their warm welcome
and considered input
into the Committee’s inquiry. The Committee undertook roundtable hearings
with community members from
both Christmas and the Cocos Islands to understand
community concerns and visited sites throughout both islands to see the
strength and resilience of communities. The visit also allowed the
Committee the opportunity to hear directly from residents about
their needs,
priorities and concerns about future developments. The Committee received
positive feedback from community members appreciating
the style of consultation,
as a chance for them to speak openly and frankly about the strengths and areas
of improvement for the
Australian Government in its contribution to their
islands. It is clear to the Committee that all residents are proud of their
of the islands, there is a strong desire that the Australian
Government work
alongside them and develop opportunities that lie outside the realms of its
defence and border protection responsibilities.
Mr Ben Morton MP
17 August 2017
A. Submissions and exhibits
Submissions
National Security College, Australian National University
Dr Sam Bateman AM and Dr Anthony Bergin
Mr Kelvin Matthews
Air Power Australia
Mr Julian Yates
Department of Defence
§ 6.1 Supplementary to submission 6
Mr Stephen Clay
Strategic Forum Ltd
Dr Malcolm Davis
Department of Immigration and Border Protection
Mr Peter Jennings PSM
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development
Cocos Islands Cooperative Society Ltd
Future Directions International
Christmas Island Tourism Association
Shire of Christmas Island
Strategic Forum Ltd (related to Submission 8)
R. Babbage, ‘Should Australia Plan to Defend Christmas and Cocos
Canberra Papers Strategy and Defence
no. 45, Published By
Strategic and Defence Studies Centre, Research School of Pacific Studies, The
Australian National University,
Canberra, Australia, 1988.
Air Power Australia (related to Submission 4)
A monograph by Dr C. Kopp, ‘Basing Infrastructure Considerations in
the Defence of Australia’s Indian Ocean Approaches,
, 25 February 2012.
Mr John Clunies-Ross
R. Wettenhall, ‘Decolonising through integration: Australia’s
off-shore island territories,’
Island Studies Journal
, 11 (2), pp.
B. Public hearings and witnesses
Friday, 17 February
2017—Canberra
Air Power Australia
§ Mr Peter Goon, Head of Test and Evaluation
§ Dr Carlo Kopp, Head of Capability and Strategic Research
Strategic Forum Ltd
§ Dr Ross Babbage, Chief Executive Officer and Non-Resident Senior
Fellow, Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, Washington
National Security College,
Australian National University
§ Dr David Brewster, Senior Research Fellow
§ Professor Rory Medcalf, Head of College
Department of
§ Mr Tom Hamilton, First Assistant Secretary, Strategic Policy
§ Major General Gus Gilmore, Head, Military Strategic Commitments
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade
§ Ms Kathy Klugman, First Assistant Secretary, South and West Asia
Department of Infrastructure
and Regional Development
§ Ms Vicki Middleton, Executive Director, Local Government and
Territories Division
§ Ms Karly Pidgeon, General Manager, Indian Ocean Territories Branch
Department of Immigration
and Border Protection
§ Dr Benjamin Evans, Assistant Secretary, Strategy Branch
§ Rear Admiral Peter Laver, Commander, Maritime Border Command
Private capacity
§ Dr Anthony Bergin
§ Mr Stephen Clay
§ Dr Malcolm Davis
§ Mr Julian Yates
Thursday, 23 March
2017—Canberra
Future Directions
International
§ Major General John Hartley AO (Retired), Institute Director
Private capacity
§ Mr Peter Jennings
Tuesday, 4 April
2017—Christmas Island
Administrator of the Indian
Ocean Territories
§ Mr Barry Haase
Australian Federal
§ Sergeant Steven Wiggins, Territory Controller, Shire of Christmas
Chinese Literary
Association of Christmas Island
§ Ms Gee Foo, Secretary
Christmas Island Casino
§ Mr Michael Asims, Business Development Manager
Christmas Island Tourism
Association
§ Mrs Kirsty Faulkner, Committee Member
Indian Ocean Group Training
Association
§ Mr Daniel Becker, General Manager
Islamic Council of
Christmas Island
§ Mr Gregory McIntosh, Chairman
Parks Australia
§ Mr Scott Suridge, Park Manager, Christmas Island and Pulu Keeling
National Parks
Phosphate Resources
§ Mr Mark Brandon-Baker, Consultant
§ Mr Clive Brown, Chairman
Shire of Christmas
§ Mr David Price, Chief Executive Officer
§ Mr Gordon Thomson, Shire President, and General Secretary, Union of
Christmas Island Workers
Private capacity
§ Mr Cliff Tindall
Wednesday, 5 April
2017—West Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Cocos Islands Cooperative
Society Limited
§ Mr Ronald Grant, General Manager
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Community Resources Centre
§ Ms Kelly Edwards, Coordinator
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Tourism Association
§ Ms Stephanie Hagenbrock, Tourism Manager
Island Petroleum
§ Mr Geoffrey Bennett, Manager
Shire of Cocos (Keeling)
§ Mr Aaron Bowman, Chief Executive Officer
Private capacity
§ Mr Greg Cahill
§ Mr John Clunies-Ross
§ Mr Gerald Short
Wednesday, 5 April
2017—Home Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Cocos Islands
Cooperative
§ Mrs Seriwati Iku, Project Manager
Persatuan Islam Pulu Cocos-
Cocos Islands Islamic Association
§ Mr Mohammed Isa Minkom, President
Oceania House
§ Ms Avril Whyte, Manager
Shire of the Cocos
(Keeling) Islands
§ Mr Aaron Bowman, Chief Executive Officer
§ Mr Balmut Pirus, President
§ Ms Jeannette (Ayesha) Young, Shire Councillor
Private capacity
§ Mr Noom Semat (Nek Nang), through Mr Balmut Pirus, interpreter
Indian Ocean Territories Fact
Sheet provided to the Committee by the Department of Infrastructure and Regional
Development and Department
of Foreign Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Future Directions
International,
Submission 15
Indo-Pacific refers to an
emerging Asian maritime system that encompasses both the Pacific and Indian
Oceans, defined in large part
by the geographically expanding interests and
reach of China and India and the continued strategic role and presence of the
States. See: Rory Medcalf, ‘Indo-Pacific: What’s in a
name?’, 16 August 2012, The Interpreter
<https://www.lowyinstitute.org/the-interpreter/indo-pacific-whats-name>
viewed 25 July 2017.
Department of Foreign Affairs
Submission 12
, p.1, Professor Medcalf, National Security
Committee Hansard
, 17 February 2017, p. 3.
Department of Foreign Affairs
Submission 12
Department of Foreign Affairs
Submission 12
, pp. 11-13.
Standing Committee on the National Capital and External Territories,
Governance in the Indian Ocean Territories—Final Report: Economic
Development and Governance,
March 2016.
Joint Standing Committee on the
National Capital and External Territories,
Governance in the Indian Ocean
Territories—Final Report: Economic Development and Governance
Department of Infrastructure
and Regional Development,
Submission 13
Joint Standing Committee on
the National Capital and External Territories,
Governance in the Indian Ocean
Territories—Final Report: Economic Development and Governance,
2016, p. 129.
Joint Standing Committee on
the National Capital and External Territories,
Governance in the Indian Ocean
Territories—Final Report: Economic Development and Governance,
2016, p. 133.
Department of Infrastructure
and Regional Development, ‘Christmas Island environment and
http://regional.gov.au/territories/Christmas/enviro_herritage.aspx
viewed 30 August 2017 and
Department of Infrastructure and Regional
Development, ‘Cocos Islands environment and heritage’
http://regional.gov.au/territories/Cocos_Keeling/enviro_herritage.aspx
viewed 30 August 2017.
Serco manages a number of
immigration detention centre facilities, including those on Christmas Island.
See: Serco, ‘Immigration
http://www.serco-ap.com.au/our-services/our-work/immigration-services
viewed 25 July 2017.
The Indian Ocean Regional
Development Organisation was established by the Australian Government to promote
and support the policies,
strategic plans, and priorities that facilitate
development in the Indian Ocean Territories. Membership comprises the
Administrator
of the Indian Ocean territories, a representative from each of the
two shires and three community representatives from Christmas
Island and Cocos
(Keeling Islands) respectively. See: Department of Infrastructure and Regional
Development, ‘Appointment of
new Regional Development Organisation
http://regional.gov.au/territories/indian_ocean/iot_bulletins/2016/A25-2016_appointment_RDO_members.aspx
viewed 25 July 2017.
Dr Sam Bateman AM,
Professorial Research Fellow, Australian National Centre for Ocean Resources and
Security, University of Wollongong
and Dr Anthony Bergin, Senior Analyst,
Australian Strategic Policy Institute,
Submission 2
Mr Peter Jennings, private
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 23 March 2017, p. 2.
Department of Infrastructure
and Regional Development, ‘Christmas Island environment and
http://regional.gov.au/territories/Christmas/enviro_herritage.aspx
viewed 30 August 2017 and Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development,
‘Cocos Islands environment and heritage’
http://regional.gov.au/territories/Cocos_Keeling/enviro_herritage.aspx
viewed 30 August 2017.
Dr David Brewster and Professor Rory Medcalf, National Security College,
Australian National University,
Submission 1
Mr Julian Yates,
Submission 5,
Dr David Brewster and
Professor Rory Medcalf, National Security College, Australian National
University,
Submission 1
Claire Aird,
‘Australia’s first naval victory commemorated 100 years after battle
between HMAS Sydney and German Raider
SMS Emden’ 5 November 2014, ABC News
http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-11-01/australia-commemorates-centenary-of-first-naval-victory/5853712
viewed 30 August 2017.
Claire Aird,
‘Australia’s first naval victory commemorated 100 years after battle
between HMAS Sydney and German Raider
SMS Emden’ 5 November 2014, ABC News
http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-11-01/australia-commemorates-centenary-of-first-naval-victory/5853712
viewed 30 August 2017.
Department of Infrastructure
and Regional Development, ‘Christmas Island environment and
http://regional.gov.au/territories/Christmas/enviro_herritage.aspx
viewed 30 August 2017.
Shire of Christmas Island,
Submission 17,
Mr Julian Yates,
Submission 5
, p. 2; Department of Infrastructure and Regional
Development, ‘Christmas Island environment and heritage’
http://regional.gov.au/territories/Christmas/enviro_herritage.aspx
viewed 30 August 2017; and Department of Infrastructure and Regional
Development, ‘Cocos Islands environment and heritage’
http://regional.gov.au/territories/Cocos_Keeling/enviro_herritage.aspx
viewed 30 August 2017.
Shire of Christmas Island,
Submission 17
Mr Julian Yates,
Submission 5,
Dr David Brewster and
Professor Rory Medcalf, National Security College, Australian National
University,
Submission 1
Dr David Brewster and
Professor Rory Medcalf, National Security College, Australian National
University,
Submission 1
Dr Ross Babbage Chief
Executive Officer, Strategic Forum and Non-resident Senior Fellow, Center for
Strategic and Budgetary Assessments,
Washington DC,
Committee Hansard
Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 9.
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
, p. 13; Rear Admiral Peter Laver,
Commander, Maritime Border Command, Department of Immigration and Border
Protection,
Committee Hansard,
Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 8.
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Department of Defence,
2016 Defence White Paper
, p. 61, paragraph 2.92.
Major General John Hartley
AO (Retired), Director and Chief Executive Officer, Future Directions
International,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 23 March 2017, p. 2.
Major General John Hartley AO
(Retired), Director and Chief Executive Officer, Future Directions
International,
Submission 15
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Dr Ross Babbage, Chief
Executive Officer, Strategic Forum and Non-resident Senior Fellow, Center for
Strategic and Budgetary Assessments,
Washington DC,
Committee Hansard
February 2017, p. 25; Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade,
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Dr David Brewster and
Professor Rory Medcalf, National Security College, Australian National
University,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 6
Dr Anthony Bergin, private
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 13.
Dr Malcolm Davis, private
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 26.
Mr Barry Haase,
Administrator of the Indian Ocean Territories,
Committee Hansard
Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 13.
Department of Defence,
Submission 6
Dr David Brewster and
Professor Rory Medcalf, National Security College, Australian National
University,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 6
Dr David Brewster and
Professor Rory Medcalf, National Security College, Australian National
University,
Submission 1
Dr David Brewster and
Professor Rory Medcalf, National Security College, Australian National
University,
Submission 1
Dr David Brewster and
Professor Rory Medcalf, National Security College, Australian National
University,
Submission 1
Dr David Brewster and
Professor Rory Medcalf, National Security College, Australian National
University,
Submission 1
Mr Peter Jennings, private
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 23 March 2017, p. 6.
Mr Peter Jennings, private
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 23 March 2017, p. 6.
Mr Peter Jennings, private
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 23 March 2017, p. 6.
Dr Ross Babbage, Chief
Executive Officer, Strategic Forum and Non-resident Senior Fellow, Center for
Strategic and Budgetary Assessments,
Washington DC,
Committee Hansard
February 2017, p. 26.
Dr Ross Babbage, Chief
Executive Officer, Strategic Forum and Non-resident Senior Fellow, Center for
Strategic and Budgetary Assessments,
Washington DC,
Committee Hansard
February 2017, p. 17.
Dr David Brewster, Senior
Research Fellow, National Security College, Australian National University,
Committee Hansard
, 17 February 2017, p. 5.
Dr Anthony Bergin, private
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 5.
Dr Ross Babbage, Chief
Executive Officer, Strategic Forum and Non-resident Senior Fellow, Center for
Strategic and Budgetary Assessments,
Washington DC,
Committee Hansard
February 2017, p. 9.
Mr Stephen Clay, private
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 26.
Dr David Brewster, Senior
Research Fellow, National Security College, Australian National University,
Committee Hansard
, 17 February 2017, p. 26.
Dr Ross Babbage, Chief
Executive Officer, Strategic Forum and Non-resident Senior Fellow, Center for
Strategic and Budgetary Assessments,
Washington DC,
Committee Hansard
February 2017, p. 26.
Department of Defence,
Submission 6,
p. 2; Mr Tom Hamilton, First Assistant Secretary, Strategic
Policy Division, Department of Defence,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17
February 2017, p. 6.
Mr Peter Jennings, private
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 23 March 2017, p. 6.
Dr Sam Bateman AM,
Professorial Research Fellow, Australian National Centre for Ocean Resources and
Security, University of Wollongong
and Dr Anthony Bergin, Senior Analyst,
Australian Strategic Policy Institute,
Submission 2
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Dr David Brewster and
Professor Rory Medcalf, National Security College, Australian National
University,
Submission 1
Dr Ross Babbage, Chief
Executive Officer, Strategic Forum and Non-resident Senior Fellow, Center for
Strategic and Budgetary Assessments,
Washington DC,
Committee Hansard
Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 9.
Dr Ross Babbage, Chief
Executive Officer, Strategic Forum and Non-resident Senior Fellow, Center for
Strategic and Budgetary Assessments,
Washington DC,
Committee Hansard
Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 9.
Dr Ross Babbage, Chief
Executive Officer, Strategic Forum and Non-resident Senior Fellow, Center for
Strategic and Budgetary Assessments,
Washington DC,
Committee Hansard
Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 9.
Dr Ross Babbage, Chief
Executive Officer, Strategic Forum and Non-resident Senior Fellow, Center for
Strategic and Budgetary Assessments,
Washington DC,
Committee Hansard
Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 9.
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Mr Peter Jennings, Executive
Director, Strategic Policy Institute,
Submission 11
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Department of Immigration
and Border Protection,
Submission 10
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Major General John Hartley
AO (Retired), Director and Chief Executive Officer, Future Directions
International,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 23 March 2017, p. 2.
Major General John Hartley
AO (Retired), Director and Chief Executive Officer, Future Directions
International,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 23 March 2017, p. 3.
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Department of Defence,
Submission 6
, p. 4; see also: Major General Gus Gilmore, Head, Military
Strategic Commitments Division, Department of Defence,
Committee Hansard
Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 17.
Department of Defence,
Submission 6
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
, p. 12; see also: Dr Benjamin Evans,
Assistant Secretary, Strategy Branch, Department of Immigration and Border
Protection,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 17.
Department of Defence,
Submission 6
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
, pp. 8, 12.
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Department of Defence,
Submission 6
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Department of Defence,
Submission 6
Major General Gus
Gilmore, Head, Military Strategic Commitments Division, Department of Defence,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 4.
Major General Gus
Gilmore, Head, Military Strategic Commitments Division, Department of Defence,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 7.
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
Dr David Brewster, Senior
Research Fellow, National Security College, Australian National University,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 27.
Dr David Brewster, Senior
Research Fellow, National Security College, Australian National University,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 17.
Professor Rory Medcalf,
Head of College, National Security College, Australian National University,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 14.
Mr Peter Jennings,
private capacity,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 23 March 2017, p. 7.
Dr David Brewster, Senior
Research Fellow, National Security College, Australian National University,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 5; Professor Rory
Medcalf, Head of College, National Security College, Australian National
University,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 4.
Dr Malcolm Davis, private
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 10.
Dr Anthony Bergin,
private capacity,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 13;
Professor Rory Medcalf, Head of College, National Security College, Australian
National University,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p.
Dr Anthony Bergin,
private capacity,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p.
Mr Peter Jennings,
private capacity,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 23 March 2017, p. 2.
Professor Rory Medcalf,
Head of College, National Security College, Australian National University,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 13.
Mr Peter Jennings,
private capacity,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 23 March 2017, p. 2.
Mr Peter Jennings,
private capacity,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 23 March 2017, p. 8.
Major General John
Hartley AO (Retired), Institute Director, Future Directions International,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 23 March 2017, p. 8.
Major General John
Hartley AO (Retired), Institute Director, Future Directions International,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 23 March 2017, p. 8.
Dr Ross Babbage, Chief
Executive Officer, Strategic Forum, and Non-resident Senior Fellow, Center for
Strategic and Budgetary Assessments,
Washington DC,
Committee Hansard
Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 17.
Dr Benjamin Evans,
Assistant Secretary, Strategy Branch, Department of Immigration and Border
Protection,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 17.
Mr Peter Jennings,
private capacity,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 23 March 2017, p. 7.
Dr Malcolm Davis, private
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 17.
Dr Malcolm Davis, private
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 17.
Future Directions
International,
Submission 15
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Submission 12
See for example: Mr Peter
Jennings, private capacity,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 23 March 2017,
p. 7; Dr Malcolm Davies, Senior Analyst, Defence Strategy and Capability,
Australian Strategic Policy Institute,
Submission 9
Mr Peter Jennings,
private capacity,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 23 March 2017, p. 7.
Mr Tom Hamilton, First
Assistant Secretary, Strategic Policy Division, Department of Defence,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 14.
Ms Kathy Klugman, First
Assistant Secretary, South and West Asia Division, Department of Foreign Affairs
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 15.
Ms Kathy Klugman, First
Assistant Secretary, South and West Asia Division, Department of Foreign Affairs
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 15.
Dr David Brewster, Senior
Research Fellow, National Security College, Australian National University,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 13.
Dr Malcolm Davis, Dr
Malcolm Davies, Senior Analyst, Defence Strategy and Capability, The Australian
Strategic Policy Institute,
Submission 9
Mr Peter Jennings,
private capacity,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 23 March 2017, p. 2.
Department of Defence,
Submission 6
Department of Defence,
Submission 6
Department of Defence,
Submission 6
Department of Defence,
Submission 6
Department of Defence,
Submission 6
Dr Malcolm Davis, private
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 10.
Professor Rory Medcalf,
Head of College, National Security College, Australian National University,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 14.
Professor Rory Medcalf,
Head of College, National Security College, Australian National University,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 14.
Dr Malcolm Davis, private
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 25.
Department of Defence,
Submission 6
National Security
College, Australian National University,
Submission 1
See for example: Dr
Anthony Bergin, private capacity,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17
February 2017, p. 5; Dr Ross Babbage, private capacity,
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 9.
Dr Anthony Bergin,
private capacity,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p.
Strategic Forum,
Submission 8
Dr Ross Babbage, private
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017.
See for example: Mr Peter
Jennings, private capacity,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 23 March 2017,
p. 4; Dr Ross Babbage, private capacity,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17
February 2017, p. 9.
See for example: Mr
Julian Yates, private capacity,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February
2017, p. 11; Strategic Forum,
Submission 8
, p. 6; Air Power Australia,
Submission 4
See for example: Mr Peter
Jennings, private capacity,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 23 March 2017,
See for example: Mr Peter
Jennings, private capacity,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 23 March 2017,
See for example: Mr Peter
Jennings, private capacity,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 23 March 2017,
See for example: Mr Peter
Jennings, Executive Director, Australia Strategic Policy Institute,
Submission 11
Strategic Forum,
Submission 8
Strategic Forum,
Submission 8
Dr Ross Babbage, Chief
Executive Officer, Strategic Forum, and Non-resident Senior Fellow,
Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessment,
Washington DC,
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, pp. 21-22.
Mr Balmut Pirus,
President, Shire of the Cocos (Keeling) Islands,
Committee Hansard
Island, 5 April 2017, p. 4.
Mrs Seriwait Iku, Project
Manager, Cocos Islands Cooperative,
Committee Hansard
, Home Island,
5 April 2017, p. 7.
Mr Stephen Clay, private
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 22.
Mr Stephen Clay, private
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 22.
Mr Gregory McIntosh,
Chairman, Islamic Council of Christmas Island,
Committee Hansard
Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 7.
Department of Defence,
Submission 6.1
Department of Defence,
Submission 6.1
Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development,
Submission 13
Dr Carlo Kopp, Head of
Capability and Strategy Research, Air Power Australia,
Committee Hansard
Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 28.
Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development,
Submission 13
Ms Vicki Middleton,
Executive Director, Local Government and Territories Division, Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development,
Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 8.
Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development,
Submission 13
Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development,
Submission 13
, pp. 3, 12.
Mr Julian Yates, private
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 11.
Mr Gordon Thompson, Shire
President, Shire of Christmas Island, and General Secretary, Union of Christmas
Island Workers,
Committee Hansard
, Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p.
Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development,
Submission 13
, p. 3. See also:
Mr Julian Yates, private capacity,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17
February 2017, p. 11 and Dr Ross Babbage, Chief Executive Officer, Strategic
Forum, and Non-resident Senior Fellow,
Centre for Strategic and Budgetary
Assessments, Washington DC,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February
2017, p. 9.
Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development,
Submission 13
See for example: Mr
Gordon Thompson, Shire President, Shire of Christmas Island, and General
Secretary, Union of Christmas Island
Committee Hansard
Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 5 and Mr Cliff Tindall, private capacity,
Committee Hansard, Christmas Island, 4 April 2017,
Mr Barry Haase,
Administrator of the Indian Ocean Territories,
Committee Hansard
Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 15.
Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development,
Submission 13
Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development,
Submission 13
Ms Vicki Middleton,
Executive Director, Local Government and Territories Division, Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17
February 2017, p. 8.
Vicki Middleton, Executive Director, Local Government and Territories Division,
Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development,
Committee Hansard
Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 8.
Ms Vicki Middleton,
Executive Director, Local Government and Territories Division, Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development,
Committee Hansar
d, Canberra, 17
February 2017, p. 8.
Ms Vicki Middleton,
Executive Director, Local Government and Territories Division, Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17
February 2017, p. 8.
Ms Vicki Middleton,
Executive Director, Local Government and Territories Division, Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17
February 2017, p. 8.
See for example: Dr Ross
Babbage, Chief Executive Officer, Strategic Forum, and Non-resident Senior
Fellow, Center for Strategic
and Budgetary Assessment, Washington DC,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 25; Air Power
Submission 4
Mr Peter Jennings,
private capacity,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 23 March 2017, p. 3.
See for example: National
Security College, Australian National University,
Submission 1
See for example: National
Security College, Australian National University,
Submission 1
Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development,
Submission 13
See for example: National
Security College, Australian National University,
Submission 1
See for example: National
Security College, Australian National University,
Submission 1
19; Major General Gus Gilmore, Head, Military Strategic Commitments Division,
Department of Defence,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, pp.
21-22; Dr Malcolm Davis,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017,
p. 19; See for example: Mr Peter Jennings, private capacity,
, Canberra, 23 March 2017, p. 4.
Mr Peter Jennings,
Executive Director, Australian Strategic Policy Institute,
Submission 11
See for example: Dr Sam
Bateman and Dr Anthony Bergin,
Submission 2
Ms Vicki Middleton,
Executive Director, Local Government and Territories Division, Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17
February 2017, p. 23.
Ms Vicki Middleton,
Executive Director, Local Government and Territories Division, Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17
February 2017, p. 23.
Mr Tom Hamilton, First
Assistant Secretary, Strategic Policy Division, Department of Defence,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 23.
Mr Tom Hamilton, First
Assistant Secretary, Strategic Policy Division, Department of Defence,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 23.
Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development,
Submission 13
Dr Sam Bateman and Dr
Anthony Bergin,
Submission 2
Dr Sam Bateman and Dr
Anthony Bergin,
Submission 2
Mr Greg Cahill, private
Committee Hansard
, West Island, 5 April 2017, p. 14.
Mr Greg Cahill, private
Committee Hansard
, West Island, 5 April 2017, p. 14.
Mr Greg Cahill, private
Committee Hansard
, West Island, 5 April 2017, p. 15.
Mr Stephen Clay, private
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 22.
Mr John Clunies-Ross,
private capacity,
Committee Hansard
, West Island, 5 April 2017, p.
Dr Anthony Bergin,
private capacity,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p.
Mr Gordon Thompson, Shire
President, Shire of Christmas Island, and General Secretary, Union of Christmas
Island Workers,
Committee Hansard
, Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p.
Shire of Christmas
Submission 17
Mr Clive Brown, Chairman,
Phosphate Resources Limited,
Committee Hansard
, Christmas Island, 4 April
2017, p. 7.
Mr Barry Haase,
Administrator of the Indian Ocean Territories,
Committee Hansard
Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 2.
Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development,
Submission 13
Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development, 29 June 2017,
Community Bulletin
D33/2017 – Repairs to Christmas Island Port Infrastructure
Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development, 29 June 2017,
Community Bulletin
D33/2017 – Repairs to Christmas Island Port Infrastructure
Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development, 29 June 2017,
Community Bulletin
D33/2017 – Repairs to Christmas Island Port Infrastructure.
Ms Vicki Middleton,
Executive Director, Local Government and Territories Division, Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17
February 2017, p. 7.
Mr Cliff Tindall, private
Committee Hansard
, Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, pp.
Shire of Christmas
Submission 17
Mr Cliff Tindall, private
Committee Hansard
, Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, pp.
Mr Cliff Tindall, private
Committee Hansard
, Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, pp.
Shire of Christmas
Submission 17
Shire of Christmas
Submission 17
Shire of Christmas
Submission 17
Mr Cliff Tindall, private
Committee Hansard
, Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, pp.
Cliff Tindall, private capacity,
Committee Hansard
, Christmas Island, 4
April 2017, pp. 21–22. See also: Mr Barry Haase, Administrator of the
Indian Ocean Territories,
Committee Hansard
, Christmas Island, 4 April
2017, p. 23.
Mr Gordon Thompson, Shire
President, Shire of Christmas Island, and General Secretary, Union of Christmas
Island Workers,
Committee Hansard
, Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 4;
Mr Barry Haase, Administrator of the Indian Ocean Territories,
, Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 23.
Mr Cliff Tindall, private
Committee Hansard
, Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, pp.
Department of Immigration
and Border Protection,
Submission 10
Australian Government,
2015 Budget Paper no. 2
http://www.budget.gov.au/2015-16/content/bp2/html/bp2_expense-16.htm
viewed 17 July 2017.
Mr Gordon Thompson, Shire
President, Shire of Christmas Island, and General Secretary, Union of Christmas
Island Workers,
Committee Hansard
, Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p.
Shire of Christmas
Submission 17
Shire of Christmas
Submission 17
Mr Gordon Thompson, Shire
President, Shire of Christmas Island, and General Secretary, Union of Christmas
Island Workers,
Committee Hansard
, Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p.
Mr Daniel Becker, General
Manager, Indian Ocean Group Training Association,
Committee Hansard
Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 15.
Mrs Kirsty Faulkner,
Committee Member, Christmas Island Tourism Association,
, Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 6.
Mr Gregory McIntosh,
Chairman, Islamic Council Christmas Island,
Committee Hansard
, Christmas
Island, 4 April 2017, p. 23.
Ms Gee Foo, Secretary,
Chinese Literary Association of Christmas Island,
Committee Hansard
Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 9; Department of Infrastructure and Regional
Development, ‘Cocos Islands environment and
http://regional.gov.au/territories/Cocos_Keeling/enviro_herritage.aspx
viewed 13 July 2017.
Mr Gregory McIntosh,
Chairman, Islamic Council of Christmas Island,
Committee Hansard
Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 13.
Shire of Christmas
Submission 17
, pp. 2, 3.
Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development, ‘Cocos Islands environment and
http://regional.gov.au/territories/Cocos_Keeling/enviro_herritage.aspx
viewed 13 July 2017.
Mr Mohammed Isa Minkom,
President, Persatuan Islam Pulu Cocos, Cocos Islands Islamic Association,
Committee Hansard,
Mr John Clunies-Ross,
private capacity,
Committee Hansard,
West Island, 5 April 2017, p. 7.
Ms Kelly Anne Edwards,
Coordinator, Cocos (Keeling) Islands Tourism,
Committee Hansard,
Island, 5 April 2017, p. 7. Ms Edwards noted that the members of the Australian
Defence Force did participate in these types
Mr John Clunies-Ross,
private capacity,
Committee Hansard,
West Island, 5 April 2017, p. 4.
See, for example: Mr
Geoffrey Bennett, Manager, Island Petroleum Services,
Committee Hansard
West Island, 5 April 2017, p. 2.
Mr John Clunies-Ross,
private capacity,
Committee Hansard,
West Island, 5 April 2017, p.
Joint Standing Committee
on the National Capital and the External Territories (2016)
Governance in the
Indian Ocean Territories—Final Report: Economic Development and
Mr Clive Morris Brown,
Chairman, Phosphate Resources Limited,
Committee Hansard
, Christmas
Island, 4 April 2017, p. 24.
Mr Stephen Clay,
Submission 7
Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development,
Submission 13
Mr Barry Haase,
Administrator of the Indian Ocean Territories,
Committee Hansard
Christmas Island, 4 April 2017,
Mr Gordon Thomson, Shire
President, Shire of Christmas Island, and General Secretary, Union of Christmas
Island Workers,
Committee Hansard
, Christmas Island, 4 April 2016, p.
Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development,
Submission 13
Mr Michael Nicholas
Asims, Business Development Manager, Christmas Island Casino Resort,
Committee Hansard
, Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 8.
Mr Stephen Clay,
Submission 7
Mr Gregory McIntosh,
Chairman, Islamic Council, Christmas Island,
Committee Hansard
, Christmas
Island, 4 April 2017, p. 7.
Mr Michael Nicholas
Asims, Business Development Manager, Christmas Island Casino Resort,
Committee Hansard
, Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 8.
Ms Lisa Preston,
Chairperson, Christmas Island Tourism Association,
Submission 16
Ms Gee Foo, Secretary,
Chinese Literary Association of Christmas Island,
Committee Hansard
Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 19.
Mr Michael Nicholas
Asims, Business Development Manager, Christmas Island Casino Resort,
Committee Hansard
, Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, pp. 17, 19.
Ms Lisa Preston,
Chairperson, Christmas Island Tourism Association,
Submission 16
Mr Barry Haase,
Administrator of the Indian Ocean Territories,
Committee Hansard
Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 15.
Mr John Clunies-Ross,
private capacity,
Committee Hansard,
West Island, 5 April 2017, p. 4.
Mr Daniel Becker, General
Manager, Indian Ocean Group Training Association,
Committee Hansard
Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 15.
Mr Daniel Becker, General
Manager, Indian Ocean Group Training Association,
Committee Hansard
Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 15.
Ms Gee Foo, Secretary,
Chinese Literary Association of Christmas Island,
Committee Hansard
Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 9.
Cocos Islands Cooperative
Society Limited,
Submission 14
Mr Barry Haase,
Administrator of the Indian Ocean Territories,
Committee Hansard
Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 2. See also: Mr Ronald James Grant, General
Manager, Cocos Islands Cooperative Society,
Committee Hansard,
Island, 5 April 2017, p. 3.
Cocos Islands Cooperative
Society Limited,
Submission 14
Mr Gregory McIntosh,
Chairman, Islamic Council Christmas Island,
Committee Hansard
, Christmas
Island, 4 April 2017, p. 7.
Mr Barry Haase,
Administrator of the Indian Ocean Territories,
Committee Hansard
Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 2.
Mr Barry Haase,
Administrator of the Indian Ocean Territories,
Committee Hansard
Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 2.
Mr Balmut Pirus,
President, Shire of the Cocos (Keeling) Islands,
Committee Hansard,
Island, 5 April 2017, p. 4.
Mrs Seriwait Iku, Project
Manager, Cocos Islands Cooperative,
Committee Hansard,
5 April 2017, p. 7.
Ms Jeanette (Ayesha)
Young, Shire Councillor, Shire of the Cocos (Keeling) Islands,
Mr Gregory McIntosh,
Chairman, Islamic Council, Christmas Island,
Committee Hansard
, Christmas
Island, 4 April 2017, p. 7.
Ms Avril Whyte, Manager,
Oceania House,
Committee Hansard,
also: Mr Geoffrey Bennett, Manager, Island Petroleum Services,
West Island, 5 April 2017, p. 10.
Ms Avril Whyte, Manager,
Oceania House,
Committee Hansard,
also: Mr Aaron Bowman, Chief Executive Officer, Shire of Cocos (Keeling)
Committee Hansard,
West Island, 5 April 2017, p. 11.
Ms Jeanette (Ayesha)
Young, Shire Councillor, Shire of the Cocos (Keeling) Islands,
Mr Barry Haase,
Administrator of the Indian Ocean Territories,
Committee Hansard
Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 20. See also: Mrs Seriwait Iku, Project
Manager, Cocos Islands Cooperative,
Committee Hansard,
April 2017, p. 7.
For example see: Mr Barry
Haase, Administrator of the Indian Ocean Territories,
Committee Hansard
Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 2.
Mr Stephen Clay,
Submission 7
Mr Clive Morris Brown,
Chairman, Phosphate Resources Limited,
Committee Hansard
, Christmas
Island, 4 April 2017, p. 7.
Mr Julian Yates,
Submission 5
Mr Julian Yates,
Submission 5
Shire of Christmas
Submission 17
Mr Geoffrey Bennett,
Manager, Island Petroleum Services,
Committee Hansard
, West Island, 5
April 2017, p. 2.
For example see: Mr Barry
Haase, Administrator of the Indian Ocean Territories,
Committee Hansard
Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 2.
Mr Balmut Pirus,
President, Shire of the Cocos (Keeling) Islands,
Committee Hansard,
Island, 5 April 2017, p. 4.
Mr Geoffrey Bennett,
Manager, Island Petroleum Services,
Committee Hansard,
West Island, 5
April 2017, p. 5.
Ms Kelly Anne Edwards,
Coordinator, Cocos (Keeling) Islands Community Resources Centre,
, West Island, 5 April 2017, p. 13. See also: Mr Stephen Clay,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 17 February 2017, p. 22.
Ms Kelly Anne Edwards,
Coordinator, Cocos (Keeling) Islands Community Resources Centre,
, West Island, 5 April 2017, p. 13.
Mr Geoffrey Bennett,
Manager, Island Petroleum Services,
Committee Hansard
, West Island, 5
April 2017, p. 13.
Mr Gordon Thomson, Shire
President, Shore of Christmas Island, and General Secretary, Union of Christmas
Island Workers,
Committee Hansard
, Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 12.
See for example: Mr
Michael Asims, Business Development Manager, Christmas Island Casino Resort,
Committee Hansard
, Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 8; Mr Barry Haase,
Administrator of the Indian Ocean Territories,
Committee Hansard
Christmas Island, 4 April 2017, p. 11; Mr Mohammed Isa Minkom, President,
Persatuan Islam Pulu Cocos, Cocos Islands Islamic Association,
Islamic Council, Christmas Island,
Committee Hansard
, Christmas Island, 4
April 2017, p. 11; Ms Stephanie Hagenbrock Tourism Manager, Cocos (Keeling)
Islands Tourism Association,
Committee Hansard,
West Island, 5 April
2017, p. 17.
Mr Gregory McIntosh,
Chairman, Islamic Council, Christmas Island,
Committee Hansard
, Christmas
Island, 4 April 2017, p. 11.
Mr Mohammed Isa Minkom,
President, Persatuan Islam Pulu Cocos, Cocos Islands Islamic Association,
Committee Hansard,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (479 KB)
PDF format (361 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter