URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/ACTLAStaCEP/2019/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:05:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ACT Legislative Assembly Standing Committee on Planning and Urban Renewal ( Parliament) --- "Inquiry into Annual and Financial Reports 2017-2018" [2019] ACTLAStaCEP 3 (19 March 2019)
Report On Annual and Financial Reports 2017-2018
The Committee
Committee Membership
Secretariat
Resolution of appointment
Terms of reference
Recommendations
Conduct of the Inquiry
Structure of the Report
Acknowledgements
2 Annual Reporting Requirements
Timing and Presentation of Reports
3 Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate
Introduction
Land Policy
Standalone v Multi Unit Dwelling Sites
Land Policy - Affordable Housing
Land Release for Community Sector
Alternative Housing Models
Planning Delivery, Planning Policy and Urban Renewal
Housing Choices
Committee Comment
Demonstration Housing (managed by the SLA)
Kingston Arts Precinct
Section 72 Dickson
Curtin Master Plan and Territory Plan Variation
Committee Comment
Urban Renewal - Public Housing Renewal Taskforce
Public Housing Renewal Taskforce - Numbers
Invoice Fraud Matter
Urban Renewal - Loose Fill Asbestos Insulation Eradication Scheme
Current Status of Demolitions
Properties where Residents are Choosing to Remain
Compliance with Asbestos Management Plans
Complex Properties
4 Suburban Land Agency
Introduction
Coombs – Block 3 Section 12
Mingle Program
Sustainability Targets
Committee Comment
5 Chief Minister
Introduction
Architects Board of the ACT
Nature of Complaints
Registration and Accreditation
6 City Renewal Authority
Introduction
Dickson Town Team / Town Team Concept
7 Conclusion
Appendix A - Witnesses
9 November 2018
Appendix B – Questions taken on Notice/
Questions on Notice
On Annual and Financial Reports 2017-2018
Standing Committee on Planning and Urban Renewal
Ms Caroline Le Couteur MLA Chair
Ms Suzanne Orr MLA Deputy Chair
Mr Mark Parton MLA
Secretariat
Ms Annemieke Jongsma Secretary
Ms Jindriska Coufalova Senior Research Officer
Ms Lydia Chung Administrative Assistant
Michelle Atkins Administrative Assistant
Telephone 02 6205 1253
Post GPO Box 1020, CANBERRA ACT 2601
committees@parliament.act.gov.au
www.parliament.act.gov.au
of appointment
13 December 2016 the ACT Legislative Assembly (the Assembly) agreed by
resolution to establish legislative and general purpose
standing committees to
inquire into and report on matters referred to them by the Assembly or matters
that are considered by the
committees to be of concern to the community,
(e) a Standing Committee on Environment and Transport and City Services to
examine matters related to city and transport services,
public infrastructure,
heritage and sport and recreation and matters related to all aspects of climate
change policy and programs,
water and energy policy and programs, provision of
water and energy services, conservation, environment and ecological
sustainability.
Assembly agreed that each committee shall have power to consider and make use of
the evidence and records of the relevant standing
committees appointed during
the previous Assembly.
Terms of reference
On 25 October 2018, the Assembly referred the annual and financial reports
for the calendar year 2017 and the financial year 2017—2018
to Assembly
committees for inquiry and report by the last sitting day in March 2019, in
accordance with a schedule.
reports were presented to the Assembly pursuant to the
Annual Reports
(Government Agencies) Act 2004
The reports and parts of reports referred to the Standing Committee on
Planning and Urban Renewal were:
 Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate -
Architects Board of the ACT
 Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate -
Planning; Loose Fill Asbestos Insulation Eradication Scheme;
Public Housing
Renewal Taskforce and Affordable Housing; Land Policy;
 City Renewal Authority; and
 Suburban Land Agency.
Australian Capital Territory
Australian capital Territory Public Service
Canberra Institute of Technology
Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate
City Renewal Authority
Development Application
Economic Development
Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate
Land Development Agency
Public Housing Renewal Taskforce
Suburban Land Agency
Transport Canberra and City Services
Table of Contents
Recommendations
1.1 On 25 October 2018, the Assembly referred the
annual and financial reports for the calendar year 2017 and the financial year
to Assembly committees for inquiry and report by the last sitting day
in March 2019.
1.2 The following annual reports, or sections of annual reports were referred
to the Standing Committee on Planning and Urban Renewal
(the Committee):
 Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate -
Architects Board of the ACT
 Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate -
Planning; Loose Fill Asbestos Insulation Eradication Scheme;
Public Housing
Renewal Taskforce and Affordable Housing; Land Policy;
 City Renewal Authority; and
 Suburban Land Agency.
Conduct of the Inquiry
1.3 The Committee held a public hearing on 9 November 2018. At this hearing,
the Committee heard evidence from 25 witnesses. Full
details of witnesses who
appeared are available in Appendix A of this report. Transcripts from the
hearings are available at:
http://www.hansard.act.gov.au/hansard/2017/comms/default.htm#planning
1.4 A total of 14 questions were taken on notice during the public hearings
and 25 questions were placed on notice after the hearing.
Please refer to
Appendix B for a list of the questions. Answers to the questions are provided on
the inquiry webpage:
https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/in-committees/standing-committees-current-assembly/standing-committee-on-planning-and-urban-renewal/inquiry-into-annual-and-financial-reports-2017-2018
Structure of the Report
1.5 The report presents a summary of the Committee’s inquiry into the
annual reports listed in paragraph 1.2. In developing
this report, the Committee
has primarily focused on the issues that were raised at public hearings although
some additional material
has been drawn from annual report documents.
1.6 The structure of this report is as follows:
 Chapter 1: Introduction
 Chapter 2: Annual Reporting Requirements
 Chapter 3: Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development
Directorate
 Chapter 4: Suburban Land Agency
 Chapter 5: Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development
Directorate
 Chapter 6: City Renewal Authority
 Chapter 7: Conclusion
1.7 The EPSDD is responsible for the policy component of many matters for
which the operational component is the responsibility of
the CRA or SLA. Please
be advised that as questions during the hearings often addressed both policy and
operational issues in relation
to particular projects or aspects of operation
these matters may be discussed in this report either under the EPSDD chapter
in the CRA or SLA chapters.
Acknowledgements
1.8 The Committee thanks relevant ACT Government Ministers and accompanying
directorate officials for providing their time and expertise
as witnesses at its
annual reports hearings.
2 Annual Reporting
Requirements
Annual Reports (Government Agencies) Act 2004
sets out the
framework for annual reporting across the ACT public sector. In accordance with
Annual Reports (Government Agencies) Act 2004
, the Annual Reports
Directions (the Directions) are issued annually to outline agency reporting
requirements.
2.2 As specified in the Directions, annual reports are ‘reports from
agency heads to their responsible Minister, the Legislative
Assembly and the
Annual reports
enable agencies to provide an account of their performance, through Ministers,
to the Legislative Assembly and the
wider community.
2.3 The Directions state that an effective annual report will:
 provide clear information about the directorate/public sector body's
purpose, priorities, outputs and achievements;
 focus on results and outcomes - communicate the success or
shortfalls of the directorate/public sector body's activities
in pursuing
government objectives in the reporting year, while accounting for the resources
used in the process and explaining changes
in performance over time;
 discuss results against expectations - provide sufficient
information and analysis for the Legislative Assembly and community
fully informed judgment on a directorate/public sector body's performance;
 clearly identify any changes to structures or functions of the
directorate/public sector body in the reporting period;
 report on directorate/public sector body financial and operational
performance and clearly link this with budgeted priorities
and financial
projections as set out in annual Budget Estimate Papers and the entity Statement
of Intent and Corporate Plan;
 provide performance information that is complete and informative,
linking costs and results to provide evidence of value
 discuss risks and environmental factors affecting the
directorate/public sector body's ability to achieve objectives including
strategies employed to manage these factors, and forecast future needs and
expectations;
 recognise the diverse needs and backgrounds of stakeholder groups
and present information in a manner that is useful to the
maximum number of
users while maintaining a suitable level of detail; and
 comply with legislative reporting requirements including the
Reports (Government Agencies) Act 2004
and the Annual Report Directions.
2.4 Annual reports are public documents and available for use by
stakeholders, including educational and research institutions, and
the broader
community. They provide a valuable tool for public reporting, accountability and
transparency.
Timing and Presentation of
2.5 The Directions for 2017-2018 required annual reports to be presented to
the responsible Minister before the close of business
on 5 October 2018. Unless
an extension of time was granted under
Annual Reports
(Government Agencies) Act 2004
, annual reports were required to be given to
the Speaker’s office by the close of business on 12 October 2018.
3 Environment, Planning and
Sustainable Development Directorate
Introduction
3.1 The Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate (EPSDD)
is responsible for developing and implementing a wide
range of policies and
programs across city planning and development, climate change and the
environment.
3.2 Sections of the EPSDD 2017-2018 Annual Report were referred to the
Committee for inquiry and report.
3.3 The Committee held a public hearing with Ms Rachel Stephen-Smith MLA,
Minister for Employment and Workplace Safety; Minister for
Urban Renewal on 9
November 2018 to examine the following area of the EPSDD 2017-2018 Annual
 Loose Fill Asbestos Insulation Eradication Scheme; and
 Urban Renewal
3.4 The Committee held a public hearing with Mr Mick Gentleman MLA, Minister
for Planning and Land Management on 9 November 2018 to
examine the following
area of the EPSDD 2017-2018 Annual Report:
 Land Policy (now referred to as Land Supply and Policy);
 Planning Delivery; and
 Planning Policy.
3.5 The Committee held a public hearing with Ms Yvette Berry MLA, Minister
for Housing and Suburban Development on 9 November 2018
to examine the following
area of the EPSDD 2017-2018 Annual Report:
 Public Housing Renewal Taskforce and Affordable Housing
3.6 Other areas of the EPSDD 2017-2018 Annual Report were considered by other
Committees.
Land Policy
3.7 The Land Supply and Policy Division is responsible for land development
projects including affordable housing, land economics,
land strategy and policy
and building policy.
3.8 The Committee discussed the following issues with the Minister and
Directorate Officials:
 Commercial Land
 Indicative Land Release
 Standalone v Multi-unit Dwelling
 Western Edge Study
 Large supermarket sites in developing
Standalone v Multi Unit Dwelling Sites
3.9 The Committee noted that 432 of the 4,309 residential sites released
during the reporting period were for single or standalone
and queried what
evidence suggested that 90% of people actually wanted to live in multi-unit
dwellings. The Minister indicated that:
I talked earlier on about the workshops for the statement of planning intent.
That is where we start to get feedback from the public
on how they want to live
in the future. Particularly younger people advised us that they want to live in
denser opportunities, as
long as they have good amenity. When we say
“dense” they were talking about apartment-style living. They said
like to live in those opportunities, as long as we have good amenity
and good urban open space with it as well.
Moreover, they did not talk particularly about the size or the height of their
building. They told us how they would actually want
to live, close to great
opportunities for dining, for recreation, close to their friends, close to work
if possible, and close to
public transport stops. That is where the evidence
started to come through about how we change from, as I mentioned earlier,
to urban intensification, if you like.
The land release has shown support for that move most recently. You have seen a
take up in accommodation of that style. It is not
just younger people that are
picking it up, either. There are a lot of other people picking it up,
particularly older persons that
want to downsize. You will see that in some of
the suburbs, too; not particularly apartment accommodation. But certainly where
persons want to age in place, they have taken up opportunities to have a
denser lifestyle, if you
Directorate further stated that the quoted figures had been affected by the
asset recycling initiative:
I just add, minister, that in relation to that particular year, keep in mind
that we had the asset recycling initiative that contributed
significantly to the
larger number of apartments, particularly within the city renewal precinct where
we had sites in Braddon, Turner
and Reid that totalled 1,243 dwellings in that
locality. So I would not expect, in terms of that 90 per cent—the figure
you mentioned—you would be seeing that every year.
Certainly in terms of the current policy, it is 50/50 greenfield, urban renewal.
The feedback from the community, as the minister
said, is looking at something
greater in terms of the urban infill. But importantly in terms of that
particular year, we need to
keep in mind that there were a number of sites that
contributed significantly to the apartment
3.11 During
the ongoing discussion the Committee referred to the Winton Housing Choices
Survey (Winton Sustainable Research Strategies
Survey) and queried the how the
percentage of land released for single, stand-alone dwellings correlated with
this survey figure
of 91% of people wanting to move into a detached house. In
response the Directorate stated:
I know the survey figures have been quoted often. In that survey it is important
to keep in mind that you cannot take the response
to a particular question in
isolation. For example, in terms of those people who wanted to live in a
detached home, the figure was
quite high. The nature of that particular question
was: if there were no other considerations, what is your ideal home? People were
saying, “Yes, we would like a detached home.”
But then you ask them to start weighing up other considerations such as: do you
want the city to spread; are you okay with the environmental
impacts that that
might have; are you okay with the social costs and the environmental costs of
that? As people started to filter
that through, the results started to shift in
terms of, “Well, yes, we would like a detached home but we are also okay
medium and high-density if that means we can protect other important
I do not think we should just selectively quote particular points out of that
survey. We commissioned that work. We asked the question
intentionally to
understand what is people’s preferred housing choice. But then we wanted
them to start thinking about what
that means for the city. Once you get them to
think about what it means for the city, their attitudes start to
Committee continued to express concern that the number of blocks available for
purchase (as single residential blocks), 119
blocks available as at 30 June
was not enough to meet
demand. The Directorate sought to clarify this number stating that it did not
include Mr Fluffy blocks which
were believed to number ‘about 80 blocks on
the market today.’
3.13 The Minister also stated:
If you look at new blocks in that particular time frame, you look at the demand
from people who want to buy new blocks. But if you
look overarchingly at the
number of people who are purchasing stand-alone homes across the ACT, where we
have movement now, and we
have quite a lot of movement, since we are moving to
reduce stamp duty. In particular, older people who want to downsize into smaller
accommodation pay no stamp duty if they do not have an income. You see a lot
more movement where younger families want to purchase
a single stand-alone home.
It may be in a residential suburb that is already completed, for example. So
these add to the mix of opportunity.
As to whether it is enough, we test that by
looking at the market and what people are asking
Land Policy - Affordable
3.14 The EPSDD is a significant contributor ACT Housing Strategy and the
provision of safe, affordable and appropriate homes for all
Canberrans.
3.15 The Committee discussed the following matters with the Minister and
Directorate officials:
 Affordable Housing
 Affordable Housing Advisory
 Sale of Affordable Housing
 Land Release for Community
 ACT Housing
 Consultation and Engagement process for development of ACT Housing
 Adaptable/Accessible
 Alternative Housing
Land Release for Community Sector
3.16 The Committee noted that the current government policy splits social and
affordable housing targets into affordable housing which
is for affordable
purchase, community housing for affordable rental, and public
In a discussion on the
current aim to dedicate 15% of all land release to such housing through infill
and greenfields the Committee
asked a number of questions in relation to the
sites that will be available for community housing.
3.17 In this context the Committee queried how the community housing sites
were going to be sold to community housing providers. In
response the
Directorate stated that:
With the community housing site targets, none of those sites have yet been
released to the community housing sector, but we are intending
to release those
through an expression of interest
Directorate also indicated that any prospectus of what land release is likely in
this capacity would be ‘incorporated
into the four-year land release or
indicative land release
we have done some analysis on the numbers which showed that, under the old 20
per cent of greenfield target, the policy was delivering
approximately 400
affording dwellings per year. Under the new 15 per cent target, we will be
looking at a number closer to about
630 dwellings a year for the three
categories.
Directorate went on to inform the Committee that:
The intention is to release those through an expression of interest process. We
have started having conversations with the community
housing sector about things
like their capacity to grow, their ability to finance and develop those sites,
what their capacity to
pay for them might be and the rest of their financial
modelling that might help inform our decision about how we release those.
the sites have not yet been released, we have not yet released what the
expression of interest criteria will be. There has been no
firm decision about
what price those sites will be released for at this
Committee asked about the pricing model that may be applied to such sites and
were informed by the Directorate that:
In terms of what the sites might go for, it is important to note that, because
it is housing, it would need to be at market value;
otherwise it would be a
concessional lease. Let me come back to what market value is. It would need to
be a market value lease. Importantly,
when we talk about a market value lease,
that is what the market is prepared to pay for the particular site. When we go
by ensuring that we have criteria that deal with the typical issues
around who the provider might be and what the provider needs
to include in the
development of the site, that then dictates what the market is. That would bring
Committee noted that the market value of a site that has a requirement to have a
certain percentage of units as affordable
purchase or rental would be less than
if such criteria did not apply. The Directorate stated that they agreed with
this assessment.
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government issue the expected selection criteria and lease conditions for future
community housing
sites as soon as possible so that community housing providers
can prepare for their release.
Alternative Housing Models
3.23 It was noted during the hearing that the ACT Housing Strategy
implementation plan had committed to an investigation into alternative
and detail was sought as
to what had been planned in this regard. The Directorate informed the Committee
There are two housing projects in the ACT. ECHO and Smart Urban Villages were
provided $45,000 to look at their innovative designs
and the sustainable living
opportunities that they provide or might think about but also to consider, given
that it was a significant
part of the feedback that we heard during the
consultation period, particularly homes like the Nightingale model, which is in
I am not sure if there are any others in Australia at the moment, but
something similar to that kind of community-style housing as
well. There is work
already happening around investigating that type of
Directorate also referred to how, in addition to the innovation fund they were
also progressing demonstration housing:
Importantly, what we are wanting to do here is make sure that all our policy
work and our delivery work is connected across portfolios.
While the housing
strategy and the innovation fund do provide for opportunities in terms of
building the capability of these providers,
we are also then wanting to provide
opportunities for them to build examples of this type of housing so that people
can see, touch,
feel, walk through and understand exactly what opportunities
exist through co-housing models like the ones that we have just
Directorate then explained why they were progressing these options as well as
looking at completing a report:
we are looking at a range of different options here. We could have just run with
the report, seen what came out of the report and
then looked at strategies
beyond that. We could have just looked at the innovation fund and providing
opportunities for those two
providers to develop their ideas or we could have
just done the demonstration projects. What we are trying to do here is make sure
that we get the momentum, having a number of prongs in getting these
opportunities moving.
the reporting part is also about following up on those two projects that the
minister referred to so that we can understand whether
they can deliver
co-housing, what are the impediments. With all the implementation actions on the
strategy, there is a certain amount
of monitoring that we will do to inform the
next raft of policies that we might suggest to continue with the supply of
housing. That
is part of that reporting, working with them and through all the
projects on the innovation fund and the demonstration project to
see what we can
learn to better inform policy and the future
Committee asked when the report would be completed and were informed that:
The funding has only just been allocated. We will monitor that over the next
year or so to see how that is progressing. And we did
include in the
implementation strategy that we will monitor annually and report publicly on the
website how we are progressing on
Planning Delivery, Planning
Policy and Urban Renewal
3.27 The Planning Delivery Division is responsible for administrating
development assessment processes in the Territory, including
environmental
impact assessments and administration of deed and leasehold systems. This
Division also includes the Office of the
Surveyor-General.
3.28 The Planning Policy Division is responsible for the Territory Plan
(which provides the policy framework for the administration
of planning in the
ACT), strategic planning, civil infrastructure planning and major
3.29 The Urban Renewal Division is responsible for driving the ACT
Government’s urban renewal agenda by supporting major projects
that aim to
improve the liveability of our city and through the delivery of the Public
Housing Renewal Program, Asset Recycling Initiative
and Loose-fill Asbestos
Insulation Eradication
3.30 The Committee discussed the following issues with the Ministers and
Directorate Officials:
 Sheds on Residential
Properties;
 Shipping Containers on Residential
Properties;
 Coombs Shops;
 McKellar Shops;
 Kama Nature Reserve/Whitlam/Molonglo Stage
 Housing Choices;
 Territory Plan
 Curtin Master Plan and Territory Plan
 Eastern Broadacre Strategic Assessment (including
 National Capital Design Review
 Integrated Plan re Red Hill Nature Reserve and
 Ministerial
Responsibilities;
 ACT Housing
 Demonstration
 Town Teams (outside of CRA
responsibilities);
 Sustainability
 Kingston Arts
 Asset Recycling
 S74 and s76
Housing Choices
3.31 The Committee noted the progress of the developing policy on Housing
Choices, making particular reference to the consultation
process that had been
undertaken, including the Collaboration Hub. The Minister indicated to the
Committee that:
I think that it is quite an exciting opportunity for Canberra in looking at the
future of being able to choose how to live in a residential
area. As you are
aware, we have done quite a bit of work with the community. We had the
particular panel that I think worked very
well. In fact, I want to congratulate
the people who facilitated the housing choices collaboration hub. I think that
it was a really
good result. In relation to the recommendations from that, we
accepted all of those recommendations. I think we are moving forward
3.32 In this
context the Committee asked the Directorate what the next steps in the project
would be. In response the Directorate
indicated that:
The next steps I have announced. I think I mentioned in this place before that
in 2019, once we complete the planning strategy refresh,
which I hope will be
very soon, we will be launching into a Territory Plan review. I would expect
that much of what we learned through
the engagement activities will find its way
into the Territory Plan review. But there are some aspects of that work that may
subject of a separate Territory Plan
Committee Comment
3.33 The Committee notes that during 2017 there was substantial community
input into the housing choices project as well as high interest
Collaboration Hub. The majority of the Committee is concerned that much of this
community effort may be put on hold for the
Territory Plan Review, which may
take several years to complete.
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government identify the most urgent issues raised by stakeholders and the
community during the
housing choices consultation and address these through a
Territory Plan Variation in 2019.
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government update submitters, stakeholders and the community in 2019 with an
action plan that
outlines how the issues raised though housing choices
consultation will be addressed.
Demonstration Housing (managed by the SLA)
3.36 The Committee made reference to the 18 demonstration housing projects
that had made it to the second stage of assessment and
asked for detail on the
next stage of the process. The Directorate indicated that there was a variety of
As you said, 18 have got through. We have been really surprised in that they are
all demonstration housing projects but they are
the sort of thing that is
happening elsewhere. Nightingale co-housing is an easy one to talk about. Liam
Wallis, the CEO of Nightingale,
came here and did a half-day workshop not just
with us but all the other proponents to learn about that. At the end of the day
said, “I wish the Victorian state government could run something like
this demonstration housing project process,” because
he thought that it
really listened to industry and got both community and industry proponents
We have seen a couple of proposals for co-housing, build-to-rent schemes and
townhouses. Townhouses as a typology are not particularly
innovative but these
are townhouses specifically designed for ageing in place or ageing in the
community. That is also interesting
because when we talk about ageing in place,
some people talk about ageing in place as adaptable housing and a house they can
in forever. But when you talk to people in the community they see ageing in
place as downsizing but not leaving their suburb. In
some suburbs where there is
not townhouse or adaptable use housing, even just townhouses in those areas
would be considered new for
A manor house was put forward, so multiple bedrooms in a manor house, and also
micro apartments. We are working with the proponents
of the micro apartments to
work out whether micro apartments would be both deliverable and then livable,
that is, if the inside space
is tiny, what are we doing for the outdoors to make
sure it is a livable
alternative.
Directorate further informed the Committee that as each proponent was at a
different stage, in the next phase they expected
the proposals to offer up
examples of ‘design and build quality excellence and the environmental
standards excellence.’
They indicated that:
Our assessment criteria for the stage 2 RFP includes design quality and build
quality and also the criteria from the Assembly resolution.
Along with the
national capital design review panel we will be looking at the successful
proposals and basically locking them in
through a delivery deed to deliver what
we have assessed in their
We are not asking for a change to the rules or anything; we are just asking them
to come forward with their best. We will assess
those because we want to see
that they are demonstrably better than what is current. But, as I said, we will
use the design review
panel including the Government Architect. For the
environmental standards we have a level of expertise both within the directorate
and external as required to assess whether or not they meet
Directorate then detailed some of the steps that would follow:
The next part is we are dividing those into projects that are being proposed
where they already have identified a site and they are
pretty ready to go and
those that have a new type but they need access to land. So we are splitting the
two proposals in that way.
We will go out for a request for a proposal. We have talked to all the
proponents. We are mindful it will be over Christmas, so we
will go out for a
longer period of time. The proponents are comfortable with us going out over
Christmas for that request for a proposal.
We expect those back probably early
February next year and then we will do the assessment.
I should say that each of the proponents is at a very different stage. Some, if
they have land, they have holding costs. They might
decide to pull out and
pursue something else if it is not perfect. But I would like to think that by
May or June, the end of this
financial year, we will have some DAs in the
system. Then we might see some action on the ground by the end of the next
I think I mentioned this when we talked about this at estimates: some of them
are talking about planning regulations they would like
to change: RZ2 and RZ1.
But the one that keeps coming up is, “Can we rid third-party appeal rights
for these projects?”
That always raises concerns. So those are some of the
things we have seen the proponents come through with, all for consideration
further down the
further discussion it was acknowledged by the Directorate that some of the
development applications for the projects may require
Territory Plan Variations
the nature of which would not be known until the proposals were received:
Some might require a site-specific variation, some might be just minor difficult
amendments and some would have flow-on effects.
A Territory Plan variation would
depend on the variation, the response from the community and the response from
this committee. That
is where the holding costs for some of those proponents
will come into play. We have been very up-front; we have talked through the
frames and kept them up to date with the time frames but, as I say, some of
those that already have land might decide not to
pursue this process and go with
something less innovative because they have large holding
We would have to consider them when we get the proposals. We will get the
proposals in February and then we will see what requirements
against the
Territory Plan are
Kingston Arts Precinct
3.40 The Committee asked the Directorate what stage the development of the
Kingston Arts Precinct was at, and were informed that:
It is still within its preferred tenderer negotiations in Stage 2 of the
Kingston Arts Precinct, which is essentially the tendering
stage. We hope to
have the negotiations complete by the first quarter of next calendar
Committee then made additional queries as to the possible start date for
construction and were informed by the Directorate
I do not know if it is something that you could define, other than as to what a
normal developer would naturally do. You would conclude
the negotiation process.
One would assume that that could be successful. Then they would have to go
through a DA process, which may
take a number of months. It could take eight to
12 months, possibly, and then you have a construction stage from there. As John
to, we would hope to conclude those negotiations around the first
quarter of next year, and so you could look at 12 months or so
construction would
an answer to a Question Taken on Notice the Directorate further informed the
Committee that:
The Kingston Arts Precinct was released to the market in a two stage land sale
process, first stage being a Request for Proposal
(RFP) and second being a
Request for Tender (RFT).
The proponents and subsequently invited tenderers were required to demonstrate
that they can provide at least the minimum number
of publicly available car
parking spaces on weekdays (500 spaces) and on weekends (800 spaces). These
numbers have been determined
by balancing the existing site demands, expected
uses for the land into the future and the ability of the site to utilise car
across a week with varying uses.
Publicly available car parking is a separate requirement to parking provisions
for the future residential and commercial developments
within the site area.
The preferred tenderer's development proposal meets this
requirement.
further questioning the Directorate acknowledged that the delay between the
announcements of the project and the current
tendering stage was
‘frustrating’ and that the reasons for the delay was:
a paradigm shift in our governance model. For decisions that the new board are
required to make, it is important that we ensure that
every step of the process
before that decision is made has been appropriately governed and has been done
appropriately and well.
When the new board joined, this process had been in
train for a year or two. Then, as part of the new board joining and as part of
our briefing of the new board, we have taken the time to ensure that probity is
appropriate, our business case is appropriate and
everything is in line to
ensure that when we make a recommendation to go ahead with the preferred
tenderer we are 100 per cent sure
appropriate.
Section 72 Dickson
3.44 The Committee asked a number of questions about Section 72, Dickson,
particularly in relation to the relationship between the
previous and current
community consultation processes. In responding to these questions the
Directorate first acknowledged the previous
consultation processes but also
highlighted that there was a new focus:
We absolutely understand that the community is frustrated because it has been
going for a long time. If you look at our ‘your
say’ website, you
will see that it was the baseline. The very first thing that we took back to the
community was, “This
is what you told us in 2014 and 2015,” but we
also know a lot of things have changed. We are putting this out there to say,
“Is this still current?” For some people it is
One of the things that the team have tried to make clear is a high level of
consciousness around the fact that there have been a
number of previous
consultations in relation to Dickson section 72. The information provided to the
community has tried to take on
board the feedback from those previous
consultations and to be clear that that is part of the work for this. But, to
some extent,
some of those previous consultations had a slightly different
the continuing discussion the Directorate went on to detail what had occurred
since the earlier consultation process:
During the very first stage we did a social pinpoint exercise. It was online,
and it was a matter of saying, “Go and tell us
where you think the
problems are and what ideas you have for section 72.” We started to see a
whole new range of ideas coming
forward that were not part of the original
conversations. Some of those original conversations were very much focused on
what happened
where the Northside Community Service Majura community centre is.
Obviously, this is a much more integrated approach. Also, other sites on section
72 really were not part of that original conversation.
The approach we are
taking is to say that that has to be a good baseline. Before we even started the
public consultation, we invited
in three members of the community: the chair of
the North Canberra Community Council, as well as two other members of the
from Dickson who had been quite vocal and very well engaged in that
and in previous engagements in Dickson.
We had a meeting with them to say, “We know the community is going to be
cynical. I guess this is a bit like Red Hill; we’re
at the same starting
point. We know that you might be suspicious of what is going on, but we really
want to try to start with a clean
slate, take everything we have learnt and
build a more collaborative approach to understanding what the future of section
to be, now that we know that there is a quickly changing demographic
and different needs emerging within the inner north community.”
We met again with the three representatives. We gave them the opportunity to go
back and talk with the people they have been representing.
I think pretty well
everything that they suggested that we add to the engagement was added: about
pulling in the Dickson pool and
taking advantage of the summer period, and doing
things like walk shops.
We are trying lots of different ways to make sure that there is a really open
spread of input coming back to us around section 72.
We also made sure that it
was clearly in the context of the engagements on Watson, for the Academy of
Interactive Entertainment,
the city gateway work that was going on, and the work
that was going on with public housing.
People say, “You’re talking too much and we’re getting
confused.” We said, “Let’s make sure people
understand how it
all fits together.” Section 72 is not just for people on the other side of
the stormwater channel, and it
is not just for people on the other side of
Antill Street. It is actually for all of Dickson, Downer, Watson and
Hackett— all
of the surrounding
3.46 The Directorate explained that this all meant that they
were effectively only halfway through the community engagement process
there were some key milestones yet to come:
We are about to put out the report on ‘your say’, hopefully next
week, to summarise the second stage of the engagement.
We had an open house to
show people the scenarios. We went to the North Canberra Community Council. We
said, “These are not
scenarios for all residential; we haven’t even
assigned what the possible uses may be, let alone what the possible zonings
be. This is how you could break up this site in different ways.”
We are reflecting back, both in the first stage report which you will see on
your say and in the second stage report that, as I said,
hopefully will be out
next week, and we are hearing very clearly that the community wants particular
attention paid to the green
spaces. We are also hearing, which was not quite so
strongly stated four years ago, that you really should have some level of mixed
use which includes residential. Another message is that social housing,
community housing, is another thing that people want to see.
We have had a very
clear message that they do not want it to be all private residential, and I do
not think that any of us have suggested
that as something that would be an
That is what we are going back to the community with next Thursday. We will have
one more workshop and we will say, “Show us
physically how you think this
should work.” We are sitting down with members of the community. They
again reiterated issues
around building height, about the open space and about
wanting to make sure that they connect.
One of the other big issues that has come out of it is that it is about what
happens at the ground level. You might have residential
above, but a building
with residential is not necessarily all residential. There are possibilities for
community use and there are
possibilities for commercial. They are all sending a
pretty strong message: not retail. They do not want to take over from Dickson.
We need Dickson group centre to work.
That is also why, with the town team that was mentioned this morning, we are
looking to hook up with them and say, “Clearly,
we want this to integrate
with Dickson. We’re really happy for you to help us talk to the community,
including looking at ideas
of activating, within section 72, with the town
team,” because we know that the community trusts the town team. We know
the community does not particularly trust us; that is okay. It is a bit
like a dog with mange: you know it is there; let’s
feel sorry for it, but
we’d rather you not be there. That is the reality of being an engagement
officer in planning in Canberra.
That is okay; we can live with that.
I think we are at an exciting point now. Next Thursday we come back for the
second workshop, and that is where we say, “Based
on what you’ve
told us about the open space, the balance between the open space and the built
form and the heights and the
importance of the connection along the green spine
of the current stormwater drain, this is what it might look like.”
The community gets to come back and tell us again whether or not we heard them
correctly. If they say, “We’re kind of
happy with this
baseline,” we have then got to go back again and design an estate
development plan and then do pre-development
application consultation. The thing
I want to stress is that we are actually only halfway through the consultation
Committee made additional queries as to the possible estate development plans,
development applications and territory plan
variations and were informed that
although consultants are on board the process was still in consultation
I am saying I am making no assumptions about it and nobody here is either,
because you do not know what variation you may or may
not need until you know
what you want to put into the overall site. There is also a difference between a
zone and a use. People talk
does not necessarily mean it has to be zoned CFZ. At the moment we need to
that there is a likelihood that there will be some type of variation, but
as to what that looks like, we are still in the middle
consultation.
We certainly have some rough goals for being able to start talking with the
community about the estate development plan in the first
half of next year.
Obviously, there is also alignment with Common Ground, because that is a very
clearly stated government commitment.
It is about having these two processes
working together and the engagement working together.
I would expect some of the outcomes that you are seeking answers to are going to
be happening over the next 12 months. With the exact
timing, there are two
processes working together, and we have a number of stages of engagement that we
have to go through. Certainly,
we are indicating in the listening report that we
are talking about some of those major milestones being met next year, as in
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends that in
developing planning for section 72 the ACT Government addresses the need for
community and recreational
facilities over the next 10-15 years, given the
expected large increase in population in the surrounding suburbs.
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government provide detailed feedback to the community about how they have, or
have not, incorporated
the features of section 72 that members of the community
desired during public consultation.
Curtin Master Plan and Territory Plan Variation
3.50 The Committee asked the Directorate what the current status was in
relation to the Curtin Master Plan and any associated territory
plan variations
and were informed that:
We are currently settling the master plan to refer to the minister for his
consideration. I expect he will have that in a matter
of days. I would expect
the Territory Plan variation to follow soon after. You might recall, Ms Le
Couteur, that we incorporated
with the draft master plan a draft variation, so
people could see how that might translate. That work is done, so we will be
to go out fairly soon. Having said that, of course there is the
Christmas-New Year period. So, realistically, the TPV might not be
until early
in the new year simply because by the time it is considered by the minister and
the government and released we would
not want to notify in December, I would
expect. I think most people would rather we wait. But if you have a different
view on that—that
the community would be happy with consultation over the
December-January period—I am happy to receive that view. And the DA
currently under
assessment.
Committee Comment
3.51 The Committee notes that it has made numerous recommendations in
previous reports about improving the timeliness of completing
master plans and
territory plan variations.
Recommendation 6
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government provides enough resources for the EPSDD planning area
responsibilities, including
community consultation, to be delivered in line with
community expectations, particularly in relation to master plans and territory
plan variations.
Urban Renewal - Public
Housing Renewal Taskforce
3.53 The EPSDD is responsible for the coordination of the Asset Recycling
Initiative and the Public Housing Renewal
3.54 The Committee discussed the following matters with the Minister and
Directorate officials:
 Asset Recycling;
 Public Housing Renewal Taskforce –
 Public Housing Renewal Taskforce –
 Public Housing Renewal Taskforce – Community
 Public Housing Renewal Taskforce – end of
 Public Housing Renewal approach under ACT Housing
 Chapman Public Housing
 Invoice Fraud
Public Housing Renewal Taskforce - Numbers
3.55 The Committee was informed by the Directorate that the current public
housing renewal program was due to finish in June 2018
and that it had
‘been for the most part, very positively received by the community’
and had achieved ‘newer and
more sustainable homes for our
community’ which ‘have made a significant change in people’s
3.56 The Committee then made a number of queries as to how the program had
been tracking and were informed by the Directorate that:
We are proud to say that we have secured sites and buildings for all 1,288
replacements. Some of those will be privately bought within
existing dwellings;
some of them are new builds, as we have seen.
As the minister said, we have faced some challenges with some areas of the
community. That has been a difficult time for us. It means
that on most of our
sites we have dropped the number of dwellings, in response to community
concerns, which means we need to purchase
more dwellings. What it has shown is
that we have been really responsive to the community. We have thought a lot
the bulk and the scale. Often we have taken two, three
or four designs back to the community before we have landed on a product that
think suits the community and their needs, addressing all of those issues.
We are on track for completion, with 1,288 to be delivered by June or July next
year. Obviously, there are ACAT appeals, and we have
had those. I think we are
in really good shape. We have built a team of expert capital delivery people
that are used to dealing with
the community on what are sometimes seen as
sensitive projects.
3.57 The Directorate further informed the Committee that:
As at November, as of last week, 861 dwellings had already been delivered. We
expect to deliver another 81 in this calendar year.
We are building 304
dwellings across Canberra. They will be in Denman Prospect, Greenway, Holt,
Throsby, Taylor and Monash. With
the program of 1,288, the figures are 772
dwellings constructed and 516
Invoice Fraud Matter
3.58 The Committee raised the matter of fraudulent invoicing, involving the
Public Housing Renewal Taskforce, that had been reported
in the Canberra Times
on 7 November 2018 and asked the Directorate whether the matter had been
resolved. In their response the Directorate
informed the Committee the
circumstances surrounding the incident:
In relation to the matter itself, I might just talk a bit about what happened in
the particular circumstances. When we receive an
invoice, there is a process
that we go through in making payment for that invoice. What appears to have
happened is that a very sophisticated
operator made contact using an email
address that was a recognised email address for that particular provider. The
email included
details of the previous bank accounts and the authorised
person’s name, saying that they had recently sent an invoice, saying
they had changed their bank account details, and asking us to please provide the
funds to that new bank account.
Our officer at the time went through it. Everything looked legitimate; they made
the change and the money was deposited. Very soon
after, fortunately, the actual
person made contact to ask where the payment was. We were able to say, “We
have made that payment.”
Very quickly, we were able to recover the moneys.
We identified, as I recall, that the bank account was at Melbourne Airport, I
a branch at Melbourne Airport.
The money was recovered with assistance from the bank, very quickly. But,
importantly, the point I am wanting to make here is that
it was quite
sophisticated. Whoever did this had the details of the directors of the company,
they had their email addresses and
they were able to get an address that
essentially was exactly the same. So for all intents and purposes, we were
dealing with the
Directorate then indicated that:
There is absolutely no suggestion that it is an ACT government employee, and
possibly it is not even an Australian resident, that
set up this scheme, if you
will. If one was to speculate, one would say that it would be an overseas-based
scam. The other thing
that I will say is that, just from talking to other people
and having this raised, I dare say we are not the only capital works company
Canberra who have been done by this
It was very sophisticated. From both the initial investigation and the internal
audit, it was crystal clear that there was no internal
malice; no-one within the
task force or the ACT government was set up to benefit from
Committee also queried as to if all the monies that were paid had been recovered
and were informed that:
As I said, we were very lucky to secure the money back very quickly. I think
that within hours a freeze had been put on that particular
bank account and we
were able to get the funds back through the
We recovered all the moneys that were paid. All the moneys were recovered. And
in terms of the payment itself, it was a progress
payment towards
construction.
Committee then sought details of the measures would be put in place to prevent
such an issue from reoccurring and were informed
by the Directorate that:
from our perspective, what we have since done is undertake an internal audit to
better understand what we could have done differently
or better to make sure
that these sorts of fraudulent attempts are not made—or, if they are made,
that we do not succumb to
them. We have received that audit report and
implemented all the recommendations from that
This is clearly a highly sophisticated scheme. What we have done as a result of
the audits—and nothing is foolproof in this
modern criminal world—is
work with Shared Services, who now seek an additional authorisation when
contractors change their
Urban Renewal - Loose Fill
Asbestos Insulation Eradication Scheme
3.62 The EPSDD is responsible, through the Asbestos Response Taskforce, for
delivering the Loose Fill Asbestos Insulation Eradication
3.63 The Committee discussed the following issues with the Minister and
Directorate Officials:
 Plot ratios on Mr Fluffy
 Current status of
demolitions;
 Workforce
 Updates to
 Properties where residents are choosing to
 Compliance with Asbestos Management
Properties;
 Asbestos at Harrison
 Dual Occupancy
Current Status of Demolitions
3.64 The Committee asked about the current status of the loose-fill asbestos
eradication scheme and were informed by the Directorate
I think we are progressing well. We see ourselves as well ahead of where we
predicted we would be at this stage and that is due to
both efficiencies of the
market and efficiencies that we have gained in contracting. As you know,
individual residents were able
to nominate a surrender date, and some of those
have brought it forward.
Where do we think we are? Nine hundred and fifty-seven of the 1,023 affected
properties have now been demolished. Of those 957 demolished,
954 have been
removed from the affected residential premises register. Of those, 809 have been
sold. Forty-five went back to the
original owner through the first right of
refusal, 759 have been public sales and five have been sold to another
government agency,
obviously Housing ACT. I do not need to say that.
Where we are now: we think we will have probably one last auction in the current
form, probably in December this year, and that I
think will be the last large
auction that we will see. The remaining properties will take either a little
more time to come forward
to demolition time or be deferred for some time and
they will be single, one-offs. Where we were doing multiple demolitions every
week we are now doing one a fortnight. They are the numbers that we are looking
at. Therefore the sales program will be very different
Properties where Residents are Choosing to Remain
3.65 The Committee asked the Directorate what the current plan was for
asbestos affected homes that were not participating in the
buyback scheme. The
Minister indicated that
I guess the first thing to say is that the government’s position remains
that properties affected by loose-fill asbestos insulation
should be vacated as
soon as possible and that the only way to remove the physical, financial and
social risks is through demolition.
Geoffrey noted that a number of participants
are choosing to bring forward their surrender date. This year we have seen seven
those. Additionally, there was one self-funded private demolition in 2018 and
there are a further four that are being considered
or are underway. The task
force continues to expect movement in surrender dates and private demolitions.
Given the changes in the
market and the way that that is evolving, our current
position is that it is premature to determine what the best course of action
will be when the number and circumstances of those remaining is not fully
Directorate went on to explain the necessity for these properties to have an
asbestos management plan:
All residents affected by this need to have their asbestos management plan in
place. We will keep reminding residents of that and
work with our colleagues at
WorkSafe to remind people of that so that with those not participating in the
scheme or those who have
not undertaken their own private demolition, visitors,
contractors or tradesmen who come onto their site are aware of the presence
pressed further by the Committee as to whether these residents would be forced
out of their homes the Minister reiterated
...it is premature at the moment to determine the best course of action now,
when the number and the circumstances of those remaining
is not known at this
time, and the market continues to change and people’s circumstances
continue to
Compliance with Asbestos Management Plans
3.68 The Committee raised concerns about compliance with asbestos management
plans and were informed by the Directorate that there:
are currently 48 houses that are still occupied that have been identified as
having loose-fill asbestos. Of those 48 houses, there
are a total of 23
properties now that are fully compliant with the legislative requirements about
having an asbestos assessment done,
having asbestos management plans and having
any recommendations by the licensed asbestos assessors in terms of modifications
as sealing of certain areas of their house done. There are four houses out
of that 48 that are partially compliant, meaning that
they have an asbestos
management plan and they are in the process of fully complying with those
management plans. At this stage,
there are 21 properties which are not compliant
with the current
legislation.
Directorate went on the explain that they were continuing to communicate with
the owners of the houses that were still occupied:
I have written to all of the owners with their various levels of compliance,
emphasising the need to comply with the legislation
in terms of meeting their
safety responsibilities to visitors and tradespersons who may enter the house.
There are a number of places
which we continue to liaise with, with a dedicated
officer, to educate in terms of the necessity for taking that responsibility and
meeting the regulatory requirements of the
legislation.
questioned by the Committee as to what options were available to the government
to rectify situations where the owners did
not meet the regulatory requirements.
The Directorate indicated that:
There are a number of remedies. Our preference is to continue to liaise with
those households and to make sure that they are fully
aware of those
responsibilities. If, ultimately, education and engagement do not lead to them
meeting the legislative requirements,
there are potentially a number of
regulatory options that could be pursued in terms of making sure that those
households are safe
to other people, including tradespeople who may visit and
other people who must enter those properties, such as people working for
Evoenergy doing meter readings, and generally meeting those responsibilities.
There are a number of regulatory options available
which we would look at,
ultimately, on a case-by-case
We prefer to engage with each household. Each household has their own range of
reasons why they may or may not be compliant. They
are individually based; there
is not one set collective view. We are very conscious of that and we will
continue to liaise with each
household, with their particular circumstances, to
ensure that they fully appreciate the responsibilities and the obligations under
legislation.
pressed further as to whether these households would be forced out of their
Certainly not by WorkSafe under current dangerous substances legislation. It is
making sure that everyone undertakes their responsibilities.
Protecting the
community—those who visit their property: as well as themselves, their
families, friends and anyone else who
enters that property—is our primary
Minister went on to clarify that this answer was not in relation to people being
able to stay in their homes outside of the
buyback period but was given in the
context of:
enforcement action around whether or not someone has an asbestos management plan
today. I interpreted Mr Parton’s question
as a question to Mr Jones about
whether he could require them to leave their house in that
Recommendation 7
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government continue to work with affected residents who remain in their Mr
Fluffy properties
to ensure the ongoing safety of the residents, visitors,
contractors and other tradespeople.
Complex Properties
3.74 During discussion as to the complexity of many of the remaining
properties, the Directorate was asked what the current status
was with the 53
remaining ‘complex’ properties and informed the Committee that:
As at 7 November, yesterday, 25 complex properties have now been demolished.
Twenty-one of those were affected and four of those
were impacted. We continue
to work through
answer to a Question Taken on Notice the Directorate informed the Committee
There are 53 complex properties in total across 33 sites. As at 14 November
2018, 25 have been demolished across 19 sites, leaving
28 properties across 14
sites still to be demolished.
A breakdown of demolition progress as at 14 November 2018, per electorate is
below (noting that there are no complex properties in
Brindabella
Ginninderra
Murrumbidgee
4 Suburban Land Agency
Introduction
4.1 The Suburban Land Agency (SLA) was established as a statutory authority
City Renewal Authority and Suburban Land Agency Act 2017
4.2 The SLA is responsible for developing and releasing suburban land,
encouraging and promoting urban renewal outside of declared
urban renewal
precincts, contributing to the growth and diversification of the
Territory’s economy, and social and environmental
sustainability.
4.3 The key functions of the SLA as outlined in the
City Renewal Authority
and Suburban Land Agency Act 2017
 buying and selling leases of land on behalf of the Territory;
 ensuring a mixture of public and private housing in new suburbs
 increasing the supply of affordable and community housing;
 meeting housing targets;
 carrying out development of land in a manner that is environmentally
sustainable;
 exercising our functions in a way that supports statutory greenhouse
gas emissions targets and delivers environmentally sustainable
development;
 following and supporting Whole of Government (WhoG)
strategies.
4.4 The Committee held a public hearing with Ms Yvette Berry MLA, Minister
for Housing and Suburban Development on 9 November 2018
to examine the Suburban
Land Agency 2017-2018 Annual Report.
4.5 The Committee held a public hearing with Ms Rachel Stephen-Smith MLA,
Minister for Urban Renewal on 9 November 2018 to examine
the Suburban Land
Agency 2017-2018 Annual Report – as relates to Urban Renewal Sites.
4.6 The Committee discussed the following matters with the Minister’s
and SLA officials:
 Revenue Targets not being
 Coombs – Block 3
 Relationship between Director-General EPSDD and
 Water Police
 Remand Centre
 Long and Mid-range forecasts for target sale prices for
 Social Policy for Land
 15% target for social and affordable housing (in ACT Housing
Strategy) - impact on prices and revenue
 Kama Nature
Reserve/Whitlam;
 Sustainability
 Riverview and
Ginninderry;
 Developers and knowledge of Lease
Variations;
 Development Applications approved that have involved significant
increase in the number of
 Lease Variation Charges imposed on Development Applications that
have been approved that have involved significant increase
in the number of
 Control of Land
Coombs – Block 3
4.7 The Committee asked a number of questions in relation to Coombs block 3,
, particularly in relation to the increase in the number of potential
unit dwellings from 44 prior to the sale of the site, to over
200 units at the
time a lease variation was sought and a Development Application submitted. The
Directorate indicated that:
I might comment first in relation to how the numbers are set. They are
essentially set through the estate development planning process,
and Mr Gordon
may talk a little more about that particular process. I might then jump to the
latter part about how we get to the
point of an application that has been made
through the DA process, because, presumably, you are also interested in that
As I said, the estate development plan is the process that establishes and looks
at road networks. It looks at community needs analysis,
it looks at a mix of
housing tithes and it also looks to establish the zoning, when you uplift the
future urban area. As we work
through all that, there is work done to determine
what is the best mix of housing and yield for particular blocks of land. Once
site is then sold with that—and in this case I think it was 44
units—the Planning and Development Act does provide an
opportunity for
lessees to apply to vary the lease. That does happen from time to time. There
was a period quite a number of years
ago where you could not vary the lease for
a period of five years after it had been purchased.
There was a change made—and I cannot tell you exactly when, but it was to
that five-year mark—that meant you could vary
the lease. This was because
the feedback that we were getting was that it was too restrictive and that
people were just sitting on
the land for five years and not doing anything with
it until it got to a point where they could seek to vary the lease. There were
circumstances where there were very good reasons for that. In the current
circumstance, in the event that the lease variation and
development application
were approved, the difference would be that they would need to pay 100 per cent
of the lease variation charge,
as opposed to 75 per cent, which is the norm
after the five
SLA further indicated that:
The estate development plan sets out the range of dwellings allowed on a parcel
of land, and that is on the basis of the structure
planning and the precinct
concept planning for the site. That then develops into an estate development
plan and is circulated within
government agencies, where they look at things
like, as Mr Ponton mentioned, the community needs, the road network, the volume
traffic that might be on that road and the availability of suburban parks and
schools. Those sorts of things come into play when
they are looking at the
estate development plan. That goes through a whole-of-government agency review
and then goes into the process
of a DA approval. Within that, it has a planning
control plan that looks at the minimum and maximum numbers of dwellings that
be on a site, and then it goes through and gets approved. Those dwelling
numbers then get lifted up into the Territory Plan, I think
as a planning
control that is related to the EDP, and when a developer comes in that is
fundamentally what they would be allowed
under the lease that they get issued.
But, as was described, there is an opportunity for a lease
Committee then queried the adequacy of the consultation with the community on
this matter and were informed that:
I think the important thing with this particular proposal, and what it
highlighted for me as chief planner, was that I would have
expected that, in the
particular circumstances, there would have been a degree of pre-DA consultation.
The proponent bought the land
and they determined that they wanted to do
something different from what the lease purpose clause provided.
Ordinarily—and
I think I have made my position fairly clear to the
development industry—in such circumstances I would want to see that they
would engage very early with their local communities.
Sadly, that did not happen on this occasion. We have challenged the proponent in
this particular circumstance as to why they did
not do that and, quite rightly,
they have pointed out that under the pre-DA consultation guidelines that were
released about a year
ago, greenfields areas—and this is considered a
greenfields area—have been excluded. That was quite an eye-opener for
After talking with the minister for planning and Minister Berry as part of the
12- month review of those guidelines, which is currently
underway, I will be
looking to remove that exemption from undertaking pre-DA consultation
guidelines, because you are absolutely
right. People buy into an area, it is
new, they expect a certain outcome on other parcels of land, based on the estate
development
plan. The current legislation does allow for the lease to be varied.
But, as I said, as an absolute minimum, I would expect that
pre-DA consultation
to occur. Mr Parton, you mentioned the 222, or thereabouts, units that are
proposed. I just need to highlight
that that particular application is currently
under assessment and we ought not to assume that it will be approved in that
Directorate further emphasised that the development application process in
relation to this matter was not concluded and
no assumptions as to the outcome
should be made:
In some of the public commentary I have heard and seen—I know I am
generalising—there appears to be an assumption that,
because the
application has been made, that is what will be approved. We need to carefully
consider the submissions that have been
received. We will also need to consider
the advice from other referral entities. We will need to undertake an assessment
the relevant precinct codes and the broader provisions of the Territory
Plan and the legislation and then determine what is appropriate
particular site. Until that assessment is complete I cannot say that 222 units
is an appropriate outcome for that site.
But it is a live application, so we
need to see what comes out of that
assessment.
Recommendation 8
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government change the pre-DA consultation guidelines to remove the current
exemption for greenfield
Recommendation 9
The Committee recommends that if the number
of units proposed for a site is varied that the ACT Government consider the
impact of this variation on issues such as traffic and local amenity
as part of the Development Application process.
Mingle Program
4.13 During a discussion on the Mingle Community Development Program (Mingle
Program) the SLA informed the Committee how the Mingle
Program changes its focus
as a suburb develops:
With the Suburban Land Agency’s mingle program we are working with local
residents as they move in. We initiate local resident
groups, we initiate a
local Facebook page and we also work with them to do a mentoring program.
Initially, probably in the first
12 to 18 months, we establish a program of
activities and events which is also endorsed by the local residents. As we move
the program, depending on whether it is a three or five-year program, we
then work with those residents so that those events can
become more sustainable.
We mentor them, we work alongside them and we show them how to do event
approvals. We also show them how to do Facebook messaging
and how to communicate
with each other—we help them with communications. We also help them to
connect with each other and put
out calls for local skills in the community.
Where we find that there are local musicians, local school groups, or whatever
be, that do this work for free, or volunteer their services, we find
that those events become more sustainable.
It is about really getting that core group of residents that become our
champions in each community, and we educate them and work
alongside them. As the
Suburban Land Agency’s program removes itself after a number of years and
transitions out of the suburb,
we know that those residents are geared up to be
able to run the program
themselves.
this context the Committee asked as to the status of the Mingle Program in
Moncrieff, in the electorate of Yerrabi, and was
informed that:
We launched Moncrieff last December, when we opened the Moncrieff recreation
park. Since then we have established a resident group.
We meet with them
bi-monthly. This year alone we have initiated a group that is delivering the
Diwali festival of lights event on
Sunday, and that is really resident led. It
is completely resident driven but we support them in that journey. We are almost
ahead in Moncrieff, which is great to see. On 2 December we are also
delivering a Christmas event, which again is about celebrating
those local
traditions that people want to see. In addition to that we are seeing that the
entertainment, the communications and
all the messaging around that is being
driven by the residents.
We support by way of some of that initial funding, but ultimately a lot of these
services are volunteered, to the point where the
residents on a Sunday night are
cooking some of the food, and it is all about sharing a plate and bringing the
SLA then went on to inform the Committee about the progress of a the Mingle
Program in a number of other suburbs in the Yerrabi
electorate, beginning with
Throsby launched earlier this year. Since then we have established a Facebook
page and a quarterly newsletter, and we have had a
couple of introduction
events. We have had a brekkie in the park, and a treasure trek, where we have
encouraged people to walk around
the suburb. As you would be aware, we launched
the kangaroos a few weeks ago. We are trying to establish a group of residents
will become those resident champions. We probably do not quite have the
population there at the moment, but as we go through the
next six months, a lot
of that will be occurring. Particularly with Throsby, as it does not at the
moment have any community facilities,
we are working quite closely with the
Mulligans Flat team, as well as Harrison School, which is the local feeder
school for that
relation to Lawson the Directorate made note of the new partnership with the
Canberra Institute of Technology (CIT) and told
the Committee that:
A whole class, on community development, are running the program for us this
year. Part of that is educating them and mentoring them.
Next Saturday night we
are delivering a local twilight movie night, and the students are being brought
on that journey. We have also
just started a program where one of those students
in that class is working in our team, for one day a week at the moment, to get
an insight into community development. Lawson has only just commenced, and it
will go for a maximum of 18
Directorate also informed the Committee that the Mingle Program in Taylor was to
start in 2019:
We know that the school is due to open in February. We have held some
introduction conversations. The first of the potential students
for next year
met the principal this week. We were very heavily promoting that and involved in
that. We would hope to initiate the
Taylor program early next year. Part of that
initiation is understanding the community— putting out surveys, knowing
are and what skills we need to produce and gaps we need to fill as part
of that program. That program will then run for five years
terms of future developments in the Yerrabi Directorate, the Committee was
informed that ‘the next stage of Jacka does
meet the threshold for the
community program.’
4.19 Outside of the Yerrabi electorate, several aspects of the Molonglo
Mingle Program were highlighted to the Committee by the Directorate,
Stromlo Cottage; book boxes and a local seniors group:
The Molonglo mingle has been going really well as well, with Stromlo Cottage,
and some of the things that the community has picked
up and run with down there.
They are being facilitated and
encouraged.
We have established a book box in Wright and Coombs. The first one was in
Coombs, next to the school. It is amazing to see. It is
filled with books each
week. We have had no vandalism. It was completely resident led. Part of the
difference in this program is
that we make sure that these things are driven by
the community and owned by the community. We work with them to deliver that, so
that, hopefully, it is there forever. The other great thing about Molonglo is
that we have started a local seniors group which meets
each week. It started
with two people and it now regularly has 17 people. Those people were not
connected to their neighbours probably
two years ago, and now put each
other’s bins in when they are away. They are the small wins that we get
out of that local
Recommendation 10
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government continue to facilitate and support the Mingle Community Development
Program in new
and developing suburbs across the ACT.
Sustainability Targets
4.21 The SLA were asked a number of questions by the Committee in relation to
environmental and sustainability measures and were informed
We are working with our board to have a sustainability strategy for both
environmental and social sustainability. We have identified
infrastructure as one of the areas where we look to ensure we have an
appropriate strategy in play. We are working with EPSDD
and other parts of
government to ensure that the strategy we put forward is appropriate within the
policy context, and then also
working with TCCS to ensure that it is
maintainable. We have definitely identified that as an area that we are looking
at and will
be focusing on. We do not yet have a number which is the goal for a
new suburb as to what we want the tree canopy to do. The reason
for that is that
we are working with other parts of government to ensure that it is consistent
with policy and
maintainability.
4.22 Whilst
the establishment of targets was not yet finalised the Committee were informed
that there was already a focus on sustainability
in terms of the optimal
orientation of buildings to maximise solar access:
Part of our strategy is to improve people’s awareness of how to build a
more sustainable home. We have a lot of knowledge within
the group that we would
like to ensure is appropriately passed through to the community. The main idea
is to provide a bunch of guidelines
which essentially say, “For these
particular lots and this particular orientation, this is the type of house you
appropriately build for a sustainable
this context the Directorate also made mention of efforts they were making in
terms of living infrastructure:
We do work closely with, and do have an initiative at the moment with TCCS to
start a working group to see how we can ensure that
we are providing better
living infrastructure in our newer suburbs, to understand things like how much
verge area we have to plant,
with an appropriately deep band of trees. We work
with TCCS then to ensure that what we do is appropriately maintainable through
the whole of life of particular
infrastructure.
Committee Comment
4.24 In considering the excellent targets and goals set out in the City
Renewal Authority sustainability strategy the Committee feels
that the same
targets and goals should be applied more widely, to the work of the Suburban
Land Authority, in both urban renewal
and greenfield areas.
Recommendation 11
The Committee recommends that the
Suburban Land Agency consider adopting a sustainability strategy similar in
intent to that recently
released by the City Renewal Authority.
Introduction
5.1 The Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate
(CMTEDD) leads the public sector and works collaboratively both
government and with the community to achieve positive
5.2 As a central agency, CMTEDD provides strategic advice and support to the
Chief Minister, the directorate’s Ministers and
the Cabinet on policy,
economic and financial matters, service delivery,
whole‐of‐government (WHoG) issues and intergovernmental
5.3 The annexed Annual Report of the ACT Architects Board was referred to the
Committee for inquiry and report.
5.4 The Committee held a public hearing with Mr Gordon Ramsay MLA, Minister
for Building Quality Improvement on 9 November 2018 to
examine the 2017-2018
Annual Report of the ACT Architects Board.
5.5 Other areas of the CMTEDD 2017-2018 Annual Report were considered by
other committees.
Architects Board of the
5.6 The ACT Architects Board (the Board) is established under the
Architects Act 2004
. Its role is to ensure registered architects provide
services to the public in a professional and competent
5.7 The ACT Architects Board's functions are to:
 register architects;
 investigate complaints given to the Board about registered people
and people who have been registered;
 consider whether it is necessary to take disciplinary action against
registered people and people who have been registered
and, if it is, to take the
necessary action;
 consider and report to the Minister about issues referred to the
Board by the Minister for advice;
 advise the Minister in relation to the practice of architecture, for
example, about codes of professional conduct;
 further a common and harmonious approach to the administration of
legislation about architects by cooperation with local
 accredit courses of study in architecture; and
 provide general advice to consumers about the professional conduct
and standards of competence expected of registered
architects.
5.8 The Committee discussed the following matters with the Minister and Board
 Update on Board
activities;
 Issues referred to
 Nature of complaints to the
 Registration and
Accreditation;
 Access Canberra
Nature of Complaints
5.9 The Committee queried that nature of complaints that had been received by
the Board during the reporting period. In response the
Directorate indicated
The board received two complaints. If I recall correctly one related to an
architect or a person representing to be an architect
who was not a registered
architect, and the board has written to them...The other complaint related to
allegations that the architect
had engaged in behaviour in relation to a
development proposal. That was not something the Architects Board regulated so
action was taken in relation to that
Registration and
Accreditation
5.10 The Committee queried the process for registering as architect in the
ACT and were informed by the Directorate that:
The architect registration process is a national process. As I mentioned
earlier, part of that is a three-part examination with the
first part being an
individual obtaining a qualification. In the ACT and across the country that is
a masters in architecture. The
ACT has one architecture school, and the role of
the board in its remit is to approve courses of study of architecture.
course is one that is approved by the board.
In terms of an individual, they need to have demonstrated skills and experience.
There is a set of national competency standards
that apply right across the
country where individuals need to demonstrate their experience at an executive
level. That means that
they have done the work unsupervised for a large portion
of the education requirements they need to demonstrate. That, coupled with
statement of their experience aligning to those national standards of
competency, is required to be submitted, and that is part
one of the assessment
for registration.
The second part of the assessment, as I mentioned earlier, is an examination
testing the knowledge and experience of an architect
prior to them entering into
practice. That covers some of those national competency areas such as
understanding and applying legislation
and understanding and administering
contracts in terms of engagement with clients.
The third part is the interview that is undertaken by peers within the industry.
The ACT Architects Board coordinates that examination
process on behalf of the
AACA. Like many other jurisdictions, the ACT has a high pass rate and we see
that the process that exists
provides that stepping stone and a clear pathway
for registration as an architect in the
6 City Renewal Authority
Introduction
6.1 The City Renewal Authority (CRA) is a Territory Authority established
City Renewal Authority and Suburban Land Agency Act 2017
6.2 As defined in the
City Renewal Authority and Suburban Land Agency Act
, the CRA’s role is to:
 Encourage and promote a vibrant city through the delivery of
design-led, people focussed urban renewal;
 Encourage and promote social and environmental sustainability;
 Operate effectively with sound risk management practices to ensure
value for money.
6.3 The Committee held a public hearing with Mr Andrew Barr MLA, Chief
Minister on 9 November 2018 to examine the City Renewal Authority
Annual Report.
6.4 The Committee discussed the following matters with the Minister and CRA
 Dickson Town Team / Town Team
 CRA Sustainability Strategy – aims and
 CRA Sustainability Strategy – relationship to EPSDD Planning
strategies;
 CRA Sustainability Strategy – climate
 CRA Sustainability Strategy – connections with other
 Sustainability Measures external to
 Internal Audit
 Visual Identity
 Henry Roland
 ACT Government relationship with NCA – negotiations involving
City to the Lake, Embassy placements and other associated
 Achieving Code + 1 – Active
 Achieving Code + 1 – Energy efficiency
 Achieving Code + 1 – 3 bedroom
 Achieving Code + 1 – Liveability and urban design (including
green space, tree cover, water saving
 City Activation v
 City Activation
 City Activation interim measures (including pick and mix tables;
deck chairs; poet corner; winter festival; children’s
playground);
 CRA Board Meeting
 Live Music Venues/Entertainment
 Sydney and Melbourne Buildings – Waste
Enclosures.
Dickson Town Team / Town Team
6.5 The Committee asked a number of questions in relation to the town team
concept which the CRA had implemented in Dickson. The CRA
explained that:
The town team is a not-for-profit organisation that originated out of Western
Australia. It does exist overseas in other locations.
It is very much about the
idea of bringing those three groups together, particularly residents, community
and businesses, to have
a view as to how they might enliven and renew their
local town centre. It is predominantly based on that model of bringing those
three groups together to form a cohesive
Town team is an approach to the way in which the authority wants to go about its
place-making program across the precinct...Dickson
was a prime example of a
location within a precinct where we recognised that it was important we form or
strengthen resilience within
that community to take responsibility for the way
in which Dickson emerges as a really competitive and appealing
CRA indicated that the ACT government was not a member of the voluntary
association, which it described as ‘an alliance
of traders, residents in
the community and the City Renewal Authority around a shared set of objectives
in urban renewal’
when asked to whether any funding was provided indicated that:
We have funded the work associated with the place planning work that we have
been doing in Dickson. A component of that work was
to explore the appetite
within the group that Andy has just referred to for forming this type of group.
The consultant that we used
in preparing that place plan had direct
experience—indeed, had people on their team who had been associated with
the formation
of town teams in other jurisdictions as part of their consultancy
work. I guess that it was really as a result of being able to talk
Dickson interests and stakeholders about the benefits that other similar
communities have enjoyed through that approach that
got this idea across the
line. It is really a point where we say, “We have done our bit. It is over
to you now to take the
responsibility to help gather up the interest that we
have created through that process.” It is for them to drive it. So
steps back, but we obviously keep close lines of communication with
them about any follow-up work we will be doing, particularly
improvements.
a future levy was not discounted by the Chief Minister he indicated that it was
not ‘imminent’ but could be
‘something that may transpire in
the future’ depending ‘on local interest and a perceived
6.8 When asked by the Committee as to whether the town team concept would be
rolled out in other areas of Canberra the Chief Minister
indicated that it would
not be a CRA responsibility:
There would be no problem with that, should there be interest. It is not
something that I think you can force on an area. But should
there be that
desire, we have a working example in the city of how it can operate. We would be
very comfortable to share those experiences,
should there be interest in other
parts of Canberra to work with local stakeholders to facilitate just such an
outcome. I would say
in the context of the city model that you have large and
small players involved. I think that is helpful, beneficial to the overall
success of such a program. It is not just your large shopping mall anchor; it is
also a very significant buy-in from small and medium
enterprise, as well as the
property owners within the different precincts. The point I could certainly make
within the CRA precinct is that there are different
areas. We have sort of sub-areas within the broader program. That allows for
even more localised responses within a precinct
CRA Sustainability Strategy
6.9 The Committee asked the CRA about their recently release sustainability
strategy and were informed that:
Sustainability is a core strategic goal of the CRA. You can trace the importance
of that goal right back to what the act that established
the authority was
talking about. Our concept of sustainability is one of multiple sustainability,
of promoting and supporting sustainable
development as part of the renewal
program. We have done that in a way that acknowledges the different elements of
sustainability,
particularly social sustainability.
You can imagine that the renewal effort and, again, that people-centred approach
that is a core foundation of our work are quite
important in the way in which we
go about our renewal program. The basis of our strategy was not to reinvent the
wheel. It was to
go back and look at pre-existing, already approved strategies
that have already been implemented around climate change and around
intersections with our work. The lens through which we have looked at our needs,
in terms of sustainability strategies, is
improving building performance, particularly making them more thermally higher
performing; our
contribution to dealing with the heat island effects that we
have in our city; and promotion, for example, of electric vehicle charging.
whole series of performance indicators are articulated within that strategy.
My board is very keen to ensure that we just do not accept current practice.
Many of the indicators are in fact about code plus one,
which is an approach to
say, “Yes, that is what might happen in the mainstream, but if we are
serious about real achievement
in the sustainability space we need to be setting
stretch targets.” The sustainability strategy which was released today
articulates what those targets are and that we will be monitoring the
performance of our work and the way in which we act both as
a referral agency
and, indeed, through our own projects as we take sites to market. We should be
leading by example, so we have a
great opportunity through our work as a land
developer also to be demonstrating best practice, next practice approaches to
sustainability.
Committee then asked for details about the targets set out in the strategy and
were informed that:
The targets for 2025 include improving housing choices for families by lifting
the number of three-bedroom dwellings within the renewal
precinct. We want to
promote and support a greater level of active travel within the precinct. To do
that we are targeting what is
called a walk score, which is a measure of the
walkability attractiveness and the means by which people, other than in cars,
access different places within the precinct, whether that be cycling or
walking but, in particular, walking. Having access to facilities
means their
dependency on cars is reduced.
As I said a moment ago, we also want to promote and achieve much higher levels
of efficient energy performance in any of the new
developments and even in the
adaptive re-use of buildings within the precinct. We see real scope particularly
for non-residential
buildings to be achieving energy performance targets that
are at least 25 per cent above the current codes. When I talk about those
stretch targets I think we can do that particularly in building performance and
management.
discussing the targets articulated in the strategy the Committee asked the CRA
to explain how they were going to reach the
noted 25% energy performance target
and were informed that:
The code is the base Australian standard or the recognised standard which all
developments need to achieve, so the code plus one
is obviously the next level
up. If our ambition is to achieve a code plus one rating on energy performance,
it means those developers
delivering that building stock need to consider the
energy and thermal capacity of the building, they need to design it to a higher
standard, they need to orientate the building in a way to achieve access to
natural daylight and things of that nature. They are
the kinds of things the
development industry needs to achieve in delivering those outcomes for the
it was noted that the CRA did not have the statutory power to enforce such
measures they indicated that:
Everything we do is about encouraging those outcomes. We are also the mandatory
referral authority for developments that sit within
the CRA area, so every
development application comes across our desk. We have very deep and meaningful
conversations with applicants
as they apply for a development approval. I can
count dozens of examples of conversations with developers around improving their
energy and thermal capacity performance and basic things like access to
daylight. We have rejected many applications because apartments
enough access to daylight. Those things affect thermal capacity, for residents
to actually have a decent life. We have
those discussions all the time and we
have the capacity to not recommend a development
application.
The statutory levers we can pull are quite limited. That is why we are talking
to our colleagues in the environment and planning
directorate about how the
strategic plan refresh and, following that, the Territory Plan review might help
strengthen our ability—particularly
if we are a referral agency—to
say that these are the requirements of the statutory instrument of a plan.
If that were to occur it would give us the teeth, as it were. As Andy has just
said, much of what we have been able to achieve is
by encouraging potential
applicants and current applicants for new developments to adopt the kinds of
standards we are setting. In
most cases we find that, as Andy has said, we have
developers who are quite receptive to that because they understand that
are becoming much more savvy about the performance of the buildings
they want to be taken to
Committee Comment
6.13 The Committee commends the City Renewal Authority on the excellent
targets and goals set out in its sustainability strategy.
Recommendation 12
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government amends the Territory Plan and its infrastructure design standards to
assist the City
Renewal Authority to meet the goals and targets in its
Sustainability Strategy.
CRA Board Meeting Minutes
6.15 The CRA was asked a number of questions in relation to the meetings of
its board and how they were accounted for. In particular
the Committee asked
meetings mentioned in the website
In response the CRA
stated that:
We have a backlog regarding reporting the outcome of those meetings. We would be
in a position fairly soon to make sure that the
balance of the minutes and the
outcomes of those board meetings are reported publicly, and we are working
backlog was explained to the Committee as not being due to any disputes but
simply due to gaining the approvals necessary:
There is a process we have to go through with the chair and the board itself to
make sure that the minutes accurately and correctly
reflect the outcome of the
meetings. We go through that process and make sure that, once those have been
signed off and approved,
they are then loaded up onto the public
There are no disputes. It is simply so that the board has the opportunity, quite
correctly and appropriately in a governance sense,
to make sure that the minutes
reflect the decisions that are
further questioned on this matter by the Committee the CRA further
What I have said to you is that there is a backlog in publishing those meeting
outcomes. I accept that there has been too long a
gap between those meetings and
the publication of them, and we are doing everything we need to do to make sure
that those outcomes
are up on the website and that the community, under the open
access arrangements, of course, have access to those
It is important that we are absolutely transparent in our work as a public
agency. The agency has now been operating for a month.
The governance
arrangements, the business operational arrangements, are now bedding down. I can
assure you that if the agency has
been slow to make sure that that information
which is publishable is being made available, we will be making sure that, in a
timely way, those outcomes are published within the shortest possible time
frame, with the support and cooperation of the
was also supported by the Chief Minister who indicated that whilst he was
‘satisfied with the governance arrangements’
he was ‘not
satisfied that there has been a delay in posting this information on the
6.19 When asked if there was a legislative requirement for the minutes to
be published the CRA responded that the relevant legislation
‘requires us
to make sure that the proceedings, the outcomes of those meetings, are
published,’
response to a Question Taken on Notice the Committee was informed that:
There is no legislative requirement for the City Renewal Authority to publish
the minutes of its Board's meetings online.
The Authority's Chair has chosen to publish, on the Authority's website, a list
of the headings of matters considered at each Board
meeting. These documents are
known as 'Publishable Outcomes'. This publication is done once the minutes are
approved by the Board,
and within available staff resources. The Authority is
currently working to update the Publishable Outcomes on its website as soon
asked if any board minutes had been removed from the website the Committee was
informed in an answer to a Question Taken
on Notice that ‘no board minutes
or Publishable Outcomes have been removed from the Authority’s
Recommendation 13
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government ensure that the publication of City Renewal Authority Board meeting
outcomes or ‘Publishable
Outcomes’ be completed in a more timely
7 Conclusion
7.1 The Committee has made 13 recommendations in this report relating to a
broad range of topics.
7.2 The Committee would like to thank ACT Government Ministers and
directorate officials for their contribution this this inquiry.
Ms Caroline Le
Couteur MLA
6 March 2019
A - Witnesses
9 November 2018
Yvette Berry MLA, Minister for Housing and Suburban Development
Mr Andrew Barr MLA, Chief Minister
Ms Stephen Smith MLA, Minister for Urban Renewal
Mr Mick Gentleman MLA, Minister for Planning and Land
Mr Gordon Ramsay MLA, Minister for Building Quality
Improvement
Mr Ben Ponton, Director-General, EPSDD
Mr Geoffrey Rutledge, Deputy Director-General, Sustainability and
the Built Environment, EPSDD
Mr Craig Simmons, Chief Operating Officer, EPSDD
Ms Elizabeth Howell, Senior Manager, Affordable Housing,
Ms Deb Foulcher, Director, Strategy and Viability, Housing
Mr Malcolm Snow, Chief Executive Officer, City Renewal
Mr Andy Sharp, Director Design and Place Strategy, City Renewal
Mr Joey Lee, Chief Financial Officer, Suburban Land Agency &
City Renewal Authority,
Mr John Dietz, Chief Executive Officer, Suburban Land Agency
Mr Tom Gordon, Executive Director, Development Delivery, Suburban
Land Agency
Ms Jody Gleeson, Corporate Marketing, Suburban Land Agency
Ms Chloe Howorth, Director, Urban Renewal, EPSDD
Ms Karen Wilden, Director, Engagement and Executive Support,
Mr Bruce Fitzgerald, Executive Director, Urban Renewal,
Mr Greg Jones, Director, Workplace Protection, CMTEDD
Dr Erin Brady, Deputy Director-General, Land Strategy and
Environment, EPSDD
Mr George Cilliers, Director, Development Assessment,
Mr Alex Nockels, Acting Director, Land Development Projects,
Ms Kathy Cusack, Executive Director, Planning Policy,
Mr Ben Green, A/g Director, Regulatory, Solutions and Compliance,
Access Canberra, CMTEDD
Appendix B – Questions
taken on Notice/
Questions on Notice
Questions taken on Notice – 9 November 2018
Hearing date
Directorate/
Answer date
9 November 2018
Cost to date for PHRT Program
9 November 2018
WSD in last 12 months
9 November 2018
Minutes not on web from CRA Board meetings – possible
breach of requirements
9 November 2018
Have any CRA Board Minutes been removed from the web
9 November 2018
Information on Lease Variations where DA has been approved
and the LVC that applied in each of these DAs
9 November 2018
Active travel location in North Wright
9 November 2018
SLA – Urban Renewal
Size of proposed carpark in Kingston Arts Precinct
9 November 2018
EPSDD – Loose Fill Asbestos Eradication Scheme
How many complex properties remaining – broken down by
region/electorate
9 November 2018
EPSDD – Loose Fill Asbestos Eradication Scheme /
Access Canberra
Harrison School
- When was the testing conducted relative to the asbestos concern being
- what day was access to the site (esp children) restricted
- when is Worksafe supposed to be advised in such circumstances (according
to legislation)
9 November 2018
Lease length of greyhound racing club
9 November 2018
When was the shipping container complaints –
comparison of 2017-2018 number of complaints with previous years.
9 November 2018
When was the shipping container section of the planning regulations last
9 November 2018
What contact has been made between government agencies and
the developer of the Coombs shops
9 November 2018
EPSDD/Access Canberra
What have been the number of complaints about sheds –
financial year
Questions on Notice - related to hearings of 9 November 2018
Hearing date
Directorate/
Answer date
9 November 2018
Staffing breakdown and demographics in SLA
9 November 2018
Staffing breakdown and demographics in CRA
9 November 2018
Development Applications – boundaries (see also p34
Annual Report)
9 November 2018
EPSDD/SLA – Urban Renewal
Yarralumla Brickworks and Land Release in Eastlake
9 November 2018
Status of Rural Leases as per Auditor-General’s Report
9 November 2018
EPSDD/SLA – Urban Renewal
Future Brownfields Land Releases – EPIC
9 November 2018
Zero Emissions Targets and Urban Heat Island issues
9 November 2018
Sustainability Goals – SLA as compared to CRA
9 November 2018
Coombs Development
9 November 2018
Release of sites for supermarkets in Coombs
9 November 2018
Land Release Policy – Asset Recycling Initiative (see
also p32 Annual Report EPSDD)
9 November 2018
West Basin and Henry Rolland park
9 November 2018
Haig Park improvements – implementation and
9 November 2018
City Centre Marketing and Improvement Levy
9 November 2018
EPSDD (asbestos)
Sales of Mr Fluffy Blocks
9 November 2018
EPSDD (asbestos)
Complaints re: remediation and non-compliance with asbestos
management plants
9 November 2018
Residential Shortfall (see also p168 SLA Annual
9 November 2018
Mixed Use Land Release (see also p168 SLA Annual
9 November 2018
Community Land Release (see also p169 SLA Annual
9 November 2018
Publication of Board Meeting Outcomes
9 November 2018
Strathnairn Land Release (see also p 169 SLA Annual
9 November 2018
Land Release Policy – Residential Dwelling
9 November 2018
Land and Property Report (see also p 88 EPSDD Annual
9 November 2018
Land Release Policy – Commercial Land Release (see
also p 32 EPSD Annual Report)
9 November 2018
Land Release Policy - Detached Residential Block Sales
Legislative Assembly for the
ACT, Minutes of Proceedings No. 2, 13 December 2016, pp. 39-43, accessible at
http://www.parliament.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/1017980/MoP002F2.pdf
Legislative Assembly for the
ACT, Minutes of Proceedings No. 76, 25 October 2018, pp. 1065-1077, accessible
https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0011/1269128/MoP076F.pdf
Annual Reports (Government
Agencies) Notice 2017
Notifiable Instrument NI2017-280, p. 6.
Annual Reports (Government
Agencies) Notice 2017
Notifiable Instrument NI2017-280, p. 9.
Environment, Planning and
Sustainable Development Directorate – Planning, accessible at
https://www.planning.act.gov.au/about_us
Environment, Planning and
Sustainable Development Directorate – Planning, accessible at
https://www.planning.act.gov.au/about_us
, 9 November
2018, p. 98.
, 9 November
2018, pp. 45; 55; 61; 98-103.
, 9 November
2018, pp. 107-109.
November 2018, pp. 105-106.
November 2018, pp. 99-103.
Environment, Planning and
Sustainable Development Directorate Annual Report 2017-18
Minister Gentleman,
, 9 November 2018, p. 107.
, 9 November 2018, pp. 107-108.
, 9 November 2018, p. 108.
Suburban Land Agency
Annual Report 2017-18
Mr Rutledge,
, 9 November 2018, p. 109.
Minister Gentleman,
, 9 November 2018, pp. 108-109.
Environment, Planning and
Sustainable Development Directorate – Affordable Housing, accessible at
https://www.planning.act.gov.au/topics/affordable_housing
November 2018, pp. 2-10.
November 2018, pp. 14-16.
November 2018, pp. 2-3; 11-15.
November 2018, pp. 2-3.
November 2018, p. 15-17.
November 2018, pp. 15-17.
November 2018, p. 17.
November 2018, pp. 9-11
November 2018;
ACT Housing Strategy Implementation Plan
, October 2018,
https://www.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/1265640/ACT-Housing-Strategy-2018-Implementation-Plan.pdf
, 9 November 2018, p. 2.
, 9 November 2018, p. 3.
, 9 November, 2018, p. 7.
, 9 November, 2018, p. 2.
, 9 November 2018, pp. 2-3.
, 9 November 2018, p. 3
Ms Cheyne MLA,
, November 2018, p. 9
Minister Berry,
Transcript,
9 November 2018, pp. 9-10.
Transcript,
9 November 2018, p. 10.
Transcript,
9 November 2018, p. 10.
9 November 2018, p. 10.
Dr Brady, Transcript, 9
November 2018, p. 11.
Environment,
Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate Annual Report 2017-18
34; Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate –
Planning, accessible at
https://www.planning.act.gov.au/about_us
Environment, Planning and
Sustainable Development Directorate – Planning, accessible at
https://www.planning.act.gov.au/about_us
Environment, Planning and
Sustainable Development Directorate – Planning, accessible at
https://www.planning.act.gov.au/about_us
November 2018, pp. 109-112;
Answer to Question Taken on Notice No.
November 2018, pp. 93-98;
Answer to Question Taken on Notice No. 12; Answer
to Question Taken on Notice No. 11.
November 2018, pp. 99-101.
November 2018, p. 92.
November 2018, pp. 60-62; 103-105;
Answer to Question Taken on Notice No.
November 2018, pp. 16; 22; 69; 90-92;
November 2018, pp. 23; 70-71; 91-92.
November 2018, pp.112-113.
November 2018, pp. 92-93;
Answer to Question Taken on Notice No. 10.
November 2018, pp. 73-74; 106-107.
November 2018, pp. 113-114.
November 2018, pp. 68-69.
November 2018, pp. 1-16; 57-59.
November 2018, pp. 10; 69-76.
November 2018, pp. 69-70.
November 2018, pp. 70-71.
November 2018, pp. 75-76;
Answer to Question Taken on Notice No. 7.
November 2018, p. 80.
November 2018, p. 113.
Minister Gentleman,
, 9 November 2018, p. 90.
, 9 November 2018, pp. 90-91.
Mr Rutledge,
, 9 November 2018, p. 72.
Mr Rutledge,
, 9 November 2018, p. 74.
Ms Howorth,
, 9 November 2018, p. 74.
Mr Rutledge,
, 9 November 2018, p. 74.
Mr Rutledge,
, 9 November 2018, pp. 72-73.
Mr Rutledge,
, 9 November 2018, p. 73.
Mr Rutledge,
, 9 November 2018, p. 74.
9 November 2018, p. 75.
, 9 November 2018, p. 75.
Answer to Question Taken
on Notice No. 7
9 November 2018, p. 75.
, 9 November 2018, p. 76.
Minister Stephen-Smith,
, 9 November 2018, p. 76.
, 9 November 2018, pp. 76-79.
, 9 November 2018, pp. 76-79.
Transcript,
9 November 2018, p. 79.
Transcript,
9 November 2018, p. 79.
Transcript,
9 November 2018, pp. 112-113
Environment, Planning and
Sustainable Development Directorate Annual Report 2017-18
November 2018, pp. 1; 58; 69; 80; 107.
November 2018, p. 5;
Answer to Question Taken on Notice No. 1.
November 2018, pp. 3-5.
November 2018, pp. 4-6.
November 2018, pp. 1-4.
November 2018, pp. 1-7; 11-15
November 2018, pp. 5-6.
November 2018, pp. 7-9.
Minister Berry,
, 9 November 2018, p. 4.
Mr Rutledge,
, 9 November 2018, p. 4.
Mr Rutledge,
, 9 November 2018, pp. 4-5.
Transcript,
9 November 2018, pp.7-8.
Mr Rutledge,
, November 2018, p. 8.
Mr Rutledge,
, November 2018, p. 9.
Transcript,
9 November 2018, p. 8.
Transcript,
9 November 2018, p. 9.
Transcript,
9 November 2018, p-8.
Mr Rutledge,
, November 2018, p. 9.
November 2018, pp. 80-81.
November 2018, p. 81.
November 2018, pp. 81-82.
November 2018, p. 82.
November 2018, p. 82.
November 2018, pp.83-86.
November 2018, pp. 83-84.
November 2018, pp. 86-87;
Answer to Question Taken on Notice No. 8.
November 2018, pp. 87-89;
Answer to Question Taken on Notice No. 9.
November 2018, p. 87.
Mr Rutledge,
, 9 November 2018, p. 81.
Minister Stephen-Smith,
, 9 November 2018, p. 83.
Mr Rutledge,
, 9 November 2018, p. 83.
Minister Stephen-Smith,
, 9 November 2018, p. 85.
, 9 November 2018, p. 83.
, 9 November 2018, pp. 83-84
, 9 November 2018, p. 84.
, 9 November 2018, p. 84.
, 9 November 2018, p. 84.
Minister Stephen-Smith,
, 9 November 2018, p. 85.
Mr Rutledge,
, 9 November 2018, p. 86.
Answer to Question
Taken on Notice No.8
Suburban Land Agency
Annual Report 2017-18
Suburban Land Agency
Annual Report 2017-18
November 2018, pp. 44-47.
November 2018, pp. 47-52.
November 2018, p.52.
November 2018, pp. 52-54; 98-99.
November 2018, p. 54.
November 2018, pp. 54-55.
November 2018, pp. 55-58.
November 2018, p. 59-60.
November 2018, pp. 59-62; 103-104.
November 2018, pp. 62-63; 69-70;
Answer to Question Taken on Notice No.
November 2018, pp. 64-66.
November 2018, pp. 66-67.
November 2018, pp. 47-52.
November 2018, p. 51.
November 2018, pp. 51-52;
Answer to Question Taken on Notice No. 5.
November 2018, pp. 54-59.
Transcript,
9 November 2018, pp. 47-48.
, 9 November 2018, p. 48.
Transcript,
9 November 2018, pp. 48-49.
Transcript,
9 November 2018, p. 50.
Ms Gleeson,
Transcript,
9 November 2018, pp. 63-64.
Ms Gleeson,
Transcript,
9 November 2018, pp. 64-65.
Ms Gleeson,
Transcript,
9 November 2018, p. 65.
Ms Gleeson,
Transcript,
9 November 2018, p. 65.
Ms Gleeson,
Transcript,
9 November 2018, p. 65.
Ms Gleeson,
Transcript,
9 November 2018, pp. 65-66.
Minister Berry,
, 9 November 2018, p. 66.
Ms Gleeson,
Transcript,
9 November 2018, p. 66.
Transcript,
9 November 2018, p. 63.
Transcript,
9 November 2018, p. 62.
Transcript,
9 November 2018, p. 62.
Chief Minister,
Treasury and Economic Development Annual Report 2017-18,
Chief Minister,
Treasury and Economic Development Annual Report 2017-18,
ACT Architects Board
Annual Report 2017-18
as annexed in the
Chief Minister, Treasury and
Economic Development Annual Report 2017-18,
ACT Architects Board
Annual Report 2017-18
as annexed in the
Chief Minister, Treasury and
Economic Development Annual Report 2017-18,
November 2018, p. 115.
November 2018, p. 115.
November 2018, pp. 115-116.
November 2018, p. 116.
November 2018, p. 116.
November 2018, pp. 116-117.
Transcript,
9 November 2018, pp. 115-116
Transcript,
9 November 2018, p. 116
City Renewable
Authority Annual Report 2017-18
November 2018, pp. 19-21.
November 2018, pp. 21-25;
Answer to Question Taken on Notice No. 2.
November 2018, pp. 25-30.
November 2018, p. 25.
November 2018, pp. 24-25.
November 2018, pp. 25-30.
November 2018, pp. 34-35.
November 2018, pp. 33-34.
November 2018, p. 32.
November 2018, pp. 30-33.
November 2018, p. 22.
November 2018, pp. 22-23.
November 2018, pp. 22-23.
November 2018, pp. 24-25.
November 2018, pp. 25-30.
November 2018, pp 34-35.
November 2018, pp. 35-37.
November 2018, pp. 20-21; 37-38.
, 9 November 2018, pp. 38-42;
Questions Taken on Notice No. 3; Answer to Questions Taken on Notice No.
November 2018, p. 42.
November 2018, pp. 42-43.
, 9 November 2018, p. 19.
, 9 November 2018, p. 19.
Chief Minister Barr,
, 9 November 2018, p. 19.
, 9 November 2018, p. 20.
Chief Minister Barr,
, 9 November 2018, p. 20.
Chief Minister Barr,
, 9 November 2018, p. 21.
, 9 November 2018, p. 22.
, 9 November 2018, p. 22.
, 9 November 2018, p. 23.
, 9 November 2018, p. 23.
, 9 November 2018, p. 23.
November 2018, p. 38.
, 9 November 2018, p. 38.
, 9 November 2018, p. 38.
, 9 November 2018, pp. 38-39.
, 9 November 2018, p. 40.
, 9 November 2018, p. 41.
Chief Minister Barr,
, 9 November 2018, p. 41.
, 9 November 2018, p. 40.
Answer to Questions
Taken on Notice No. 3.
Answer to Questions
Taken on Notice No. 4.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (581 KB)
PDF format (937 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter