URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBSD/2025/64.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:14:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Administrative Review Tribunal and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2025 - Initial Scrutiny [2025] AUSStaCSBSD 64 (29 October 2025)
Chapter 1 :
Initial scrutiny
Administrative Review Tribunal and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 20252
Procedural fairness
Adequacy of review rights3
Procedural fairness – natural justice hearing rule12
Delegated legislation modifying or exempting primary legislation (Henry VIII)25
Significant matters in delegated legislation
Retrospective application30
Initial scrutiny
1.1 The committee comments on the following bills and, in some instances,
seeks a response or further information from the relevant
Administrative Review
Tribunal and Other Legislation Amendment Bill
The Administrative Review Tribunal and Other Legislation Amendment Bill
2025 seeks to amend the
Administrative Review Tribunal Act 2024
provide a general discretion to dispense with an oral hearing in proceedings;
and to amend the
Migration Act 1958
to provide for the Administrative
Review Tribunal to make certain migration decisions, including about student
visas, without conducting
an oral hearing.
Attorney-General
House of Representatives on 3 September 2025
Bill status
Before the House of Representatives
Adequacy of review
1.2 Section 106 of the
Administrative Review Tribunal
(ART Act) sets out the circumstances in which the Administrative Review
Tribunal (the Tribunal) (for review decisions only) may reach
a decision in
proceedings without the holding of a hearing. These circumstances include where
it appears to the Tribunal that the
issues in the proceeding can be adequately
determined without the parties’ attendance. The hearing of a proceeding is
as the hearing of the substantive
proceeding.
1.3 Schedule 1, item 3, proposed subsection 106(6) in the bill seeks to
provide an additional discretion for the Tribunal to dispense
with an oral
hearing. This discretion would apply where it appears to the Tribunal that the
issues can be adequately determined in
the absence of the parties to the
proceeding and it is reasonable in the circumstances for the Tribunal to make a
decision without
holding the hearing. Before doing so, the Tribunal must give
each party a reasonable opportunity to make submissions about its proposal
resolve the matter without a hearing, and must take any submissions it receives
into account. This would have the effect of the
Tribunal making a decision on
the papers.
1.4 The explanatory memorandum states:
The new discretion would give the Tribunal additional flexibility in relation
to the procedures to be followed in a proceeding. It
would enable the Tribunal
to dispense with a hearing in circumstances where the Tribunal considers it
would be appropriate. This
would support the objective of the Tribunal resolving
matters as quickly and with as little formality as a proper consideration of
matter permits. This recognises that in some circumstances (particularly where
the issues to be resolved are objective and can
be readily resolved based on
documentary evidence) an oral hearing is not necessary to provide procedural
fairness and properly determine
1.5 Procedural fairness is a fundamental common law principle. Australian
courts have insisted that a right to a fair and unbiased
hearing will be implied
into statutory powers which are apt to affect individual interests and rights
unless the Parliament has excluded
this inference with plain words of necessary
intendment.
The courts have
justified this approach in part by the importance of procedural fairness to
ensure that relevant information is available
to decision-makers. However, these
principles are also recognised as acknowledging the human dignity of those who
are subject to
1.6 The committee accepts that the content of procedural fairness in
administrative decision-making is flexible and not subject to
prescriptive rules.
However, the
conduct of oral hearings can enhance the fairness of proceedings in various
ways, particularly in the context of review
proceedings. For example, an oral
hearing will generally provide a more accessible, customisable and user-oriented
forum for the
disputation of facts or complex legal issues. Oral hearings may
also be seen to uphold the human dignity of self-represented litigants
individuals requiring adjustments to participate fully. Further, oral hearings
enable a fluid and responsive dialogue between
parties and the decision-maker,
which can enhance the accuracy of proceedings by eliciting relevant evidence or
misapprehension.
1.7 The committee accepts that even in relation to review proceedings such
advantages may be overborne by considerations of cost,
delay or other associated
constraints. In the context of the ART proceedings, however, any proposed
departures from the default rule
requiring an oral hearing (subject to an
applicant’s consent to hear a matter on the papers) require strong
justification given
that oral hearings were designed to contribute to
transparency and foster public confidence in the Tribunal’s
These significant
objectives are included as express objectives of the ART in the ART
The committee is concerned
that the significance of oral hearings in contributing to transparency and
public confidence in the ART
has not been adequately addressed by the
justification for the proposal.
1.8 The committee’s concerns are exacerbated by the drafting of
proposed subsection 106(6) and (7), which could be improved
to better maintain
the fairness of tribunal proceedings. On the current framing of proposed
subsection 106(6), the exercise of the
discretion is contingent on it
‘appear[ing] to the Tribunal’ that the issues for determination in
the proceeding can
be adequately determined in the absence of the parties and
that it is reasonable in the circumstances to make a decision in the proceeding
without the holding of a hearing.
1.9 It is unclear to the committee whether this condition enlivening the
discretionary power, that ‘it must appear to the Tribunal’,
intended to differ in its operation relative to a condition that the Tribunal
‘be satisfied’ of certain matters,
which are subject to implied
obligations of rationality and
reasonableness.
committee’s examination would therefore be assisted by additional
information addressing why the formulation in the bill
has been preferred and
whether its operation would be similarly subject to obligations to act
reasonably and rationally, as have
been read into the exercise of powers based
on a decision-maker’s satisfaction of relevant matters.
1.10 Further, the committee notes that proposed subsection 106(6) requires
the Tribunal to consider whether ‘the issues for
determination within the
proceeding can adequately be determined in the absence of the parties’ and
‘whether it is reasonable
in the circumstances to make its decision’
without holding a hearing. It is of some concern to the committee that this
does not specifically require the Tribunal to direct its attention
directly to fairness, namely, whether ‘a reasonable and
fair repository of
the power would adopt [an oral hearing] in the
circumstances.’
1.11 Finally, the committee notes that the justification for the proposed
change proceeds without reference to any empirical evidence
enabling the Senate
to consider the likely use and impact of the proposed discretion to dispense
with oral hearings. In these circumstances,
the committee is concerned by the
absence of any proposal to require a review of the exercise of the proposed
discretion by a suitable
entity after an appropriate period of time. The
committee considers that a formal review would enable Parliament to consider the
appropriateness of this general discretion having regard to evidence about the
frequency and circumstances in which it is used, the
frequency with which it is
contested by applicants and their reasons why, as well as any broader feedback
provided by ART users,
members and stakeholders.
1.12 In light of the above, the committee seeks the minister’s
detailed advice as to:
the justification for a discretionary power empowering the
Tribunal to dispense with an oral hearing, with particular reference to
benefits oral hearings have in the context of review proceedings and their
significance in fostering public confidence in the
whether the discretion in Schedule 1, Part 1, proposed subsection
106(6) could be more narrowly drafted so as to better control its
exercise, for
example by requiring the Tribunal to be satisfied of the relevant matters,
including that procedural fairness would
not be unduly compromised in the
circumstances of the relevant proceeding;
whether the bill could be amended to provide for a statutory
review of Schedule 1, Part 1 in the bill, with a report to be tabled
in both the
Houses of Parliament.
Procedural fairness – natural justice hearing
1.13 Item 16 of Schedule 1 seeks to insert a new Division 4A into the
Migration Act 1958
(Migration Act) which would require the Tribunal to
review decisions to refuse to grant a student visa on the
Other applications for
review of Migration Act decisions relating to temporary visas may also be
prescribed by regulation as applications
to be reviewed on the
1.14 The explanatory memorandum provides limited rationale in support of the
default rule in student visa refusal decisions, subject
to limited exceptions.
It is appropriate for applications for review of a decision to refuse a
student visa to be reviewed on the papers, having regard to
the nature of the
issues under review, the temporary and short-term nature of a student visa, and
the low volume and complexity of
written materials relevant to proceedings of
this kind. Enabling decisions of this kind to be reviewed on the papers would
an efficient and proportionate method of review, while ensuring that
genuine applicants are given a meaningful opportunity to present
their case to
the Tribunal in writing.
1.15 The committee accepts that there is a need to efficiently and
proportionately triage categories of reviewable decisions for which
hearing is undertaken. However, as the proposed amendments to the ART Act in
Schedule 1 of the bill would enable the Tribunal
a general discretion to proceed
with matters on the papers, it is unclear to the committee why a more
proportionate approach such
as this could not be adopted with respect to student
visa refusal decisions on a case-by-case basis. Such an approach would, in the
committee’s opinion, better recognise the varied features and durations of
programs of study to which student visa decisions
may relate and associated
complexity that may arise in some cases with respect to the issues for
determination. In this regard, it
is noted that the explanatory materials do not
engage in any detail with why it would be adequate to determine issues
visa refusal decisions in the absence of the parties.
1.16 In addition, as discussed below regarding significant matters in
delegated legislation, the explanatory memorandum provides little
justification
of the regulation-making power that would enable the categories of temporary
visa decisions treated as applications
to be reviewed on the papers to be
1.17 This status as an application to be reviewed on the papers is a matter
of some significance insofar as the bill seeks to exhaustively
state certain
requirements of the natural justice hearing rule for such applications. Proposed
subsection 367E(3) provides that,
insofar as Division 4A and other relevant
provisions are taken to be an exhaustive statement of the requirements of the
natural justice
hearing rule regarding the matters they deal with, the Tribunal
is not required to observe any principle or rule of common law relating
matters. These matters include, among others, that:
• the Tribunal must invite the applicant to provide written submissions
and evidence about specified or prescribed issues of
• subject to exceptions, the Tribunal must give to the applicant any
information it considers would wholly or partly lead it
to affirm the decision
under review, ensuring as far as practicable that the applicant understands its
relevance and has an opportunity
• the applicant may request that the relevant Department provide a copy
of any written material that it has given or produced
to the Tribunal for the
purpose of the review and, subject to exceptions, must be given that
information;
• the Tribunal must observe certain procedures relating to giving
information in notices and directions, non-disclosure obligations
arising from
certain information, and methods it may use to give a document to a
1.18 In relation to this approach, the explanatory memorandum states:
Section 367E is intended to operate in a similar way to existing section
357A, which is the broadly equivalent provision in Division
4. However, section
367E would cover a number of additional matters, such as the requirement for the
Tribunal to put an applicant
on notice of, and give the applicant an opportunity
to present their case in relation to, certain issues (those being the
issues’ covered by an invitation given to an applicant
under subsection 367F(1)).
The exhaustive statement of the natural justice hearing rule set out at
section 367E would not apply to all aspects of a Tribunal
review. In particular,
as explained in relation to section 367F below, it would not apply to how the
Tribunal is to give an applicant
an opportunity to present their case in
relation to issues that are
covered by an invitation issued under
section 367F (for example, whether the applicant satisfies a criterion for a
the criterion on which the decision to refuse the visa
was based, if the Tribunal considers that the applicant’s satisfaction
the other criterion is an issue in the
proceeding).
Scrutiny Digest 2 of 2024,
the committee commented on existing
section 357A of the Migration Act, which provides an exhaustive statement of
natural justice for
reviewable migration and protection decisions by the
The committee notes that the Migration Act sets out a procedural code for the
making of migration and protection decisions which apply
to the various stages
of decision-making, including at the current Administrative Appeals Tribunal.
The committee considers, from
a scrutiny perspective, that reliance on such a
procedural code will necessarily result in unfairness in some cases as this
the requirement for the Tribunal to consider what fairness requires in
the circumstances of each case.
Further, the committee notes that the codification of the natural justice
hearing rule was intended to provide clarity to applicants.
However, as the
meaning of the procedural code has been the subject of extensive litigation, it
is unclear to the committee whether
the gains in clarity and certainty thought
to be associated with codification have been realised in practice, and therefore
there is sufficient justification for their use in this context given
the risk that the code may result in procedural unfairness
1.20 The committee here reiterates its previous concerns about the use of
procedural codes that seek to exhaustively set out the requirements
justice for applications to be reviewed on the papers under proposed section
1.21 The prescriptive application of procedural codes setting out natural
justice requirements can give rise to unfairness that would
be otherwise
inconsistent with common law principles of procedural fairness. The committee
notes, for example, that the Tribunal
is not obliged to disclose information
that is not specifically about the applicant or another person and that is just
of persons to which the applicant or that other person
Where it impliedly
conditions the exercise of statutory powers as a matter of common law principles
of statutory interpretation,
procedural fairness will
require a decision-maker to disclose information about considerations personal
to an affected person. At times, however, procedural
fairness will require more
general information – not specific to the affected person –to be
provided to an applicant
where deemed significant by the decision-maker but
where its use would not reasonably be expected by the affected
1.22 Finally, it is noted that, unlike in subsection 357A(3) of the Migration
Act, section 367E would not require the Tribunal to
act in a fair and
just manner in applying the procedural requirements set out in Division
While stating that proposed
section 367E is intended to operate in a similar way to existing section 357A,
the explanatory memorandum
does not adequately identify why an equivalent
requirement has not been included.
1.23 In light of the above and considering the committee comments in
Scrutiny Digest 2 of 2024
, the committee requests the minister’s
detailed advice as to:
why it is appropriate for reviewable migration decisions in
relation to a decision to grant a student visa to be determined as an
application to be reviewed on the papers;
whether the bill could be amended to require that the
Administrative Review Tribunal must act in a fair and just manner when applying
proposed Division 4A.
The committee’s consideration of this matter is assisted if the
minister’s response addresses the volume of student visa
applications to which the proposed requirement would apply, the proportion of
review decisions being remitted to the primary
decision maker, and the adequacy
of existing case management processes.
1.24 The committee otherwise draws its scrutiny concerns to the attention
of senators and leaves to the Senate as a whole the appropriateness
continuing implementation of codes of procedure for the making of decisions to
be reviewed on the papers.
Delegated legislation modifying or exempting primary
legislation (Henry
1.25 Schedule 1, item 16, proposed section 367D of the Migration Act
specifies various provisions in the ART Act, relating to the
powers to manage proceedings,
that do not apply to applications to be reviewed on the
Paragraph 367D(h) allows
for any other provision of the ART Act to be prescribed by the regulations. In
effect, the proposed paragraph
would enable the regulations to disapply or
modify the operation of the ART Act.
1.26 In relation to proposed paragraph 367(h), the explanatory memorandum
Paragraph 367D(h) would enable regulations to prescribe other provisions of
the ART Act that would not apply in relation to applications
to be reviewed on
the papers. It is anticipated that regulations would be made for this purpose
only to address any unanticipated
interactions between new Division 4A of the
Migration Act and the ART
1.27 Provisions enabling delegated legislation to modify the operation of
primary legislation are akin to Henry VIII clauses, which
authorise delegated
legislation to make substantive amendments to primary legislation (generally the
relevant parent statute). The
committee has significant scrutiny concerns with
Henry VIII-type clauses, as such clauses impact on the level of parliamentary
and may subvert the appropriate relationship between the Parliament and
the Executive. Consequently, the committee expects a sound
justification to be
included in the explanatory memorandum for the use of any clauses that allow
delegated legislation to modify
the operation of primary legislation.
1.28 The committee notes that the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC), in
its Review of the Legislative Framework for Corporations
and Financial Services
Regulation, has set out some helpful guidance as to when delegated legislation
should be permitted to override
or modify the operation of an Act. The review
states that it should only be done in exceptional circumstances where there is a
need or benefit in doing so, the empowering provision is as circumscribed
as possible, and there are sufficient safeguards in place
to reflect the
significance of the power. The ALRC also set out some criteria in relation to
when it may be appropriate to delegate
a power of exclusion or
1.29 It is of some concern to the committee that the information provided in
the explanatory memorandum does not give meaningful consideration
to appropriate
safeguards or expressly acknowledge the proposed provision as akin to a Henry
VIII clause. It is, for example, unclear
to the committee whether the proposed
regulation-making power would be subject to substantive or procedural conditions
limiting its
scope or requiring prior consideration or satisfaction of certain
matters (including consultation with relevant stakeholders) or
Parliamentary scrutiny procedures beyond those contemplated in the
Legislation Act 2003
(e.g. disallowance and sunsetting).
1.30 Accordingly, the committee requests the minister’s advice as
why it is appropriate to include proposed paragraph 367D(h) that
allows for the operation of the primary legislation to be modified;
whether there are adequate legislative safeguards in place to
ensure that proposed paragraph 367D(h) will be used appropriately.
Significant matters in delegated
legislation
Retrospective
application
1.31 The committee considers that significant matters should be included in
primary legislation unless a sound justification for the
use of delegated
legislation is provided. Prescribing kinds of applications for review of a
reviewable migration decision that relate
to a temporary visa as an application
to be reviewed on the papers is one such
1.32 In this instance, the explanatory memorandum states:
Paragraph 367C(2)(b) would enable regulations to specify kinds of
applications for review of decisions relating to a temporary visa
which are to
be treated as applications to be reviewed on the papers for the purposes of
Division 4A. A decision ‘relating
to’ a temporary visa includes a
decision to refuse to grant, or a decision to cancel, a temporary visa
The Regulations set out individual visa subclasses and the criteria for the
granting of visas. It is appropriate for additional kinds
of applications for
review of decisions relating to temporary visa to be prescribed in regulations,
rather than in primary legislation,
so that any prescribed visa types can be
kept in alignment with future changes to the Regulations. Any regulations made
regulation-making power in new paragraph 367C(2)(b) would be
disallowable.
1.33 While noting this explanation, the committee has generally not accepted
a desire for administrative flexibility to be a sufficient
justification, of
itself, for leaving significant matters to delegated legislation. The committee
notes that allowing that prescribing
the kinds of applications that are to be
treated as an application to be reviewed on the papers in regulations may
greatly impact
the quality of procedural fairness to which affected applicants
are entitled by law.
1.34 As discussed above, certain procedural rights under the ART Act are
expressly disapplied for applications to be reviewed on the
papers under
proposed Division 4A of the Migration Act. Accordingly, proposed paragraph
367C(b) would enable regulations to greatly
expand the scope of migration
decision review applications for which an oral hearing is not required and for
which procedural fairness
requirements are exhaustively stated within Division
4A; with any such expansion only somewhat limited with respect to applications
concerning decisions about temporary visas.
1.35 The ALRC in its Review of the Legislative Framework for Corporations and
Financial Services Regulation, stated that matters which
should be dealt with in
primary legislation include procedural matters that are the essence of a
legislative scheme, “for example,
It is unclear to
the committee why at least further high-level guidance in relation to these
matters could not be provided on the
face of the bill.
1.36 The committee also notes that the regulations may prescribe certain
kinds of applications for review of temporary visa decisions
(or circumstances
relating to those applications) that were made to the Tribunal before the
regulations have commenced.
would mean that certain types of applications already made to the Tribunal
before commencement of the regulations would be automatically
taken to be
applications to be reviewed on the papers.
1.37 Retrospective application challenges a basic principle of the rule of
law that laws should only operate prospectively. The committee
therefore has
long-standing scrutiny concerns in relation to provisions which have the effect
of applying retrospectively. These
concerns will be particularly heightened if
the legislation will, or might, have a detrimental effect on individuals.
1.38 Generally, where proposed legislation will have a retrospective effect,
the committee expects that the explanatory materials
will set out the reasons
why retrospectivity is sought, whether any persons are likely to be adversely
affected and the extent to
which their interests are likely to be affected. If
an individual's interests will, or may, be affected by the retrospective
application
of a provision, the explanatory memorandum should set out the
exceptional circumstances that nevertheless justify the use of retrospectivity.
In this instance, the explanatory memorandum states that:
In accordance with subsection 367C(4), regulations made for the purposes of
paragraph 367C(2)(b) would be able to prescribe kinds
of applications made
to the Tribunal before, on, or after the commencement of the regulations. This
would enable, for example, regulations
to have the effect that an application
for review of a decision relating to a specified kind of temporary visa, which
has already
been made to the Tribunal but in relation to which the Tribunal has
not yet been constituted, is to be reviewed on the papers. The
retroactive
application of regulations is appropriate to ensure the Tribunal can apply
consistent procedures to reviews of the same
1.39 It is concerning to the committee that any retrospective variation of
the status of an application to one to be reviewed on the
papers would take
place without any consideration of the individual circumstances of each
application. In this sense, although the
changes are procedural rather than
substantive in nature, they are apt to adversely affect substantive rights to
the extent that
they may lessen what procedural fairness would otherwise have
required in the particular circumstances.
1.40 The High Court of Australia has underscored the significance of the
reasonable expectations of the public when assessing the
retrospective operation
‘...the reason for regarding retrospective law making as unjust is that
it disappoints the justified expectations of those who,
in acting, have relied
on the assumption that the legal consequences of their acts will be determined
by the known state of the law
established at the time of their
1.41 In this sense, the procedural consequences of the status of a review
application that has already been made being changed retrospectively
one to be reviewed on the papers – carries a real risk of diminishing
expected standards of fairness and public
confidence in the ART and, indeed, the
rule of law.
1.42 In light of the above, the committee requests the minister’s
detailed advice as to:
why it is considered necessary and appropriate to leave the
categories of temporary visa review applications that may be prescribed
applications to be reviewed on the papers under paragraph 367C(2)(b) to
regulations; and
why it is appropriate for regulations made under paragraph
367C(2)(b) to apply retrospectively and whether any persons are likely
detrimentally affected by such application.
This entry can be cited as:
Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills, Administrative Review
Tribunal and Other Legislation
Amendment Bill 2025,
Scrutiny Digest 6 of
; [2025] AUSStaCSBSD 64.
Schedule 1, item 3, proposed
subsection 106(6). The committee draws senators’ attention to these
provisions pursuant to Senate
standing order 24(1)(a)(iii).
Administrative Review
Tribunal Act 2024
Explanatory memorandum,
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZSSJ
(2016) 259 CLR 180.
See generally
Australia Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1963] HCA 41
Administrative Review
Tribunal Bill 2023
, explanatory memorandum p. 73.
Administrative Review
Tribunal Act 2024
subsections 9(d)
(e). These are the tribunal must
pursue an independent mechanism of review that is just and fair and improves the
transparency and
quality of government decision-making.
See for example,
for immigration and Citizenship v SZMDS
240 CLR 611.
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
159 CLR 550
Schedule 1, item 16. The
committee draws senators’ attention to these provisions pursuant to Senate
standing orders 24(1)(a)(i)
and 24(1)(a)(iii).
Schedule 1, item 16,
proposed paragraph 367C(2)(a).
Schedule 1, item 16,
proposed paragraph 367C(2)(b).
Explanatory memorandum,
Schedule 1, item 16,
proposed section 367F.
Schedule 1, item 16,
proposed section 367G.
Schedule 1, item 16,
proposed section 367J.
Schedule 1, item 16,
proposed paragraph 367E(4);
Migration Act 1958
Explanatory memorandum,
Senate Standing Committee
for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Digest 2 of 2024
, pp. 16-17.
Schedule 1, item 16,
proposed paragraph 367G(2)(a).
See, for example,
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural affairs; Ex parte Miah
Migration Act 1958
subsection 357A(3).
Schedule 1, item 16,
proposed subsection 367D(h). The committee draws senators’ attention to
this provision pursuant to Senate
standing order 24(1)(a)(iv).
These include
Administrative Review Tribunal Act
sections 43
, paragraph 63(2)(a),
sections 80
section 106.
Proposed subsection
Explanatory memorandum,
Australian Law Reform
Commission, Report 141,
Confronting
Complexity: Reforming Corporations and Financial Services Legislation
(November 2023), Appendix D, pp. 298–301.
Schedule 1, item 16,
proposed subsections 367C(2), (4)–(5). The committee draws senators’
attention to this provision
pursuant to Senate standing order 24(1)(a)(i) and
24(1)(a)(iv).
Schedule 1, item 16,
proposed paragraph 367C(2)(b).
Explanatory memorandum,
Australian Law Reform
Commission, Report 141,
Confronting
Complexity: Reforming Corporations and Financial Services Legislation
(November 2023), Appendix D, pp. 295.
Proposed subsection
Explanatory memorandum,
Stephens v R
[2022] HCA 31
273 CLR 635
, [33]–[34] per Keane, Gordon, Edelman and Gleeson JJ, citing H
The Concept of Law
edition, Oxford University
Press, 2012, p. 276.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (166 KB)
PDF format (155 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter