URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJStaCPW/2019/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:09:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Parliamentary Joint Standing Committee on Public Works (46th Parliament) --- "Shoalwater Bay Training Area Remediation Project, Queensland - PP 528/2019" [2019] AUPJStaCPW 13 (2 December 2019)
Conduct of the inquiry
Need for the works
Options considered
Scope of the works
Proposed Work Elements
Community consultation
Cost of the works
Committee comment
5. Navy Capability Infrastructure
Sub-program
5.1 The Department of Defence (Defence) seeks approval from the Committee to
proceed with the Navy Capability Infrastructure Sub-program:
Facilities and
Infrastructure to Support New Navy Capabilities.
5.2 The 2016 Defence White Paper noted the Government’s commitment to
‘build a strong and sustainable naval shipbuilding
As part of this long-term plan,
shipbuilding will commence with construction in Australia of Offshore Patrol
Vessels from 2018 and
Hunter Class Frigates from
The shipbuilding capacity
will be consolidated at the Australian Naval Infrastructure’s Osborne
Naval Shipyard (SA), and at
the Australian Marine Complex at Henderson
5.3 The proposed works will provide fit for purpose facilities and
infrastructure to support the introduction into service of the
nine Hunter Class
Frigates and the 12 Arafura Class Offshore Patrol Vessels (OPV) at nine
locations in Australia, and support the
Navy Training Pipeline Simulation
Requirements at HMAS Stirling
5.4 The estimated cost of the project is $1.8 billion (excluding GST).
5.5 The project was referred to the Committee on 10 September 2019.
5.6 Subject to Parliamentary approval, construction activities are expected
to commence in 2020 and be completed by early 2027.
Conduct of the
5.7 Following referral, the inquiry was publicised on the Committee’s
website and via media release.
5.8 The Committee received eight submissions and two confidential
submissions. A list of submissions can be found at Appendix A.
5.9 On 20 November 2019, the Committee conducted a site inspection at HMAS
, public and in-camera hearings. A transcript of the public
hearing is available from the Committee’s website.
Need for the works
5.10 The project will support the two new capabilities, the Hunter Class
Frigates and the Offshore Patrol Vessels, which will replace
the Anzac class
Frigates and the Armidale Class Patrol Boat in an extended transition up to the
5.11 Defence told the Committee that the incoming fleet of Hunter Class
Frigates will:
...provide the Australian Defence Force with the highest levels of lethality and
deterrence that Australia’s major surface
combatants need during times of
global uncertainty...The Frigates will be able to conduct missions independently
or as part of a
task group, and will have sufficient range and endurance to
effectively.
5.12 Defence
noted that the Hunter Class Frigates ‘will also have the flexibility to
support humanitarian assistance and disaster
5.13 With regards to the 12 Arafura Class OPV, Defence stated that the Patrol
Vessels will:
...undertake constabulary missions, maritime patrol and response duties. State
of the art sensors and command and communications
systems will enable the
vessels to operate alongside Australian Border Force vessels, other Australian
Defence Force units and regional
partners. The design of these vessels will
support specialist mission packages, such as a maritime tactical unmanned aerial
The range and associated operational endurance of the Arafura Class
Offshore Patrol Vessels will permit support of most Australian
Defence Force
operations.
support the introduction of these new capabilities, Defence undertook:
...comprehensive master planning, site investigations, stakeholder consultation,
whole-of-life cost analysis and design development
during the development phase
of the project to establish the capital facilities and infrastructure works
required to support the
introduction into service and sustainment of these
capabilities.
the public hearing Defence explained:
The key drivers for the projects are: the berthing requirements for the new,
larger ships; the increased crewing numbers for these
ships; the implications of
the Naval Shipbuilding Plan for training, logistics and maintenance; the
facilities required to effectively
support the integration of combat systems for
these capabilities; and the opportunities for integrating the requirements. The
deficiencies identified in existing facilities and infrastructures
include: wharf structures and services that cannot accommodate
the increased
size or number of ships proposed at HMAS Stirling, HMAS Coonawarra and HMAS
Cairns; a lack of capacity and operational
support facilities for ship-specific
training, maintenance and logistics to meet the significantly increased
requirements of the
new capabilities; and a lack of capacity in domestic support
facilities, such as accommodation, to support the increased crew
5.16 Defence
explained in their submission how these key drivers and deficiencies provided a
rationale for this project to be undertaken
in a program approach, where the
overall facilities requirements would be undertaken as a single program of
5.17 Defence further stated that the ‘program approach...has been
designed to optimise value for money and capability
5.18 The program approach categorised the elements of the project into
functional groups:
1 Maritime Structures – wharves and associated structures and services
required to support the berthing of vessels
2 Operational Support Facilities - a range of support functions and address
requirements for the remote monitoring of berthed vessels
3 Ship Zero Facilities – proposed facilities will accommodate
Class-specific training, sustainment, logistics, engineering and
management of
the evolution of these complex capabilities
4 Shipbuilding Facilities - support the mature requirements of the Ship Build
Program Office, and Crew Zero
5 Domestic Support Facilities – include facilities for living in
accommodation, recreation and fitness, messing and medical
6 Engineering Services – required to be upgraded or installed at new
development sites to support the new
capabilities.
5.19 The project is taking place at nine locations around Australia:
▪ WA - HMAS
Palmer Barracks, Henderson
▪ NT - HMAS
Coonawarra,
RAAF Darwin
▪ QLD - HMAS
▪ SA – St Kilda Transmitting Station, Osborne Naval
Options considered
5.20 Defence described in their submission the range of design options for
each of the functional groups which were considered.
5.21 They noted that the considerations included in some cases refurbishment,
upgrading of existing facilities or building new facilities.
In the case of
marine structures, consideration was given to providing flexibility for future
capability requirements.
5.22 Where new facilities are required, Defence ensured that there were no
suitable or surplus facilities
Where Defence is
required to purchase land for new facilities, they will ensure that the land is
located appropriately to complement
Scope of the works
5.23 The proposed facilities and infrastructure involve new works and
refurbishment or upgrading of existing facilities and infrastructure
the proposed locations.
Proposed Work
5.24 There are 22 work elements with two being included as below the line
items. The proposed scope of the project are listed by location
− Element 1 -Maritime Structures – extension of the Parkes and
Oxley Wharves and provision of shore power
− Element 2 - Operational Support Facilities – construction and
expansion of maintenance and logistics support facilities
− Element 3 - Ship Zero Facilities – construction of a new
training precinct
− Element 4 - Domestic Support Facilities - construction of medium
density living in accommodation and upgrades to existing
− Element 5 - Engineering Services Infrastructure – extend
existing services to support new, upgraded or refurbished facilities.
− Element 6 - Operational Support Facilities – construction of
crew support areas
− Element 7 - Ship Zero Facilities – construction of a capability
− Element 8 – Shipbuild Program Facilities - below the line
− Element 9 - Engineering Services Infrastructure – new
engineering services infrastructure for each facility.
Palmer Barracks
− Element 10 - Operational Support Facilities – below the line
− Element 11 -Maritime Structures – dredging, wharf works and
provisions of services to support berthing.
− Element 12 - Operational Support Facilities – construction of
support facilities
− Element 13 - Engineering Services Infrastructure – extend
existing services to support new, upgraded or refurbished
facilities.
RAAF Darwin
− Element 14 - Operational Support Facilities – construction of
new explosive ordnance storage building
− Element 15 -Maritime Structures – construction of a new wharf
and upgrade and extension of existing wharf services.
− Element 16 - Operational Support Facilities – construction of
new facilities and upgrade of existing facilities
− Element 17 – Cadet Facility – demolition of existing
facilities and new facilities constructed
− Element 18 - Engineering Services Infrastructure – extend
existing services to support new, upgraded or refurbished
facilities.
Cairns – other locations
− Element 19 - Operational Support Facilities – construction of
new explosive ordnance facilities and upgrade of existing
− Element 20 – Shipbuild Program Facilities - construction of
new facilities
− Element 21 - Engineering Services Infrastructure – new
engineering services infrastructure for the new development.
St Kilda Transmitting Station
− Element 22 – Shipbuild Program Facilities - construction of a
land based test site.
5.25 These work elements will be undertaken to support the location of the
▪ The fleet of Hunter Class Frigates will be homeported at HMAS
Stirling (WA) and at the Garden Island Defence Precinct
▪ The fleet of Arafura Class Offshore Patrol Vessels will be homeported
(NT) and HMAS
5.26 Defence also noted that they intend to acquire and develop properties at
Henderson (WA), in the Cairns area, and at Osborne
consultation
5.27 In its submission to the Committee, Defence stated it had conducted a
wide range of consultations with local residents and other
stakeholders, both external and internal.
5.28 Defence advised that there was general support for the project from the
consultation process but advised that there were two
issues raised during the
consultation which were specific to
5.29 The first issue related to the demolition of a particular building at
which the Cairns Navy League considered had heritage value.
Defence responded that they are assessing whether the building has any
5.30 The second issue related to traffic in the Rockingham area, particularly
the traffic to and from HMAS
. The Mayor of the City of
Rockingham indicated a concern about the traffic but also noted that the concern
is related to the level
of classification of the road, which has been raised
with the WA Government.
Sammels also provided a letter of support for the project to the
5.31 Defence noted that during the consultation for the facility at St Kilda,
a significant percentage of the local population attended.
The local population
were interested in whether there would be any provision of sewage lines as part
of the project and Defence indicated
that they have provided a response for
5.32 The Committee received a range of letters of support for the
Cost of the works
5.33 The Navy Capability Infrastructure Sub-program has an estimated cost of
$1.8 billion, exclusive of GST.
5.34 Defence provided further details on project costings in its confidential
submission and during an in-camera hearing.
5.35 The Committee is satisfied that the costings for the project provided to
it have been adequately assessed by the proponent entity.
Committee comment
5.36 The Navy Capability Infrastructure Sub-program is an ambitious program
of works that aims to support the introduction of the
new capabilities, the
Hunter Class Frigates and the Armidale Class Offshore Patrol Vehicles.
5.37 The Committee was interested to hear the relationship between this
project and the Naval Shipbuilding Plan. The ongoing projects
to build the new
capabilities, while outside the remit of the Committee, will add capacity to the
areas of Osborne in South Australia
and Henderson in Western Australia and the
Committee is pleased to see the work that Defence is doing to ensure in this
5.38 In relation to the size of the project and the program based approach
which has been taken by Defence, the Committee was pleased
to hear that the
program will be split into 11 contracts. The opportunity for a wide range of
local builders to the area, including
tier 2, to be able to be involved in the
project is encouraging.
5.39 The community consultation undertaken for this project over the nine
locations was extensive and the Committee is encouraged
by the number of letters
of support it received in support of the project.
5.40 The Committee did not identify any issues of concern with the proposal
and is satisfied that the project has merit in terms of
need, scope and
5.41 Having regard to its role and responsibilities contained in the
Public Works Committee Act 1969
the Committee is of the view that this
project signifies value for money for the Commonwealth and constitutes a project
fit for purpose, having regard to the established need.
Recommendation 5
5.42 The Committee recommends that the House of Representatives resolve,
pursuant to
Section 18(7)
Public Works Committee Act 1969
is expedient to carry out the following proposed works: Navy Capability
Infrastructure Sub-Program.
5.43 Proponent entities must notify the Committee of any changes to the
project scope, time, cost, function or design. The Committee
also requires that
a post-implementation report be provided within three months of a project
completion. A report template can be
found on the Committee’s website.
Hon Dr John McVeigh MP
Department of Defence,
Defence White Paper
, 2016, p. 114.
Department of Defence,
Defence White Paper
, 2016, p. 21.
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1, p. 2.
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Brigadier Matt Galton,
Director-General, Capital Facilities and Infrastructure, Department of Defence,
Transcript of evidence,
20 November 2019, p. 1.
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1.1
, pp. 13-20
Defence note that works for
Garden Island will be the subject of a future referral to the PWC. Department of
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1.1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1.1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1.1
Mr Barry Sammels,
Submission 8
Lieutenant Colonel Peter
Sims, Project Director, Navy Capability Infrastructure Sub-Program,
Transcript of Evidence,
20 November 2019, p. 2.
The Hon Warren Entsch MP,
Submission 2
, Industry Capability Network NT,
Submission 3
of Cockburn,
Submission 4
, Mr Bob Manning,
Submission 5
Submission 6
, Freemantle Chamber of Commerce,
Mr Barry Sammels,
Submission 8.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (169 KB)
PDF format (573 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter