URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBSD/2025/72.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:14:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Legislation Amendment (Miscellaneous Measures No. 1) Bill 2025 - Initial Scrutiny [2025] AUSStaCSBSD 72 (29 October 2025)
Health Legislation Amendment (Miscellaneous Measures No. 1) Bill 2025213
Broad discretionary powers
Significant matters in delegated legislation
Incorporation of external materials as existing from time to time214
Health Legislation
Amendment (Miscellaneous Measures No. 1) Bill
This bill introduces amendments to a variety of Acts relating to the Health
portfolio, including to:
• Amend the
Health Insurance Act 1973
to provide for the
automation of Medicare provider numbers; remedy minor issues; and amend the
Bonded Medical Program in relation
to repayment of education costs.
• Amend the
Private Health Insurance Act 2007
to ensure the
validity of registration and claims processes for the Private Health Insurance
Rebate Premiums Reduction Scheme.
• Amend the
Health Insurance Legislation Amendment (Assignment of
Medicare Benefits) Act 2024
to delay the commencement of assignment of
Medicare benefits arrangements.
• Make consequential amendments to the
Australian Immunisation
Register Act 2015
Health, Disability and Ageing
House of Representatives on 4 September 2025
Bill status
Before the Senate
Broad discretionary
Significant matters in delegated
legislation
Incorporation of external
materials as existing from time to
1.245 Schedule 1 of the bill proposes to amend the
Health Insurance Act
to alter the method by which Medicare provider numbers are allocated.
Specifically, Schedule 1 seeks to establish a regime that would
enable the Chief
Executive Medicare to approve the use of a computer program to allocate provider
numbers. In addition to the use
of computer programs, several decisions relating
to the allocation of provider numbers are exercisable directly by the Chief
Medicare. A Medicare provider number is required to make claims under
both the Medicare Benefits Schedule and the Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme and,
as such, the allocation of a provider number can impact a medical
practitioner’s ability to practice and
render eligible Medicare
1.246 The substantive provisions relating to the new automation of provider
numbers system are contained within proposed
, which would be inserted
Health Insurance Act 1973
by item 2 of Schedule 1 to the bill.
This includes proposed sections 22J and 22K, which relate to the revocation or
suspension of
the allocation of a provider number respectively.
1.247 Proposed subsection 22J(1) requires the Chief Executive Medicare to
revoke the allocation of a provider number to a person in
the circumstances
specified in a legislative instrument made under subsection 22J(5). Notification
of a revocation decision made
under subsection (1) would be required under
subsection (4) and the decision itself may be subject to reconsideration under
section 22T. However, the bill appears to provide no explicit limits or
guidance on what circumstances may be specified within a
subsection (5)
instrument.
1.248 Where a bill includes significant matters in delegated legislation, the
committee expects the explanatory memorandum for the
bill to address why it is
appropriate to include the relevant matters in delegated legislation. The
committee also expects that there
is sufficient guidance on the face of the
primary legislation to appropriately limit the matters that are being left to
legislation. The committee's view is that significant matters should
be included in primary legislation unless a sound justification
for the use of
delegated legislation is provided.
1.249 In this instance, the explanatory memorandum provides no justification
for the use of delegated legislation and does not provide
any explicit guidance
on the use of the power or point to any such guidance on the face of the bill.
Instead, the explanatory memorandum
provides general guidance on revocations,
stating that:
Revocation is generally used where the health professional will definitely
not ever be returning to the place of practice, or where
Services Australia
becomes aware the health professional was not actually entitled to the original
MPN allocation, for example if
Services Australia becomes aware there was
incorrect information in the
application.
1.250 While the committee welcomes this guidance, it is not clear to the
committee why these factors could not have been included
on the face of the
bill. Moreover, the committee considers that it would have been more appropriate
to include a justification for
the reliance on delegated legislation,
particularly given the significant effect that revocation of a provider number
may have on
medical practitioners.
1.251 Subsection 22J(3) additionally provides that the Chief Executive
Medicare may revoke the allocation of a provider number to
a person for a place
of practice if the Chief Executive Medicare is satisfied that it would be
appropriate in all the circumstances
to do so. This decision is subject to the
same notification and reconsideration provisions noted above.
1.252 The committee retains a long-standing scrutiny concern regarding
provisions that give administrators seemingly ill-defined or
wide-ranging
powers. In this case, the committee considers that the broad language contained
within proposed subsection 22J(3) render
it unclear when the Chief Executive
Medicare would be authorised to exercise their suspension powers.
1.253 The explanatory memorandum notes:
Under subsection 22J(3), the CEM may also revoke a MPN if the CEM is
satisfied that it would be appropriate in all the circumstances
to do so. This
may include where, for example, after allocation a MPN to a person for a place
of practice, the CEM becomes aware
that information in the application was
incorrect and the health professional should not have been allocated the
provider number.
1.254 While welcoming this guidance, the Committee considers that it would
have been more appropriate to include such guidance on
the face of the bill. The
committee also notes that the explanatory memorandum does not include any
justification for providing the
Chief Executive Medicare with such a broad
discretionary power nor does the explanatory memorandum discuss whether there
constraints on the exercise of the Chief Executive Medicare’s
power located outside the bill.
1.255 Proposed subsection 22K(1) requires the Chief Executive Medicare to
suspend the allocation of a provider number upon request
of the holder of the
number or the applicant for the allocation of the number. Additionally, proposed
subsection 22K(2) requires
the Chief Executive Medicare to suspend the
allocation of a provider number in the circumstances specified in an instrument
under proposed subsection 22K(6). As with the delegated legislation making
power set out under section 22J, there are no limits or
guidance set out on the
face of the bill that relate to the exercise of the subsection 22K(6)
legislation making power, although
the power is subject to notification and
reconsideration requirements.
1.256 As noted above, the committee's view is that significant matters should
be included in primary legislation unless a sound justification
for the use of
delegated legislation is provided. In this instance, the explanatory memorandum
Subsection 22K(2) provides that the CEM must, in writing, suspend the
allocation of a provider number in the circumstances specified
in a legislative
instrument made under subsection 22K(6). This could include where a MPN has been
allocated to an ineligible health
professional from a non-Ahpra cohort. Upon
identifying their ineligibility, Services Australia would notify the applicant
decision to suspend the MPN and invite them to provide additional
evidence to support their eligibility and a decision to lift the
suspension of
their MPN. As the applicant may be able to provide evidence to support their
eligibility, that would not be readily
available to Services Australia through
other means, suspension could be more appropriate in these circumstances than
revocation.
1.257 The committee welcomes this detailed guidance. However, as with
proposed subsection 22J(5), it is not clear to the committee
why similar
guidance could not be included on the face of the bill. In addition, there is
again no justification provided for the
reliance on delegated legislation making
powers in this instance.
1.258 Subsection 22K(3) provides that the Chief Executive Medicare may
suspend the allocation of a provider number to a person for
a place of practice
if the Chief Executive Medicare is satisfied that it would be appropriate in all
the circumstances to do so.
This power is also subject to notification and
reconsideration requirements.
1.259 The explanatory memorandum notes:
Subsection 22K(3) provides that the CEM may suspend the allocation of a
provider number if the CEM is satisfied that it would be appropriate
circumstances to do so. This could include where a health professional with a
current Ahpra registration has had location
restrictions applied to their
eligibility for a MPN for a period of time, thereby rendering them ineligible
for the MPN they were
previously issued associated with the restricted
location/s. This could aid in preventing the use of this MPN to make fraudulent
Medicare benefits claims for the period of time that the locations restrictions
are in place.
The ability for the CEM to suspend the allocation of a MPN other than at the
request of the holder of the MPN can also assist to minimise
the risk of
accidental or malicious misuse of the provider number in association with
claiming for Medicare
1.260 While noting this guidance, the committee is again concerned about the
lack of any explicit justification for the reliance on
broad discretionary
powers, as well as the lack of commentary on any limitations or guidance on the
use of those powers and the lack
of any limitations or guidance on the face of
1.261 The committee’s concerns in relation to the suspension and
revocation powers set out in proposed sections 22J and 22K
are exacerbated by
proposed section 22V in the bill. Proposed section 22V would provide that any
instrument made under proposed
, including instruments made under
proposed subsections 22J(5) and 22K(6), may make provision in relation to a
matter by applying,
adopting or incorporating, any matter contained in an
instrument or other writing as in force or existing from time to time.
1.262 Where provisions in a bill allow the incorporation of legislative
provisions by reference to other documents, this raises the
prospect of changes
being made to the law in the absence of parliamentary scrutiny. Further, the
incorporation of external material
can create uncertainty in the law and, if
relevant information is not publicly available, may mean that members of the
not able to freely and readily access the terms of the law. The
committee’s consistent scrutiny view is that where material
incorporated by reference into the law it should be freely and readily available
to all those who may be interested in the law.
The committee also considers that
any proposal to allow the incorporation of legislative provisions by reference
to other documents
should be comprehensively justified in the bill’s
explanatory memorandum. In this instance, the explanatory memorandum contains
justification, merely re-stating the effect of the
1.263 In light of the above, the committee requests the minister’s
advice as to:
whether guidance can be included on the face of the bill in
relation to the delegated legislation making powers set out at proposed
subsection 22J(5) and subsection 22K(6);
whether there are any limits or constraints on the exercise of the
broad discretionary powers set out at subsection 22J(3) and subsection
and if so, where these constraints are located;
if there are no such constraints, whether guidance can be included
on the face of the bill in relation to the proposed broad discretionary
why it is considered both necessary and appropriate to rely on the
use of these delegated legislation making powers and broad discretionary
why it is considered necessary and appropriate to allow the
incorporation of legislative provisions by reference to other documents
whether incorporated material will be made freely and readily available to all
persons interested in the law, including individuals
not in the industries
This entry can be cited as:
Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills, Health Legislation
Amendment (Miscellaneous Measures
No. 1) Bill 2025,
Scrutiny Digest 6 of
; [2025] AUSStaCSBSD 72.
Schedule 1, item 2, proposed
subsection 22J(3) and 22K(3). The committee draws senators’ attention to
these provisions pursuant
to Senate standing orders 24(1)(a)(ii), 24(1)(a)(iv)
and 24(1)(a)(v).
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (108 KB)
PDF format (110 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter