URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJCHR/2025/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:08:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Report Snapshot [2025] AUPJCHR 24 (27 August 2025)
Report snapshot1
Legislative instruments
In this report the committee has examined the following bills and legislative
instrument for compatibility with human rights. The
committee's full
consideration of legislation commented on in the report is set out in Chapter
Chapter 1: New and continuing matters
Bills introduced 25 March to 31 July 2025
Bills commented on in
Private members or senators' bills that may engage and limit human
Aged Care (Accommodation Payment Security) Levy Amendment Bill
Aged Care and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2025
Seeking Information
Expanding the definition of ‘guardian’
Rights of persons with disability to equal recognition before the
This bill seeks to amend the
Aged Care Act 2024
(Aged Care Act) to
expand the definition of ‘guardian’ by providing that a guardian
also includes a class of persons prescribed
by the rules. Under the Aged Care
Act, guardians are persons authorised to do a thing on behalf of an individual
that may or must
be done by the individual under, or for the purposes of, the
Aged Care Act. They must also be registered by the System Governor as
‘supporter’ if they request to be registered as a supporter and the
System Governor is satisfied of certain matters.
As the measure has the effect
of expanding who has decision-making authority for an individual, this engages
the rights of persons
with disabilities to equal recognition before the law. The
committee previously commented on the guardian and supporter framework
a person may be registered as a supporter of an individual in
Report 9 of 2024
Report 10 of 2024
. The committee is seeking further
information from the minister in order to assess the compatibility of this
measure with this human
Information sharing
Right to privacy
The bill includes numerous provisions which provide for the sharing, use
and disclosure of personal information. In particular, the
bill provides for
transitional arrangements between the old aged care framework and the new
framework in the Aged Care Act, and this
includes the collection, use and
disclosure of ‘protected information’ (which includes personal
information) within the
meaning of various Acts. The bill also provides for the
disclosure of personal information to state and territory fire authorities
relevant to fire safety. These measures engage and limit the right to
While the measures likely seek legitimate objectives and are rationally
connected to those objectives, some questions remain as to
the proportionality
of the measures with the right to privacy. It is unclear what kind of personal
information may be shared under
these measures and the bill and explanatory
materials do not provide any information as to what safeguards are in place to
the appropriate use and disclosure of personal information. The committee
has previously raised concerns in relation to privacy regarding
information
sharing and disclosure provisions in the
Aged Care Quality and Safety
Commission Act 2018
Report 13 of 2018
Aged Care Act 2024
Report 9 of 2024
Report 10 of 2024
. The committee further considers that
without a foundational assessment of the
Aged Care Act 1997
Social Security Act 1991
Social Security (Administration) Act
, it is difficult to fully assess the privacy implications of the
measure relating to transitional provisions.
The committee recommends that an independent review of the privacy
implications of the information-sharing scheme be undertaken after
a specified
period of operation; that a foundational assessment of the
Social Security
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
undertaken; and that the statement of compatibility be updated to provide a more
fulsome assessment of the compatibility of these
measures with the right to
would be captured by the
measures. The committee draws these human rights
concerns to the attention of the minister and the Parliament.
Appropriation Bills
Seeking Information
Appropriation of money to fund public services
Multiple rights
These three bills seek to appropriate money from the Consolidated Revenue
Fund for a range of services. Proposed government expenditure
to give effect to
particular policies may engage, limit or promote multiple human rights,
including civil and political rights, and
economic, social and cultural rights.
The rights of vulnerable groups, including women, Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people,
people with disability, children and ethnic minorities, may be
engaged where policies have a particular, direct impact on these groups.
However, the statements of compatibility accompanying these bills state that no
rights are engaged.
The committee acknowledges that appropriation bills may present particular
difficulties given their technical and high-level nature,
and as such it may not
be appropriate to assess the human rights compatibility of each individual
measure. However, the committee
considers that the allocation of funds via
appropriation bills is susceptible to a human rights assessment that is directed
questions of compatibility. The committee notes the inclusion of a
'Women's Budget Statement' demonstrates that it is possible to
assess the impact
of appropriations on the rights of specific groups. The committee also considers
that a statement of compatibility
with human rights should address the
compatibility of measures which directly impact human rights and which are not
addressed elsewhere
in legislation, as the appropriation bills may be a key
opportunity for the Parliament to consider the compatibility of the measure
human rights. The committee considers that further information is required to
fully assess the compatibility of the measure,
and is seeking further
information from the Minister for Finance.
Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Bill (No. 1)
Introduced on 25 March 2025, lapsed at dissolution of 47
Appropriation Bill (No. 1) 2025-2026
Introduced on 25 March 2025, lapsed at dissolution of 47
Appropriation Bill (No. 2) 2025-2026
Introduced on 25 March 2025, lapsed at dissolution of 47
Australian Education Legislation Amendment (Prohibiting the
Indoctrination of Children) Bill 2020
Restored to Notice Paper on 23 July 2025
The committee notes that this non-government bill appears to engage and may
limit human rights. Should this bill proceed to further
stages of debate, the
committee may request further information from the legislation proponent as to
the human rights compatibility
of the bill.
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1)
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2)
Seeking Information
ASIO compulsory questioning powers framework and adult questioning
Multiple rights
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1)
seeks to amend the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act
(ASIO Act) to extend, by 18 months, Division 3 of Part III of the
Act, which provides for the compulsory questioning powers framework.
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 2025 (ASIO
Amendment No. 2 bill) seeks to make the compulsory
questioning powers framework
permanent. The committee has previously commented on the compulsory questioning
powers framework when
it was introduced in the ASIO Act in
Report 7 of 2020
Report 9 of 2020
The ASIO Amendment No. 2 bill further seeks to amend the definition of
‘adult questioning matter’ to expand the matters
in which a warrant
may be issued to include: espionage; sabotage; politically motivated violence;
promotion of communal violence;
attacks on Australia’s defence system;
acts of foreign interference; or the protection of Australia’s territorial
border integrity from serious threats.
The measures in these bills engage and may limit multiple human rights,
including the rights to privacy; liberty; freedom of movement;
fair trial;
freedom of expression; rights of persons with disability and children’s
rights. The committee is seeking further
information from the Minister for Home
Affairs in order to assess the compatibility of these measures with these human
Broadcasting Services Amendment (Audio Description) Bill 2019
Restored to Notice Paper 23 July 2025
Commonwealth Workplace Protection Orders Bill 2025
Seeking Information
Impaired decision-making ability
Rights of persons with disability to equal recognition before the
This bill seeks to establish a workplace protection orders scheme to
prevent personal violence against, or with respect to, Commonwealth
workers and
Commonwealth workplaces. The bill would allow a workplace protection order to be
made as a consent order, which may be
made when an application for a final order
is made, the parties to the proceeding have consented to its terms and, if the
court considers
that the respondent has ‘impaired decision-making
ability’, when the respondent is represented by a lawyer, litigation
guardian, or parent or guardian (in relation to children).
The committee notes that it commented on a previous version of this bill in
Report 1 of 2025
that lapsed at the end of the 47th
Parliament. The committee considered that the bill engaged multiple human rights
and contacted
the department in relation to the adequacy of its statement of
compatibility, specifically in relation to the rights of the child
and the right
to a fair hearing. The committee welcomes the more fulsome assessment provided
in the statement of compatibility accompanying
this bill in relation to these
human rights, and considers that its concerns with respect to this matter have
been addressed.
The committee notes that by providing for consent orders to be made against
individuals with impaired decision-making ability, this
measure engages the
rights of persons with disability to equal recognition before the law. The
committee considers further information
is required to assess the compatibility
of this measure with this right, and as such seeks the advice of the Minister
for Home Affairs
in relation to this matter.
Competition and Consumer Amendment (Australian Energy Regulator
Separation) Bill 2025
Constitution
Alteration (Right to Free Speech) 2025
Restored to Notice Paper on 28 July 2025
The committee notes that this non-government bill appears to engage and may
limit human rights. Should this bill proceed to further
stages of debate, the
committee may request further information from the legislation proponent as to
the human rights compatibility
of the bill.
Restored to Notice Paper on 23 July 2025
Crimes Amendment (Repeal Mandatory Minimum Sentences) Bill
Introduced on 26 March 2025, lapsed at dissolution of 47
Restored to Notice Paper on 23 July 2025
Criminal Code Amendment (Using Technology to Generate Child Abuse
Material) Bill 2025
Customs Amendment (Australia-United Arab Emirates Comprehensive Economic
Partnership Agreement Implementation) Bill 2025
Customs Legislation Amendment (Commercial Greyhound Export and Import
Prohibition) Bill 2021
Restored to Notice Paper on 23 July 2025
Customs Tariff Amendment (Australia-United Arab Emirates Comprehensive
Economic Partnership Agreement Implementation) Bill 2025
Defence Housing Australia Amendment Bill 2025
Early Childhood Education and Care (Strengthening Regulation of Early
Education) Bill 2025
Advice to Parliament
Publication of a register of actions taken against providers
Children's rights and right to privacy
This measure seeks to amend the
New Tax System (Family Assistance)
(Administration) Act 1999
to expand the Secretary's discretionary power to
publicise enforcement events and information in relation to sanctions and
suspensions
against early childhood education and care providers on a public
register. The committee notes that the bill (now Act) serves an
purpose of enhancing the Commonwealth’s ability to support the actions of
State and Territory regulators and respond
to serious concerns about the safety
and quality of parts of the early childhood education and care sector.
The committee considers that the public register may help to ensure that
child care providers provide high quality and safe care to
children, and
therefore the measure promotes the rights of the child. However, the committee
considers that expanding the type of
information that may be published about a
provider engages and limits the right to privacy. The committee considers
that the measure
pursues a legitimate objective and the measure is likely to be
effective to achieve the stated objective. However, the committee
considers that
as the measure is not accompanied by adequate safeguards, including access to
review, and noting that there may be
less rights restrictive approaches
available, the measure may not constitute a proportionate limit on the right to
The committee recommends that the government consider undertaking a
foundational review of the human rights compatibility of the
New Tax System
(Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
, including consideration of
whether the Act contains adequate safeguards to ensure that any limitation on
the right to privacy is
permissible.
Powers of entry
Children's rights and the right to privacy
This measure seeks to insert a new provision into the
New Tax System
(Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
which modifies Part 2 of the
Regulatory Powers Act (Standard Provisions) Act 2014.
The measure would
enable an authorised person to enter the premises of a child care service
without the consent of the occupier of
the premises and without a monitoring
warrant, and require the occupier of the premises to provide reasonable
facilities and assistance
for the effective exercise of an authorised person's
powers. The bill departs from the
Regulatory Powers Act (Standard Provisions)
which requires the consent of the occupier or a monitoring warrant
to be issued to authorise entry to the premises. The measure would
certain conditions if entry to the premises is without a monitoring warrant and
without the consent of the occupier.
The committee notes that the purpose of the measure is to ensure that child
care providers comply with the law and provide high quality
and safe child care.
To the extent that the measure achieves this purpose, the measure promotes
children's rights. However, as the
measure applies to in home care services and
would allow authorised persons to enter the premises of these services without a
and without the consent of the occupier, the committee notes that this
measure engages and may limit the right to privacy. The committee
considers that
while protecting the safety of children is an important objective, it remains
unclear whether this constitutes a legitimate
objective in the context of this
specific measure as it has not been clearly demonstrated why the measure is
necessary and why the
current laws are insufficient to achieve the stated
objective. The committee further considers that the accompanying safeguards do
not appear to be sufficient and as such the measure may not constitute a
proportionate limit on the right to privacy.
However, as the bill has now passed, the committee makes no further comment
on the bill.
Electoral Legislation Amendment (Electoral Communications) Bill
This bill is substantially the same as the
Electoral Legislation Amendment
(Electoral Communications) Bill 2024
, which the committee previously considered.
As such, the committee reiterates its previous comments as set out in
Report 11 of 2024
Report 1 of 2025
and notes that should this bill
proceed to further stages of debate, the committee may request further
information from the legislation
proponent as to the human rights compatibility
of the bill.
Electoral Legislation Amendment (Electoral Communications) Bill 2025
This bill is substantially the same as the
Electoral Legislation Amendment
(Electoral Communications) Bill 2024
, which the committee previously considered.
As such, the committee reiterates its previous comments as set out in
Report 11 of 2024
Report 1 of 2025
and notes that should this bill
proceed to further stages of debate, the committee may request further
information from the legislation
proponent as to the human rights compatibility
of the bill.
Electoral Legislation Amendment (Fair Territory Representation) Bill
Restored to Notice Paper on 23 July 2025
Electoral Legislation Amendment (Fairer Contracts and Grants) Bill
Restored to Notice Paper on 23 July 2025
Electoral Legislation Amendment (Lowering the Voting Age) Bill
Restored to Notice Paper on 23 July 2025
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Amendment (Climate
Trigger) Bill 2022
Restored to Notice Paper on 23 July 2025
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Amendment
(Reconsiderations) Bill 2025
Introduced on 25 March 2025, finally passed both Houses on 26 March
Fair Work Amendment (Paid Reproductive Health Leave and Flexible Work
Arrangements) Bill 2025
Introduced on 26 March 2025, lapsed at dissolution of 47
Restored to the Notice Paper on 23 July 2025
Fair Work Amendment (Protecting Penalty and Overtime Rates) Bill
Great Australian Bight (World Heritage Protection) Bill 2025
Restored to Notice Paper on 23 July 2025
Health Insurance (Pathology) (Fees) (Repeal) Bill 2025
Health Legislation Amendment (Improved Medicare Integrity and Other
Measures) Bill 2025
This bill seeks to amend the
Health Insurance Act 1973
(the Act) to
expand the circumstances in which the privilege against self-incrimination is
abrogated. Under the Act, the Professional
Services Review Agency (the Agency)
has the power to compel individuals to produce documents for inspection. An
individual is not
entitled to refuse to produce the documents on the ground that
the production of documents might tend to incriminate them. While
provides for use and derivative use immunities, there are exceptions to the
derivative use immunity. This bill seeks to expand
those exceptions, meaning
that any information, document or other material obtained under the relevant
provision in the Act would
be admissible in proceedings: for offences for
failing to produce documents or give information or for producing false or
documents; before a Committee or the Determining Authority; to
recover an amount that is recoverable as a debt to the Commonwealth
or otherwise
required to be repaid to the Commonwealth; and any other proceedings in relation
to compliance with a requirement under
Part VAA of the Act.
This measure was previously considered by the Senate Standing Committee for
the Scrutiny of Bills (Scrutiny of Bills Committee) in
Digest 2 of 2025
(pp. 26-29) and
Digest 3 of 2025
(pp. 11-13). In its consideration of this
measure, the Scrutiny of Bills Committee raised concerns about the necessity and
appropriateness
of expanding the exceptions to when use and derivative use
immunities apply, and noted that the measure may result in practitioners
required to provide self-incriminating information and documents that are
admissible as evidence against them.
The committee reiterates the concerns raised by the Scrutiny of Bills
Committee and notes that the measure limits the right to a fair
trial insofar as
it abrogates the privilege against self-incrimination. The right to a fair trial
includes the right not to be compelled
to testify against oneself or confess
guilt. Broad exceptions to a derivative use immunity could have significant and
far-reaching
implications for a person's right not to be compelled to testify
against themselves. As a person cannot refuse to produce documents
to the Agency
on the basis that it may tend to incriminate them, there is a risk that the
information obtained may be used to find
other evidence against the person which
could be used against them in other proceedings. The committee considers that
this may have
the practical effect that the person would be compelled to testify
against and incriminate themselves with respect to other proceedings.
committee therefore considers that this measure may not be compatible with the
right to a fair trial, and draws these concerns
to the attention of the minister
and the Parliament.
Higher Education Support Amendment (End Dirty University Partnerships)
Restored to Notice Paper on 23 July 2025
Housing Investment Probity Bill 2024
Restored to Notice Paper on 23 July 2025
Interactive Gambling Amendment (Ban Gambling Ads) Bill 2024
Restored to Notice Paper on 23 July 2025
Landholders Right to Refuse (Gas and Coal) Bill 2015
Restored to Notice Paper on 23 July 2025
Liability for Climate Change Damage (Make the Polluters Pay) Bill
Introduced on 26 March 2025, lapsed at dissolution of 47
Lobbying (Improving Government Honesty and Trust) Bill 2025
Restored to Notice Paper on 23 July 2025
The committee notes that this non-government bill appears to engage and may
limit human rights. Should this bill proceed to further
stages of debate, the
committee may request further information from the legislation proponent as to
the human rights compatibility
of the bill.
National Health Amendment (Cheaper Medicines) Bill 2025
National Housing and Homelessness Plan Bill 2024
Restored to Notice Paper on 23 July 2025
Pacific Banking Guarantee Bill 2025
Parliamentary Business Resources Legislation Amendment (Machinery of
Government Change) Bill 2025
Introduced on 25 March 2025, finally passed both Houses on 26 March
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Public Consultancy and Services
Contracts Bill 2025
Remuneration Tribunal Amendment (There For Public Service, Not Profit)
Restored to Notice Paper on 23 July 2025
Repeal Net Zero Bill 2025
Right to Protest Bill 2025
Restored to Notice Paper on 23 July 2025
Sex Discrimination Amendment (Restoring Biological Definitions) Bill
The committee makes no comment on this bill on the basis that the first
reading was negatived and will therefore not proceed to further
Strengthening Oversight of the National Intelligence Community Bill
This bill is substantially the same as the
Intelligence Services
Legislation Amendment Bill 2023
, which the committee previously considered. As
such, the committee reiterates its previous comments as set out in
Report 8 of 2023
Report 10 of 2023
In particular, this bill seeks to amend the
Criminal Code Act 1995
to introduce an exemption from certain civil and criminal liability for defence
officials for certain ‘computer related conduct’.
The committee
previously noted that exempting persons from civil and criminal liability for
computer related conduct engages and
may limit the right to privacy of a person
in Australia, and consequently may also engage the right to an effective remedy.
The committee
considered that despite the ability of a person who suffered
detriment as a result of the conduct contemplated by the measure to
compensation and other relief from the Commonwealth, as the extent of any
potential interference with the right to privacy was
not clear, it was not
possible to conclude whether the remedies identified would be considered
effective remedies for the purposes
of international human rights law.
The committee notes that the statement of compatibility with human rights
does not identify that the bill may engage the right to
an effective remedy. The
committee further notes that the statement of compatibility does not refer to
the concerns previously raised
by the committee or include the information
provided by the former Attorney-General to the committee with respect
to these matters
Ministerial Responses to Report 10 of 2023)
. The committee
considers that inclusion of this information would have been helpful. The
committee has authorised its secretariat
to correspond with departments
regarding the quality of statements of compatibility. As such, the committee's
secretariat has written
to the department in relation to this matter.
Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Amendment (Frontline Emergency
Service Workers) Bill 2025
Restored to Notice Paper on 23 July 2025
Supply (Parliamentary Departments) Bill (No. 1) 2025-2026
Introduced on 25 March 2025, finally passed both Houses on 26 March
Supply Bill (No. 1) 2025-2026
Introduced on 25 March 2025, finally passed both Houses on 26 March
Supply Bill (No. 2) 2025-2026
Introduced on 25 March 2025, finally passed both Houses on 26 March
Tertiary Education Legislation Amendment (There For Education, Not
Profit) Bill 2025
Restored to Notice Paper on 23 July 2025
Therapeutic Goods Amendment Bill 2025
Treasury Laws Amendment (More Cost of Living Relief) Bill 2025
Introduced on 26 March 2025, finally passed both Houses on 26 March
Treasury Laws Amendment (Payments System Modernisation) Bill
Universities Accord (Cutting Student Debt by 20 Per Cent) Bill
Universities Accord (National Higher Education Code to Prevent and
Respond to Gender-based Violence) (Consequential Amendments) Bill
Universities Accord (National Higher Education Code to Prevent and
Respond to Gender-based Violence) Bill 2025
This bill is substantially the same as the Universities Accord
(National Higher Education Code to Prevent and Respond to Gender-based
Bill 2025, which the committee previously considered in
Report 2 of 2025
. The bill would provide for the
establishment and enforcement of a new National Higher Education Code to Prevent
and Respond to Gender-based
Violence (code) to be made by future legislative
instrument. The code would establish national standards for higher education
in connection with preventing and responding to gender-based violence.
The bill would establish a regulatory framework by which to
monitor and enforce
compliance with the code. By providing for the establishment of a code which may
itself impose requirements on
higher education providers to collect and disclose
information, including potentially personal information, and providing the
with information collection, use and disclosure powers, the bill
engages and may limit the right to privacy.
The committee previously recommended that the bill be amended and the
statement of compatibility be updated to provide a more fulsome
assessment of
the proportionality of the measure with the right to privacy. The committee
notes that the statement of compatibility
with human rights accompanying this
bill has been updated with further information on the collection and disclosure
of personal information,
which addresses one of the committee's previous
recommendations. However, the committee notes that its previous
recommendations to
amend the bill have not been implemented and as such, the
committee retains its concerns regarding the compatibility of the bill
right to privacy. The committee therefore reiterates its previous comments, as
Report 2 of 2025
, that it is not clear that the scheme which
the bill seeks to establish would be sufficiently circumscribed, accompanied by
safeguards, or subject to review and oversight, such that it would
constitute a proportionate limit on the right to privacy.
We All Come Together For Country Bill 2025
Introduced on 26 March 2025, lapsed at dissolution of 47
Whistleblower Protection Authority Bill 2025
Restored to Notice Paper on 23 July 2025
The committee notes that this non-government bill appears to engage and may
limit human rights. Should this bill proceed to further
stages of debate, the
committee may request further information from the legislation proponent as to
the human rights compatibility
of the bill.
Legislative
instruments
Chapter 1: New and continuing matters
Legislative instruments registered on the
Register of Legislation
between 22 March to 30 July
Legislative instruments commented on in
Legislative instruments previously
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation (Statement of Procedures)
Instrument 2025
This instrument provides for procedures to be followed in the exercise of a
compulsory questioning warrant under Division 3 of Part
Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
(ASIO Act). This includes
requirements relating to: the types of information that ASIO must provide to the
Attorney-General when requesting
a warrant (including information relating to
any known vulnerabilities or sensitivities of a warrant subject to the extent
are relevant to the questioning); the conduct of questioning
(including the provision of healthcare, food, breaks, and the ability
warrant subject to leave the place of questioning during a break); the conduct
of searches and any use of force; rules relating
to video recording of
questioning; and complaints mechanisms.
The committee has previously commented on the Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation (Statement of Procedures) Instrument 2020
Report 2 of 2021
Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation Amendment Bill 2020
(now Act) in
Report 7 of 2020
Report 9 of 2020
, which introduced the compulsory
questioning powers framework in the ASIO Act and under which this instrument is
made. While the
committee considered that the statement of procedures has some
safeguard value for people subject to a warrant, the compulsory questioning
powers framework more broadly engages a significant number of human rights,
including the rights to privacy, liberty, freedom of
movement, protection of the
family, fair trial, freedom of expression, as well as the rights of persons with
disability and the rights
of the child.
The committee is seeking further information in relation to proposed
amendments to the compulsory questioning powers framework in
Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1) 2025
Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 2025
in this report.
The committee notes that, while this instrument is exempt from disallowance (and
so does not require a statement
of compatibility), the committee has
consistently recommended that a statement of compatibility with human rights
nonetheless be
prepared in relation to exempt instruments where they contain
measures that engage and may limit human rights, particularly where
committee has previously raised concerns in relation to the measure. The
committee has authorised its secretariat to notify departments
where statements
of compatibility appear to be inadequate. As such, the committee's secretariat
has written to the department in
relation to this matter.
Biosecurity (Entry Requirements) Determination 2025
Seeking Information
Entry requirements
Multiple rights
This legislative instrument revokes and remakes the Biosecurity (Entry
Requirements) Determination 2016 to set requirements for individuals
Australian territory. In particular, the instrument sets requirements relating
to individuals entering Australia who have
been in yellow fever risk regions,
and entry requirements for individuals who may be, or may have been, infected
with a listed human
The committee considers that to the extent that the measures in this
instrument assist in preventing the spread of a listed human
Australian territory, including yellow fever, they would promote the right to
health. However, the committee notes that
by requiring individuals to provide
personal information to officials, including medical information relating to
vaccination status,
and requiring an individual to be screened by equipment for
the purpose of establishing whether they are infected with a listed human
disease, the measures may engage and limit the right to privacy. The committee
also notes that the measures may engage and limit
other human rights to the
extent that they trigger powers relating to human biosecurity control orders
Biosecurity Act 2015
. Further, to the extent that the measures
apply to children and people with disability, the rights of these groups would
engaged and limited. The committee notes that while the measures pursue
a legitimate objective and are rationally connected to that
objective, questions
remain as to whether the measures are proportionate. The committee is
seeking further information from the minister
in order to assess the
compatibility of these measures with these human rights.
Identity Verification Services Amendment (Participation Agreements)
This instrument amends the Identity Verification Services Rules 2025
(Rules) to extend the period of time during which prescribed
entities can
continue to access the Document Verification Service (DVS) without an executed
participation agreement provided for
Identity Verification Services
. The committee has previously considered the Rules (in
Report 6 of 2024
Identity Verification
Services Bill 2023
Identity Verification Services (Consequential
Amendments) Bill 2023
(now Acts) (in
), which established a federal legislative
framework to support the operation of identity verification services. The
Identity Verification Services Act 2023
requires that all entities
accessing identity verification services must be a party to a participation
agreement. The committee considered
that participation agreements were a key
safeguard with respect to the limitation on the right to privacy. Participation
also contain requirements with respect to reporting breaches of
security, having arrangements in place for dealing with complaints,
informing individuals about these matters, which assists to protect the right to
an effective remedy.
The committee considers that extending the period of time during which
certain entities can continue to access the DVS without a participation
agreement weakens the overall value of this safeguard and increases the risk
that the identity verification facilities and services
may impermissibly limit
the right to privacy (and the right to an effective remedy if the individual was
not notified of any breach).
The committee therefore reiterates its concerns in
relation to the legislative framework in which this instrument operates,
particularly
with respect to the rights to privacy and an effective remedy, as
Instruments imposing sanctions on
individuals
A number of legislative instruments impose sanctions on individuals. The
committee has considered the human rights compatibility of
similar instruments
on a number of occasions, and retains scrutiny concerns about the compatibility
of the sanctions regime with
However, as these
legislative instruments do not appear to designate or declare any individuals
who are currently within Australia's
comment in relation to these instruments at this stage.
This section can be cited as
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights, Report snapshot,
Report 4 of
; [2025] AUPJCHR 24.
The committee makes no
comment on the remaining bills on the basis that they do not engage, or only
marginally engage, human rights;
promote human rights; and/permissibly limit
human rights. This is based on an assessment of the bill and relevant
information provided
in the statement of compatibility accompanying the bill.
The committee may have determined not to comment on a bill notwithstanding
the statement of compatibility accompanying the bill may be inadequate.
Appropriation Bill (No. 1)
Appropriation Bill (No. 2) 2025-2026
Appropriation (Parliamentary
Departments) Bill (No. 1) 2025-2026
The committee examines all
legislative instruments registered in the relevant period, as listed on the
Federal Register of Legislation.
To identify all of the legislative instruments
scrutinised by the committee during this period, use the advanced search
Federal Register of
Legislation
, and select ‘Collections’ to be 'legislative
instruments'; ‘type’ to be ‘as made’; and date to
‘registered’ and ‘between’ the date range listed
Unless otherwise indicated,
the committee makes no comment on the remaining legislative instruments on the
basis that they do not
engage, or only marginally engage, human rights; promote
human rights; and/permissibly limit human rights. This is based on an assessment
of the instrument and relevant information provided in the statement of
compatibility (where applicable). The committee may have
determined not to
comment on an instrument notwithstanding that the statement of compatibility
accompanying the instrument may be
inadequate.
Taxation Administration
(Defence Related International Obligations and Other Matters – Indirect
Tax Refunds) Determination
2025; List of Threatened Species Amendment (421)
Instrument 2025; Currency (Australian Coins) Amendment (2025 Perth Mint No. 1)
Determination
2025 were previously deferred in
Report 3 of 2025
2025) due to an administrative error.
See Autonomous Sanctions
(Designated Persons and Entities and Declared Persons – Russia and
Ukraine) Amendment (No. 3) Instrument
2025 [F2025L00754] and Autonomous
Sanctions (Designated Persons and Entities and Declared Persons—Thematic
Sanctions) Amendment
(No. 2) Instrument 2025 [F2025L00673].
See, most recently,
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights:
(20 March 2024) pp. 14–20 and
(8 December 2021), pp. 2-11.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (380 KB)
PDF format (128 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter