URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJCHR/2025/33.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:08:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Report Snapshot [2025] AUPJCHR 33 (2 October 2025)
Report snapshot1
Legislative instruments
In this report the committee has examined the following bills and legislative
instruments for compatibility with human rights. The
committee's full
consideration of legislation commented on in the report is set out in Chapters 1
Chapter 1: New and continuing matters
Bills introduced 25 August to 4 September 2025
Bills commented on in
Private members or senators' bills that may engage and limit human
Chapter 2: Concluded
Bills committee has concluded its examination of following receipt of
ministerial response
Administrative Review Tribunal and Other Legislation Amendment Bill
The committee has deferred consideration of this bill.
Appropriation Bills
Advice to Parliament
Appropriation of money to fund public services
Multiple rights
These bills appropriate money from the Consolidated Revenue Fund for a
range of services. Proposed government expenditure to give
effect to particular
policies may engage, limit or promote multiple human rights, including civil and
political rights, and economic,
social and cultural rights. The rights of
vulnerable groups, including women, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people, people
with disability, children and ethnic minorities, may be engaged
where policies have a particular, direct impact on these groups.
However, the
statements of compatibility accompanying these bills state that no rights are
engaged. The committee sought further
information from the Finance Minister
in relation to the compatibility of these bills with multiple rights in
Report 4 of 2025
While the committee notes that it may not be appropriate to assess human
rights compatibility for each individual measure in appropriation
committee considers that the allocation of funds via appropriation bills is
susceptible to a human rights assessment that
is directed at broader questions
of compatibility, namely, their impact on progressive realisation obligations
and on vulnerable
minorities or specific groups. The committee considers that
appropriation bills are a key opportunity for the Parliament (and for
committee) to consider the compatibility of these measures with human rights.
The committee's expectation is that statements
of compatibility with human
rights accompanying appropriations bills should address the compatibility of
measures which directly
impact human rights and which are not addressed
elsewhere in legislation. In particular, the committee expects that where the
appropriations
bills propose a real reduction in funds available for expenditure
on certain portfolios or activities that may impact human rights,
the statement
of compatibility should identify this and explain why this is a permissible
limit. The committee has made recommendations
to this effect and draws these
human rights concerns to the attention of the minister and the Parliament for
consideration of statements
of compatibility prepared for future appropriations
Australia Day Bill 2025
Australian Centre for Disease Control Bill 2025 and Australian Centre
for Disease Control (Consequential Amendments and Transitional
Provisions) Bill
Seeking Information
Multiple measures relating to the collection, use and disclosure of
information
Rights to health, privacy and effective remedy
These bills seek to establish the Australian Centre for Disease Control, as
well as the office of the Director-General and the Advisory
Council of the
Australian Centre for Disease Control. The Australian Centre for Disease Control
Bill 2025 contains numerous measures
which would enable the Director-General of
the Australian Centre for Disease Control to collect, use and disclose
information, including:
the requirement to publish public health advice, the
power to request information, the power to direct people to give information,
the requirement to publish a register of directions, authorising the collection,
use and disclosure of information in various circumstances
and the power to make
data-sharing declarations for serious threats to public health.
These measures may promote the right to health to the extent that they
would improve access to public health information and advice.
However, the
committee notes that by providing for the collection, use and disclosure of
information, the various measures engage
and limit the right to privacy. While
these measures generally pursue a legitimate objective of promoting public
health and may be
rationally connected to this objective, it is not clear
whether the limitations on the right to privacy are proportionate. The committee
therefore considers further information is required to assess the compatibility
of these measures with these rights, and as such
seeks the advice of the
Minister in relation to these matters.
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1)
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2)
Seeking Information
ASIO compulsory questioning powers framework and adult questioning
Multiple rights
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1)
(now Act) amended the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act
(ASIO Act) to extend, by 18 months, Division 3 of Part III of the
Act, which provides for the compulsory questioning powers framework.
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 2025 (ASIO
Amendment No. 2 bill) seeks to make the compulsory
questioning powers framework
permanent. The committee has previously commented on the compulsory questioning
powers framework when
it was introduced in the ASIO Act in
Report 7 of 2020
Report 9 of 2020
The ASIO Amendment No. 2 bill further seeks to amend the definition of
‘adult questioning matter’ to expand the matters
in which a warrant
may be issued to include: espionage; sabotage; politically motivated violence;
promotion of communal violence;
attacks on Australia’s defence system;
acts of foreign interference; or the protection of Australia’s territorial
border integrity from serious threats.
The measures in these bills engage and may limit multiple human rights,
including the rights to privacy; liberty; freedom of movement;
fair trial;
freedom of expression; rights of persons with disability and children’s
rights. The committee sought further information
from the Minister for Home
Affairs in order to assess the compatibility of these measures with these human
The Minister for Home Affairs provided a response to the committee in
relation to the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill
(No. 1) 2025
on 3 September 2025. The Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 2025 (ASIO Amendment No. 2 bill) was
referred to the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security on 27
August 2025. As the ASIO Amendment No. 2 bill is
still before the Parliament,
the minister requested and the committee agreed to receive a response from the
minister in relation
to the ASIO Amendment No. 2 bill by 28 November 2025.
The committee notes that the minister has provided useful information as to
the number of times the compulsory questioning powers
have been used since first
introduced in 2003. However, the committee retains its concerns as to the
necessity of extending the framework,
noting that the measures engage and limit
multiple human rights. The committee considers further information is still
required to
assess the compatibility of the measures with these rights, and
awaits the further response from the minister.
Climate Change (National Framework for Adaptation) Bill 2025
Commission of Inquiry into Antisemitism at Australian Universities Bill
The committee notes that this non-government bill appears to engage and may
limit human rights. Should this bill proceed to further
stages of debate, the
committee may request further information from the legislation proponent as to
the human rights compatibility
of the bill.
Commonwealth Workplace Protection Orders Bill 2025
Advice to Parliament
Impaired decision-making ability
Rights of persons with disability to equal recognition before the
This bill seeks to establish a workplace protection orders scheme to
prevent personal violence against, or with respect to, Commonwealth
workers and
Commonwealth workplaces. It would permit a court to make a consent order when an
application for a final order is made,
the parties to the proceeding have
consented to its terms and, if the court considers that the respondent has
impaired decision-making
ability, when the respondent is represented by a
lawyer, litigation guardian or, for children, a parent or guardian. The
considered that by providing for consent orders to be made against
individuals with impaired decision-making ability, this measure
engages the
rights of persons with disability to equal recognition before the law. The
committee sought further information from
the minister in Report 4 of 2025 in
order to assess the compatibility of the measure with this right.
The committee notes that, depending on the type of representative and the
to an order on behalf
of the respondent. The committee therefore considers that there is a risk that
the measure may facilitate a
form of substitute decision-making in certain
circumstances, contrary to the requirement, under international human rights
substitute decision-making to be replaced with supported
decision-making regimes. The committee has made a recommendation to amend
bill and otherwise draws its human rights concerns to the attention of the
minister and the Parliament.
Competition and Consumer Amendment (Divestiture Powers) Bill
Competition and Consumer Amendment (Make Price Gouging Illegal) Bill
Defence Amendment (Defence Honours and Awards Appeals Tribunal) Bill
This bill seeks to amend the
Defence Act 1903
to restrict review of
length of service awards. In particular, a decision to refuse to recommend a
person for a length of service
award would not be a reviewable decision if the
person to whom the refusal to recommend the award relates has reached more than
years of age (or such lesser age as is prescribed by the regulations) or, if
the person is deceased, would have reached more than
100 years of age, at the
time of the application to recommend the person for the award.
This measure engages the right to equality and non-discrimination as there
is a direct discriminatory intent to treat people differently
on the basis of
age, which is a protected attribute. Differential treatment will not constitute
unlawful discrimination if the differential
treatment is based on reasonable and
objective criteria such that it serves a legitimate objective, is rationally
connected to that
objective and is a proportionate means of achieving that
The committee notes that while the statement of compatibility identifies
that the right to non-discrimination is engaged in relation
to this measure, it
does not provide sufficient information to demonstrate that such a limit on the
right to non-discrimination would
be permissible. The stated objective of the
bill and this measure is to improve resourcing constraints in the Defence
Honours and
Awards Tribunal. However, under international human rights law, a
legitimate objective must be one that is necessary and addresses
an issue of
public or social concern that is pressing and substantial enough to warrant
limiting the right. It is not sufficient
that a measure seeks an outcome
regarded as desirable or administratively convenient. The statement of
compatibility does not identify
the pressing or substantial need to prevent
reviews of decisions on the basis of age and the stated objective appears to be
directed towards administrative convenience. The statement of
compatibility also does not demonstrate how the stated objective would
achieved by limiting reviews of length of service awards on the basis of age. In
terms of proportionality, the measure does not
appear to be clearly
circumscribed, as it permits a lesser age to be prescribed by future regulations
thereby potentially broadening
the discriminatory effect of the measure; nor
does the measure appear to be flexible in its application. The committee
considers that this measure may not be compatible with the right to
equality and non-discrimination and, despite the potentially
limited practical
impact of the measure on individuals, draws this concern to the attention of the
minister and the Parliament.
The committee notes there may be other human rights that may be engaged by
this bill and the committee may make further comment on
these additional human
Digital ID Repeal Bill 2024
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Amendment (Board of
Management Functions) Bill 2025
Freedom of Information Amendment Bill 2025
The committee has deferred consideration of this bill.
Health Legislation Amendment (Miscellaneous Measures No. 1) Bill
Higher Education Support Amendment (Fair Study and Opportunity) Bill
Advice to Parliament
Removal of natural justice
Prohibition on the expulsion of aliens without due process
This bill (now Act) removes the rules of natural justice in relation to
third country reception arrangements, the giving of removal
pathway directions
and the collection, use and disclosure of certain information. The bill provides
for the retrospective validation
of things done or purportedly done in relation
to these matters if those things would otherwise be wholly or partly invalid
the rules of natural justice were not observed.
The committee considers that by disapplying the rules of natural justice in
relation to the exercise of certain powers that facilitate
the removal of
non-citizens from Australia, this engages the right not to be expelled from a
country without due process. The committee
considers that ensuring that removal
and third country reception processes are not subject to ‘delay or
uncertainty’
is not a legitimate objective for the purposes of
international human rights law. The committee considers that as the rules of
justice are to be disapplied for numerous powers, and as the measure
imposes a blanket prohibition without regard to the merits of
an individual case
with limited other processes of review, the measure does not appear to be
compatible with the prohibition on expulsion
of aliens without due
Right to non-refoulement, prohibition against torture, cruel, inhuman
and degrading treatment, and right to an effective remedy
The committee considers that by disapplying the rules of natural justice,
this may result in a greater likelihood that individuals
are removed from
Australia and that they may not have the opportunity to provide reasons as to
why they should not be removed to
a country where they face a risk of
persecution. This engages Australia’s non-refoulement obligations and
right to an effective
remedy. The committee considers that it is not possible to
conclude whether third country reception arrangements would contain sufficient
safeguards to ensure that a person is not removed to a third country where there
is a real risk that they may be exposed to ill-treatment
or torture in that
country or a real risk of chain
refoulement.
Multiple rights
The committee previously commented on the
Migration Amendment
which introduced the collection, use and disclosure of
information powers and the third country reception arrangements in
. The committee previously commented on the
Migration Amendment
(Removal and Other Measures) Bill 2024
which introduced the power for the
minister to give a removal pathway direction in
The committee considered that these powers engaged and limited numerous
human rights, including criminal process rights; due process
rights with respect
to the expulsion of aliens; the rights to freedom of movement, health, liberty,
freedom of assembly, association, expression
and effective remedy; non-refoulement obligations, and the prohibition on
torture and
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
By disapplying the rules of natural justice, the committee considers that
the amendments likely exacerbate the underlying human rights
concerns with the
powers to collect, use or disclose information (including to a foreign
government), enter third country arrangements
and give removal pathway
directions, to the extent that they limit an individual’s ability to
challenge the exercise of these
Right to a fair hearing
The committee notes that the bill directly affects the outcome of a case
currently pending before the High Court of Australia. The
committee considers
there is a risk that this could constitute an impermissible interference with
the independence and impartiality
of the judiciary, an element of the right to a
fair hearing.
As the bill has now passed, the committee makes no further comment in
relation to this legislation.
Housing Australia Amendment (Accountability) Bill 2025
Human Rights (Parliamentary Scrutiny) Amendment (Consideration of
UNDRIP) Bill 2023
Members of Parliament (Staff) Amendment (Providing Certainty and
Improving Integrity) Bill 2025
Private Health Insurance (National Joint Replacement Register Levy)
Amendment Bill 2025
Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Amendment (Ban
Unethical Contractors) Bill 2025
The committee notes that this non-government bill appears to engage and may
limit human rights. Should this bill proceed to further
stages of debate, the
committee may request further information from the legislation proponent as to
the human rights compatibility
of the bill.
Repeal Net Zero Bill 2025
Road Vehicle Standards Amendment (Safer E-Bikes) Bill 2025
Social Security and Other Legislation Amendment (Responding to Robodebt)
Social Security and Other Legislation Amendment (Responding to Robodebt)
Social Security and Other Legislation Amendment (Technical Changes No.
2) Bill 2025
Seeking Information
Validation of income apportionment method
Rights to social security and effective remedy
This bill retrospectively validates income apportionment as a lawful method
of assessing employment income during the period from
1 July 1998 to 6 December
2020 for the purposes of certain social security entitlements. This bill also
seeks to establish the Income
Apportionment Resolution Scheme (Resolution
As this bill has the effect of validating debt decisions that would have
limited a person’s entitlement to social security,
the measure engages and
may limit the right to social security. This right includes the right not to be
subject to arbitrary and
unreasonable restrictions of existing social security
coverage. The committee also notes that effective remedies should be
to individuals whose right to social security is violated by the
measures in the bill. The committee is seeking further information
minister in order to assess the compatibility of this measure with these human
Superannuation Legislation Amendment (Tackling the Gender Super Gap)
Telecommunications Amendment (Enhancing Consumer Safeguards) Bill
Telecommunications and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2025
Seeking Information
Accessing communications for developing and testing interception
capabilities
Right to privacy and effective remedy
The bill seeks to amend the
Telecommunications (Interception and Access)
(TIA Act) to provide that authorisations of interception of
communications for developing and testing interception capabilities includes
access to stored communications. By expanding the power of an agency to access
stored communications under authorisations for developing
and testing
interception capabilities, rather than just live communications, this measure
engages and limits the right to privacy.
If an individual’s right to
right to an effective
remedy. The committee considers further information is
required to assess the compatibility of this measure with these rights, and
such seeks the minister's advice in relation to these matters.
Sharing personal telecommunications data under International Production
Right to privacy; effective remedy and life
The bill would broaden the scope of private telecommunications data that
can be intercepted through an interception International
Production Order (IPO),
and would provide for prescribed communications providers to copy stored
communications. In doing so this
measure engages and limits the right to
interception authorisation,
this may engage the right to an effective remedy.
Further, where information is shared with a foreign country where that country
has the death penalty, as is the case with the United States, this measure may
engage and limit the right to life.
The committee has previously raised concerns regarding the compatibility of
the IPO framework with the rights to privacy and an effective
remedy, and the
right to life, both when this framework was introduced in 2020 and when the
agreement between Australia the US was
designated in regulations in 2022. The
committee notes that the explanatory materials do not refer to the
committee’s previous
comments or recommendations in relation to the IPO
The committee considers further information is required to assess the
compatibility of this measure with these rights, and as such
minister's advice in relation to these matters.
Broadening immunity from liability in controlled operations
Right to privacy, right to an effective remedy and rights of the
The bill seeks to clarify the threshold for authorising and varying
controlled operations in the
Crimes Act 1914
by providing that only
direct and reasonably foreseeable consequences must be considered. The committee
notes that the bill further
seeks to provide that a participant in a relevant
controlled operation is immune from criminal and civil liability in relation to
dealing with sexual offence material.
The committee notes that depending on the nature of the controlled
operation, this may engage and limit multiple human rights. The
further notes that as the conduct of a participant in a controlled operation may
be protected by civil and criminal immunity,
where an individual’s human
rights are violated in the course of a controlled operation, this may engage the
right to an effective
remedy. The committee considers further information is
required to assess the compatibility of this measure with the right to an
effective remedy, and as such seeks the minister's advice in relation to these
Treasury Laws Amendment (Strengthening Financial Systems and Other
Measures) Bill 2025
Legislative
instruments
Chapter 1: New and continuing matters
Legislative instruments registered on the
Register of Legislation
between 31 July to 21 August
Legislative instruments commented on in
Chapter 2: Concluded
Legislative instruments committee has concluded its examination
of following receipt of ministerial response
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General
Federal Law) Rules 2025
This instrument sets out the rules of practice and procedure to be followed
in the conduct of general federal law proceedings in the
Federal Circuit and
Family Court of Australia (the Court), as made by the Judges of the Court.
Division 9.4 of the instrument deals
with the rules relating to litigation
guardians. In particular, the rules provide that a person is considered to need
a litigation
guardian when a person does not understand the nature and possible
consequences of the proceeding; or they are not capable of adequately
conducting, or giving instruction for the conduct of, the proceeding; or they
are subject to an administration, guardianship or similar
order. Children are
taken to need a litigation guardian. A person who is considered by the court to
need a litigation guardian may
start or respond to a proceeding only by the
person’s litigation guardian. In effect, a litigation guardian acts on
of the person who is considered to need a litigation guardian.
To the extent that an appointed litigation guardian may act on behalf of a
person with disability in court proceedings, the measure
may facilitate a form
of substitute decision-making. The committee notes that such measures are
contrary to the requirement under
article 12 of the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities (regarding the right to equal recognition before the
as elaborated by the UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, to replace such decision-making regimes with supported
decision-making. The committee has considered similar provisions in the
Commonwealth Workplace Protection Orders Bill 2025
and refers the Court and the
Parliament to its comments in relation to these matters (as set out in this
Report 5 of 2025
The committee further notes that to the extent that a litigation guardian
is appointed for children, the rights of the child are engaged.
Convention on the Rights of the Child, Australia is required to ensure that, in
all actions concerning children, the best
interests of the child are a primary
consideration. This requires legislative, administrative and judicial bodies and
institutions
to systematically consider how children's rights and interests are
or will be affected directly or indirectly by their decisions
and actions.
The committee notes that the rights of people with disability and children
were not identified in the statement of compatibility accompanying
instrument. The committee has authorised its secretariat to notify departments
or agencies where statements of compatibility
appear to be inadequate. As such,
the committee’s secretariat has written to the Court in relation to this
Protection of Movable Cultural Heritage Amendment (2025 Measures No. 1)
Regulations 2025
This legislative instrument amends the
Protection of Movable Cultural
Heritage Regulations 2018
to enable the temporary export of certain Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander artwork held on loan by the Commonwealth or a
collecting institution. Insofar as this instrument facilitates the
removal from Australia of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
heritage, it engages and may limit cultural rights. The UN Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights has made clear
that cultural rights impose
obligations on states to preserve and promote cultural heritage. In particular,
indigenous peoples have
the right to act collectively to ensure respect for
their right to control and protect their cultural heritage, which includes,
other things, their artwork. States should respect the principle of free,
prior and informed consent of indigenous peoples in all
matters covered by their
specific rights.
The committee notes that the statement of compatibility accompanying this
instrument states that it is intended that principal institutions
will consult
with members of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities to obtain
their support before exporting their artwork.
The committee considers that, to
the extent that this consultation constitutes free, prior and informed consent,
any limit on the
right to culture would likely be proportionate. However, much
will depend on how consultation is undertaken in practice and the quality
such consultation. The committee notes that the statement of compatibility did
not clearly specify any safeguards to ensure that
free, prior and informed
consent would be obtained. The committee has authorised its secretariat to
notify departments where statements
of compatibility appear to be inadequate. As
such, the committee’s secretariat has written to the department in
relation to
this matter. The committee otherwise draws these human rights
concerns to the attention of the minister and the Parliament.
This section can be cited as
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights, Report snapshot,
Report 5 of
; [2025] AUPJCHR 33.
The committee makes no
comment on the remaining bills on the basis that they do not engage, or only
marginally engage, human rights;
promote human rights; and/permissibly limit
human rights. This is based on an assessment of the bill and relevant
information provided
in the statement of compatibility accompanying the bill.
The committee may have determined not to comment on a bill notwithstanding
the statement of compatibility accompanying the bill may be inadequate.
Appropriation Bill (No. 1)
Appropriation Bill (No. 2) 2025-2026
Appropriation
(Parliamentary Departments) Bill (No. 1) 2025-2026
The committee examines all
legislative instruments registered in the relevant period, as listed on the
Federal Register of Legislation.
To identify all of the legislative instruments
scrutinised by the committee during this period, use the advanced search
Federal Register of
Legislation
, and select ‘Collections’ to be 'legislative
instruments'; ‘type’ to be ‘as made’; and date to
‘registered’ and ‘between’ the date range listed
Unless otherwise indicated,
the committee makes no comment on the remaining legislative instruments on the
basis that they do not
engage, or only marginally engage, human rights; promote
human rights; and/permissibly limit human rights. This is based on an assessment
of the instrument and relevant information provided in the statement of
compatibility (where applicable). The committee may have
determined not to
comment on an instrument notwithstanding that the statement of compatibility
accompanying the instrument may be
inadequate.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (255 KB)
PDF format (181 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter