URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBRp/2016/66.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:13:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Criminal Code Amendment (High Risk Terrorist Offenders) Bill 2016 [2016] AUSStaCSBRp 66 (30 November 2016)
Criminal Code Amendment (High Risk Terrorist Offenders) Bill 2016
Trespass on personal rights and liberties
General comment
General observations of the Committee
Trespass on personal rights and liberties
Item 1, proposed subsections 105A.4(1) and (2)
Trespass on personal rights and liberties - proposed subsections 105A.4(1) and (2)
Trespass on personal rights and liberties—procedural fairness
Item 1, proposed subsection 105A.5(4)
Trespass on personal rights and liberties - proposed subsection 105A.5(4) - procedural fairness
Rights and liberties unduly dependent upon insufficiently defined administrative powers
Proposed section 105A.8
Rights and liberties unduly dependent upon insufficiently defined administrative powers - Proposed section 105A.8
Criminal Code Amendment (High Risk Terrorist
Offenders) Bill 2016
This bill amends the
Criminal Code Act 1995
to establish a scheme
for the continuing detention of high risk terrorist offenders at the conclusion
of their custodial sentence
Attorney-General
Senate on 15 September 2016
The committee dealt with this bill in
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016
Attorney-General responded to the committee’s comments in a letter dated
27 November 2016. A copy of the letter is attached
to this report.
Attorney-General’s general comment - extract
I note that the Bill was referred to the Parliamentary Joint Committee on
Intelligence and Security (PJCIS) inquiry. The PJCIS tabled
its report on 4
November 2016. The Government has accepted all 24 of the PJCIS
recommendations.
I intend to move Government amendments to the Bill in the Senate in the week
commencing 28 November 2016 to implement the PJCIS recommendations.
amendments will also enhance safeguards and improve the efficacy of the
continuing detention scheme. To assist the Committee’s
consideration of the Bill please find below an overview of the amendments to
make important changes to the continuing detention
scheme. The amendments will
provide that:
• an application for a continuing detention order may be commenced up
to 12 months (rather than 6 months) prior to the expiry
of a terrorist
offender’s sentence;
• the scope of the offences to which the scheme applies will be limited
by removing offences against Subdivision B of Division
80 (treason) and offences
against subsections 119.7(2) and (3) of the
Criminal Code
(publishing
recruitment advertisements);
• the Attorney-General must apply to the Supreme Court for a review of
a continuing detention order (at the end of the period
of 12 months after the
order began to be in force, or 12 months after the most recent review ended) and
that failure to do so will
mean that the continuing detention order will cease
to be in force;
• the Attorney-General must undertake reasonable inquiries to ascertain
any facts known to a Commonwealth law enforcement or
intelligence or security
officer that would reasonably be regarded as supporting a finding that a
continuing detention order should
not be made (or is no longer required);
• the application for a continuing detention order, or review of a
continuing detention order, must include a copy of any material
possession of the Attorney-General or any statements of facts that the
Attorney-General is aware of that would reasonably
be regarded as supporting a
finding that an order should not be made;
• on receiving an application for an interim detention order the Court
must hold a hearing where the Court must be satisfied
that there are reasonable
grounds for considering that a continuing detention order will be made in
relation to the terrorist offender;
• each party to the proceeding may bring forward their own preferred
relevant expert, or experts, and the Court will then determine
the admissibility
of each expert’s evidence;
• any responses to questions or information given by the terrorist
offender to an expert during an assessment will not be admissible
in evidence
against the offender in criminal and other civil proceedings;
• the criminal history of the offender that the Court must have regard
to in making a continuing detention order will be confined
to convictions for
those offences referred to in paragraph 105A.3(1)(a) of the Bill;
• if the offender, due to circumstances beyond their control, is unable
to obtain legal representation, the Court may stay the
proceeding and/or require
the Commonwealth to bear all or part of the reasonable cost of the
offender’s legal representation
in the proceeding;
• when sentencing an offender convicted under any of the provisions of
Criminal Code
to which the continuing detention scheme applies, the
sentencing court must warn the offender that an application for continuing
could be considered; and
• the continuing detention scheme will be subject to a sunset period of
10 years after the day the Bill receives Royal Assent.
To enhance oversight of the continuing detention scheme, the amendments also
provide that:
Independent National Security Legislation Monitor Act 2010
will be amended to require the Independent National Security Legislation
Monitor (INSLM) to complete a review of the continuing detention
scheme five
years after the day the Bill receives Royal Assent; and
Intelligence Services Act 2001
will be amended to require
that the Committee review the continuing detention scheme six years after the
day the Bill receives Royal
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
Trespass on personal rights and
General comment
This bill provides for the continued detention of terrorist offenders who are
serving custodial sentences, after those sentences have
been served. Orders for
continuing detention of terrorist offenders will, it is proposed, be based on a
judicial assessment in civil
proceedings that the offender presents an
unacceptable risk to the community at the time they are due to be released,
having served
their sentence. Before making an order the courts must be
satisfied to a ‘high degree of probability’ of the existence
level of risk and, also, that there are no less restrictive means which would
effectively prevent that risk. Although the
period for which a continuing
detention order may be made is limited to a maximum of 3 years, there is no
limit on the number of
such orders that may be made.
Proceedings for a continuing detention order (or an interim order) are
characterised by the usual procedures and rules for civil proceedings:
standard rules of evidence and procedure apply, the parties have a right to be
heard and adduce evidence, reasons for decisions
must be given, and decisions
may be appealed. However, the application of these indicia of judicial process
does not change the fact
that the proposed scheme for the continuing detention
of terrorist offenders fundamentally inverts basic assumptions of the criminal
justice system. ‘Offenders’ in our system of law may only be
punished on the basis of offences which have been proved
beyond reasonable
doubt. This bill proposes to detain persons, who have committed offences and
have completed their sentences for
those offences, on the basis that there is a
high degree of probability they will commit similar offences in the future.
In justifying this significant departure from the presumption of innocence,
the explanatory memorandum points to the fact that some
states and territories
have enacted similar schemes in relation to sex offenders. It is suggested,
however, that the principle that
persons should not be imprisoned for crimes
they may commit should continue to be accepted as a fundamental postulate of our
of law, despite some legislatures having accepted limited exceptions to
it. If exceptions to this foundational principle are created
and widened, then
there is a risk to the integrity of the system of criminal justice. Furthermore,
if one exception is used to justify
further exceptions—based on predictive
assessments about serious risk to the public—then it is unclear, as a
legal principle, how the proliferation of exceptions can be
The inversion of fundamental principles proposed by this bill is justified on
the basis that the rationale for detention is non-punitive.
Rather, it is
suggested, the bill has a protective purpose. The explanatory materials state
that the detention will be authorised
because of an unacceptable risk to the
community. It will not be punishing the person for a past offence or a future
offence which
will likely be committed:
...the continued detention of a terrorist offender under the scheme does not
constitute additional punishment for their prior offending
– the continued
detention is protective rather than punitive or retributive (statement of
compatibility, p. 9)
It may be accepted that in some circumstances, detention may be justified on
the basis of protecting the public from unacceptable
risks without undermining
the presumption of innocence or the principle that persons should not be
imprisoned for crimes they may
commit. For example, detention on the basis of
risks associated with the spread of communicable disease do not threaten these
assumptions of our criminal law. However, where the trigger for the
assessment of whether or not a person poses an unacceptable risk
community is prior conviction for an offence, the protective purpose cannot be
clearly separated from the functioning of the
criminal justice system. If the
continuing detention is triggered by past offending, then it can plausibly be
characterised as
retrospectively
imposing additional punishment for that
offence. If the continuing detention is not conceptualised as imposing
additional punishment,
then the fact that it is triggered by past offending on
the basis of predicted future offending necessarily compromises the principles
identified above.
Unlike detention on the basis of other threats to the public (such as the
spread of disease) the basis of detention, on either interpretation,
person’s status as an offender (either a past offender or a likely future
offender). It is for this reason that it is
suggested that this bill inverts the
fundamental principles of our criminal justice system. Although it is suggested
in the explanatory
material that the purpose of the detention may also be said
to be protective, it remains the case that it is imposed based on a combination
of past offending and conclusions about the likelihood of future offences being
The committee draws Senators’ attention to the significant scrutiny
concerns outlined above about the proposed continuing detention
order scheme and
requests that the Attorney-General provide further justification for the
approach which addresses these concerns.
Attorney-General’s response - extract
General observations of the Committee
The Committee noted that if the continuing detention order is triggered by
past offending, then it can plausibly be characterised
retrospectively
imposing additional punishment for that offence. The scheme will only be
applicable to people who have committed certain offences.
In this respect, there
is a connection between the operation of the scheme and a conviction which was
secured through a criminal
justice process. However, the threshold for obtaining
a continuing detention order is based on the risk the person presents to the
community at the end of their custodial sentence. Preventative detention imposed
on this basis does not constitute additional punishment.
The protective purpose of the scheme is reflected in numerous features
including the grounds on which a continuing detention order
may be made or
affirmed; the matters to which the Court must have regard when making or
reviewing a continuing detention order; the
requirement to consider less
restrictive measures; and the requirement that the period of detention
authorised by a continuing detention
order be limited to a period that is
reasonably necessary to prevent the unacceptable risk. The fact that the effect
of a continuing
detention order or interim detention order is to commit the
terrorist offender to detention in a prison does not render the detention
The Committee considers that detention may be justified on the basis of
protecting the public from unacceptable risks such as the
spread of communicable
disease, but is concerned about creating a ‘proliferation of
exceptions’ to the principle that
persons should not be imprisoned for
crimes they may commit. However, this is not a valid reason for not creating new
regimes that authorise detention in the interests of protective
safety, provided those regimes are carefully confined with appropriate
justifications and safeguards.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Attorney-General for this response.
The committee welcomes the Attorney-General’s advice that a number of
Government amendments will be moved to the bill. The committee
welcomes the
substance of many of these proposed amendments, however, it notes that these
amendments go to issues around the process
for the making of the order but do
not address the committee’s fundamental scrutiny concerns about the
continual imprisonment
of persons whose sentences have been served.
The committee notes the Attorney-General’s view that preventative
detention imposed on the basis of the risk the person presents
to the community,
even where there is a connection between the operation of the scheme and the
prior conviction ‘does not constitute
additional punishment’. The
committee also notes the Attorney-General’s view that the
committee’s concern about
creating a ‘proliferation of
exceptions’ is ‘not a valid reason for not creating new protective
regimes that authorise
detention in the interests of protective safety’.
The committee reiterates its earlier comments that the proposed scheme for
the continuing detention of terrorist offenders fundamentally
inverts basic
assumptions of the criminal justice system. It also reiterates its view that the
principle that persons should not
be imprisoned for crimes they
commit should continue to be accepted as a fundamental postulate of our system
of law, despite some legislatures having accepted
limited exceptions to it (such
as in relation to sex offenders). The committee notes that the
Attorney-General’s response highlights
its concern that if one exception
is used to justify further exceptions, it is unclear, as a matter of legal
principle, how the proliferation
of exceptions can be limited. The
Attorney-General’s response appears to indicate that it cannot be so
limited, as this is
not a valid reason for not creating new protective regimes.
The committee remains concerned that where the trigger for the assessment
of whether or not a person poses an unacceptable risk to
the community is prior
conviction of an offence, the protective purpose cannot be clearly separated
from the functioning of the criminal
justice system. The committee reiterates
that even if the continuing detention is not conceptualised as imposing
additional punishment
(much of which will depend on the actual conditions of
detention, which is dealt with in the response below), the fact that the basis
for the order is triggered by past offending on the basis of predicted future
offending, necessarily compromises basic assumptions
of the criminal justice
The committee draws its scrutiny concerns to the attention of Senators and
leaves the appropriateness of the continuing detention
order scheme to the
consideration of the Senate as a whole.
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
Trespass on personal rights and
Item 1, proposed subsections
105A.4(1) and (2)
Proposed subsection 105A.4(1) provides that a terrorist offender that is
subject to a continuing detention order must be treated in
a way appropriate to
their status as a person who is not serving a sentence of imprisonment. However,
paragraphs (a) to (c) of that
subsection provide for exceptions to that
principle. In particular, the principle may be subverted on the basis of
‘reasonable
requirements necessary to maintain’:
• the management, security or good order of the prison;
• the safe custody or welfare of the offender or any prisoners; and
• the safety and protection of the community.
Proposed subsection 105A.4(2) provides that the offender must not be
accommodated or detained in the same area or unit of the prison
as persons who
are in prison for the purpose of serving sentences of imprisonment. This general
principle is subject to similar exceptions
as in the case of proposed subsection
105A.4(1), along with further exceptions relating to rehabilitation, treatment,
work, education,
general socialisation or other group activity or where an
offender elects to be accommodated or detained with the general prison
population.
If the purpose of continuing detention orders is preventative rather than
punitive, it is unclear why the general principles articulated
in subsections
105A.4(1) and (2) should be subject to all of the broad exceptions provided for
in the bill, particularly those potentially
based on reasons of efficiency. It
is suggested that it is not possible to interpret the overall scheme as
non-punitive unless the
detention regime is kept entirely separate and where
appropriate modifications to the normal conditions of incarceration for
offenders are made. If prison conditions remain the same the
punitive/protective distinction appears to be rendered meaningless in
application. These exceptions exacerbate the general scrutiny concerns
identified above. It must be emphasised, however, that
removing these exceptions
would not ameliorate those general concerns.
In addition some of the exceptions in proposed section 105A.4 are very broad.
In particular, the ambit of reasonable requirements
necessary to maintain the
‘management, security and good order’ of the prison is unclear.
The committee considers that these provisions allowing for a terrorist
offender to ultimately be treated and detained in the same
manner and in the
same area as persons serving prison sentences appear to undermine the stated
non-punitive nature of the scheme.
The committee seeks the
Attorney-General’s advice as to what are the likely conditions of
detention for a terrorist offender
in a prison under a continuing detention
order and what is the justification for having such broad exceptions to the
general principle
that the person must be treated in a way that is appropriate
to their status as a person who is not serving a sentence of imprisonment.
Attorney-General’s response - extract
Trespass on personal rights and liberties -
proposed subsections 105A.4(1) and (2)
The Committee has sought advice about the likely conditions of detention for
a terrorist offender in a prison under a continuing detention
order and the
justification for having exceptions to the general principle that the person
must be treated in a way that is appropriate
to their status as a person who is
not serving a sentence of imprisonment.
Subsections 105A.4(1) and (2) have been drafted to make it clear that the
default position is for offenders under a continuing detention
order to be
treated and accommodated differently to those offenders who are serving a
sentence of imprisonment. However, the provisions
also recognise that there may
be limited situations where this is either not reasonable given the risk the
offender may present to
the community or other offenders, or in the best
interest of the offender.
For example, one exception is when the offender elects to be accommodated or
detained in an area or unit of the prison with other
offenders who are serving
sentences of imprisonment. This promotes the rights of the offender by providing
them with greater opportunity
to participate in decisions relevant to their
accommodation. Other exceptions are focused on promoting the offender’s
such as through participation in group activities, rehabilitation or
education programs. In relation to the exceptions relevant to
ensuring the
security or good order of the prison, or the safety and protection of the
community, there would need to be reasonable
grounds to justify the use of these
exceptions.
Accordingly, the conditions the offender under the continuing detention order
will be subject to
vary, depending upon the particular
circumstances of the case. My Department has convened an Implementation Working
Group with legal,
corrections and law enforcement representatives from each
the proposed post sentence preventative detention scheme, including the housing
of offenders under the regime. In particular,
the Working Group will consider
developing ‘Management Standards’ that would provide a minimum
standard all correction
authorities should meet, ensuring that conditions in
correction facilitates are appropriate and proportionate.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Attorney-General for this response.
The committee notes the Attorney-General’s advice that the default
position is that offenders under a continuing detention order
(CDO) will be
treated and accommodated differently to those serving a sentence of imprisonment
but that there may be ‘limited
situations’ where this is not
reasonable or in the best interests of the offender. The committee also notes
the Attorney General’s
advice that there would need to be reasonable
grounds to justify the use of the exceptions based on the security or good order
the prison or the safety or protection of the community. The committee also
notes the advice that consideration will be given to
‘Management Standards’ that provide a minimum standard that all
correction authorities should meet.
Despite the Attorney-General’s advice that there are
‘limited’ situations where it may not be reasonable to treat
accommodate an offender subject to a CDO in a way that is appropriate to their
status as a person not serving a term of imprisonment,
the committee considers
that the provisions, as drafted, allow for a broad exception to this general
principle. In particular, the
committee considers that paragraph 105A.4(1)(a),
which provides an exception in relation to reasonable requirements necessary to
maintain the ‘management, security or good order of the prison’ is
overly broad. While the committee agrees that there
is a requirement that the
exception be a ‘reasonable requirement’, because the phrase
‘management, security or
good order of the prison’ is so broad and
ultimately the view of prison officials, it would be difficult to challenge a
to this effect. For example, as the provision is drafted, it is
conceivable that prison authorities may decide to treat a person
subject to a
CDO in the same way as those serving sentences of imprisonment, because to do
otherwise may cause resentment amongst
other prisoners and affect the good order
of the prison.
The committee’s scrutiny concerns also apply in relation to proposed
paragraph 105A.4(2)(b) which provides that an offender
must not be accommodated
or detained in the same area of the prison as those serving terms of
imprisonment unless ‘it is necessary
for the security or good order of the
prison’. In this instance, the committee notes that the requirement is
that it is ‘necessary’
for the security or good order of the prison
and not that it is ‘reasonably necessary’. This appears to impose a
approach to where the person is to be accommodated, based on what
prison authorities consider necessary for the good order of the
It is also not clear, based on the Attorney-General’s response, as
to what are the likely conditions of detention for a terrorist
offender in a
prison under a CDO. The committee welcomes the development of ‘Management
Standards’ that would provide
a minimum standard all correction
authorities should meet. However, the committee notes that such standards are
not required by the
legislation and they would not be subject to parliamentary
scrutiny. Furthermore, without these standards being included in the primary
legislation it is not possible to evaluate the extent to which they may address
the scrutiny concerns identified by the committee.
The committee therefore seeks the Attorney-General’s further advice
- whether it is possible to include these standards in the primary
legislation; and
- if this approach is rejected, whether the bill could be amended to
require the making of such standards by a legislative instrument,
which would be
subject to parliamentary scrutiny and the disallowance process.
The committee requests that the key information provided by the
Attorney-General be included in the explanatory memorandum, noting
importance of these documents as a point of access to understanding the law and,
if needed, as extrinsic material to assist with
interpretation (see
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
The committee draws its scrutiny concerns to the attention of Senators and
leaves the appropriateness of the exceptions to treating
an offender subject to
a CDO differently to those serving terms of imprisonment to the consideration of
the Senate as a whole.
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
Trespass on personal rights and
liberties—procedural fairness
proposed subsection 105A.5(4)
Proposed subsection 105A.5(4) requires that an
applicant for a continuing detention order must give a copy of the application
offender within two business days of making the application. The
provision, in this way, facilitates a fair hearing. However,
105.5(5) provides that the applicant is not required to give the
offender, when the applicant gives them a copy of the application
pursuant to
subsection 105.5(4), any information included in the application if the
Attorney-General is likely to, under a number
of identified bases, seek to have
information or material suppressed or protected from release to the general
The committee seeks the Attorney-General’s advice as to the extent to
which an offender will receive such information or material
(which is part of
the case made against them) prior to the ultimate hearing for the continuing
detention order.
Attorney-General’s response - extract
Trespass on personal rights and liberties -
proposed subsection 105A.5(4) - procedural fairness
The Committee has sought advice as to the extent to which an offender will
receive information or material prior to the ultimate hearing
for the continuing
detention order.
Subsection 105A.5(4) requires the offender to be given a copy of the
continuing detention order application within two days of the
application being
made. This ensures the offender understands the allegations that have been made
against them at a very early stage.
Subsection 105A.5(5) does not require the
Attorney-General to include in the copy of the application that goes to the
offender any
material over which the Attorney-General may seek protective orders
preventing or limiting the disclosure of the information. For
example, the
Attorney-General may wish to seek suppression orders to ensure the information
in the application can be protected from
release to the broader public. The
provision will enable the Attorney-General to give a redacted copy of the
application to the offender
until the Court has dealt with the suppression order
application.
Subsection 105A.5(4) will not prevent the material that the Attorney-General
seeks to rely on in the application from ultimately being
disclosed to the
offender. I propose to move Government amendments in the Senate to make this
very clear. The amendments will specifically
provide that a complete copy of the
application must be given to the offender within a reasonable period before the
preliminary hearing.
In addition, the Government amendments will also include a requirement that
the application must contain any material in the possession
Attorney-General and a statement of facts that the Attorney-General is aware of,
that would reasonably be regarded as supporting
a finding that an order should
not be made.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Attorney-General for this response.
In particular, the committee welcomes the Attorney-General’s advice
that he proposes to move Government amendments to make it
clear that ‘a
complete copy of the application must be given to the offender within a
reasonable period before the preliminary
In light of the Attorney-General’s advice that Government amendments
will be moved to provide that a complete copy of the application
must be given
to the offender within a reasonable period before the preliminary hearing, the
committee makes no further comment on
this matter.
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
Rights and liberties unduly dependent upon
insufficiently defined administrative
Proposed section 105A.8
Proposed section 105A.8 sets out mandatory relevant considerations which the
court must consider in determining whether to make a
continuing detention order.
The explanatory material merely repeats the listed considerations without
explaining their relevance
given the purpose of the legislation and the legal
tests to be applied. For example, it is not clear from the explanatory material
accompanying the bill why the general criminal history of an offender is
relevant given the purposes of the legislation. Nor is it
clear how ‘any
other information as to risk of the offender committing a serious
offence’ is to be understood.
The committee requests a detailed justification from the Attorney-General for
the basis for the relevance of these matters and more
specificity about the type
of information and factors which should legitimately form part of the
decision-making process.
Attorney-General’s response - extract
Rights and liberties unduly dependent upon
insufficiently defined administrative powers - Proposed section
The Committee has sought a detailed justification for the basis for the
relevance of the matters set out in section 105A.8 and more
specificity about
the type of information and factors which should legitimately form part of the
decision-making process.
Section 105A.8 provides a list of matters the Court must consider when
determining whether to make a continuing detention order. These
matters have
been largely modelled on similar requirements in State and Territory
post-sentence detention schemes. It is a matter
for the Court as to the weight
it places on each of these matters when considering whether to make a continuing
detention order.
Proposed section 105A.8 assists the Court by outlining matters which are
directly relevant to an assessment of the offender’s
risk to the
community. For example, in determining whether to make an order, the Court is
required to consider the safety and protection
of the community, any expert
reports relevant to the offender’s risk, and any treatment or
rehabilitation programs in which
the offender has participated and the level of
the offender’s participation in those programs. These matters are relevant
the offender’s risk to the community.
The Committee asked, in particular, about the requirement under paragraph
105A.8(g) for the Court to have regard to the offender’s
general criminal
history. I propose to move Government amendments in the Senate that will
appropriately confine this requirement
so that the Court will only have to have
regard to the offender’s prior convictions for any offences that fall
within the categories
listed in paragraph 105A.3(1)(a).
The Committee also asked how paragraph 105A.8(i) should be understood.
Paragraph 105A.8(i) requires the Court to consider any other
information as to
the risk of the offender committing a serious
offence. This enables the
Court to consider matters that are not captured by the other paragraphs in the
section, but are relevant
to the risk of the offender committing a serious
offence. For example, this could include admissible evidence from police or
other agencies, that will assist the Court in considering
the risk of the
offender committing a serious
offence. Section 105A.8 is designed to
provide the Court with an appropriate degree of flexibility. Importantly, the
rules of evidence
and procedure for civil matters apply when the Court has
regard to the matters in section 105A.8 (see section 105A.13).
Committee response
The committee thanks the Attorney-General for this response.
In particular, the committee welcomes the Attorney-General’s advice
that he proposes to move Government amendments to confine
the court’s
consideration of the offender’s criminal history to prior conviction for
relevant terrorist offences (and
not their criminal history more broadly).
The committee requests that the key information provided by the
Attorney-General be included in the explanatory memorandum, noting
importance of these documents as a point of access to understanding the law and,
if needed, as extrinsic material to assist with
interpretation (see
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
In light of the information provided, the committee leaves the
appropriateness of the relevant mandatory considerations the court
regard to in making a continuing detention order to the consideration of the
Senate as a whole.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (130 KB)
PDF format (183 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter