URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUHRStaCARFF/2018/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:06:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Agriculture and Water Resources (45th Parliament) --- "Super-charging Australian Agriculture" [2018] AUHRStaCARFF 3 (11 December 2018)
PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Super-charging Australian Agriculture
Inquiry into superannuation fund investment in agriculture
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Agriculture and Water
© Commonwealth of Australia
ISBN 978-1-74366-941-9 (Printed Version)
ISBN 978-1-74366-942-6 (HTML Version)
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 3.0 Australia License.
The details of this licence are available on the Creative Commons website:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/au/
Terms of Reference
List of Recommendations
1 Introduction
2 Regulatory barriers
Investment regulatory barriers
Financial regulation barriers for overseas
Other regulatory barriers
The perception of risk as a
Sector-specific barriers
Environmental and climatic risk
Commodity market and currency
Regulatory uncertainty risk
Committee comment
3 Practical barriers
Asset and investment data opening
Government data transformation
Committee comment
Foreign investment and tax
Committee comment
Understanding, education and promotion of
agricultural investment
Committee comment
Support for existing agribusiness to
increase investment
Committee comment
Concluding comments
Appendix A. Submissions
Appendix B. Public
Mr Rick Wilson MP O'Connor, WA
Deputy Chair
Ms Meryl Swanson MP Paterson, NSW
Hon Dr David Gillespie MP Lyne, NSW
(from 10/9/2018)
Hon Joel Fitzgibbon MP Hunter, NSW
(until 10/9/2018)
Ms Justine Keay MP Braddon, TAS
(from 10/9/2018)
Mr Matt Keogh MP Burt, WA
Mrs Nola Marino MP Forrest, WA
Mr Tony Pasin MP Barker, SA
Mr Rowan Ramsey MP Grey, SA
Committee Secretariat
Joel Bateman, Committee Secretary
(from 10/9/18)
Melanie Brocklehurst, Committee Secretary
(until 7/9/18)
Jeff Norris, Inquiry Secretary
(from 2/10/18)
Louise Milligan, Senior Researcher
Benjamin Vea Vea, Researcher
Danny Miletic, Office Manager
(until 21/9/18)
Terms of Reference
To inquire into and report on whether:
§ there are any regulatory requirements imposed on superannuation funds
by the Australian Securities and Investment Commission
(ASIC), Australian
Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) and any other relevant regulators, which
are acting as a barrier to superannuation
fund investment in Australian
agriculture;
§ the information required by the superannuation funds in order to
invest in Australian agriculture is readily available, and
if not, what
statistical performance reporting of the agricultural sector is necessary;
§ there are any other practical barriers to superannuation fund
investment in Australian agriculture.
List of Recommendations
Recommendation 1
3.31 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government prioritise
implementing the
Improve the Agricultural Statistics
. This should focus on achieving the identified outputs, including
appropriate levels of detail and timeliness for agricultural data.
The funding
to allow for industry cooperative development and maintenance of a flexible
future data environment should be part of
these prioritised outcomes.
Recommendation 2
3.47 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government investigate the
following to reduce the impact of foreign investment
and taxation rules on
agricultural investment:
§ Reviewing the rules regarding foreign investment advertising
requirements and managed investment trust tax rates, and consider
any unintended
consequences when applied to investment in agriculture by companies investing on
behalf of foreign interests or in
tandem with domestic investors; and
§ Engaging with state and territory governments regarding the impact of
stamp duty and land tax on agricultural investment, while
investigating options
for taxation offset relief at the Commonwealth level in appropriate
circumstances.
Recommendation 3
3.63 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government engage with
Council of Australian Governments councils and agricultural
peak bodies to
develop an information and promotional platform on the benefits of investing in
Australian agriculture.
This platform could then be promoted to the superannuation and investment
sector, both domestically and internationally, to supplement
the existing
international promotion undertaken by Austrade.
Recommendation 4
3.81 The Committee recommends that an initial superannuation and agricultural
industry investment working group be convened, facilitated
by the Australian
Government in the first instance, to identify and promote improved business
process, structure and corporate nature,
that would attract increased
investment.
1. Introduction
1.1 Agricultural commodities provide approximately
$60 billion annually to the Australian economy, making the sector a major
contributor.
1.2 According to Industry Super Australia (ISA), the sector has the potential
to be even bigger, but will require ‘significant
and patient financial
The sector offers
‘a variety of investment opportunities with products that are highly
valued by domestic and global
1.3 Mr Ed Peter, Group Chairman of Duxton Asset Management, explained the
benefit of investing in agriculture over other assets like
energy, metals and
mining, is that agriculture ‘is a gift that keeps on giving’:
With both energy and metals and mining, once I dig it out, it’s gone.
[Agriculture] is a gift that keeps on giving. As long
as I husband my land, I
will get a return every year.
1.4 The appeal of Australian agriculture is our country’s size and
‘variety of climatic zones’ that enable producers
to offer a diverse
range of commodities.
For example,
food products range from ‘annual and permanent crops, livestock and
various animal and insect products, including
everything from mushroom growing
to beekeeping’.
Additionally,
Australia’s geographical proximity to Asia and its growing middle-class
provides access to exportation opportunities
commodities.
1.5 Given the current stable base of agricultural product, and its growing
appeal in neighbouring markets, the attractiveness of investment
in agriculture
sector interests would appear logical, especially from the significant capital
available from superannuation funds
within Australia itself.
1.6 However, there is a lack of superannuation fund investment in the
industry due to:
§ complex foreign investment rules;
§ fund manager inexperience;
§ environmental concerns;
§ volatility of the commodities market; and
§ an absence of sector performance data.
1.7 Both the Australian Securities and Investment Commission (ASIC) and the
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA)—regulator
financial services industry and enforcer of prudential standards across the
superannuation industry respectively—indicate
that no specific regulatory
or legislative barriers to agricultural investment exist within their
1.8 Despite this, industry analysis suggests that Australian superannuation
funds ‘only [hold] a very small portion of farm
Australia’.
1.9 However, superannuation funds are interested in agriculture. ISA notes
that ‘Australian based managed funds...have invested
or committed over
$2.3 billion’ in the
with industry
superannuation funds investing $1.6 billion in agricultural assets since
1.10 According to the National Farmers’ Federation (NFF), Australian
farmers export approximately 67 per cent of their produce,
but further
investment is needed to build efficiency and
competitiveness.
1.11 The Consolidated Pastoral Company (CPC) too believes a crucial element
to ‘Australian agriculture realising its potential
is access to
research that estimates a capital investment of $600 billion is required in
Australian agriculture from now until 2050
to support production growth. Noting
that the superannuation industry holds $2.6 trillion on behalf of its
members, the CPC says
the sector needs to be able to entice investment from this
source of substantial
1.12 Initiatives that grow overall agricultural business profitability, and
knowledge and experience in the sector, will see increased
capital investment
from varied sources, including superannuation
1.13 This inquiry was initiated when, on 24 May 2018,
the then Treasurer, Hon Scott Morrison MP, asked the Committee to inquire
report on whether:
§ there are any regulatory requirements imposed on superannuation funds
by ASIC, APRA and any other relevant regulators, which
are acting as a barrier
to superannuation fund investment in Australian agriculture;
§ the information required by the superannuation funds in order to
invest in Australian agriculture is readily available, and
if not, what
statistical performance reporting of the agricultural sector is necessary;
§ there are any other practical barriers to superannuation fund
investment in Australian agriculture.
1.14 The Committee received 21 submissions and three supplementary
submissions, and held eight public hearings. Details of these are
included at
appendices A (submissions) and B (public hearings) of this report.
1.15 This report discusses some of the barriers—regulatory and
otherwise—that have to date limited superannuation fund
investment in
agriculture. The focus throughout is on practical actions the Australian
Government can take to remove these barriers
and encourage further investment.
Recognising that all investments carry some level of risk, only those specific
to agriculture will
be considered.
1.16 The report consists of three chapters:
§ Introduction;
§ Regulatory barriers; and
§ Practical barriers.
2. Regulatory barriers
Investment regulatory barriers
2.1 From the inquiry’s outset, the Committee
established that no distinct financial regulatory barriers to superannuation
investment in agriculture exist in Australia. This was identified by both
investors and the regulators themselves.
2.2 The Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) and the Australian
Securities and Investment Commission (ASIC) indicated
that no regulatory
barriers existed in their fields of responsibility.
2.3 APRA, responsible for establishing and enforcing prudential standards in
the superannuation industry, said that it:
...does not impose any specific regulatory requirements on superannuation
funds in relation to investment in Australian agriculture.
Superannuation trustees must comply with legislative and prudential
requirements including the requirement to have an investment strategy
investment governance framework in place. These requirements do not proscribe,
nor prevent, particular types of
investments.
2.4 Additionally, when questioned specifically as to whether there is a
legislative barrier to agriculture investment, APRA representatives
[C]ertainly not in the APRA legislation. The APRA legislation effectively
opens up to invest in what the trustee has the expertise
and the access to
invest in. We don’t say you can or you can’t do any particular type
of investment.
2.5 While its role is to regulate and enforce companies and financial
services businesses to protect consumers, investors and creditors,
highlighted that it:
...does not impose regulatory requirements on superannuation funds in
relation to any particular investments, including in relation
agriculture.
The laws ASIC administers are concerned with the investment activities of
superannuation funds to the extent that the activities relate
funds’ conduct and disclosure with respect to fund
2.6 ASIC explained that the form of disclosure requirements may vary
depending on the nature of the investment, but ‘does not
consider that
these requirements are acting as barriers to investment in
agriculture’.
Financial regulation barriers for overseas investors
2.7 While this inquiry’s focus was on investment
by Australian-based superannuation funds, the rules surrounding foreign
(including overseas pension funds) are also relevant. This is because
investment funds often pool Australian and overseas investors,
and the rules
applicable to overseas investors therefore can apply to Australian ones as
2.8 In accordance with the
Foreign Acquisitions and Takeovers Regulation
, administered and enforced by the Foreign Investment Review Board
(FIRB), foreign investment in the agricultural sector (including
the procurement
of agricultural land) must undergo an approval process. Foreign investments
(excluding foreign government investors)
in agribusiness with a value greater
than $57 million, or in agricultural land, where the investors’
accumulative land holdings
exceed $15 million, require the Australian
Treasurer’s approval. Exemptions apply for trade agreement partners, but a
$0 threshold
applies to foreign government
2.9 Additionally, the Australian Taxation Office Register of Foreign
Ownership must be notified of all land acquisitions by foreign
regardless of their value and the need for the Treasurer’s
2.10 The approval process is aimed at ensuring that the sale of assets or
land is open and transparent, with considerations pertaining
§ ‘the timetable and scale of the sales process,’ including
mandatory 30-day public marketing campaign within the
six months period prior to
the sales agreement; and
§ ‘the number of interested parties,’ including
participation and/or opportunities for Australian
2.11 Laguna Bay Pastoral Company (LBPC) noted these requirements are
impediments to foreign investment in the agricultural
Areas of concerns and
hindrance highlighted included:
§ inconsistent and arbitrary regulation of foreign investment in
agricultural land and an uncompetitive tax regime;
§ approval from the Treasurer...to acquire more than a cumulative $15m
in total of agricultural land;
§ foreign buyers [to] demonstrate that the land has been advertised to a
wide domestic audience for
2.12 Mr Timothy McGavin, Chief Executive Office of LBPC, stressed that their
major barrier is the 30-day marketing rule, saying ‘it
has to go and it
has to go urgently’.
2.13 Mr McGavin is also concerned that under current FIRB regulations
LBPC, although ‘a wholly owned Australian company’,
is treated in
the same way as a foreign-owned investment firm because they have ‘a mix
of offshore investors’.
The impact of having foreign investors co-investing with locally owned funds is
that the relevant Managed Investment Trust (MIT)
tax rate increases from 15 per
cent to 30 per cent.
stated that:
We're getting treated the same as a Chinese investment corporation, and we're
very different to them. We're not a trade buyer. We're
not a sovereign fund
that's government owned. We've got pensions that are deemed government but we're
all put in the same bucket.
Split them out; work out who's a pension fund and
who's a sovereign. There's a big
difference.
2.14 The Consolidated Pastoral Company (CPC) agrees that the current
regulatory regime is a deterrent to foreign investment in agriculture
complexity.
2.15 In highlighting these concerns, CPC noted that the complexities of
foreign investment have flow-on effects to domestic investment:
It is not only CPC’s view but also CPCs’ experience that the
complexities and inconsistencies in the current foreign investment
regime have
the potential to stifle foreign investment in Australian agriculture and damage
the Government’s broader policy
Secondly, reforming the domestic regulatory environment has limited value if
the foreign investment regulatory regime is complex and
deters potential
Thirdly, a complex and inconsistent foreign investment regime can also deter
domestic institutional investors who are concerned the
regime will limit the
size of the market when they wish to
Other regulatory barriers
2.16 While there may not be specific financial
regulatory barriers to superannuation investment in agriculture, other
regulatory barriers
exist. Dr Jason West from the University of
Queensland’s School of Agriculture and Food Sciences identified some of
There are regulatory impediments against superannuation funds imposed by a
range of authorities acting as a barrier to superannuation
fund investment in
Australian agriculture. The compliance framework confronting agricultural
investors concerning land use, chemical
control, livestock treatment and crop
management is substantial. This prevents interest from private investors
directing funds into
anything beyond farmland
2.17 Dr West acknowledged that while these regulatory requirements (such as
environmental protection and land use) are not unique
to the agricultural
sector, the regulatory burden to meet these requirements may act as a deterrent
to investment.
2.18 Other submitters identified certain regulatory or reporting requirements
that may also act as a deterrent to investment in agriculture,
perspective of either superannuation investors or individuals acting as trustees
for self-managed superannuation funds.
2.19 Ms Jo-Anne Bloomfield outlined a number of regulatory impediments to
investment in agricultural enterprises by self-managed superannuation
(SMSFs), operated under the
Superannuation Industry (Supervision)
2.20 Whilst these regulatory impediments do not act as barriers to major
superannuation investment, the requirement for SMSF trustees
to comply with
extra regulation may prevent investment or expansion of operations managed by
SMSFs in the sector.
The perception of risk as a barrier
2.21 ASIC’s SmartMoney website illustrates
another type of barrier, describing agribusiness investments generally (not just
those from superannuation funds) as ‘very risky’:
Agribusiness schemes may offer attractive tax benefits, but they are very
risky. Many things can go wrong, for example:
§ crops can fail;
§ plants and animals can lose value;
§ market prices will fluctuate over time, making investment returns
difficult to predict;
§ the scheme manager may collapse; and
§ it is virtually impossible to on-sell your investment.
For these reasons, agribusiness schemes are not appropriate for most
2.22 The webpage also highlights ‘the unpredictable nature of
agribusiness schemes’, that ‘your money may be locked
up for many
years and exposed to high risk over that time’ and notes that investors
‘should avoid investing more than
a small portion of [their] money in
agribusiness schemes’.
2.23 The advice concludes:
The high risk of agricultural schemes means you may lose some or all of your
money, or make a worse return than a less risky investment.
Of course, some
schemes will succeed - but be very cautious and always seek professional
financial advice.
2.24 This risk-adverse profiling of agricultural investment was a point made
by a number of stakeholders, highlighting that the financial
perception of
agricultural enterprise in Australia is a significant hurdle to overcome if
attitudes are to change.
2.25 As Industry Super Australia (ISA) noted, some high-profile failed
investments in the past have ‘skewed perceptions amongst
superannuation fund trustees and fund
Amongst other
things, ISA pointed to the ‘tougher and less predictable’ nature of
Australian agricultural conditions
compared to international farming
2.26 Prime Super pointed to the environment of superannuation investment and
noted that, while long-term performance of investment
in agriculture may be
strong, short-term risk causes problems for investment funds:
Both the Government and APRA are regularly quoted on the need to remove the
bottom quartile of underperforming funds. Any one year
of underperformance
contributes to the risk of longer term underperformance, therefore the
investment focus of superannuation funds
is always on delivering a strong return
over the short term, which then roles out to provide strong long term
performance. An asset
class that provides a risk to short term performance is
therefore one to be avoided.
2.27 Ultimately, the risk-return profile of agricultural investment, in any
suitably large scale, is unacceptable to superannuation
funds in Australia,
especially as the data and market understandings identified in this chapter
contribute to investment scepticism.
Sector-specific barriers
2.28 The nature of agriculture as a sector presents
unique barriers, beyond those discussed above. These barriers include:
§ liquidity;
§ environmental and related risks;
§ international markets; and
§ regulatory uncertainty.
2.29 Investments in agriculture need long-term
commitments, whereas the majority of investors generally prefer or even require
options. Superannuation investors in particular need access to liquid
assets due to the requirement to be able to access funds to
pay for rollover
requests and lump sum option benefits.
2.30 This lack of liquidity is often cited as a benefit of investing in
agriculture, where ‘patient capital’ can be utilised
long-term investments, without the constant flux of market volatility. This
point was made, for instance, by Dr West:
Agriculture assets require access to patient capital; that is, capital that
does not need to generate returns year-on-year, but returns
over the natural
business cycle. The need for long-term asset returns to fund long-term
liabilities would suggest agriculture is
a well-matched investment to fund the
retirement needs of
Australians.
2.31 However, Prime Super argued that it is misleading to consider
superannuation fund investments as long-term:
As a superannuation fund invests for a large pool of members there is a need
§ be able to provide liquidity to those members that are nearing
retirement, to allow them to withdraw all or part of their superannuation
§ be able to provide liquidity for those that are in retirement, through
the payment of an income stream;
§ meet ongoing benefit payments to those members that transfer to other
funds or are in receipt of death or disability payments;
§ provide the best outcome for all members over every economic
The above apply every year, as in every year there are a number of new
members joining the Fund and beginning their long term investment
superannuation as well as a number of members that have reached retirement age
and are therefore withdrawing their account to
fund their retirement.
Whilst superannuation is a long term investment it is also necessary to
deliver a strong short term return each and every
2.32 As such, Prime Super described liquidity as ‘probably the key risk
associated with investing in
agriculture’.
2.33 This point was also recognised by Warakirri Asset Management, who noted
that larger funds might find agricultural assets more
suitable than would other
fund types:
From a structural perspective, not all superannuation funds are necessarily
suited to an investment in an illiquid asset like Agriculture.
Large scale
defined pension funds or defined contribution funds, backed by a large member
base and consistent net inflows, have the
necessary asset size and investment
time frame, driven by certainty around funds under management that may warrant
an investment
2.34 CPC identified the illiquidity of agricultural investments as one of the
main barriers to greater superannuation fund investment
2.35 APRA outlined that the distinction between a liquid and illiquid asset
is not ‘black and white’, but the ‘working
definition will
tend to be: something that can be liquidated without a significant loss in value
within about 30 days’.
2.36 This definition highlights the dilemma that superannuation investment
faces with potential agricultural assets, as the ability
to liquidate an
agricultural asset within 30 days without loss will not necessarily align with
their rollover requirements and liquidity
considerations.
2.37 Industry Super Australia diverts from this opinion of liquidity as a
risk or barrier to investment, directly rejecting the issue
of liquidity of
these assets for larger superannuation
Whether this is a matter
of opinion, or a scale issue regarding the ability for larger funds to absorb
asset flexibility in their
overall investment pool, is unclear as no other
witnesses or submitters rejected liquidity as a barrier.
Environmental and climatic risk
2.38 For some prospective investors, especially
superannuation funds looking for secure and stable prospects, the impact on the
agricultural
sector from external or environmental influences poses too great a
risk. Of specific note is the sector’s vulnerability to
environmental and
climatic variability.
2.39 Prime Super highlighted, as one of the main reasons for their own
unsatisfactory outcomes investing directly in agriculture,
that ‘climatic
events (the drought during the 2000s) had a significant impact on the business,
from the cost of running the
business and the reduced quantity of
2.40 While acknowledging that the economy as a whole is affected by
environmental factors, Prime Super noted that the agricultural
‘fundamentally
Whereas other
sectors can ameliorate impacts by changing practices or sources of materials,
agriculture is generally bound to the
land, water and climate of the region it
is located in.
2.41 Australian Ethical Investment Ltd argued that the nature of much of the
animal agricultural sector rules it out as an investment
choice for ethical
...environmental, human rights and animal welfare considerations mean we rule
out large-scale commercial animal agriculture companies
and invest selectively
in other forms of food
agriculture.
2.42 Agriculture as a sector poses concerns for investment–both
superannuation and otherwise–that has ethical factors
to consider. Several
significant factors have been identified:
§ greenhouse gas emissions;
§ deforestation and biodiversity loss;
§ water scarcity and water use;
§ antibiotics;
§ waste and water pollution;
§ working conditions;
§ food safety;
§ sustainable proteins; and
§ animal welfare.
2.43 For example, Australian Ethical Investment Ltd decided to divest from a
salmon farming company due to concerns about the sustainability
company’s practices.
2.44 The scale of this type of investment, and its consideration for
superannuation funds, should not be underestimated:
As of 2018, 81% of the largest super funds have embedded a formal commitment
to responsible investment (up from 70% in 2016). We expect
this trend to
continue, driven largely by consumer demand. Consumer research conducted in 2017
revealed that nine in ten Australians
expect their super or other investments to
be invested responsibly and
2.45 To respond to these concerns, Australian Ethical Investment Ltd
suggested that greater recognition within the sector of this
barrier and moving
to address the perceived business risk that it brings would be necessary:
Australian agricultural businesses need to do more to disclose how they are
managing environmental, human rights and animal welfare
risks. This is crucial
to allow investors to properly assess the risks and returns of investment in the
2.46 CPC highlighted that the agriculture sector must invest in
‘world’s best practice animal welfare and environmental
standards’ to attract
investment.
Commodity market and currency risk
2.47 An inherent risk to the agriculture sector, and
relevant to investment considerations, is the impact that cycles in commodity
markets can have on the commodity outputs that most agribusinesses produce.
2.48 Performance assessments of the sector by potential investors will always
assess commodity cycles as part of their risk
2.49 Select Harvests identified that their success in attracting
superannuation investment into their almond interests have required
‘shareholders who have been willing to ‘ride thru’ the almond
commodity price cycle’.
2.50 As a natural consequence of this commodity risk, the fluctuations in
currency value has a related risk, as any commodity exported
and traded in
overseas markets will be affected by the value of the Australian dollar.
2.51 This risk was noted by Prime Super, whereby the value of export-quality
crops was ‘significantly impacted’ by fluctuations–including
period of above-US Dollar parity–of the Australian
2.52 Select Harvests acknowledged this impact as well, with the majority of
their almond crop being traded in US
Regulatory uncertainty risk
2.53 More than most sectors in the Australian economy,
agriculture exists in a permanent state of flux. The inherent uncertainty faced
by those in the sector, including as a consequence of the points mentioned
above, leads to further uncertainty in the regulatory
environment.
2.54 ISA identified the absence of a strategic national policy as a barrier
to agricultural investment, arguing that efforts since
the 1980s to deregulate
the sector have led to decreased competition, the ‘locking up’ of
supply-chain infrastructure
and the power of the two grocery giants to dictate
2.55 The Investor Group on Climate Change (IGCC) also highlighted the need
for policy consistency, noting that ‘there is a need
for policy certainty
and political consensus ... to underpin the development of long-term risk
assessments ... and to provide certainty
investors’.
2.56 CPC Chief Executive Officer, Mr Troy Setter, believes consistency is the
key to increasing investment:
That’s some of the feedback we’ve had from both domestic
investors and international investors...Consistent policy on
foreign investment
and consistent policy on tax, the environment, workplace health and safety and
labour...as many of those things
that can be consistent from government help
balance out the inconsistencies of the season, market and commodity
Committee comment
2.57 Stakeholders, including the regulators
themselves, noted that there are no specific regulatory barriers for
superannuation funds
seeking to invest in agriculture in Australia. Equally
evident, however, is the existence of other issues which create disincentives
increased investment by superannuation funds in the sector.
2.58 Most particularly, foreign investment rules may deter Australian managed
funds with foreign co-investors from investing in local
agriculture since they
are considered in the same tax category as foreign investment firms.
2.59 The sector, in part because it is not well understood, has a reputation
for being high-risk. The volatility of agriculture in
general means that
investors will need to be well informed and committed to longer term
investments.
2.60 Another key concern for investors is the uncertainty and volatility of
the sector as a whole.
2.61 Further practical barriers are discussed in the next chapter.
3. Practical barriers
3.1 As previously identified, specific regulatory
barriers to superannuation fund investment in agriculture are minimal. However,
there are a number of other contributors to low superannuation investment:
§ Agricultural performance and investment data either does not exist, or
is not catered to investment profiling that superannuation
fund managers either
understand or will access in preference to market data that they are already
familiar with.
§ The simple nature of superannuation in Australia–funds must have
access to quick-turnaround liquid assets that can be
sold easily and still have
easily understood high-yield returns.
§ The few successful domestic investments that can be identified (such
as FirstState Super’s investment in Select Harvests)
are due to a number
of cumulative factors which cannot be easily replicated:
- specialised agribusiness ventures where superannuation funds invest in land
leaseback arrangements with proven return;
- direct education of fund managers to understand the business being invested
- dedication of ‘patient capital’ within a fund’s overall
investment profile.
§ Moves to improve agricultural data by government are not focussed
toward financial or investment relevant detail.
§ The promotion of the associated high-risk profile for agricultural
investment is abundant throughout the market, even perpetuated
by regulators
such as ASIC.
§ Extensive overseas investment from state-owned pension funds and other
hedge fund style investments has led to a conception
that domestic regulation
discourages investment, or is hampered by the ‘cherry-picking’ of
the assets available by those
overseas funds.
§ Infrastructure quality and ownership to support the ‘paddock to
plate’ supply chain is not confidently understood
or seen as a priority
for private or government investment.
§ Certain policies regarding foreign investment discourage co-investment
by domestic and foreign funds, increasing the risk profile
that may encourage
domestic superannuation investment.
§ State land taxes and duties can discourage investment in agriculture,
where annualised returns are a priority.
3.2 The Committee also acknowledges that a number of other issues hamper
greater investment in the agricultural market. While these
concerns are valid
and undoubtedly impact their profitability and ability to harness market forces,
the narrow scope of this inquiry
regarding superannuation investment in
agriculture did not allow for full consideration of these issues.
3.3 Regardless of this restriction, the Committee believes that the
discussion in this chapter, and the associated recommendations,
will help in
improving investment in the sector in a broader sense, outside of that from just
superannuation funds.
3.4 Given that there are no easily identifiable discrete regulatory barriers
to superannuation investment, the Committee considers
that the areas below are
the best ways forward to help educate investors and stimulate growth and
potential within the sector.
Asset and investment data opening
3.5 Multiple submitters and witnesses to the inquiry
provided insight into the disparate and confused nature of data relevant to the
agricultural sector, its financial performance and investment suitability.
3.6 While the current Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource
Economics and Sciences (ABARES) survey and the resultant data
is valuable, it is
not specifically designed for use by potential
3.7 Investment managers and advisors require specific types of data in order
to accurately assess the worth of investment options.
In many cases, this
information is inadequate or simply non-existent for the agricultural sector.
Compared to other investment categories,
where such data is easily available,
superannuation funds may find agriculture an unappealing, or hard to understand,
sector in which
to invest. This creates a barrier to further investment, since
superannuation funds need to analyse longitudinal and cross-sectional
performance and investment data to inform decisions.
3.8 Warakirri Asset Management described the existing level of agricultural
data as ‘not readily accessible or centralised’
and noted that
‘the available information is fragmented and difficult to
3.9 Examples of the types of data necessary, but difficult to source,
§ financial data–markets, supply and demand trends and values;
§ physical data– information on soils, climate, river flows,
ground water, dam levels.
3.10 ABARES surveys, one of the main sources of information about the
Australian agricultural sector, draw heavily on voluntary surveys,
and therefore
are considered problematic.
Additionally, the granularity of this and other data for meaningful investment
analysis is problematic.
3.11 Across the breadth of the evidence received, data accessibility,
relevance or granularity, was the most recurring issue
3.12 The potential impact of data improvement was captured best by the
National Farmers’ Federation (NFF):
NFF considers superannuation fund investment in Australian farm businesses
could be increased if risks and likely returns could be
more accurately
calculated through the provision of better data. This includes more detailed and
timely data on the physical (eg.
Water availability, soils, climate impact) and
financial (eg. market fluctuations, demand and supply data) factors impacting
profitability. Australia has traditionally lacked relevant benchmark
indexes which allow for performance to be measured and compared.
Improved data
enabling comparisons with other investments, such as long-term income and
returns data, is also likely to increase
superannuation fund consideration of
agricultural assets as investment
3.13 A re-focussed and redirected ABARES and Australian Bureau of Statistics
(ABS) collection of data would prove more useful in this
3.14 The current agricultural statistics system supported and produced by
ABARES has served the sector well for many years. However,
the aggregated data
reported by ABARES, reflecting cross-sections of agriculture, does not attract
much scrutiny from investors.
The Department of Agriculture and Water Resources
(DAWR) acknowledged that they receive requests for custom data sets from
More robust
investment-relevant data could cater for such requests automatically.
3.15 The lack of a national performance benchmark for agriculture means that
fund managers, not just in superannuation, lack an investment
3.16 More specifically, some stakeholders referenced stock exchange indexes
in countries like the USA, for potential adaptation to
the Australian market.
However, it was clarified that these indexes are generally for agricultural
commodities and futures
given the lack of listed agriculture companies on Australian stock exchanges,
were not applicable guides for adaptation.
3.17 Ultimately, the consensus appeared to be that a next-generation
collaborative dataset needs to be developed to allow for all
sectors to inform
each other about investment opportunities and benefits.
3.18 Similarly, the contested nature of the potential investment returns from
the agricultural sector, or specific producers (beef,
dairy etc.), leads to
confusion for potential investment.
3.19 Prime Super tendered adjusted return figures for all agriculture
industries income and capital return of 3.6 per cent for the
2010–2016, whereas the long-term return promoted by Industry Super
Australia was 9.7 per cent (1980–2016). Prime
Super points out that this
is artificially inflated by returns during the boom-period from 1980 until
3.20 Whether the return figures are accurate or not, dispute shows that the
lack of centrally aggregated data regarding performance
and asset value leads to
a perception of instability and vagary around return from the sector and its
3.21 This perception is then challenged further by the lack of internal
capacity within superannuation funds to understand the data
they can access, or
know where to get the support to get access to that information if they are so
Government data transformation
3.22 The National Agricultural Statistics Review
conducted in 2015 found that:
...the existing agricultural data ecosystem relies heavily on a range of
voluntary and compulsory surveys, undertaken by industry
and government. A lack
of coordination and collaboration between these collection bodies regularly
results in respondents receiving
multiple requests to provide similar
information. The escalating cost of collection activities, rising compliance
burden, and increasing
frustration of survey respondents has resulted in a
narrowing of survey coverage and falling response rates, reducing data quality
and utility.
3.23 Out of this review, a transformation strategy has been developed by the
ABS and ABARES, known as the
Roadmap to Improve the Agricultural Statistics
(the Roadmap).
3.24 DAWR outlined the consultation process underway to capture the practical
ways forward to achieving the goals of the Roadmap,
identifying the following
actions underway to progress the transformation:
§ developing work programs and project proposals to undertake future
transformation activities;
§ identifying and assessing existing agricultural datasets, held by
government and industry, for use in the production of statistics;
§ engaging with industry groups to identify opportunities to collaborate
on collection activities, develop common standards and
share data;
§ engaging with state and territory government agencies to improve data
sharing protocols and mechanisms; and
§ communicating with stakeholders about the Roadmap for improving
agricultural statistics, transformation and statistics collection
activities and
seeking feedback on value propositions and stakeholder engagement strategies
more broadly.
3.25 Implementation of the Roadmap would lead to potential improvement in
agricultural data for superannuation fund investment including:
§ more detailed and timely data delivery to aid supply chain businesses
(and by association, any investors in those businesses);
§ insights for marketing strategies to enable promotion of Australian
agriculture as a quality product;
§ improved data for insurance purposes;
§ better decision making and tools to increase efficiency and
profitability; and
§ better government use of disparate data sources, with improved policy
development and investment and assistance
3.26 Most importantly, DAWR identifies that ‘the availability of
detailed, reliable and timely data will reduce uncertainty
and encourage
third-party investment’. Additionally, ‘expenditure that improves
the efficiency of the sector and opens
links to new or under serviced markets
will result in increased returns to farms and industry more
3.27 DAWR highlighted that even though a need for transformation of existing
data has been identified and prioritised as part of the
Roadmap, the
collaboration required between government and industry is crucial:
...the diversity of Australian agriculture has meant that past efforts have
been uncoordinated and lacked the resources and impetus
to address whole of
system issues. To overcome this, a significant collaborative funding and
resourcing effort will be required to
support the development of a next
generation data and knowledgebase for agriculture and related
industries.
Committee comment
3.28 Expansion of agricultural asset and investment
data is crucial to the future success of larger-scale investment, superannuation
or otherwise, in Australian agriculture.
3.29 However, the current state of government data (ABARES and ABS) and its
relevance to commercial and industry interests was highlighted
inadequacy, coupled with the lack of understanding of the sector more generally.
The result is a disconnect between datasets
and any potentially interested
superannuation investment managers or other investment sources.
3.30 The Committee agrees that the Roadmap priorities identified are the next
step in building the appropriate datasets and indexes
that investors can use.
However, the funding and resourcing issue requires a delicate approach to enable
the Commonwealth to come
up with a cooperative funding model with industry,
which allows agility and change to be prioritised as industry data needs
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government prioritise
implementing the
Improve the Agricultural Statistics
. This should focus on achieving the identified outputs, including
appropriate levels of detail and timeliness for agricultural data.
The funding
to allow for industry cooperative development and maintenance of a flexible
future data environment should be part of
these prioritised outcomes.
Foreign investment and tax impacts
3.32 The level of investment in Australian agriculture
by overseas pension funds and similar defined benefits retirement investment
managers, especially from Europe, the USA and Canada, is significant.
3.33 According to ISA, global pension funds are now allocating more than 1
per cent of total assets to agriculture, internationally
and here in
3.34 This increased investment is seen as an indication that these funds see
benefit in long-term investment in the
However, the inherent
difference between these funds and those in Australia alters the investment risk
profile that they face when
locking into longer-term investment in
agriculture.
3.35 Stakeholders that run local investment management or agriculture
operations for these overseas investors pointed out that this
investment builds confidence in the market and shows that successful investment
can lead to aggregated operations for local
investment to build
3.36 However, restrictions on foreign investment into agriculture, or
requirements that are seen as burdensome, can impact on this
direct investment
stream and on those foreign funds co-investing with domestic investors,
including superannuation funds.
3.37 These concerns fell mainly to the two issues outlined in Chapter 2:
§ 30-day advertising requirement for agricultural acquisitions by
foreign persons; and
§ managed investment trust tax rates.
3.38 Changes to foreign investment and taxation rules can impact on a foreign
pension fund, foreign investor, or their agent in Australia,
easily acquiring
assets, or encouraging investment (either solo or in partnership with local
investors) due to tax impacts.
3.39 Additionally, submitters identified that land tax and stamp duty was a
significant value offset consideration for the expected
returns of an asset in
its first year, so could discourage any investment in either the short or long
Committee comment
3.40 While the issues regarding foreign investment and
tax impacts outlined above impact on the business models that certain submitters
identified, they do not directly affect the direct topic of this inquiry, except
if a local fund is planning to co-invest with an
overseas fund.
3.41 The scale of foreign pension and equity fund investment in Australian
agriculture is significant and increasing. For the market
to mature in ways that
encourage growth, modernisation, efficiency and aggregation of assets, and
attract domestic investment, the
contribution of overseas investors needs to be
realistically acknowledged and supported. Investments that build capacity in the
agricultural
sector to grow and improve are important.
3.42 Any improvement in asset profile and management of agriculture as an
attractive investment will lead to more investment in the
sector itself, as well
as the associated supply chain infrastructure.
3.43 Accordingly, there is merit in revisiting the rules regarding foreign
investment advertising requirements and managed investment
trust tax rates when
applied to investment in agriculture by locally owned companies co-investing
with foreign funds.
3.44 These considerations should not be a blanket exemption or a similar
removal of these rules, but should consider whether these
rules are having an
unintended impact by creating barriers for domestic investors.
3.45 Additionally, the Australian Government should engage with states and
territories through the Trade and Investment Ministers’
Meeting and other
appropriate Council of Australian Governments (COAG) councils to discuss the
impact of stamp duty and land tax
on agricultural asset investment.
3.46 Land taxes and stamp duties are state and territory issues, however, the
potential for some offset relief for investors could
encourage funds to look
past that initial value offset. For that reason, the Australian Government
should investigate the potential
for taxation offsets at the Commonwealth level
to alleviate the initial impact of stamp duty and land tax on select agriculture
investments.
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government investigate
the following to reduce the impact of foreign investment and taxation
agricultural investment:
Reviewing the rules regarding foreign investment advertising
requirements and managed investment trust tax rates, and consider any
consequences when applied to investment in agriculture by companies investing on
behalf of foreign interests or in tandem
with domestic investors; and
Engaging with state and territory governments regarding the impact
of stamp duty and land tax on agricultural investment, while investigating
options for taxation offset relief at the Commonwealth level in appropriate
circumstances.
Understanding, education and promotion of agricultural investment
3.48 The low level of understanding and education of
investment managers in agriculture is a chief contributor to the low level of
superannuation investment in the sector. The limited investment by general
superannuation funds into agricultural assets creates
a vicious circle amongst
the investment manager cohort: limited understanding of the sector leads to
limited investment in the sector,
which in turn results in less interest in or
knowledge of the sector.
3.49 This is complicated further by the publicly stated risk profiles
associated with the sector, as discussed in the previous chapter.
3.50 The regulator, APRA, noted regarding the current lack of expertise:
In many other asset classes you have a well-established grouping of
investment managers who operate in this space. With agriculture
that is not the
case. There are not as many investment managers already operating in the sector.
So there isn't the same what I would
call ecosystem of investment managers
operating in this space so it makes it a harder sector for them to get exposure
3.51 LBPC agrees that agriculture ‘is not widely covered in the asset
consulting sector’ and that this lack of knowledge
is off-putting to
interested investors.
creates a further circular effect whereby the lack of investor demand does not
warrant consultant investment in increasing their
competency in the asset
3.52 Warakirri Asset Management agrees that the existing low levels of
investment by superannuation funds ‘means there is a
lack of knowledge and
understanding of the agricultural sector within the investment community and its
3.53 The CPC also identified this as one of the primary barriers to greater
superannuation fund investment in the
3.54 This lack of ‘ecosystem’ of investment managers within
superannuation is not limited purely to agriculture either.
The lack of
understanding is underpinned by the fact that the majority of agriculture
businesses in Australia are still privately
owned, and it is rare for
superannuation funds to invest directly into any private
businesses.
Therefore, the
‘ecosystem’ of the sector itself (of majority family-owned or
small-scale operations) does not lend itself
to superannuation investment at the
foundation level.
3.55 Additionally, the lack of understanding of the sector means that there
is little analysis of agriculture as a potential investment
within the finance
sector. Mr Richard Heath of the Australian Farm Institute commented:
I think it's true that if it's not in the first few pages of the
—the financial sector itself tends to drive a lot of this sort
of stuff. You can have all the promotion coming from industry,
but unless the
financial sector internally is talking about it, promoting it and realising that
it has real value, I think it will
Committee comment
3.56 The Committee is acutely aware of the cumulative
effect of all of these factors–the lack of data on agriculture as an
investment,
the nature of superannuation investment and prudential requirements
of funds, the increasing element of foreign ownership of agricultural
and the impact of taxation and duties–has on investment prospects.
3.57 However, the lack of understanding in the superannuation industry, and
the financial sector more generally, of the investment
potential of agriculture
is arguably the number one barrier to investment.
3.58 The decision-makers within investment management frameworks within
superannuation funds do not understand the agriculture sector
and there is
currently no incentive for them to investigate further. No easily accessible
performance data can be analysed for potential
returns, and higher returns with
easier liquidity can be accessed in equities, commercial real estate, and major
infrastructure.
3.59 Accordingly, unless fund manager understanding and knowledge increases,
superannuation investment in agriculture will remain
at low levels.
3.60 To resolve this, there needs to be a coordinated and concerted education
effort from both government and the agriculture sector
to promote and inform
potential investors about the reality of investing in agriculture. This could
include information about the
technology and techniques being used to counter
failures of the past and the unknowns of climate and the market, as well as the
returns that are being seen through smarter farming and consolidated
investment in supply chain logistics.
3.61 This education program will need sector support and for the Australian
Government to work with the COAG Industry and Skills and
Transport and
Infrastructure Councils in a coordinated effort to engage with individual
producers and relevant agriculture peak bodies.
3.62 This effort can then be promoted to the superannuation and wider
financial sector, both domestically and internationally through
mechanisms that Austrade already has in place, both in the form of industry
capability reporting
investment promotion
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government engage with
Council of Australian Governments councils and agricultural peak
develop an information and promotional platform on the benefits of investing in
Australian agriculture.
This platform could then be promoted to the superannuation and investment
sector, both domestically and internationally, to supplement
the existing
international promotion undertaken by Austrade.
Support for existing agribusiness to increase investment
3.64 Even without the barriers discussed above,
superannuation funds would struggle to invest in Australian agriculture for the
reason that there are not many suitable investment options within the
3.65 Prime Super noted that funds do not typically invest in private
businesses, because:
...it is not possible to get a “real value” of the business from
an equity or debt point of view. A “real value”
is only evident at
the time of sale, and in periods of stress on markets this value can be
significantly different to the carrying
value as there is no ready pool of
buyers for the business. In contrast, the listed environment provides a ready
buyer at the right
price, therefore it is almost always possible to exit an
investment.
3.66 The rarity of agricultural businesses as listed companies on the stock
exchange removes a potential direct investment avenue
for superannuation,
especially when funds are reluctant to invest in assets that cannot be
liquidated easily.
3.67 Prime Super identified the current limitations in Australian agriculture
in this domain:
Agriculture does not have an established path for the growth of a business
through to an ultimate public listing (like through private
equity funds). This
is a key limitation for the sector, there are some listed agriculture companies,
but not many. The limitations
that exist include:
§ the need for large scale multi industry multi geographic exposures in
one entity;
§ the high risk of climatic and economic impacts on the return; and
§ the volatility of those returns due to the above
3.68 Additionally, Mr Stephen Anthony, Chief Economist at ISA, argued
...the listing question is one of ease of access to capital and desire to
scale up quickly. So where operations are in family hands
and they've been run
quite profitably and that family business operation is still running quite
effectively, it may be that that
group chooses direct control over every aspect
of the operation and that the private company form, or whatever arrangement they
in place, is more suitable to them. You want to list when you want to scale
up your operations—to take it to that next level
and then that next level
3.69 Mr Craig Roodt of APRA also commented on how the sector’s lack of
a listed market hinders investment at the scale relevant
to superannuation
...in the absence of a listed market, if we think of something like private
equity, for example, one of the considerations, especially
where a business is
going through its formative stages, is, 'What's the eventual exit process?'
Often that is by listing. With the
absence of a diverse listed sector it is less
clear. If someone wanted to pursue a roll-up strategy where they buy many small
amalgamate them and then achieve the scale benefits, one of the issues is
the absence of an exit path. That one path of exit down
the track to realise
value simply isn't there. In my opinion for those two reasons it would serve as
a discouragement.
3.70 This narrow scope for either investment in current listed companies, or
the ability for existing ventures to scale-up and list,
is currently limiting
the attractiveness of the agriculture sector for potential superannuation
investment.
3.71 The investment covenants in
subsection 52(6)
Superannuation
Industry (Supervision) Act 1993
require trustees to analyse risk and likely
return, diversification and liquidity of
investments.
increase in listed agricultural companies that can allow for superannuation
funds to invest via the equity market, an
increase in investment in line with
these covenants is unlikely to eventuate.
3.72 However, without aggregation of assets, expansion or integration of
traditional farming models and informed understanding of
the requirement of
Australian Stock Exchange listing
most agricultural
businesses will not be able to attract investment through these means.
3.73 Warakirri Asset Management pointed to the fragmented nature of the
sector as a disincentive, since it ‘takes time and patience
large-scale agricultural
investment’.
3.74 Mr Timothy McGavin of the LBPC also described scale as an issue of
We need scale. Our minimum investment size is around $30 million, otherwise
we will just lose money, and our investors want us to
keep focused on getting
3.75 The Investor Group on Climate Change recommended that there is a role
for the government to work with superannuation funds and
the agricultural sector
to ‘support the scaling up of institutional investment in the
sector...[including through] the creation
of suitable investment
3.76 The impact of overseas investors purchasing key agricultural assets
within Australia also acts as a disincentive for domestic
investment in the
supply chain, as overseas pension funds or ‘state’ investors are
seen to be ‘cherry picking’
quality assets out of the overall supply
Committee comment
3.77 As a final area for focus to increase the
potential for superannuation investment in agriculture, the Committee agrees
number of stakeholders that aggregation of existing operations,
integration of supply chain flows into existing businesses, and the
consideration of public listing of larger companies on the stock exchange will
lead to increased interest and investment.
3.78 To this end, there is merit in the creation of a ‘toolkit’
to support existing agriculture businesses in understanding
the elements
discussed in attracting investment, if that is their future desired business
3.79 The ideal factors that would contribute to increased domestic
superannuation investment could ideally be captured by bringing
representatives of superannuation funds and the agriculture peak bodies to
discuss improvements in practice and corporate
structure to attract and boost
investment.
3.80 This same forum could also be used to discuss data and performance
measurement requirements, as identified earlier in this chapter.
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends that an initial superannuation and
agricultural industry investment working group be convened, facilitated
Australian Government in the first instance, to identify and promote improved
business process, structure and corporate nature,
that would attract increased
investment.
Concluding comments
3.82 As identified throughout this report, the cause
of low superannuation investment in Australian agriculture is complex and
No one single barrier—regulatory or otherwise—is to
3.83 The simple nature of superannuation fund investment logic and the
requirement for funds to act in the best interests of their
members, while also
meeting the liquidity and return profit basis for investment, puts agriculture
and that part of the investment
market at odds.
3.84 The Committee does not believe that the issues identified and the
recommendations outlined in this report will solve this issue
However, there is room for incremental improvement in data capture and analysis,
unintended taxation impacts and sector
understanding. The recommendations
outlined in this report will hopefully lead to change in both the superannuation
and financial
sector and the agricultural sector, to bring about
mutually-beneficial relationships going forward.
Mr Rick Wilson MP
A. Submissions
Dr Jason West
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
Mr David Rees
Australian Ethical Investment Ltd
Mrs Veronica Terry
Prime Super
Warakirri Asset Management
Confidential
Australian Small Business and Family Enterprise Ombudsman
Industry Super Australia
Australian Securities and Investments Commission
Investment Group on Climate Change
Ms Jo-Anne Bloomfield
Consolidated Pastoral Company
National Farmers' Federation
Laguna Bay Pastoral Company
§ 17.1 Supplementary to submission 17
§ 17.2 Supplementary to submission 17
Agribusiness Australia
Department of Agriculture and Water Resources
§ 19.1 Supplementary to submission 19
Select Harvests
Macquarie Group
B. Public Hearings
Thursday, 21 June 2018—Canberra
Australian Securities and Investments Commission
§ Ms Jane Eccleston, Senior Executive Leader
Investment Managers and Superannuation
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
§ Mr Craig Roodt, Head of Investment Risk
§ Mr Stephen Glenfield, General Manager
Specialised Institutions Division
Thursday, 28 June 2018—Canberra
Department of Agriculture and Water Resources
§ Ms Joann Wilkie, First Assistant Secretary
Agriculture Policy Division
§ Mr Andrew McDonald, Assistant Secretary
Food, Investment and Energy Branch, Agricultural Policy Division
§ Mr Michael Ryan, Director
Agriculture Investment, Agriculture Policy Division
§ Mr David Galeano, Assistant Secretary
Farm Performance and Forestry Branch, Australian Bureau of Agriculture and
Resources Economics and Sciences
Thursday, 16 August 2018—Canberra
Prime Super
§ Mr Lachlan Baird, Chief Executive Officer
§ Mr Duncan Fraser, Director
Thursday, 23 August 2018—Canberra
Industry Super Australia
§ Mr Stephen Anthony, Chief Economist
Consolidated Pastoral Company
§ Mr Troy Setter, Chief Executive Officer
§ Mr Jack Lake, Adviser
Thursday, 13 September 2018—Canberra
Australian Farm Institute
§ Mr Richard Heath, Executive Director
National Farmers' Federation
§ Mr Tony Mahar, Chief Executive Officer
§ Ms Prudence Gordon, General Manager
Trade and Economics
Thursday, 20 September 2018—Canberra
Dr Jason West
Agribusiness Australia
§ Mr Tim Burrow, Chief Executive Officer
Thursday, 18 October 2018—Canberra
Select Harvests
§ Mr Paul Thompson, Managing Director
Laguna Bay Pastoral Company
§ Mr Timothy McGavin, Chief Executive Officer
Thursday, 25 October 2018—Canberra
Duxton Asset Management
§ Mr Ed Peter, Chairman
Southern Aurora Markets
§ Mr Garry Booth, Partner
§ Mr Connor Fitzgerald, Partner, Meet and Livestock
Bridgecape Commodities
§ Mr Scott Briggs, Managing Director
Consolidated Pastoral Company
Submission 15
Industry Super Australia
Driving Super Fund Investment in Agriculture: Discussion Paper
June 2017, p. 1.
Submission 10
Mr Ed Peter, Chairman, Duxton
Asset Management,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 25 October 2018,
Submission 10
Driving Super Fund
Investment in Agriculture: Discussion Paper
, June 2017, p. 3.
Submission 10
2; Laguna Bay Pastoral Company (LBPC),
Submission 17
Australian Securities &
Investments Commission (ASIC),
Submission 11
Mr Stephen Glenfield, General Manager, Specialised Institutions
Division, Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA),
, Canberra, 21 June 2018, p. 5; APRA,
Submission 2
Driving Super Fund
Investment in Agriculture: Discussion Paper
, June 2017, p. 3.
Driving Super Fund
Investment in Agriculture: Discussion Paper
, June 2017, p. 3.
Submission 10
National Farmers’
Federation (NFF),
Submission 16
Submission 15
Submission 15
pp. [1, 7–8].
Submission 16
Prime Super,
, p. 10; Agribusiness Australia,
Submission 18
, p. 4; National
Farmers’ Federation (NFF),
Submission 16
, p. 3; Select Harvests,
Submission 20
Australian Prudential
Regulation Authority (APRA),
Submission 2
Mr Stephen Glenfield,
General Manager, Specialised Institutions Division, APRA,
, 21 June 2018, p. 5.
Australian Securities &
Investments Commission (ASIC),
Submission 11
Submission 11
Foreign Investment Review
Board (FIRB), ‘Agriculture’,
http://firb.gov.au/investment/agricultural/
19 November 2018; FIRB, ‘Agricultural land investments [GN17]’,
http://firb.gov.au/resources/guidance/gn17/
, accessed 19
November 2018.
FIRB, ‘Agricultural
land investments [GN17]’,
http://firb.gov.au/resources/guidance/gn17/
accessed 19 November 2018.
FIRB, ‘Agricultural
land investments [GN17]’,
http://firb.gov.au/resources/guidance/gn17/
, accessed 19
November 2018.
Laguna Bay Pastoral Company
Submission 17
Submission 17
Mr Timothy McGavin, Chief
Executive Officer, LBPC,
Committee Hansard
Submission 17
p. 1; Mr Timothy McGavin, LBPC,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 18 October
2018, p. 10.
Mr Timothy McGavin, LBPC,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 18 October 2018, p. 7; LBPC,
Mr Timothy McGavin, LBPC,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 18 October 2018, p. 10.
Consolidated Pastoral
Company (CPC),
Submission 15
, pp. 1, 8.
Submission 15
Dr Jason West,
Submission 1
Dr Jason West, University
of Queensland,
Committee Hansard
, 20 September 2018, Canberra, p. 4.
Ms Jo-Anne Bloomfield,
Submission 14
ASIC MoneySmart,
Agribusiness schemes
https://www.moneysmart.gov.au/investing/complex-investments/agribusiness-schemes
accessed 27 June 2018.
ASIC MoneySmart,
Agribusiness schemes
https://www.moneysmart.gov.au/investing/complex-investments/agribusiness-schemes
accessed 27 June 2018.
ASIC MoneySmart,
Agribusiness schemes
https://www.moneysmart.gov.au/investing/complex-investments/agribusiness-schemes
accessed 27 June 2018.
Dr Jason West,
1, p. 7; Australian Ethical Investment Ltd,
, p. 2; Prime Super,
Submission 6
, p. 5; Investor Group on Climate
Submission 13
, p. [1]; NFF,
Submission 16
, p. 3; LBPC,
Submission 17.1
Submission 10
Submission 10
Prime Super,
Dr Jason West,
Submission 1
Prime Super,
Prime Super,
Warakirri Asset Management,
Submission 7
CPC, Submission 115, p.
Mr Craig Roodt, Head of
Investment Risk, APRA,
Committee Hansard
, 21 June 2018, Canberra, p.
Mr Stephen Anthony, Chief
Economist, ISA,
Committee Hansard
, 23 August 2018, Canberra, p. 3.
Prime Super,
Prime Super,
Australian Ethical
Investment Ltd,
Submission 4
Australian Ethical
Investment Ltd,
Submission 4
Australian Ethical
Investment Ltd,
Submission 4
Australian Ethical
Investment Ltd,
Submission 4
Australian Ethical
Investment Ltd,
Submission 4
Submission 15
Dr Jason West,
Submission1
Select Harvests,
Submission 20
Prime Super,
Mr Paul Thomson, Managing
Director, Select Harvests,
Committee Hansard
, 18 October 2018, Canberra,
Submission 10
Investor Group on Climate
Submission 13
Mr Troy Setter, Chief
Executive Officer, CPC,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 23 August 2018, p.
Dr Jason West,
Submission 1
, p. 6; Prime Super,
6, p. 5; Ms Jo-Anne
Bloomfield,
Submission 14
, p. 7; Consolidated Pastoral Company (CPC),
Submission 15
, p. [15]; Laguna Bay Pastoral Company (LBPC),
Warakirri Asset Management,
Submission 7
Warakirri Asset Management,
Submission 7
, p. [1] and Ms Jo-Anne Bloomfield,
Submission 14
Warakirri Asset Management,
Submission 7
Dr Jason West,
Submission 1
, pp. 4 and 6.
Dr Jason West,
Submission 1
; Warakirri Asset Management,
Submission 7
; Ms Jo-Anne
Bloomfield,
Submission 14
Submission 15
Farmers’ Federation (NFF),
Submission 16
; Agribusiness Australia
, Submission 18
; Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources (DAWR),
Submission 19
; Select Harvests,
; Macquarie Group,
Submission 21
, Submission 16
Mr Richard Heath, Executive
Director, Australian Farm Institute,
Committee Hansard
, 13 September
2018, Canberra, p. 4.
Mr David Galeano, Assistant
Secretary, Farm Performance and Forestry Branch, Australian Bureau of
Agricultural and Resource Economics
and Sciences, DAWR,
, 28 June 2018, Canberra, p. 5.
Dr Jason West,
Submission 1
, pp. 4 & 7-9; NFF,
Submission 16
, p. 3; LBPC,
Submission 17.1
Submission 19
Prime Super,
Submission 17
Australian Bureau of
Statistics & Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and
Roadmap to improve the agricultural statistics system
http://www.agriculture.gov.au/SiteCollectionDocuments/abares/ag-stats-roadmap.pdf
accessed 15 November 2018.
Industry Super Australia
Submission 10
Agribusiness Australia,
Submission 18
Submission 17
Agribusiness Australia,
Submission 18
Submission 12
p. 3; LBPC,
Submission 17.2
, p.2; Mr Ed Peter, Duxton Asset Management,
Committee Hansard
, 25 October 2018, Canberra, p. 3.
Mr Craig Roodt, Head of
Investment Risk, Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA),
, 21 June 2018, Canberra, p. 3.
Warakirri Asset Management,
Submission 7
Submission 15
Prime Super,
Mr Richard Heath, Executive
Director, Australian Farm Institute,
Committee Hansard
, 13 September
2018, Canberra, p. 6.
Agribusiness
– Industry Capability Reports
https://www.austrade.gov.au/International/Buy/Australian-industry-capabilities/agribusiness
accessed 30 November 2018.
Australia – Agribusiness and Food
https://www.austrade.gov.au/International/Invest/Opportunities/agribusiness-and-food
accessed 30 November 2018.
Prime Super,
Prime Super,
Mr Stephen Anthony, Chief
Economist, ISA,
Committee Hansard
, 23 August 2018, Canberra, p. 4.
Mr Craig Roodt, Head of
Investment Risk, APRA,
Committee Hansard,
21 June 2018, Canberra,
Mr Stephen Glenfield,
General Manager, Specialised Institutions Division, APRA,
Committee Hansard,
21 June 2018, Canberra, p. 3.
requirements
https://www.asx.com.au/listings/listing-with-asx/listing-requirements.htm
accessed 21 November 2018.
Warakirri Asset
Management,
Submission 7
Mr Timothy McGavin,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 18 October 2018, p. 10.
Investor Group on
Climate Change,
Submission 13
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (297 KB)
PDF format (588 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter