URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJStaCPW/2019/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:09:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Parliamentary Joint Standing Committee on Public Works (46th Parliament) --- "Report 03/2019 - National Museum of Australia Gallery Development Stage 1: Life in Australia - PP 259/2019" [2019] AUPJStaCPW 3 (16 September 2019)
Membership of the 45th Parliament
Membership of the 46th Parliament
Committee Secretariat
Dissolution of the 45th Parliament
Structure of the Report
Conduct of the inquiry
Need for the works
Scope of the works
Community consultation
Heritage considerations
Cost of the works
Committee comment
National Museum of Australia Gallery Development Stage 1: Life in Australia
Monday, 1 April 2019 – Canberra
National Museum of Australia
PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Report 3 2019
Referral made July 2019
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works
© Commonwealth of Australia
ISBN 978-1-76092-019-7 (Printed Version)
ISBN 978-1-76092-020-3 (HTML Version)
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 3.0 Australia License.
The details of this licence are available on the Creative Commons website:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/au/
Membership of the
The Hon Dr John McVeigh MP
Deputy Chair
Mr Tony Zappia MP
Senator Alex Gallacher
Mr Ian Goodenough MP
Ms Justine Keay MP
Ms Joanne Ryan MP
Senator Amanda Stoker
Mr Andrew Wallace MP
Senator John Williams
Membership of the
The Hon Dr John McVeigh MP
Deputy Chair
Mr Tony Zappia MP
Ms Lisa Chesters MP
Senator Alex Gallacher
Senator Hollie Hughes
Hon Barnaby Joyce MP
Senator Susan McDonald
Mr David Smith MP
Mr Rick Wilson MP
Committee Secretariat
Committee Secretary
Pauline Cullen
Inquiry Secretary
James Bunce
Senior Research Officer
Office Manager
Tanya Pratt
1. Introduction
1.1 Under the
Public Works Committee Act 1969
(the Act), the
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works is required to inquire into and
report on public works referred to
it through either house of Parliament.
Referrals are made pursuant to
of the Act, and by practice are made
by the Minister for Finance or their delegate in the House of
Representatives.
1.2 All public works that have an estimated cost exceeding $15 million must
be referred to the Committee and cannot be commenced until
the Committee has
made its report to Parliament and the House of Representatives receives that
report and resolves that it is expedient
to carry out the
1.3 Under the Act, a public work is a work proposed to be undertaken by the
Commonwealth, or on behalf of the Commonwealth concerning:
§ the construction, alteration, repair, refurbishment or fitting-out of
buildings and other structures;
§ the installation, alteration or repair of plant and equipment designed
to be used in, or in relation to, the provision of services
for buildings and
other structures;
§ the undertaking, construction, alteration or repair of landscaping and
earthworks (whether or not in relation to buildings
and other structures);
§ the demolition, destruction, dismantling or removal of buildings,
plant and equipment, earthworks, and other structures;
§ the clearing of land and the development of land for use as urban land
or otherwise; and
§ any other matter declared by the regulations to be a
1.4 The Act requires that the Committee consider and report on:
§ the purpose of the work and its suitability for that purpose;
§ the need for, or the advisability of, carrying out the work;
§ whether the money to be expended on the work is being spent in the
most cost effective manner;
§ the amount of revenue the work will generate for the Commonwealth, if
that is its purpose; and
§ the present and prospective public value of the
1.5 The Committee pays attention to these and any other relevant factors when
considering the proposed work.
Dissolution of the
1.6 The National Museum of Australia Gallery Development Stage 1: Life in
Australia project was referred to the Public Works Committee
(PWC) of the
Parliament on 13 February 2019.
1.7 The Committee had completed the inquiry processes but did not table a
report prior to the dissolution of the Parliament. The referral
1.8 The National Museum of Australia Gallery Development Stage 1: Life in
Australia project was referred to the PWC of the 46
Parliament on
31 July 2019. The Committee decided not to repeat the inquiry process as it was
advised by the National Museum of Australia
that there had been no significant
changes to the work since the original referral. Evidence taken on the inquiry
is available on
the Committee’s website.
1.9 The Committee thanks members of the PWC of the 45
for their time and expertise in conducting the inquiry.
Structure of the
1.10 In considering the works, the Committee analysed the evidence presented
by the proponent agency, submissions and evidence received
at public and
in-camera hearings.
1.11 In consideration of the need to report expeditiously as required by
Section 17(1) of the Act, the Committee has only reported
on significant issues
of interest or concern.
1.12 Chapter 2 addresses the proposed National Museum of Australia Gallery
Development Stage 1: Life in Australia project. The estimated
cost of this
project is $20.5 million (excluding GST).
1.13 Submissions are listed at Appendix A, and hearings and witnesses are
listed at Appendix B.
2. National Museum of Australia Gallery
Redevelopment Stage 1 - Life in Australia
2.1 The National Museum of Australia (NMA) seeks approval from the Committee
to proceed with stage one of its proposed gallery development
program, the Life
in Australia environmental history gallery. The proposal is to redevelop
original exhibitions to create a new 1500
square metres permanent exhibition of
environmental history provisionally titled Life in Australia.
2.2 The estimated cost of the project is $20.5 million (excluding GST).
2.3 The project was referred to the Committee on 13 February 2019.
Conduct of the
2.4 Following referral, the inquiry was publicised on the Committee’s
website and via media release.
2.5 The Committee received one submission and one confidential submission. A
list of submissions can be found at Appendix A.
2.6 On 1 April 2019, the Committee conducted a public and in-camera hearing.
A transcript of the public hearing is available on the
Committee’s
Need for the works
2.7 The National Museum of Australia (NMA) was officially opened on 11 March
2001 and was established to develop and maintain the
National Historical
Collection for the benefit of the
2.8 In 2016-17 the NMA received more than 1.8 million visitors, making it a
key cultural institution of national
significance.
2.9 In its submission to the Committee, the NMA stated:
The currency of the Museum’s galleries, the number of objects they
display, and the standard and quality of presentation is
pivotal to the
Museum’s continuing success and ability to meet legislative
responsibilities.
the public hearing, the NMA told the Committee it had developed a Master Plan to
2030 that outlines a strategy to double the
size of current exhibition space,
leads innovation in new experiential technologies, and enhances commercial
operations to raise
additional own-source income. The NMA stated that a key part
of the Master Plan is a major program of gallery
2.11 The NMA stated that the proposed gallery renewal program:
...will see the permanent galleries redeveloped into three distinct spaces with
a linked narrative experience that comprehensively
tells the story of Australia.
The first phase of this program is ‘Gallery Development Stage 1: Life in
Australia’. This
phase will involve the redevelopment of exhibitions
original to the opening of the Museum in
2.12 At the
public hearing, the NMA explained to the Committee that ‘the useful life
of these sorts of galleries is anywhere
between 15 and 20
The NMA noted
As the galleries approach their 20th year, they are showing significant signs of
age and will not meet the demand of growing audience
numbers. Over the past five
years, on-site visitor engagements at the Museum have grown by an average of 18%
each year, from 600,000
in 2014, to over 1,000,000 in 2018. With increased
visitation forecast to continue, addressing the age and deficiencies of current
galleries is an urgent
NMA stated that two of the three exhibitions to be redeveloped are currently
closed, having been retained beyond their useful
life and due to the
‘option of continuing maintenance being cost
prohibitive’.
2.14 The NMA told the Committee it had identified a number of deficiencies in
the three exhibitions to be redeveloped under this proposal:
§ Circa theatre (closed in 2017 due to age and currently repurposed as a
programming space);
§ Eternity (closed in 2017 due to age and currently repurposed as
temporary display space); and
§ Old New Land, the current permanent exhibition of environmental
history (opened in 2001).
2.15 In its submission to the Committee, the NMA also identified a number of
specific deficiencies caused by the age of these three
exhibitions:
§ Non-compliance with aspects of the building code;
§ Aged building services;
§ Aged exhibition infrastructure;
§ Lack of flexibility and functionality within the built architecture,
including a ramp and mezzanine level;
§ Confusing visitor circulation throughout;
§ Outdated exhibition narrative, content and visitor experience; and
§ Inadequate display of collection and interpretive
Scope of the works
2.16 In its submission, NMA set out the objectives of the proposed works,
stating that they were intended to:
§ Create a building envelope to support the proposed exhibition;
§ Increase exhibition space and maximise the functionality and
flexibility of the space by:
- Removing visual and physical impediments such as airlocks; ramps; and
- Creating volume for large displays;
- Improving circulation and wayfinding through a well-defined visitor path;
§ Create space for functions and events to take place in the exhibition
2.17 In order to achieve these objectives, NMA proposed the following base
building works:
§ Partial removal of an existing mezzanine floor to create a new
mezzanine floor;
§ Demolition of part of the building façade to create a new
external stair improving connections between floors and enhanced
connections to
Lake Burley Griffin;
§ Removal of the existing internal stair; and
§ Removal of existing internal
2.18 The proposed demolition works include:
§ Lower ground – an existing door will be removed and replaced
with an airlock.
§ Ground floor – the majority of existing internal walls will be
removed to provide a clear base layout for the exhibition.
An existing
non-compliant circulation ramp will be removed to create a larger usable floor
area. The design supports minimal changes
to plant and riser locations. An
existing internal stair between the Ground Floor and Level 1 will be
§ Level 1 – the existing mezzanine will be partially demolished to
increase the double height space available to the exhibition
area below. The
existing internal stair to the Ground Floor will be removed. The existing
kitchen will be refurbished.
§ General – Redundant electrical outlets, power and communications
cabling and trays will be removed. All existing lighting,
including lighting
control equipment, will be decommissioned and removed with the exception of the
emergency lighting monitoring
devices. Redundant communications cabling will be
removed. Existing floor coverings will be removed and floors will be made level
§ External – part of the eastern façade will be demolished
to allow for the new external
§ The proposed structural works include:
- A new external stair;
- Removal of an existing non-compliant circulation internal ramp; and
- Partial removal of an existing linear mezzanine to create a new
multipurpose mezzanine.
2.19 The proposed mechanical works include:
§ Two new air handling units with ultrasonic humidification systems to
provide extremely high efficiency humidification control;
§ Replacement of existing smoke exhaust fans, and/or installation of
additional smoke exhaust fans;
§ Reuse of existing mechanical ductwork and zoning where possible;
§ New diffusers to the ceilings; and
§ Recessed de-stratification fans to double-height spaces for energy
efficiency and
environmental.
2.20 Additional proposed works include:
§ Hydraulic works –new reverse osmosis plant equipment, new
drainage and cold water for the proposed new kitchenette on
Level 1, and
relocation of the existing fire hose reel and hydrant.
§ Electrical works – provision for lighting, power and mechanical
including security monitoring, detection and essential
services such as fire
detection and EWIS.
§ Acoustics – acoustic design to address noise from the building
services and the proposed exhibition.
§ Façade – parts of the existing aluminium panelled
building façade and some of the existing glazing will
be removed, and
glazing for the new external stair that is consistent with the existing patterns
in the Museum atrium.
2.21 In its submission, the NMA explained that the proposed exhibition works
will comprise the redevelopment of three existing exhibitions
theatre, Eternity and Old New Land – all of which date from 2001. A fourth
exhibition, Australian Journeys, will
be relocated and amalgamated into a larger
permanent exhibition.
2.22 According to the NMA:
Exhibition works are defined to comprise infrastructure works that are installed
within the base building structure which are required
for the medium-term
operation of the Museum. Design is the responsibility of a specialist exhibition
designer and works are generally
undertaken by specialist fit-out contractors.
The works are specific to a particular exhibition and have an expected design
proposed exhibition works include:
§ Cabinets, plinths and other exhibition-specific joinery;
§ Showcases;
§ Exhibition specific services;
§ Graphic structures;
§ Public program infrastructure and defined spaces;
§ Object barriers;
§ Exhibition lighting, both fixtures and track;
§ Exhibition security systems;
§ Exhibition graphics, signage and text;
§ Object display and support elements;
§ Hanging systems;
§ Guidelines for materials used in showcases;
§ Specified showcase systems;
§ Multimedia/digital infrastructure, both hardware and software; and
§ Floor and ceiling finishes within the exhibition
2.24 The exhibition will be entitled “Life in Australia”, and is
focused on environmental history. According to the NMA,
it will ‘reveal
the grand, dynamic patterns of the Australian continent, and explore how people
are part of its lively rhythms
The proposed key
exhibition ‘stories’ are:
§ Introduction to the Story of Australia - as told through the
Museum’s three permanent galleries: ‘Life in Australia’,
‘A Modern Nation’, and ‘Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
§ Introduction to Life in Australia – including the biodiversity,
geology and evolutionary history of the continent.
§ Power – deep time forces of creation understood geologically and
culturally, the power and agency of the non-human world,
and the role of humans
within this system – Indigenous creation spirits, deep time continental
formation, monsoons and cyclones,
and crocodiles.
§ Connection – the continent’s dynamic rhythms and flows
across landscapes and seasons – Murray Darling Basic,
Australian Alps,
whales and Eden.
§ Life – the unique biodiversity, beauty and complexity of life
in Australia, and human relationships of care and nourishment
with the non-human
world – Great Barrier Reef, arid lands, Southwest Western Australia,
Canberra region, and Tasmania.
§ Change – past, present and future
Community consultation
2.25 In its submission to the Committee, the NMA stated it has undertaken
wide-ranging consultation for this project via a participatory
develop the Life in Australia exhibition. The NMA states that it is
‘working closely with members of the public
who have a direct connection
to the content of the exhibition, including Indigenous and non- Indigenous
communities’.
2.26 The NMA stated that at the time of making its submission to the
Committee it was informing and consulting with the following
key stakeholders:
the general public, schools and the education sector, Minister for Communication
and the Arts, Council of the NMA,
Indigenous Reference Group of the NMA,
sponsors and other corporate partners, donors and lenders of content,
communities and individuals
associated with exhibition content, specialist
groups and associations, the National Capital Authority, and other
considerations
2.27 The Committee notes that although the Museum is an iconic building of
national significance located within the Parliamentary
Triangle, it is not a
place entered in the Commonwealth and National Heritage Lists.
2.28 In its submission to the Committee the NMA stated that:
The Museum has engaged the original Principal Architect of the Museum, Howard
Raggatt from practice ARM Architecture to undertake
the architectural design for
the project. The Museum and ARM Architecture are committed to the principles of
heritage management
and will ensure any change to the building has no adverse
impact on its values.
Cost of the works
2.29 ‘The Gallery Development Stage One: Life in Australia’
project has an estimated cost of $20.5 million, exclusive
of GST, and is to be
fully funded from the Museum’s existing capital
2.30 The NMA noted that it intends to seek non-Government sponsorship for the
project, in addition to the project budget of $20.5
million. This will be used
to enhance the exhibition ‘through a greater presentation of objects from
the National Historical
Collection and supplementation of technology to enhance
the interactivity and interpretative reach of the
exhibition’.
2.31 The NMA provided further details on project costings in its confidential
submission and during an in-camera hearing.
2.32 The Committee is satisfied that the costings for the project provided to
it have been adequately assessed by the proponent entity.
2.33 The Committee was pleased to note that the funding for the project is
being sourced from the Museum’s existing capital
Committee comment
2.34 The Committee recognises the National Museum of Australia as one of
Australia’s important national cultural institutions,
which plays a key
educational role in the community and in the dissemination of the Australian
2.35 The Committee encourages the NMA to continue consulting with key
stakeholders with regard to the proposed gallery development
and exhibition
2.36 The Committee did not identify any issues of concern with the proposal
and is satisfied that the project has merit in terms of
need, scope and
2.37 Having regard to its role and responsibilities contained in the
Public Works Committee Act 1969
, the Committee is of the view that this
project signifies value for money for the Commonwealth and constitutes a project
fit for purpose, having regard to the established need.
Recommendation 1
2.38 The Committee recommends that the House of Representatives resolve,
pursuant to
Section 18(7)
Public Works Committee Act 1969
, that it is
expedient to carry out the following proposed works: proposed Gallery
Development Stage 1: Life in Australia for the
National Museum of Australia in
Canberra, Australian Capital Territory.
2.39 Proponent entities must notify the Committee of any changes to the
project scope, time, cost, function or design. The Committee
also requires that
a post-implementation report be provided within three months of project
completion. A report template can be found
on the Committee’s website.
Hon Dr John McVeigh MP
A. List of submissions
National Museum of Australia Gallery Development Stage 1: Life in
National Museum of Australia
§ 1.1 Confidential
B. Public Hearings and Witnesses
National Museum of Australia
Gallery Development Stage 1: Life in
April 2019 – Canberra
National Museum of
Dr Mathew Trinca, Director
Mr Ian Campbell, Chief Financial Officer
Ms Rowena MacDonald, Acting Program Manager, Gallery Management and
Development
Ms Jilda Andrews, Acting Producer, Gallery Management and Development
Ms Katherine McMahan, Acting Assistant Director, Discovery and
Collections
WT Partnership
Mr Malcolm Prett, Associate
ARM Architecture
Ms Amber Stewart, Architect/Senior Associate
All public works that have an
estimated cost exceeding $15 million must be referred to the Committee and
cannot be commenced until
the Committee has made its report to Parliament and
the House of Representatives receives that report and resolves that it is
to carry out the work.
The Act, Section 5.
The Act, Section 17.
National Museum of Australia,
Submission 1
National Museum of Australia,
Submission 1
National Museum of Australia,
Submission 1
National Museum of Australia,
Submission 1
National Museum of Australia,
Submission 1
Dr Matthew Trinca, National
Museum of Australia,
Transcript of Evidence,
1 April 2019, p. 2.
National Museum of
Submission 1
National Museum of
Submission 1
National Museum of
Submission 1
, pp. 7 – 8.
National Museum of
Submission 1
, pp. 7 – 8.
National Museum of
Submission 1
National Museum of
Submission 1
National Museum of
Submission 1
National Museum of
Submission 1
National Museum of
Submission 1
National Museum of
Submission 1
, p. 30-32.
National Museum of
Submission 1
National Museum of
Submission 1
National Museum of
Submission 1
National Museum of
Submission 1
National Museum of
Submission 1
, pp. 34-35.
National Museum of
Submission 1
National Museum of
Submission 1
National Museum of
Submission 1
National Museum of
Submission 1
National Museum of
Submission 1
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (133 KB)
PDF format (409 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter