URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/ACTLAStaCEP/2019/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:05:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ACT Legislative Assembly Standing Committee on Environment and Transport and City Services ( Parliament) --- "Territory Coat of Arms" [2019] ACTLAStaCEP 9 (22 August 2019)
Inquiry into a Territory Coat of Arms
The Committee
Committee Membership
Current Members
Secretariat
Resolution of appointment
Terms of reference
Recommendations
1 Introduction
Background to the inquiry
Conduct of the inquiry
Structure of the report
Acknowledgements
2 What is a coat of arms?
Historical roots
Components of coats of arms
3 The City of Canberra Coat of Arms
Design Process
Meaning and symbolism
Association with Royal Australian Navy
Legal status
Views of contributors
Committee Comment
4 Should the ACT Adopt a Coat of Arms?
Support for an ACT coat of arms
City of Canberra Coat of Arms are not the Territory’s coat of arms
City of Canberra Coat of Arms is outdated and unreflective of the Territory
The process through which the City of Canberra Coat of Arms was adopted was not democratic, transparent or accountable.
Opposition to a separate ACT coat of arms
The City of Canberra Coat of Arms is the coat of arms for the Territory
The symbolism of the current coat of arms is appropriate
The adoption of a new coat of arms would be a waste of government resources
Adopting new insignia for the Territory, but not a new coat of arms
If a new Territory coat or arms was adopted, what should happen to the City of Canberra Coat of Arms?
Updating the City of Canberra Coat of Arms
5 What should be included in an ACT Coat of Arms?
Design concepts
ACT as the capital of an independent, modern and progressive nation
Connection to place and people
Simplicity in design
Heraldic principles
Design elements
Floral emblem—Royal Bluebell
Faunal emblem—Gang-gang Cockatoo
Mammal emblem—Southern Brush-tailed Rock-wallaby
Representation of the Traditional Custodians/Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community
Three branches of Government
Other design elements
Design suggestions
6 Opportunities for community participation
Scope of community consultation
Committee comment
7 Procedural considerations for adopting a Coat of Arms
Australian precedents
Process for granting a Coat of Arms
College of Arms, London
Self-adoption through Australia’s Royal Prerogative
Self-adoption through the ACT Legislative Assembly
Committee Comment
8 The ACT Flag and Other Insignia
The modified City of Canberra Coat of Arms
Relationship between a coat of arms and a flag
Design principles, concepts and suggestions
A symbols package for the ACT
Committee Comment
9 Conclusion
Appendix A - Witnesses
21 May 2019
Appendix B – Submissions
Inquiry into a Territory Coat of
Standing Committee on Environment and Transport and City
August 2019
Current Members
Ms Suzanne Orr MLA Chair
Miss Candice Burch MLA Member (from 15 Feb 2018) and Deputy Chair
(from 28 Feb 2018)
Mr James Milligan MLA Member (from 20 September 2018)
Secretariat
Danton Leary Committee Secretary (from June 2019)
Annemieke Jongsma Committee Secretary (April 2019 to June 2019)
Brianna McGill Committee Secretary (May 2018 to March 2019)
Jayden Evett Committee Support
Lydia Chung Administration
Atkins Administration
Telephone 02
Facsimile 02 6205 0432
Post GPO Box 1020, CANBERRA ACT 2601
LACommitteeETCS@parliament.act.gov.au
www.parliament.act.gov.au
Resolution of
appointment
Legislative Assembly for the ACT (the Assembly) agreed by resolution on 13
December 2016 to establish legislative and general
purpose standing committees
to inquire into and report on matters referred to them by the Assembly or
matters that are considered
by the committees to be of concern to the community,
A Standing Committee on Environment and Transport and City Services to
examine matters related to city and transport services, public
infrastructure,
heritage, and sport and recreation and matters related to all aspects of climate
change policy and programs, water
and energy policy and programs, provision of
water and energy services, conservation, environment and ecological
sustainability.
Terms of reference
At its meeting on Thursday, 29 November 2018, the Assembly passed the
following resolution:
That the Standing Committee on Environment and Transport and City Services:
(1) Further consider, and consult with the community on, a new Territory Coat of
(2) Report back to the Assembly by 6 June
Federal Capital Commission
Royal Australian Navy
Table of Contents
Recommendations
1 Introduction
1.1 On 29 November 2018 the Assembly resolved that the Standing Committee on
Environment and Transport and City Services further consider,
and consult with
the community on, a new Territory Coat of Arms; and report back to the Assembly
by 6 June 2019.
On 16 May 2019,
this reporting date was amended to 1 August 2019 and was further amended on 30
July 2019 to 31 August 2019.
Background to the inquiry
1.2 On 30 November 2017 the Assembly resolved that the Standing Committee on
Environment and Transport and City Services investigate
and report back to the
Assembly on whether the ACT should have a mammal emblem, and a recommendation on
what that should be, by September
1.3 In July 2018 the Committee published its report on an
Inquiry into a
proposal for a Mammal Emblem for the
During this inquiry, four
submissions suggested that a mammal emblem for the ACT creates the potential to
design a new coat of arms
for the ACT. The Committee recommended that the ACT
Government note the potential for the adoption of a mammal emblem to lead to
design of a Coat of Arms for the ACT, and the possible redesign of the ACT Flag.
1.4 The ACT Government tabled its formal response to the mammal emblem report
on 29 November 2018, and the document includes the following
The ACT Government notes the potential for the adoption of a mammal emblem to
lead to the design of a Coat of Arms for the ACT, and
the possible redesign of
the ACT flag.
The introduction of the new mammal emblem presents the opportunity to look at
the other symbols of our city and whether they meet
the current expectations of
our community.
All State and Territory Coats of Arms have been approved through a Royal
Proclamation process facilitated by Buckingham Palace, with
the last Coat of
Arms granted in 1984 for South Australia. The ACT flag can be changed through
the existing Legislative framework
of the Assembly.
The ACT Government supports consideration of a Territory Coat of Arms and
suggests the Standing Committee on Environment and Transport
and City Services
undertake further community consultation and consideration of this
1.5 Immediately
after tabling the Government response, the Chief Minister, Andrew Barr MLA,
moved that the Assembly adopt the Southern
Brush-tailed Rock-wallaby as the
mammal emblem for the ACT, and after debate the motion was passed by the
1.6 On the same day, the Chief Minister moved the motion which led to the
Assembly resolution that the Standing Committee on Environment
and Transport and
City Services further consider, and consult with the community on, a new
Territory coat of arms; and report back
to the Assembly by 6 June
Conduct of the inquiry
1.7 The Committee called for public submissions on 21 March 2019, with the
closing date 21 April 2019. In making this call for submission,
the Committee
was particularly interested to hear responses to two questions it posed to
potential contributors: 1) whether there
should be a coat of arms for the
Australian Capital Territory (in addition to the Canberra Coat of Arms), and 2)
what symbols might
be included in the design of an ACT coat of
1.8 This opportunity was publicised through media releases, a notice in
The Canberra Times
, a notice on the Committee’s webpage, mainstream
media coverage, and social media channels. The Committee also wrote, by email,
to individuals, groups and organisations it considered likely to be interested
in the Inquiry.
1.9 During the Inquiry the Committee received a total of 68 submissions,
which were published on the Committee’s webpage and
are listed in Appendix
B to this report.
1.10 On 21 May 2019 the Committee held a public hearing for the Inquiry,
during which it heard from 12 witnesses. These witnesses
are listed in Appendix
A to this report. The transcript of the hearing is available on the Legislative
Assembly’s website.
Structure of the report
1.11 This report is informed by research, submissions, and evidence provided
at the public hearing. The structure of the report is
as follows:
• Chapter 1—Introduction (the present chapter);
• Chapter 2—What is a coat of arms?;
• Chapter 3—The City of Canberra Coat of Arms;
• Chapter 4—Should the ACT adopt a coat of arms?;
• Chapter 5—What should be included in an ACT coat of arms?;
• Chapter 6—Opportunities for community consultation;
• Chapter 7—Procedural considerations for adopting a coat of
• Chapter 8—The ACT Flag and other insignia; and
• Chapter 9—Conclusion.
Acknowledgements
1.12 The Committee wishes to thank the following people, and acknowledge
their important contribution to the inquiry:
 The individuals and organisations who made submissions to the
Inquiry and those who appeared as witnesses;
 Staff at Archives ACT and the National Archives of Australia who
provided assistance in locating historical documents relating
to the City of
Canberra Coat of Arms;
 The staff at Canberra Museum and Gallery (CMAG), who invited the
Committee to attend a viewing of the exhibition
A Flag of Our Own
February 2019.
2 What is a coat of
Historical roots
2.1 Heraldry is the design, study, and protocol of coats of arms. It comes
from a long history of human self-representation through
designs and imagery,
with roots spanning the ancient cultures of the Middle East, Mediterranean, East
Asia, and Australia, where
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples
developed a complex system of symbols used to identify themselves, country, and
2.2 The practice as it is known today developed out of 12
Century European systems designed to record which designs had been awarded to
represent which individuals. Being awarded an armorial
bearing was considered a
great honour, as it was often at the direction of a monarch. It was traditional
to emblazon the design on
shields, flags, and
overcoat which inspired the term ‘coat of
2.3 Customary laws of heraldry developed around the grant, use, and
inheritance of coats of arms. Originally these laws only allowed
for a living
person to be awarded arms. However, this restriction was later eased to include,
among others, city authorities, academic
institutions, and commercial
businesses.
2.4 To oversee heraldic process, monarchs vested power in their heralds, as
officials responsible for the granting, control, and interpretation
of armorial
bearings on their behalf.
Nowadays these heraldic duties are typically vested in national authorities,
such as the College of Arms in England, the Court of
the Lord Lyon in Scotland,
the Canadian Heraldic Authority, and the Bureau of Heraldry in South Africa.
Australia, by contrast, does
not have its own heraldic authority.
Components of coats of
2.5 Coats of arms comprise eleven components which, in their entirety, are
called ‘heraldic achievements’. As demonstrated
in Figure 1, these
(a) an escutcheon, or shield;
(b) crowns or coronets;
(c) a helm or headwear;
(d) mantling;
(e) a torse;
(f) a crest;
(g) supporters;
(h) a slogan;
(i) a compartment;
(j) orders; and
(k) a motto.
: Labelled components of a
heraldic achievement
2.6 Central to all coats of arms is the escutcheon, or shield. Its blazon
(design) can feature a wide range of design features, including
shapes, animals, and objects. Design features on modern escutcheons often have
deeper symbolism, which help further personalise
a coat of arms and give them
2.7 Colours used in the design are traditionally restricted to a set of ten
metals, colours, and stains, collectively called
. Additional
colours have been adopted in North American and European heraldry, however these
are uncommon in British-style
2.8 The shape of the escutcheon varies, with some shapes more common in
certain areas than others and certain shapes designated for
specific people
(e.g. women and clergy) in individual heraldic traditions. In some
populations have been adopted,
such as the Inuit roundel in Canada and the Nguni shield in African heraldry
(Figure 2).
: Examples of escutcheon shapes
(left to right): Old French, Iberian, Inuit roundel, and Nguni shield
2.9 Beyond the escutcheon, which other components are used depends both on
who bears the arms and their design preferences. Elements
like orders and
coronets are typically restricted to individuals, due to depicting rank or
awards of chivalry, and do not usually
feature on non-personal
The exclusion and
inclusion of other components varies depending on the prevailing fashion of the
2.10 Supporters, which typically come in pairs, ‘support’ the
central shield from either side. These are usually either
(humans), or – less commonly –
Their stance is drawn
from a set range of
(positions). Custom insists that any
supporter must have a compartment, or something to stand on, beneath
3 The City of Canberra Coat
3.1 The arms of the City of Canberra (Image 3) were designed in 1928 and
granted by King George V to the Federal Capital Commissioners
successors in a corporate capacity, for use on the Common Seal of the City of
: The City of Canberra Coat of
Arms with its motto in English
Design Process
3.2 The Federal Capital Commission (FCC) was established in 1924 as a body
corporate to build and administer Canberra as the site
of the national
In July 1927 the
Commonwealth Department of Defence wrote to the Commonwealth Department of Home
Affairs and Territories to request
that a coat of arms be designed for use on
the new ship, HMAS Canberra, to be commissioned in July
This request was referred
to the FCC.
3.3 In August 1927, the FCC announced a public competition to design a coat
of arms for the Federal Capital Commissioners and for
the City of
The FCC rejected all
the designs it received and then employed one of the competition
entrants—an arts illustrator with expertise
in English heraldry, Charles
R. Wylie—to produce a design more satisfactory to the
Commissioners.
3.4 Wylie’s design (Image 4) was sent to the College of Arms, the
English heraldic authority, in April 1928 with a request for
a grant of the
This design was amended by
the College of Arms to a form closer to the current arms (Figure 3 above). The
escutcheon and crest were
granted by Royal Warrant of King George V on 8 October
After some alteration,
including the replacement of one of the black swans for a white one, the
supporters were granted by Letters
Patent by Garter King of Arms later that year
on 9 November.
: Canberra Coat of Arms as sent
to the College of Arms 1928
Meaning and symbolism
3.5 The official interpretation of the features of the arms is:
(l) The crossed Sword of Justice and mace intersecting an Imperial Crown
represent the Commonwealth’s executive, parliamentary,
and sovereign
(m) The castle represents the dignity, importance and grandeur of Canberra as
(n) The white rose is the emblem of the Duke of York, and recognises the role
of Prince Albert, Duke of York, in opening the provisional
Parliament House in
Canberra, on 9 May 1927;
(o) The portcullis is taken from the City of Westminster’s coat of
arms, the seat of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. This
sits in front of a
gum tree, representative of the city’s growth, and is crowned with the
imperial crown,
(p) The two swans represent Australia’s white and Indigenous
populations, and
(q) The motto, originally in Latin as
pro rege, lege, et grege
rendered in English as ‘For the Queen, the Law, and the
3.6 As noted above, Wylie’s original design submitted to the College of
Arms included two black swans (Figure 4 above), but
this was vetoed by the
College due to the design’s similarity to the coat of arms for the City of
Perth, WA, which had been
recently assigned and featured two black swans. The
Committee received submissions and heard evidence that designer Charles R. Wylie
had allegedly justified the inclusion of the white swan on the arms as a
representation of the ‘White Australia Policy’,
something reflected
in newspaper articles of the
3.7 In addition to this, the Committee heard that the English translation of
the Latin motto used by the Territory has long been considered
inaccurate, where
better translates to ‘mob’ rather than
Association with Royal
Australian Navy
3.8 There is a long association between the arms of the City of Canberra and
the Royal Australian Navy (RAN). Indeed, the impetus
for the arms’
creation was the intention to name one of the RAN’s
heavy cruisers after the city and feature its arms and a modified motto in the
ship’s badge (Image 4), as was
traditional.
3.9 Since 1928, there have been three eponymous ships to carry the City of
Canberra Coat of Arms on their badges, including HMAS Canberra
(I), which was
sunk in 1942 in the Battle of Savo Island during the Guadalcanal
The ship and its 84
crewmembers who died are memorialised in a monument on the north side of Lake
Burley Griffin.
: The Badge of the HMAS
3.10 The latest ship to bear the arms of the City of Canberra is the HMAS
Canberra (III). This ship was commissioned in 2014 and in
March 2015 was
formally designated the flagship of the
3.11 Several witnesses and submitters acknowledged the importance of the
historical association between the City of Canberra Coat
of Arms and the RAN.
These contributors suggested that this connection means that the existing coat
of arms should be retained and
protected for continued use, even if a new and
separate Territory coat of arms is
Legal status
3.12 The Committee heard conflicting evidence on the legal standing of the
current City of Canberra Coat of Arms. This confusion centred
on the ownership
of the arms and whether these arms are specific to the City of Canberra or
whether they can legitimately serve as
the arms of the wider ACT also.
3.13 As touched on above, according to the Royal Warrant granting armorial
bearings for the ‘City of Canberra’ in 1928,
the arms were for use
by ‘the Federal Capital Commissioners and their successors in their
corporate capacity’.
the FCC was abolished in 1930, the Commonwealth Government asked the High
Commissioner in London to seek advice from the College
of Arms whether the
Canberra Coat of Arms should be re-granted. AT Butler (Windsor Herald) advised
the High Commissioner that:
...in the opinion of Garter the Commonwealth Government, as the new legally
constituted authority in control of the City of Canberra,
are the successors to
the Federal Capital Commission to which Armorial Bearings were granted in 1928
and that therefore no re-grant
1932 the Commonwealth Government issued an ordinance, the ‘City of
Canberra Arms Ordinance 1932’, to govern the
use of the coat of arms under
the authority of ‘the
self-government for the ACT in 1989, this ordinance became an ACT Act, with the
relevant minister becoming an ACT Government
3.15 At the same time, following self-government, jurisdiction over the
Territory became divided between the ACT Government and the
Commonwealth
Government’s National Capital
Views of contributors
3.16 Some submitters and witnesses expressed their view that the Territory
does not have a coat of arms and that the current coat
of arms is limited to
Canberra city.
Some of these
contributors explicitly tied this belief to an opinion that the ACT Government
is not the legitimate successor to the
3.17 The Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra argued that ‘[t]he
closest current equivalent to the FCC is probably the
National Capital
Authority’. In support of this assertion the Society provided a letter
from the College of Arms that asserted
The ACT Government does not have the right to use the Arms granted to the
Federal Capital Commission in 1928... Physical possession
of the Letters Patent
in the Archives of the ACT Government does not give them any rights over the
Armorial Bearings being
on this understanding, Geoffrey Kingman-Sugar, Heraldry Special Interest Group,
the Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra,
told the Committee that the ACT
should adopt a separate coat of arms for the Territory, arguing that the city
and the Territory were
...because Canberra is a city which is an integral part of the ACT. It does not
have the same boundaries or even context as the whole
of the ACT. We are the
only territory on mainland Australia without
witnesses questioned the competency of the College of Arms in dictating which
entity could legitimately use the arms in
the context of Australian law. Richard
d’Apice AM, President, the Australian Heraldry Society, argued that:
I do not think that the ACT or indeed any other Australian body should take its
guidance from the College of Arms. The College of
Arms has no knowledge of
Australian law, it has no clue who is the successor to the Federal Capital
Commission, which is the grantee
of these arms, and I do not think that its
advice is the slightest bit helpful to the
d’Apice, continuing, told the Committee that determination of the
legitimate successor of the FCC was ‘a matter
of Australian law’. He
noted that while the arms were granted according to the English law of arms as
they existed in 1928:
...there is a separate Australian law of arms now because the Crown has
separated and the ownership of these arms are to be determined
in accordance
with Australian law of
3.21 Following
this line of argument, other witnesses and submitters suggested that the ACT
Government is the inheritor of the City
of Canberra Coat of Arms and
legitimately uses it to represent the whole
3.22 Mr d’Apice, while acknowledging that there was a question as to
what entity was the successor to the FCC and therefore
inheritor of its
arms—the ACT Government or the Commonwealth Government, argued that:
The ACT [Government] is the only body which has used these arms. The regulation
of the arms is controlled under the City of Canberra
Arms Act. That is an ACT
piece of legislation. Under that piece of legislation an ACT minister regulates
who can use the arms. This
would be very odd circumstances if the arms belonged
to the commonwealth and an ACT minister could say who could use them. The arms
are used by the legislature; they are on the top of legislation. They are widely
used by nobody else but the ACT
[Government].
the same time as making this argument, Mr d’Apice also suggested the
necessity ‘to obtain the advice of parliamentary
counsel, the crown
solicitor or whoever might be the appropriate authority to give you legal
advice’ to clarify the legal standing
of the City of Canberra Coat of Arms
and its corporate ownership.
3.24 Reflecting the lines of argument presented by Mr d’Apice, the
Australian Heraldry Society addressed this issue in detail
in its submission to
the Committee.
Society’s submission argued that by the
Australian Capital Territory
(Self-Government) Act 1988
, the body politic of the Australian Capital
Territory assumed the municipal functions previously carried out by the
Commonwealth
Government. Through this process, the submission argued, the ACT
gained ownership of the City of Canberra Coat of Arms as ‘the
successor in
its corporate capacity of the Federal Capital Commission as the municipal
authority of the Seat of the national government
Australia’.
3.25 While supportive of the selection of ‘new insignia of the
ACT’, David Hearder also submitted that the ACT Government
legitimately
uses the City of Canberra Coat of Arms to represent the whole Territory. He
The ACT is a body politic under the Crown and its Legislative Assembly is
responsible for making laws for the peace, order and good
governance of the ACT.
With the exception of land management in part, there is a broad alignment of the
FCCs [sic] Territory powers
with that of the ACT
Government.
3.26 The Canberra Coat of Arms provides only limited historical precedent for
determining the procedure to be followed should the
ACT community decide to
adopt a Territory coat of arms.
3.27 The FCC application for a coat of arms was submitted to the College of
Arms, not directly, but through the High Commissioner
The College then
liaised with the office of the King to obtain the Royal
3.28 However, circumstances have changed significantly since 1928. The ACT
obtained self-government in 1989, and the passing of the
Australia Act 1986
(Cth) significantly altered the relationship of Australia to governmental
bodies in the United Kingdom. It is likely these events
affected the pathways
by which a new Territory coat of arms could be adopted. More on the procedural
considerations surrounding the
adoption of a new Territory coat of arms is
addressed in Chapter 7.
Committee Comment
3.29 The Committee notes the contradictory evidence it received concerning
the ownership and use of the City of Canberra Coat of Arms.
Due to the nature of
this evidence, the Committee has been unable to conclusively determine the legal
standing of the City of Canberra
Coat of Arms. Because of this, the Committee
believes that the ACT Government should seek further advice to determine its
legal standing.
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government clarify the legal standing of the City of Canberra Coat of Arms.
4 Should the ACT Adopt a
Coat of Arms?
4.1 The Committee heard a wide range of opinions from witnesses and
submitters on whether the ACT should adopt a Territory coat of
arms. A vast
majority of these, however, indicated that they supported the idea of a new and
separate coat of arms for the Territory.
Of the 68 submissions the Committee
received, 53 indicated support for the idea; 10 indicated opposition; and 5
neither supported
nor opposed this idea (Table 1).
: Feedback from submitters
Support for an ACT coat of
4.2 In general, witnesses and submitters who supported the adoption of a new
coat of arms for the ACT based their opinions on three
1. The current coat of arms used by the ACT Government is the City of
Canberra Coat of Arms, not the ACT’s;
2. The current coat of arms is outdated and does not reflect the people,
history, geography, fauna and flora of the ACT; and
3. The process through which the current coat of arms was adopted was not
democratic, transparent or accountable.
City of Canberra Coat of Arms are not the
Territory’s coat of arms
4.3 Many of the submitters and witnesses who supported the adoption of a
separate coat of arms for the Territory argued that the current
coat of arms
used by the ACT Government is specifically the coat of arms for the City of
Canberra, not the whole jurisdiction of
the ACT. As discussed in the previous
chapter, this is a contentious issue open to a range of interpretations.
4.4 Reflecting this opinion, Terry Fewtrell and David Headon, for example,
submitted that:
The Coat of Arms of the City of Canberra is just that. It is not the Coat of
Arms of the ACT... It is neither appropriate nor technically
correct for those
arms to be used as applying to or representing the ACT. The fact that there is
no Coat of Arms for the ACT makes
it unique among Australian jurisdictions in
not having a dedicated Coat of
submission also highlighted that ‘[a]ll other States and Territories have
separate coats of arms for its major city
4.6 In a similar vein, Women for an Australian Republic submitted that:
The ACT is the only State or Territory that does not have a coat of arms. The
familiar one, that of the black and white swans, is
the coat of arms of the City
of Canberra... Since self-government, the coat of arms of the City of Canberra
has been used also as
the identifier for the ACT by the ACT Government. This
should now be reconsidered as the two entities are not the
submission to the Inquiry included the following table (Table 1) providing
information on the coats of arms for the States/Territories
and their respective
capital cities:
Arms--States/Territories and Capital
State/Territory and
Capital City
Date of Effect/Comments
New South Wales
1910, amended 1970s
Western Australia
South Australia
English – “South Australia” only
Northern Territory
1978 at self-government
1959 at city proclamation
Latin translated
4.8 Joseph Johnson also expressed a comparable view, noting that the arms of
the City of Canberra ‘are not those of the Territory.
Although the
Territory has used the Arms, presumably because of the lack of a separate grant,
...there are no official
Steven Squires,
likewise, argued that ‘[t]he ACT does not have an official coat of arms
and is using the coat of arms of the
City of Canberra, a symbol not designed for
this purpose’.
4.9 The Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra also argued this point.
Representing the Society before the Committee, Geoffrey
Kingman-Sugar said:
We believe that the city of Canberra arms belong to the city of Canberra.
Whether it itself exists or not, we do not know, but they
were designed
specifically for Canberra... We believe that the ACT itself does not have
City of Canberra Coat of Arms is outdated and
unreflective of the Territory
4.10 The major theme running through most submissions and evidence from those
who supported the adoption of a new coat of arms for
the Territory was the
notion that the current coat of arms does not reflect the ACT, its history, its
people, and its geography.
These contributors suggested that the symbolism of
the current coat of arms is anachronistic and unreflective of the ACT in the 21
4.11 Ivo Ostyn, for instance, told the Committee that:
If you look at current city coat of arms...they do not speak to me. I find them
irrelevant in many ways. A castle! Honestly, a castle,
a sword, crowns, a mace,
a portcullis---are these really symbols of the ACT? I do not think
Craigie, speaking of the modified City of Canberra Coat of Arms represented on
the ACT Flag, similarly submitted that:
There is so little typical of Australian sentiment embodied in the original
design. The flag instead embodies Old-world Lords, aristocratic
crowns, castles, portcullis, swords and
Hearder also argued this point, submitting that the City of Canberra Coat of
Arms ‘do not evoke an instant recognition
of the ACT, do not illustrate
anything particularly representative of the ACT and show very little that is
recognisably Australian
4.14 Many other submissions, likewise, argued that the symbolism of the City
of Canberra Coat of Arms is outdated. Comments from these
submissions
• Canberra’s Coat of Arms should reflect the character of the
capital—it should not contain archaic symbols of privilege
• Remove all reference to the crown or monarch or queen or the UK in
the coat of arms and our official motto. It is a total
anachronism;
• In a modern progressive society, symbols need to be inclusive and
inspiring. The present ones are neither. They belong to
history and need to be
not so much discarded, as put aside for symbols that speak to the diverse and
layered community we are in;
• While you can see why so many British symbols were used in the
original coat of arms, these are long out-dated and never really
had anything to
do with Canberra let alone Australia, rather only it’s [sic] colonial
monarchy and British history—castles
and crowns simply don’t scream
Canberra to me;
• The focus on the English monarchy / white history is outdated and in
poor taste;
• The Canberra Coat of Arms has little connection or relevance to the
city and community that we have become in the 21
century... Apart
from representations of sword/mace which have some parliamentary links, it
includes a castle, two crowns and a portcullis,
along with other items that are
not readily discernible to the average
• A new Coat of Arms need not be in addition to the Canberra City Coat
of Arms but should be a replacement in substitution for
that design which
includes many outdated and irrelevant symbols which do not reflect the Territory
in any way, shape or fashion.
4.15 The underlying current in the arguments presented by these contributors
was that the ACT needs a new Territory coat of arms that
is more closely
connected to the Territory and one that more accurately reflects the
Territory’s people, its geography and
its values.
The process through which the City of Canberra Coat of
Arms was adopted was not democratic, transparent or accountable.
4.16 In a detailed submission to the Committee, David Hearder pointed out
problems in the process through which the City of Canberra
Coat of Arms was
adopted in 1927-1929. He argued that ‘[t]he FCC process that resulted in
the grant of arms to the FCC from
the Monarch was not accountable (neither
public nor transparent) in the ways that the citizens of the ACT would
rightfully expect
David Headon also touched on this issue when he appeared before the
4.17 Based on an analysis of the relevant primary archival documents, Mr
Hearder recounted the process that resulted in the City of
Canberra Coat of
Arms. He noted that while a public competition was held for the initial design
of the arms, the judging process
for this was not transparent, no winner was
determined, and the final design bore little resemblance to the designs received
the competition. Mr Hearder informed the Committee that ‘[t]he
form of the design that was eventually sent to the English College
of Arms was
made by Wylie [the designer] under the explicit direction of Butters [the FCC
Chairman], in regular contact with the
Prime Minister, Stanley Bruce, without
any public involvement or endorsement
whatsoever’.
4.18 Further to this, Mr Hearder informed the Committee, the design submitted
to the College of Arms was subsequently amended, including
the replacement of
one black swan for a white one, by the College. The Latin motto, and its English
rendering, was also chosen by
the FCC without consultation with the designer or
the wider community.
also noted that, following the release of the design to the Australian public in
late April 1929, there was backlash in
the press from some quarters concerning
the design and the Latin motto.
Opposition to a separate ACT
coat of arms
4.19 In general, those opposed to the adoption of a new coat of arms for the
Territory based their opposition on the following factors:
1. The City of Canberra Coat of Arms is the coat of arms for the
2. The symbolism of the current coat of arms is appropriate; and
3. The adoption of a new coat of arms would be a waste of government
The City of Canberra Coat of Arms is the coat of arms
for the Territory
4.20 Many of the submitters and witnesses opposed to the adoption of a new
coat of arms told the Committee that the current coat of
arms used by the ACT
Government is the de facto Territory coat of arms. This evidence suggested that
the distinction between the
City of Canberra and the ACT was a fiction.
4.21 Matthew Sait, Branch Chairman, ACT and District Branch, Australian
Monarchist League, informed the Committee that:
The city of Canberra is not and has never been an entity separate from the
territory. There is no corporate existence. It has never
used, had a reason to
use or had the capacity to use a coat of arms as the city of Canberra. The
distinction between Canberra and
the ACT is simply a line on the map. This is a
distinction which the ACT government and most other people here ignore in every
4.22 Richard
d’Apice AM, President, the Australian Heraldry Society, speaking about the
City of Canberra Coat of Arms, told
the Committee:
We do not believe that they are limited to the city of Canberra, the 1928 arms.
That does not come out of the grant document... The
city of Canberra does not
exist as a polity. It does not even have any boundaries, if you go looking in
any legislation or determinations
of geographical names of borders or
anything... But these are the only arms belonging to and used by the Australian
Capital Territory...
By all means, change them if you decide that that is the
right thing to do, but do not do it on the basis that the ACT does not have
submission echoed this theme. Comments from these submissions included the
• We already have a coat of arms. . .. because the government of
Canberra is the same as the ACT government, and there is no
municipal boundary
separating the city of Canberra from other settlements in the ACT, there is no
need for a separate flag or coat
of arms. Canberra and the ACT are one and the
same governmentally, and thus should remain so
symbolically;
• The purpose of a coat of arms is to represent a person or entity.
Everyone now associates the arms with the Territory, not
just Canberra. The
attempt to distinguish between Canberra and the ACT, for these purposes is
• The City of Canberra and the Australian Capital Territory are,
always have been
, effectively two names for the same thing. Therefore the
contention that the ACT has no separate coat of arms, and that the coat
familiar to us all actually represents only the “City of Canberra”,
is hair-splitting to an extreme
• By using the arms so frequently and for so long the ACT Government
has adopted them as its own. Whatever happened in 1928,
the current arms now
undeniably represent
• The current Coat of Arms serves a dual purpose of representing both
the city and the territory;
The symbolism of the current coat of arms is
appropriate
4.24 Contributors to the Inquiry who were opposed to the adoption of an ACT
coat of arms argued that the symbolism of the City of
Canberra Coat of Arms is
relevant and appropriate in representing the whole of the Territory.
4.25 Mr Sait told the Committee that the symbolism of the City of Canberra
Coat of Arms is fit-for-purpose and remains relevant to
modern Canberra:
The most distinct thing about the ACT is that we are the seat of the federal
government. The arms encapsulate that really well. The
territory does indeed
exist for the Queen, the law and the people, as the current motto on the arms
4.26 Brendan Whyte submitted that the symbols representing the
Federal Parliament on the City of Canberra Coat of Arms ‘are
symbolic of the purpose of the ACT and Canberra: the national capital’.
Because of this, Mr Whyte argued that claims
that the current coat of arms
‘are outdated relics of foreign country cannot be further from the
4.27 Likewise, Maurice Austin submitted the following:
The current symbols almost all represent the role of the Parliament and Canberra
in the life of the country, as they should. They
include the crowns (an integral
part of Parliament, and a symbol of political neutrality), the portcullis (an
ancient representation
of the two other components of Parliament under the
Constitution
), the white rose of York (representing the inauguration of
Parliament in Canberra in 1927 by the Duke of York, and therefore the
commencement of Canberra as the permanent capital)...
The entire design is elegantly brought together by symbols of pre-and-post
European settlement (the swans), and the three things
that the elected
representatives in Parliament should keep in mind: the Crown as a guarantor of
neutrality, the law of the land (especially
Constitution
), and the people of
Australian Monarchist League placed particular emphasis on the continuing
relevance of ‘royal elements’ of the
current coat of arms, arguing
that ‘[t]he Crown is at the heart of our system of constitutional,
democratic government’.
Their submission noted, among other things, that
the ‘Executive Power of the Commonwealth is vested in the Queen; her
representative,
the Governor General, necessarily resides in the
Brenda Coles made a
similar point on the importance of the ‘royal symbols’ and the
Australian Heraldry Society contended
that ‘[a]s long as the Australian
Capital Territory remains a body politic under the Crown, the use of the crown
in the arms
of the federal capital territory cannot accurately be described as
an anachronism’.
4.29 Some of those opposed to the adoption of a Territory coat of arms
pointed out that a coat of arms gains relevance as an identifier
individual or corporate entity through the permanence of its nature. These
contributors questioned the notion that a coat of
arms should be up-dated to
suit changing popular sentiment. Mr Sait, for instance, told the Committee
These arms often tend to be very permanent in their nature... The whole nature
of them is that they have got to become recognisable.
So long as they are
distinctive, they are not really the type of thing this is updated to reflect
passing fads, modern
traditions.
support of this assertion, Mr Sait pointed to the coat of arms of the city of
Amsterdam which contains the crown of Austria.
He explained that ‘Austria
has not been a monarchy for 100 years and it has not ruled the Netherlands for
4.31 In a similar vein, Matthew Bray argued that ‘[i]t is not the job
of heraldry to be a “visual curriculum vitae”
or somehow encapsulate
all the ideas, aspirations, identities and geographic details that make up the
Territory’. Rather, he
The nature of good heraldry...is that is has timeless artistic and symbolic
design. I believe the existing arms used for the City
of Canberra is an example
of good heraldry and should be kept as representative of the
4.32 Brendan
Whyte also addressed this issue, submitting that:
Calls for presentist political posturing in our territorial symbology shows a
complete lack of understanding of the purpose of that
symbology. A coat of arms
and a flag are not things to be changed willynilly [sic], but should be eternal
reminders of the ideas
of our founding fathers, the bedrock on which we move
The adoption of a new coat of arms would be a waste of
government resources
4.33 Several contributors who opposed the adoption of a Territory coat of
arms questions whether adopting a new coat of arms for the
Territory would be a
justifiable use of government resources.
4.34 Brendan Whyte suggested that ‘there are far better things to be
spending time and money on than superfluous an [sic] redundant
arms’. He further submitted:
I am concerned that the government is spending time and money on considering
designs for a territory coat of are when there are homeless
people on our
streets... Surely the time and money could be better spent providing blankets
and meals as a first step, and affordable
housing as a second? After the
lists, then hospital
leaks, graffiti, litter . . . the list goes on. There are
plenty better things to do with MLA’s time and taxpayer’s money
ponder an extra coat of
4.35 Similar
sentiments were also expressed by Susanne Scott and Brenda
Adopting new insignia for
the Territory, but not a new coat of arms
4.36 Some contributors proposed the idea that the ACT should adopt new
insignia, but not through the model of a coat of arms. Contributors
who proposed
this idea pointed to the archaic nature of coats of arms and questioned whether
the ACT needs to adopt such old-world
symbology to represent the Territory and
its people.
4.37 Speaking to this point, Matthew Bray submitted that:
...I think it would be better not to try and design a new “coat of
arms” at all, but seek to create a different new visual
representation for
the ACT, such as a logo, that is going to be more palatable to those who seek to
disavow the older symbolism of
the armorial bearings of
a similar tone, David Hearder suggested the following:
The ACT Government, if it chooses to do so, has a once in a generation
opportunity to create and adopt new Territory insignia for,
by and on behalf of
all citizens of the Territory: ‘to boldly go’ and break free of the
English laws of arms and its
practices. If it did, it would be leading all other
Australian governments on this
supporting the adoption of a Territory coat of arms, Steven Squires also
suggested that the ACT Government adopt a new
logo. He pointed out the following
points for considering the current ACT Government logo:
: The logo should be simple and easily recognisable by
the public. This is so that the public can easily remember the logo, but also
that the design can be easily recognised at a distance.
Versatility
: The logo should be able to be used in multiple
contexts, including full colour applications. The current logo lacks this
due to the complexness of the Canberra City Arms.
: The logo should use elements or have an element that
has high public
recognition.
4.40 His submission included a suggestion for altering the
ACT Government logo which featured the Royall Bluebell. This suggestion
presented below (Figure 6).
: Proposed ACT Government logo
by Steven Squires
If a new Territory coat or
arms was adopted, what should happen to the City of Canberra Coat of Arms?
4.41 The Committee heard contrasting evidence on what should happen to the
City of Canberra Coat of Arms if a new and separate ACT
coat of arms was to be
adopted. While most suggested that the City of Canberra Coat of Arms should
remain intact, though no longer
officially used by the ACT Government to
represent the Territory, others suggested that an ACT coat of arms should
replace the City
of Canberra Coat of Arms entirely. Those opposed to the
adoption of a new coat of arms for the Territory, in contrast, suggested
measures be taken to formally adopt the City of Canberra Coat of Arms as the ACT
coat of arms.
4.42 In its submission to the Inquiry, the ACT Government noted that while it
would be ‘guided by the community’s views
as to whether there should
be a Coat of Arms for the ACT’, at the same time, it clearly indicated
...any Coat of Arms for the ACT would be in addition to the City of Canberra
Coat of Arms. The City of Canberra Coat of Arms would
still exist and remain
available for community
were other contributors who shared this
perspective.
Some of these
contributors pointed to the City of Canberra Coat of Arms’ association
with the Royal Australian Navy as a particularly
important reason that the arms
needed to be preserved and protected. Geoffrey Kingman-Sugar, for example,
submitted that:
This is part of our history! These arms have been borne in battle (HMAS Canberra
WWII) and two further ships of the Royal Australian
Navy have used those arms as
the ship’s badge under which Naval personnel served. They deserve to
remain unaltered for the
sake of the history associated with them, as well as
for posterity’s
4.44 Several
contributors suggested that a new Territory coat of arms should replace the City
of Canberra Coat of Arms. Steven Squires,
for instance, argued that:
As the ACT Government could soon have a Coat of Arms to represent the whole of
the jurisdiction, the City Arms will effectively me
[sic] made obsolete, making
it appropriate to definitively replace
4.45 Several
of those opposed to the adoption of a new Territory coat of arms suggested that
the City of Canberra Coat of Arms should
be officially made the coat of arms of
the ACT. Addressing this point, Matthew Bray, for instance, suggested that
‘we can stick
with the existing rich symbolism and timeless design in the
coat of arms of Canberra and enact the necessary legislation to adopt
ACT as well’.
Updating the City of
Canberra Coat of Arms
4.46 Some contributors suggested that, if the ACT does not adopt new arms,
then the ACT Government should explore the possibility
of updating the City of
Canberra Arms. David Hearder expressed the idea that the City of Canberra Coat
of Arms could be updated:
If this Committee chooses not to recommend that the ACT Government should have
new official insignia, then I recommend that the usefulness
of amending the
existing visual depiction of the FCC arms be explored to better represent the
ACT and all its citizens, consistent
with the existing grant without seeking a
new grant from the English College or
process to up-date the City of Canberra Arms could occur via two pathways: 1)
up-dating the look of the arms while maintaining
consistency with the existing
Royal Warrant, or 2) up-dating the arms in a way inconsistent with the Royal
Warrant and thus requiring
a more elaborate process of adoption (discussed in
more detail in Chapter 7).
4.48 The description of the City of Canberra Coat of Arms—the Verbal
Blazon—included in the Royal Warrant granting the
arms stipulates the
Azure a triple towered Castle between in chief a Sword of Justice point upwards
to the sinister Argent Pomel and Hilt Or surmounted
by a Parliamentary Mace head
upwards to the dexter Gold in saltire charged at their point of intersection
with a representation of
the Imperial Crown proper and in base a Rose also
Argent barbed and seeded proper (being the Badge of York) And for the Crest On
Wreath of the Colours In front of a Gum Tree issuant from a Mount proper a
Portcullis chained Or ensigned with the Imperial Crown
Letters Patent granting the supporters stipulated the following: ‘On the
dexter side a Swan Sable beaked Gules and
on the sinister side a White Swan
4.50 David Hearder explicitly considered what could and could not be changed
on the City of Canberra Coat of Arms within the scope
of the existing Royal
Warrant. On what could be changed, Mr Hearder noted the following:
• You could delete or alter the compartment, motto and motto scroll.
• You could change the relative sizes of the ‘charges’ on the
shield, the parts of the crest, and the supporters
without changing their
specified colour, relative positions, or any form specified in the verbal
For example, you could make the triple towered castle a whole lot smaller, and
give it a different design and colour too; you could
make the portcullis in the
crest all but transparent to display a larger gum tree more prominently (though
it would still have to
appear to be behind the
portcullis).
the elements of the City of Canberra Coat of Arms that could not be changed
within the scope of the existing Royal Warrant,
Mr Hearder explained the
All of the heraldic objects as described in the blazon have to appear in any
drawing of the arms and crest, and in their relative
positions as written. So
there must be a blue shield (though the form of the shield is not stated) that
• At the bottom, a white rose that looks like a Badge of York (there are
many forms of such), appropriately ‘barbed and
seeded’, at the
• In the middle, a castle that has three towers (and form and detail,
colour and size), and
• At the top, a mace (any Parliamentary one, and yellow) crossed as
described with the ‘sword of justice’ (white
and yellow as
described) with the ‘Imperial crown’ (as is) in the middle.
And for the Crest,
• The colours of the wreath are made from the main colours of the shield,
so would have to include blue, and the other colour
would either be white, if
the white rose dominated the castle in relative size, or, the colour of the
castle chosen if it wasn’t
white but much larger than the white rose,
• On top of the wreath, any gum tree in any form, sitting on a natural
looking hillock, with
• In front of and covering both, of any thickness, a yellow portcullis
chained to its base with
• An Imperial crown (as is) sitting on
for the Supporters of the arms, Mr Hearder pointed out that as long as a black
swan with a red beak (left) and a white swan
(right) are depicted in their
natural state, ‘the artist is free to choose how they are posed or drawn,
as their written description
4.53 Figure 7 provides an example of how the City of Canberra Coat of Arms
can be updated, or reimagined, within the scope of the
existing Royal Warrant
granting the arms—i.e., maintaining conformity to the Verbal Blazon.
: City of Canberra Coat of Arms
by Ian Mackay
Recommendation 2
Dependant on the legal standing of the
City of Canberra Coat of Arms, the Committee recommends that the ACT Government
either adopt
a Coat of Arms for the Territory or update the City of Canberra
Coat of Arms.
5 What should be included in
an ACT Coat of Arms?
5.1 In calling for submissions, one of the two questions the Committee asked
potential submitters to address was ‘what symbols
might be included in the
design of an ACT Coat of Arms’. Contributors to the Inquiry provided
numerous suggestions in response
to this question. Below, the design concepts,
design elements and design suggestions for a Territory coat of arms proposed by
contributors
is discussed.
Design concepts
ACT as the capital of an independent, modern and
progressive nation
5.2 Some contributors emphasised the role of the ACT as the seat of the
Federal Government and argued that the Territory coat of arms
needs to represent
the whole of Australia as an independent, modern and progressive nation.
5.3 Nicolle Burt, for instance, argued that:
As the national capital, it is not only appropriate but a fundamental
requirement to develop symbols of state that position the ACT
An ACT Coat of Arms would signify our
leadership position in the Commonwealth of
a similar vein, Jeremy Matthews suggested that a Territory coat of arms needs to
‘signify the ACT’s unique position
as the seat of government for the
Commonwealth of
Australia.’
d’Apice AM, likewise, informed the Committee that:
The whole focus of the ACT, and it would not exist otherwise, is that it is the
national seat of government. I think it is very important
that that be
represented.
echoed this theme. Sergio Sergi emphasised that the Territory coat of arms
‘must reflect the symbolic importance
of Canberra as the Capital City of
the Australian Nation; independent self
governing...’
5.6 Others focused on the need to represent Australia as an independent
nation. Rosemary Murdock summitted that it was essential to
‘Australia as an independent nation within the South East Asian
Evan Dently,
meanwhile, argued that ‘Canberra is first and foremost a symbol of
Australian independent thought and
decisiveness’.
5.7 Other submitters emphasised the need to represent Australia, and/or the
ACT, as a modern and progressive society. Monica Sanders
argued that in ‘a
modern progressive society, symbols need to be inclusive and
inspiring’.
Fewtrell and David Headon suggested that:
In advancing consideration of the design, it is important that it express in
design terms the locus of the ACT as the setting in
which the community lives
and give expression to its values as a modern and progressive Australian
Connection to place and people
5.8 The underlying theme running through many submissions and witness
statements from those who supported the adoption of an ACT coat
of arms was the
need for the new arms to better reflect the place, people and values of the
Territory. Representative of this line
of thought, Steven Squires suggested that
a Territory coat of arms ‘will provide a great opportunity to showcase the
its emblems’.
Stephen Boyle, meanwhile, suggested that a new coat of arms ‘is a great
opportunity to communicate and celebrate our unique
5.9 Comments from contributors expressing this view included the
• Our city’s a beautiful and distinctively Australian place, and
our community is democratic, patriotic, modern and inclusive.
That’s why I
want the ACT to have symbols that reflect the best of who and where we
• When designing a coat of arms for the ACT the symbols should be
relevant to the local ACT area. I want democratic, patriotic,
inclusive symbols;
• The current emblem does not represent the land we live on, the
people, our activities and aspirations for the magnificence
that is the
• All symbols on the coast [sic] of arms should uniquely represent
Canberra as an Australian
• ...the coat of arms should have an un-mistakenly Australian feel,
with elements that show off the unique and beautiful identity
• I believe we need a contemporary coat of arms with relevant symbols
which reflects the ACT as a democratic, multicultural
and progressive community
and which also acknowledges the traditional owners of the
• ...it should reflect Canberra’s natural environment, its
people, and history;
• ...fully reflect the ideals and values of ACT
• The symbols should be representative of the characteristics of the
• It should reflect the status and importance of our Territory as a
unique and special place and also reflect the aspirations
• ...it is important that a Coat of Arms for the ACT is designed and
adopted which speaks to and of this place and
• The design should accurately represent the people and place it
symbolises...
Simplicity in design
5.10 Many contributors emphasised the need to ensure any proposed design for
the Territory coat of arms be simple and elegant. Joseph
Johnson, for example,
argued that ‘[t]he Arms should be simple, elegant and artistic, and
distinctly representative of the
Territory’.
Fewtrell and David Headon, similarly submitted that ‘[s]implicity and good
design principles should also distinguish
the content and format of an ACT Coat
5.11 Some contributors argued this point from the perspective of good
heraldic design principles. Richard d’Apice, for instance,
‘[s]implicity...is of essence in heraldry. Keep it as simple as
possible’. This approach, Mr a’Apice
informed the Committee, meant
some things necessarily would need to be omitted from the eventual design:
I think, to try and represent multiculturalism or to represent the mountains,
the streams and the limestone plains, you are never
going to be able to crowd
all that in. Something has got to be left out. It would be highly undesirable to
represent it all, quite
5.12 Others
shared these concerns. Geoffrey Kingman-Sugar argued that ‘[h]eraldry is
meant to be clear and concise... If you
put too much detail in it you will lose
the simplicity. Heraldic design: the keep it simple principle’. Douglas
Hassall, similarly,
One point that needs always to be borne in mind is that, as the traditional
principles and practice governing the design of Achievements
of Arms indicate,
all arms, whether they be for a Nation, a State, a Territory, a Corporation or
an Individual, should have a
simple and clear design which is easily
recognisable at a distance, particularly when they are displayed upon and in any
public buildings.
In short, some of the best arms ever designed, have been the
simplest in design
5.13 Christopher Lindesay echoed this sentiment and pointed to
the Commonwealth Coat of Arms as an example of bad heraldry due to
complexity:
The problem with those things is, on websites and on letterheads that I have
seen, they are too small because you have got all the
quarters in the
commonwealth arms. It is too detailed. I think it is a good example of bad
heraldry. The challenge is to find some
symbols that encapsulates all the things
you have been talking about while maintaining simplicity in
Heraldic principles
5.14 The opinions of contributors were divided on the importance of heeding
heraldic principles in designing a coat of arms for the
5.15 Flags of Australia submitted that ‘[c]oats of arms—as
distinct from flags—require at least minimal heraldic
ACT Courts and
Tribunals similarly argued that ‘as a coat of arms is a traditional
notion, not a mere logo, any symbolism should
respect those
traditions’.
5.16 In considering the design process for a coat of arms for the Territory,
Douglas Hassall emphasised the importance of obtaining
advice’ from ‘persons and bodies possessing authoritative and proven
knowledge and familiarity with the
well-established principles of Arms and
Squires and David Headon also suggested the appropriateness of seeking advice
from heraldry experts in shaping any potential
Territory coat of arms
5.17 Mr Hassall suggested that if proper consideration was not given to the
established principles and practices of heraldry—as
advised by appropriate
experts—the resulting coat of arms would be ‘a confused and
cluttered design of
5.18 Terry Fewtrell and David Headon suggested that while heraldic principles
should be considered, they should not ‘predetermine’
the design of
the Territory coat of arms:
It is the view of this group that heraldic principles and design rules should
not predetermine the shape or outline of the Coat of
Arms. It is appropriate
that these be part of the considerations, but they should not
‘drive’ the design process. The
design brief should ensure that
there is appropriate scope for the ACT design and creative community to respond
to the challenges
of producing a final design that elegantly reflects the place
and people of the
contributors more overtly rejected the need to adhere to the principles and
practices of heraldry in guiding the design
of the Territory coat of
Appearing before the
Committee, David Hearder asked rhetorically ‘why be constrained by the
laws of arms, design straightjacket?’
He noted that ‘we have got an
incredible body of people here in Canberra with lots of design expertise. We do
not have to be
constrained by how heraldry does
Design elements
5.20 Contributors to the Inquiry provided extensive feedback on the elements
which they wished to see included in any new Territory
coat of arms. The most
popular design elements suggested by contributors were the official floral,
faunal and mammal emblems of the
ACT and symbolism to represent the
Territory’s Traditional Custodians / Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
community. Other
suggested design elements included representation of the
Territory’s geography, the Commonwealth Star, multiculturalism and
flora and fauna. Table 2, below, shows the main design elements suggested in
submissions according to their frequency of appearance.
: Suggested design elements by
appearance frequency
5.21 Of the submissions which explicitly addressed the issue of appropriate
colours for use on an ACT coat of arms, the traditional
sporting colours of the
ACT—blue and gold—featured predominantly, with some also adding
white to this suggestion.
5.22 Some suggested that green and gold also be incorporated into the design,
reflecting Australia more
5.23 Women for an Australian Republic did not recommend specific colours but
suggested that the design should be ‘[e]vocative
of the colours and
features of the
landscape’.
Floral emblem—Royal Bluebell
5.24 On 26 May 1982, the Royal Bluebell (
Wahlenbergia gloriosa
(Figure 8) was designated as the official floral emblem for the ACT. The Royal
Bluebell is native to the ACT region and grows in
higher-altitude areas of the
Territory, south eastern NSW and eastern Victoria, flowering in Canberra between
October and February.
The Royal Bluebell was named after the Swedish botanist G.
G. Wahlenberg.
Bluebell is also featured on the logo of the ACT Legislative Assembly.
5.25 The Royal Bluebell was the most popular design element suggested by
contributors, appearing in 21
submissions.
5.26 Only a few contributors provided recommendations on how the Royal
Bluebell ought to be represented on an ACT coat of arms. Appearing
Committee, Tony Burton, for example, suggested:
In a full achievement of a coat of arms...you would perhaps have a sprinkle of
bluebells on the compartment at the bottom. A little
while ago I said the
bluebell can be represented not necessarily by an insemination of the
compartment but simply by the colour
Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra also suggested that the Royal
Bluebell be represented in the compartment of an
ACT coat of arms: ‘A
green mount strewn with clusters of flowers...
Proper: depicted
realistically’
5.28 In contrast, Geoffrey Kingman-Sugar suggested that the Royal Bluebell
‘should have a main position in the shield itself’.
Ivo Ostyn also
expressed this idea in the design suggestions he provided to the
Faunal emblem—Gang-gang Cockatoo
5.29 On 27 February 1997, the Gang-gang Cockatoo (
Callocephalon
) (Figure 9) was adopted as the official faunal emblem for the
ACT. The Gang-gang is native to the Territory and Canberra is the only
where the cockatoos live. ACT Park and Conservation Service also use the
Gang-gang on their logo.
: Gang-gang
5.30 13 submissions suggested that the Gang-gang Cockatoo appear on an ACT
coat of arms.
Stephen Mills
commented that the Gang-gang is ‘surely the most characterful of the local
birds’, while Steven Squires
suggested an ACT coat of arms feature both
male and female
Gang-gangs.
5.31 Stephen Boyle suggested that the Gang-gang should be included as either
a pair of supporters for the arms, or one of the supporters
paired with a
Southern Brush-tailed Rock-wallaby. This idea appeared in several of the
suggested designs presented to the Committee
5.32 Other contributors suggested that the Gang-gang be included as the crest
of an ACT coat of arms. This idea was expressed by Ivo
Ostyn and Steve Squires
in the suggested designs they presented to the
Mammal emblem—Southern Brush-tailed
Rock-wallaby
5.33 As an outcome of the Committee’s report on the proposal for a
mammal emblem for the ACT,
29 November 2018, the Legislative Assembly passed a motion to officially adopt
the Southern Brush-tailed Rock-wallaby (
Petrogale penicillate
10) as the ACT’s mammal
The Rock-wallaby is
an endangered species and has not been sighted in the wild since 1959. According
to the ACT Government: ‘[i]n
1996 Tidbinbilla Nature Reserve started a
conservation program from a captive population of three animals and since then,
successfully bred over 60 animals’. In addition, the Government
notes that the Rock-wallaby ‘has s significant cultural
importance to the
Ngunnawal people’.
5.34 The Southern Brush-tailed Rock-wallaby was the third most popular design
element suggestion, appearing in 14
submissions.
5.35 Steven Squires, Ivo Ostyn, the Heraldry and Genealogy Society of
Canberra, and Bradley Saines suggested that the Rock-wallaby
could serve as the
supporters of an ACT coat of arms, while Stephen Boyle suggested that a
Rock-wallaby be paired with a Gang-gang
Cockatoo as the
supporters.
: Southern Brush-tailed
Rock-wallaby
5.36 One submitter pointed to the Southern Brush-tail Rock-wallaby’s
endangered status as a reason to avoid using it on an ACT
coat of arms. Lisa
Thomas submitted:
Do not use the mammal emblem because if it becomes extinct then we are forever
reminded of this failure on the coat of
Representation of the Traditional Custodians/Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander community
5.37 The second most common suggestion in submissions for design elements was
the idea that the Territory’s Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander
community and history should be represented. 19 submissions made such a
suggestion.
It was often not
clear in submissions if this suggestion related to the Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander community, the Australian
Aboriginal community, or the
Traditional Custodians of the Capital region.
5.38 Several contributors suggested that it was necessary for the ACT
Government to consult with the Traditional Custodians of the
ACT region to
determine appropriate design elements to represent the Traditional Custodians
and/or the Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Terry Fewtrell and
David Headon, for instance, noted that:
The ACT’s Aboriginal communities would have some suggestions for symbolism
and imagery that would appropriately express their
part in our overall story and
their close identity with the land of this place in which we all
5.39 Echoing
this sentiment, Steven Squires informed the Committee that:
As we become more accustomed to, more knowledge about and more aware of
Indigenous symbolism and Indigenous culture, we should incorporate
respectful way. In a respectful way we should consult with local Indigenous
organisations. For instance ATSIEB, the Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander
Elected Body, is an option, as is the Ngunnawal elders council or perhaps the
Ngambri equivalent if that
is the decision of the ACT
government.
5.40 Steven Squires also suggested that the incorporation of
Indigenous recognition into an ACT coat of arms could serve to promote
reconciliation:
With some good planning, a new ACT Coat of Arms can help reconciliation too. As
our country increasingly embraces the depth of its
Indigenous history, there is
an opportunity to include symbols and motifs that evoke the many millennia of
culture that has taken
place here. The inclusion of Indigenous symbols (provided
it is done with respect to Indigenous cultures) would add an extra layer
5.41 Related suggestions from submissions included the following:
• ...crossed boomerangs or an Aboriginal shield in the colours of the
Aboriginal flag;
• A local indigenous [sic]
• The design should also include symbols that link us to our Aboriginal
citizenry and history;
• A coat that acknowledges the Indigenous owners of this
• ...symbols which reflect the ACT as a democratic, multicultural and
progressive community and which also acknowledges the
traditional owners of the
• I think something native to Canberra, and something significant to
Canberra’s indigenous [sic]
• References to the
Ngunnawal people
as the traditional
landowners of the ACT should also be included in the
• There should be representation of our indigenous [sic] heritage, be
it in art form or as a motto for the
• ...the Coat of Arms should also represent the history of the
Ngunnawal people. Ideally this could include some form of indigenous
or imagery which depicts ‘meeting
5.42 Several submissions recommended that the Aboriginal symbol for a meeting
place (Figure 11) be incorporated into the design. On
this symbol, Steven
Squires submitted that it:
...is used in Indigenous Australian cultures to symbolise an area where
different groups meet. This alludes to the ACT’s historical
meeting place for Indigenous corroborees, the meeting place of the newly-formed
Australian Commonwealth, and now the meeting
place for the many cultures that
: Aboriginal symbol for a
meeting place
5.43 The Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra suggested that the
ACT’s Indigenous heritage could be represented in the
motto of a Territory
coat of arms in Ngunnawal language. They suggested that close consultation with
the ACT’s Indigenous community
would be ‘essential in pursuing such
a proposal’.
Three branches of Government
5.44 Several contributors highlighted the need to represent the three
branches of government—the legislative, the executive
judicial—and the separation of power between these. Flags Australian, for
example, submitted that ‘Canberra and
the Territory made for it will
always have connection with government and its three fold separation of powers.
This reference to
governance should be
retained...’
5.45 ACT Courts and Tribunal similarly submitted that ‘[a]ny new coat
of arms or Territory symbol should acknowledge the three
government’.
Law Society expressed the same view, adding that the ‘actual symbolism
used is not important to the Society, but should
be of a kind acceptable to a
broad range of community views and reflecting current community attitudes and
standards’.
5.46 Richard d’Apice expressed a comparable opinion:
...I think the symbolism of the three branches of government which are to be
found in the 1928 arms should be maintained. You have
got the mace for the
parliament... the sword of justice, to represent the second branch of
government; and the portcullis which represents
the executive power. This is a
matter of interest not just to Canberrans but to Australians
5.47 Representation of the geography of the ACT region also popularly
featured among the suggested design elements by submitters.
Mountains were
suggested in 11
submissions
while rivers were suggested in
5.48 Arguing the case for including representation of mountains in an ACT
coat of arms, Terry Fewtrell and David Headon submitted:
As residents of the ACT we live our lives against the background of the
Brindabella Range. This is the context of our lives. We love
those hills ands
the way they frame our city and our lives. They are the backdrop to our lives
and in part define us. It would be
distinctive and appropriate for the
Brindabella Range to feature as a dominant element of the design of a Coat of
Arms, just as it
is in our natural
Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra expressed a similar perspective,
noting the following points to support incorporating
a portrayal of
• High-elevation area of the ACT; 60 per cent of the ACT is hilly or
mountainous;
• Iconic part of the natural setting for the ACT, the city of Canberra
and other communities within the ACT;
• Long history of Indigenous use and custodianship;
• Associated with water resources, biodiversity and quality of life;
• Namadgi National Park – scenery, recreation,
conservation.
5.50 The Society also provided advice on how this could be represented
according to traditional heraldic practice (Figure 12).
: Representation of mountains
as suggested by the Heraldry and Genealogy Society of
5.51 The Society also provided advice on how to represent rivers in
accordance with established heraldic practice (Figure 13).
: Representation of rivers as
suggested by the Heraldry and Genealogy Society of
Other design elements
5.52 Six submissions suggested the inclusion of the Commonwealth Star/Star of
Federation (Figure 14) in the design of a coat of arms
: Commonwealth Star as
depicted by Ivo Ostyn
5.53 Steven Squires, in calling for the inclusion of the Commonwealth Star,
argued that it ‘[s]ymbolises the ACT as Australia’s
government and the ACT as part of the Commonwealth of
Australia’.
Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra included a similar statement in its
submission, adding that the Commonwealth Star
also referenced ‘clear night
skies; links with astronomy (Mt Stromlo); Canberra Deep Space Communication
Tidbinbilla’.
5.54 While opposed to the adoption of a Territory coat of arms, the
Australian Monarchist League submitted that ‘[i]f the ACT
were to adopt a
new coat of arms, the new arms should prominently feature a crown or some other
element representing our
5.55 Three submissions called for symbolic reference to multiculturalism to
be included in an ACT coat of arms design. Lauren Hutchison,
for example,
submitted that ‘If there is a shield incorporated it should be
multicoloured in skin tones to express Canberra’s
multiculturalism’.
Design suggestions
5.56 Several submitters provided suggested designs for an ACT coat of arms. A
selection of these are presented below (Figures 15-22).
: Proposed coat of arms by
Steven Squires
: Proposed coat of arms by
: Proposed coat of arms by
: Proposed coat of arms by
: Proposed coats of arms by
Bradley Saines
: Proposed coat of arms by
Flags of Australia
: Proposed emblem by Lyn
: Proposed emblem by Ivo
6 Opportunities for
community participation
6.1 As noted in Chapter 4, significant issues associated with the City of
Canberra Coat of Arms, as identified by contributors to
the Inquiry, are: 1) its
symbolism does not resonate with a large sector of the ACT’s population
and 2) it was adopted through
a process that was not democratic and which lacked
transparency and accountability. The Committee heard that if the Territory were
to adopt a coat of arms, this must involve genuine consultation with the
community to ensure that any design eventually chosen reflects
popular sentiment
and resonates with ACT residents.
6.2 The need to ensure that an ACT coat of arms be adopted through
consultation with the community was recognised by the ACT Government,
stated in its submission to the Inquiry:
It is important that there is strong community support for the introduction of a
Coat of Arms for the ACT before any change is made.
The ACT Government will be
guided by the majority community view on this
Scope of community
consultation
6.3 The opinions of contributors on who should be included in any
consultation process differed, with some suggesting Australia-wide
consultation
would be necessary and others suggesting only consultation with the residents of
the Territory would be required. The
opinion of contributors also different on
what type of community consultation should be undertaken.
6.4 Some contributors emphasised the Territory’s role as the national
capital and claimed that any coat of arms for the Territory
must necessarily
involve consultation with the wider Australian population. Representative of
this perspective, Richard d’Apice
AM, informed the Committee that:
I think that the consultation should be Australia wide and not limited to the
ACT. Although you are the residents of this place,
it was created in the first
place and its primary function is to house our federal apparatus—all three
branches of it—and
I think it is most important that that be the primary
focus of symbols which represent
contrast, other contributors emphasise that a Territory coat of arms would serve
to symbolise the Territory and its people,
not the wider Australian community,
and indicated that consultation should focus on the ACT community. Terry
Fewtrell and David Headon,
for instance, suggested that:
It would be appropriate that there is a suitable mechanism for the ACT community
to have some form of input into the design
elaborated on the type of input the community could make:
At the time of the announcement [to develop an ACT coat of arms] the public
could be invited to suggest/submit ideas or concepts
appropriate for inclusion
in an ACT Coat of Arms. A period of public comment/input would follow, during
which ACT citizens could
submit ideas via a website set up to facilitate the
project. It would also be possible to support this process by using other ACT
Government website platforms. The process could also be augmented by encouraging
local media to facilitate public discussion and
generation...
Hearder expressed a similar opinion:
The adoption of new insignia for the Territory is not a simple Executive or
Legislative Assembly decision alone to make. All citizens
of the ACT should have
an opportunity to say how new insignia are developed. To be truly democratic,
all citizens of the ACT should
have the opportunity to participate in and engage
with the final decision making, to own the insignia of the ACT made by, for, and
on behalf of all the citizens of the ACT. This process needs to be open and
transparent, and above all accountable to the citizens
of the ACT if the ACT
Government is to avoid the undemocratic and unrepresentative processes that led
to the existing FCC arms, with
all the public criticism of it that has carried
Australian Heraldry Society suggested that an attempt to consult with the public
on every design aspect of a new coat of arms
would be ‘fraught with
difficulty’. Instead, the Society proposed ‘that the consultation
should be limited to the
elements which might find a place in a new coat of arms
leaving the detail of their arrangement to those with expertise in the design
6.9 Women for an Australian Republic suggested that there should be ‘a
design competition, commissioned by the ACT Government
and open to the
world’s best designers’. ‘For public contribution to the
design phase’, they continued:
...we recommend that used by the New Zealand Government for the design of a new
flag during 2015 and 2016. The New Zealand Flag Consideration
Panel consisted of
12 members including a youth representative who was a school
6.10 Finally,
Women for an Australian Republic recommended that:
There should be a later, broader public consultation and involvement at an
advanced stage of the choice process to increase civics
awareness and education.
Unlike what took place in NZ, we do not recommend open slather on designs open
to all-comers and run-off
voting to come up with a result as this process will
be too unwieldly (and costly) for a small
people did not indicate a preference for the community to be involved in the
design process but recommended that ACT residents
be allowed a vote on the
adoption of any proposed design. Nicolle Burt, for example, submitted that:
I also respectfully suggest that the people of the ACT are given the opportunity
to vote on the final choice of a new Coat of Arms.
I suggest that a final postal
ballot on the top three designs (selected by the Standing Committee) would be
the least inconvenient
voting method for ACT electors. Should there be a tie,
then the Legislative Assembly could have a free vote on the final
Committee comment
6.12 The Committee notes that this Inquiry has been a first step towards
community consultation on whether the ACT should, or should
not, adopt a coat of
arms and what elements should be included in the design. As indicated in this
report, an overwhelming majority
of submitters indicated support for the
adoption of a Territory coat of arms and provided wide-ranging advice on what
should be considered
for any design of such a coat of arms.
6.13 Given the interest from the community and the
range of views on what should be included in a new or updated Territory Coat of
Arms, the Committee believes further consultation on potential final designs
should be undertaken with the community before adopting
a new Territory Coat of
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government engage in community consultation to determine the final design for
any new Coat of
Arms for the ACT.
7 Procedural considerations
for adopting a Coat of Arms
7.1 During the inquiry the Committee investigated the rules and procedures
that apply when adopting coats of arms. Because it happens
infrequently, there is no clear and established process for adopting a
the case since the
last time an Australian jurisdiction adopted a new coat of arms was in 1984,
prior to the passing of the
Australia Act 1986
(Cth), and because
Australia does not currently have a domestic authority for the issuance and
regulation of heraldic devices.
7.2 In its submission to the Inquiry, the ACT Government recognised this
fact, noting that:
Due to the infrequent introduction of Coats of Arms for States and Territories
in Australia, the current process is untested and
will need to be carefully
considered to ensure it is modern and
Australian precedents
7.3 Each of the Australian States and the Northern Territory has been granted
a coat of arms by Royal Assent or Royal Warrant (see
Table 2, Chapter 4). The
most recent occasion was 1984 in South
7.4 The capital cities of the States and the Northern Territory have also
each adopted a coat of arms (see Table 2, Chapter 4).
7.5 The historic example with the most equivalence or relevance for the ACT
is perhaps the Northern Territory, as it similarly is
not a State under
Australia’s Constitution but a self-governing Territory under the
Parliament.
The Committee
wrote to the Northern Territory Government seeking information about the
historical process undertaken in 1977-1978
to design and adopt their coat of
arms, and was told that:
An artist was engaged during the latter of 1977 to create a range of coat of
arms designs using Territory flora and fauna for consideration.
In March 1978, having received the consensus of the Prime Minister of the day,
the then Majority Leader of the Northern Territory,
Mr Paul Everingham, wrote to
the College of Arms, London, asking to put in motion the necessary steps toward
requesting Her Majesty,
The Queen, lay down the Royal Warrant armorial bearings
for the Northern Territory of Australia. The Territory was granted
self-government
on 1 July 1978, and on 11 September 1978 the Coat of Arms came
7.6 Importantly
however, these examples from other Australian jurisdictions predate the passing
Australia Act 1986
(Cth), which confirmed the Commonwealth of
Australia’s status as a ‘sovereign, independent and federal
and ended the remaining possibilities for the United Kingdom
Parliament to legislate with effect in Australia or be involved in the
government of Australia.
Process for granting a Coat
7.7 The Committee heard evidence form contributors that there are three
potential pathways via which a coat of arms for the Territory
could be adopted:
1) through the College of Arms, London; 2) through the Royal Prerogative of
Australia; and 3) through the legislative
College of Arms, London
7.8 As noted in Chapter 2, while coats of arms are traditionally issued and
regulated by heraldic authorities, Australia currently
has no such authority.
The English heraldic authority, the College of Arms in London, currently claims
The College of Arms is the official heraldic authority for England, Wales,
Northern Ireland and much of the Commonwealth including
Australia and New
7.9 Several
contributors to the Inquiry appeared to accept this assertion by the College of
The Heraldry and
Genealogy Society of Canberra submitted that:
For the proposed ACT Coat of Arms to have the international standing and
recognition befitting the Territory, including its historical,
current and
future roles within the Commonwealth of Australia, the ACT Coat of Arms must be
formally awarded and registered by the
heraldic authority accredited to do so.
At this time (since Australia does not have its own Heraldic Authority) that
authority is
the College of Arms,
Committee sought advice from the College of Arms on the process by which a coat
of arms could be adopted via the College.
The College advised:
All Coats of Arms under English heraldic law are granted under the Royal
Prerogative. Since the early 15th century The Sovereign
has delegated the power
to the three senior heralds or Kings of Arms to grant arms and in 1484 the
heralds were incorporated into
a College of Arms to act as an official registry
of Arms. Nearly all grants of arms are made by letters patent of the Kings of
but in a few cases such as States or the equivalent in other countries of
which The Queen is Sovereign the grant is initiated by
an approach from the
state either through the Governor General or through the Secretary of State for
Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs
to the Sovereign and the grant is made by Royal
Warrant. In both cases the grant is dealt with by the College of Arms and
at the College of Arms. If a grant was to be made by Royal Warrant, I
should therefore approach the Foreign and Commonwealth Office
7.11 Several
contributors objected to the self-proclaimed authority of the College of Arms to
having jurisdiction over the issuing
of grants of arms in
Australia—especially to body politics within Australia as a sovereign
state, as opposed to
individuals.
7.12 Terry Fewtrell and David Headon informed the Committee that:
Since the passage of the Australian Act (1986) it is understood that the College
of Arms no longer has jurisdiction in
Australia...
7.13 Matthew
Bray argued the following:
The English College of Arms is not the competent body to bestow arms on
Australian people or institutions because it is an agency
empowered from its
authority from the ‘fons honorum’ of the Queen of England.
Queen in right of Australia is a different legal person and has not explicitly
empowered the College of Arms to exercise her royal
prerogative to bestow arms
witnesses echoed this point on the relationship between the Queen of Australia
and the College of Arms in London. Geoffrey
Kingman-Sugar told the Committee
that ‘the College of Arms is part of the Queen of the United
Kingdom’s household, not
the Queen of Australia’s
household’.
7.15 On the granting of arms via the College of Arms, the Australian Heraldry
Society submitted the following:
A grant by a delegate (such as the Kings of Arms) is not the method by which
arms of sovereignty and dominion are traditionally granted
to a State or
Territory as is demonstrated by the 1928 Royal Warrant and the Royal Warrants
granting arms to the various States.
Such a grant is traditionally made by the
Sovereign directly.
Any such grant by the Kings of Arms of England would first involve a petition to
the Earl Marshal of England and would be made by
the Kings of Arms of England
using the style and titles of the Queen of Australia whose heraldic power has
not been shown to be demonstrated
to have been delegated to them.
Australia has no participation in their appointment. Their practices in
purported exercise of the Australian Prerogative Power is
subject to neither
delegation from, reporting to nor supervision by any Australian authority. The
Society believe that this is entirely
inappropriate and strongly submits that
the ACT Government should not follow this route.
The Society believe that this course of action would be entirely inappropriate
for the Territory of the capital of a sovereign
7.16 Concluding,
the Society submitted ‘that the Australian Capital Territory should no
seek a grant of arms from the King of
Arms of England at the College of Arms in
7.17 Matthew Bray also pointed out in his submission that a grant of arms via
the College of Arms ‘costs in excess of GBP10,000’.
He suggested
that this money could be better spent on ‘commissioning local artists and
exercising our own independent capacity
to adopt symbols rather than requesting
they be bestowed by a foreign
7.18 A statement by the then-Prime Minister, The Hon. Malcolm Turnbull MP, in
the House of Representative on 7 February 2018, provides
support for the
assertion that a coat of arms could legitimately be adopted in Australia without
reference to the College of Arms,
or other such bodies:
The practice of the College of Arms in England granting armorial bearings to
Australians is well established as one way Australians
can obtain heraldic
insignia if they wish to do so. There is nothing preventing any person or
organisation from commissioning a local
artist, graphics studio or heraldry
specialist to design and produce a coat of arms or identifying symbol. Those
arms would have
the same standing and authority in Australia as arms prepared by
the College of Arms in
Self-adoption through Australia’s Royal
Prerogative
7.19 Several contributors agued that any coat of arms for the Territory, or
an up-dating of the City of Canberra Coat of Arms, should
be adopted via a grant
directly from the Queen of Australia via the Governor-General.
7.20 The Australian Heraldry Society suggested that any adoption of a
Territory coat of arms or the updating of the City of Canberra
Coat of Arms:
...should be effected by an exercise of the Australian Prerogative by the
Governor-General as representative of the Queen of Australia
acting on the
representation of the ACT Executive expressed through advice to the Crown by the
relevant Federal Minister (or from
the Chief Minister direct to the
Governor-General, it that is an appropriate course of
relation to this, the Society also noted the following:
This is the preferred method as it leaves the heraldry of the ACT subject to the
Australian Prerogative of honour in relation to
heraldry where it has
historically rested since the inception of heraldry.
Direct exercise of the Royal Prerogative in the manner suggested should be
limited to arms of sovereignty and dominion and would
not be appropriate for the
grant of personal arms or the
witnesses appeared to endorse the validity of this idea. Appearing before the
Committee, Joseph Johnson suggested the following:
There are two channels you can follow. One is to go through the College of
Heralds, who still claim to have jurisdiction over Australia...
The other is to
go through the Governor-General to the Queen, in her capacity as Queen of
Australia, whereas if it goes to the College
of Heralds she has dubious
capacity. It is that old problem of the divisibility of the Crown. She is Queen
of the United Kingdom
and Queen of
7.23 Geoffrey
Kingman-Sugar similarly stated that ‘[w]e would like to see a repatriation
of the royal prerogative granting the
authority to the Governor-General to give
arms of grants’.
7.24 These latter witnesses, appearing on behalf of the Heraldry and
Genealogy Society of Canberra, seemed to imply that for this
option to be
pursued, an ‘Australian heraldry authority’ would first have to be
established to facilitate this under
the authority of the
Governor-General.
Self-adoption through the ACT Legislative Assembly
7.25 Other contributors suggested that the best method through which to adopt
a Territory coat of arms is through the ACT Legislative
Assembly enacting
relevant legislation or passing a resolution.
7.26 Terry Fewtrell and David Headon submitted that since the passing of the
Australia Act 1986
(Cth), the ‘matter of the formal authorisation
of any ACT Coat of Arms is...unclear in technical terms’, suggesting
...there would be scope for the ACT to ‘assume’ its own arms without
reference to any other Heraldic Authority. Accordingly,
the ACT Legislative
Assembly could simply adopt an agreed design for an ACT Coat of Arms by passing
a resolution by simple majority
Hearder suggested that the ACT Government has the necessary power to design,
adopt and protect an ACT coat of arms. He
The ACT Government already has the necessary power, through the ACT Legislative
Assembly and the ACT Judicial system to protect the
official emblems and
insignia of the ACT in use today, or in the
7.28 Steven
Squires similarly stated that ‘I would argue that it would be most
appropriate for the ACT government to do this
as a motion of the ACT Assembly,
not going to the London College of Arms or doing a royal
7.29 On the option to adopt an ACT coat of arms via a legislative mechanism,
the Australian Heraldry Society submitted the following:
This method would remove the ACT Arms forever from the exercise of the
Prerogative and legislation would thereafter be the only method
by which the ACT
Arms could be altered.
If new ACT arms were adopted by legislation, the result would be that the 1928
Arms (which are, in our view, the arms of the ACT)
would be governed by the
Australian Prerogative and ACT legislation while the new ACT arms would be
governed by ACT legislation.
We do not think that this is a desirable outcome
and, if legislation is to be used, we suggest that it should regulate both the
Arms and the new ACT
Australian jurisdictions, including the ACT, have passed legislation to prevent
unauthorised use of their respective State
or Territory coats of arms.
7.31 For example, the
City of Canberra Arms Act 1932
‘[a]n Act for the protection of the arms of the City of Canberra’.
It prohibits a person from using the arms, ‘without
the authority of the
Minister’ and proof thereof, in relation to ‘any trade, business,
profession’.
7.32 David Hearder noted that this Act exists to protect the use of the arms
and suggested that ‘[a]s such it is the choice
of the ACT Legislative
Assembly and its elected representatives to improve this regulation,
particularly if a decision is made to
create and adopt new insignia for the
Territory’.
7.33 In New South Wales, the
State Arms, Symbols and Emblems Act 2004
(NSW) states that:
A person must not print, issue or use the State arms or a State symbol in
connection with any trade, business, calling or profession,
or the collection of
debts, without the authority of the Governor or Attorney General proof of which
lies on the
South Australia, no one can print, publish or manufacture the South Australia
coat of arms without permission, and they cannot
be used for commercial
purposes, under the
Unauthorised Documents Act 1916
7.35 Some contributors asserted that the legislated protections ascribed to
coats of arms in Australia means that deference to traditional
authorities is no longer warranted.
7.36 The Committee notes that the evidence it received suggests that, due to
the lack of precedent in an Australian jurisdiction adopting
a coat of arms
under the prevailing legislative and regulatory landscape, there exists
complexity in determining an appropriate process
through which to adopt an ACT
coat of arms.
8 The ACT Flag and Other
8.1 A modified version of the City of Canberra Coat of Arms—without its
compartment, motto, or crest—appears on the Australian
Capital Territory
Flag (Figure 23). This flag was adopted as the official flag of the ACT on 25
March 1993 by resolution of the ACT
Legislative Assembly and gazetted on 31
March 1993.
8.2 The ACT Flag was adopted through a competition and community consultation
process conducted between 1988 and 1993. Following competitions
held in 1988 and
1992, four flag designs incorporating common elements suggested by competition
entrants were presented to the ACT
community for its consideration in
February/March 1993. The design which received the widest support was adopted as
the ACT Flag.
8.3 The Committee heard evidence that due to the depiction of a modified
version of the City of Canberra Coat of Arms on the ACT Flag,
the adoption of an
ACT coat of arms or the modification of the City of Canberra Coat of Arms would
necessitate a reconsideration
of the current ACT Flag’s
In contrast, other
contributors suggested that the current flag should only be altered so that the
complete City of Canberra Coat
of Arms be depicted
accurately.
8.4 The ACT Government recognised that a review of the ACT Flag would be
needed if a Territory coat of arms was adopted, submitting:
The introduction of a Coat of Arms for the ACT would necessitate a review and
likely change to the ACT Flag, as the existing flag
uses the modified Coat of
Arms for the City of Canberra. The ACT flag can be changed through the existing
Legislative framework of
Squires likewise submitted that: ‘[a]s adopting an ACT Coat of Arms will
require a modification to the ACT Flag,
this present an opportunity to turn the
ACT Flag into a well-loved and widely used
8.6 Terry Fewtrell and David Headon similarly informed the Committee
The adoption of an ACT Coat of Arms, links logically to the revision of the
design of the ACT flag. To make one change and not the
other would make little
contributors pointed to the ambivalence of portraying the City of Canberra Coat
of Arms on the ACT Flag, a flag designed
to represent the entire Territory, not
only Canberra.
Others pointed
to this fact to support their argument that the City of Canberra Coat of Arms is
coat of arms for the
8.8 The ACT Government submitted the following:
A redesign of the ACT flag presents the opportunity to look at how we present
the symbols of the ACT on the flag. This is another
opportunity for the
community to contribute and provide their preference for what symbols best
represent the
The modified City of Canberra Coat of Arms
8.9 A number of contributors took issue with the depiction of a modified
version of the City of Canberra Coat of Arms on the ACT Flag,
suggesting that
this is both poor heraldic and vexillological design practice.
8.10 Geoffrey Kingman-Sugar informed the Committee that ‘[t]he current
improper use of a partial Canberra City coat of arms
to represent the Territory
is improper use of heraldic
Joseph Johnson called for the ACT Flag to be revised as ‘the present one
is very “busy” and is heraldically
incorrect as it omits the
Tony Burton,
meanwhile, told the Committee that a ‘coat of arms should not be on the
flag at all, to start
8.11 Adopting the same line of criticism, the Heraldry and Genealogy Society
of Canberra made the following statement in relation
to the inclusion of a
modified version of the City of Canberra Coat of Arms on the ACT Flag:
The flag should
include a partial achievement of the Coat of Arms
(i.e. the shield from the arms together with only some of the other elements
as the crest, supporters, compartment, motto). Note that the current ACT
flag breaks this rule, as well as other vexillological
principles.
Committee heard from the ACT Flag’s designer, Ivo Ostyn, that he was
commissioned by the ACT Government to ‘design
five flags, using the
modified coat of arms’. He continued:
I was very much against using the modified coat of arms. I know from a heraldry
point of view that it is a total disaster. I think
it was driven by the then
Chief Minister, Trevor Kaine. He wanted to use a flag with a coat of arms on it.
But I think that was a
big mistake. It was part of the
Ostyn added that the ACT Flag depicting a modified version of the City of
Canberra Coat of Arms ‘was born within the
Chief Minister’s
department in a desperate attempt to simplify it for flag form’. Mr Ostyn
suggested that other than
the modified coat of arms—which ‘does not
address any heraldry reasons and it is an abomination’—the design
elements of the current flag are
appropriate.
8.14 This sentiment was also expressed by Steven Squires, who submitted:
The ACT Flag already has most of the elements of a great flag in place. It uses
the ACT colours blue and gold. It has the Southern
Cross, a great symbol
recognising the ACT as a part of the common Australian identity. However, the
design has one mistake, which
mars a potentially great symbol: The overly
complex modified Canberra Coat of
Relationship between a coat of arms and a flag
8.15 The Committee heard contrasting evidence on whether any new Territory
coat of arms should be depicted on a revised ACT Flag,
and, if so, how it should
be depicted.
8.16 Tony Burton informed the Committee that it is ‘unusual’ for
flags to depict coats of arms and noted that ‘[v]ery
few flags have got
the coat of arms’. He gave the examples, however, of Montenegro and Serbia
as countries that do this. He
noted that coats of arms are not well-suited to
flags due to their
complexity.
8.17 This latter point was echoed by Jeremy Matthews, who submitted the
The complexity inherent in a coat of arms means they are poorly suited for use
on a flag. Traditionally a coat of arms is used on
a stationary banner because
banners don’t flap, are seen from one side, and usually seen close up or
submitters suggested that a new ACT coat of arms should be depicted on the ACT
Flag. Lisa Thomas suggested effort should
be taken to ensure ‘the new coat
of arms emblem will look good when it stands alone and when it sits on the ACT
flag in place
of the current coat of
While Nicolle
Burt submitted:
Of course, any new Coat of Arms will change the design elements of the ACT Flag.
So any new design needs to account for its use as
a fixed, static image that
flies in the wind around London Circuit and on City
Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra similarly suggested that ‘the
ACT Government consider a flag design that
mirrors the proposed arms for the
8.20 Others felt that a Territory coat of arms need not be incorporated into
a new ACT flag design. Reflecting this position, Jeremey
Matthews submitted the
...I respectfully suggest that the ACT Coat of Arms not be incorporated into the
ACT Flag, and both designs be treated as two separate
initiatives. Both the coat
of arms and the flag could include the same symbolism and colours, though the
designs should be tailored
to their intended use and
its submission to the Inquiry, the Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra
considered how coats of arms, or elements of
coats of arms, could be
appropriately depicted on flags. In addition to noting that flags should not
include a partial depiction
of a coat of arms, as in the modified City of
Canberra Coat of Arms on the current ACT Flag, the Society provided the
following advice:
Clear visual links between a flag and the associated coat of arms ensures
consistent visual messaging and identification. Vexillological
best practice in
designing a flag associated with a coat of arms conforms with the following
principles:
a. A flag can display the image of the shield in a rectangular form; or
b. the design could include appropriate symbols from the Coat of
Society’s submission included examples of ‘coats of arms and flags
exemplifying heraldically and vexillologically
appropriate flag design
options’. These examples are included below (Figure 24).
: Relationship between coats
of arms and flags
8.23 Flags Australia appeared to endorse the above advice from the Heraldry
and Genealogy Society of Canberra when it submitted that:
If the ACT flag were to be based on any Coat of Arms, it does not have to be a
literal transposition. Flags can be based on Arms
using just the colours of the
Design principles, concepts
and suggestions
8.24 The Committee received a range of advice and suggestions on what should
be taken into consideration for the design of a new ACT
flag. Much of this
advice was similar to that received in relation to the design of an ACT coat of
8.25 The Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra, for instance, made the
following suggestions on the design principles for flags:
– a flag should be instantly recognizable and memorable,
which requires that it should be sufficiently simple that a child
can draw it
from memory; the number of colours should be limited, ideally two or three; and
lettering of any kind should never be
included on a flag.
– images, colours and/or patterns on a flag should be
meaningful in terms of what the flag symbolises.
Distinctiveness and Connection
– a flag should distinctively
identify the entity it symbolises and should not duplicate other flags; however,
one or more
similar elements between flag designs can be used to show
connections between entities.
8.26 Other contributors echoed this emphasis on simplicity for
flag designs. Ivo Ostyn, for instance, told the Committee that a ‘flag
something that has to be very simple. Flags are viewed from a distance, so it
has to hit you straightaway. You must know immediately
Tony Burton,
likewise, argued that ‘you do not want complication; you want simplicity
on the flag because the flag is a signal...
The more clutter on what you want to
be a signal, the more it is not doing its
Jeremey Matthews submitted that ‘[t]he simpler the flag, the more
effective it is’.
8.27 In a similar fashion, Flags Australia submitted:
Flags are mobiles. Less is more. Avoid clutter. Complex designs are distorted
when the flag flies outdoors. Flags are not static
graphics. As mobiles, flags
tend to lose anything appearing in the free end, as the flag wears in the wind.
The focal point of flags
lies in their centre or closer to the
8.28 Contributors
also made suggestions on what design elements could conceivably be included in a
re-designed ACT flag. As with suggestions
for design elements for the Territory
coat of arms, the Royall Bluebell featured most prominently in the suggestions
of contributors.
8.29 On the significance of the Royall Bluebell, Jeremy Matthews informed the
The Royal Bluebell (Wahlenbergia gloriosa) is the floral emblem of the
Australian Capital Territory. The traditional owners of the
ACT area the
Ngambri-Ngunnawal peoples used the petals of the bluebell as food, and they are
reported to make a delightful addition
to a mixed salad. A floral emblem also
reflects that Canberra is classified as a garden
8.30 Considering
the possible inclusion of a Royall Bluebell on a new ACT flag design, Tony
Burton provided the Committee with the
following words of caution:
Flags move and when the flag moves, the flower is just a lump. You cannot see
what it is. There are exceptions. The highly stylized
bauhinia flag of Hong Kong
does work. In my submission I gave an example of the federal flag in Belgium, in
Brussels. That looks
like something from a doctor’s dissecting table. That
is supposed to be an iris. That is my
Australia included an image of the ‘Brussels Capital Region’, as
referenced by Mr Burton at the public hearing,
as an example of a poor depiction
of a flower on a flag. This is included below (Figure 25).
: Flag of the Brussels
Capital Region
8.32 It should be noted that Mr Burton expressed approval at the idea of
including a stylised version of the Royall Bluebell on a
new design for the ACT
8.33 Three submitters provided the Committee with suggested designs for the
ACT flag. These suggestions a present below (Figures 26-30).
8.34 Of these suggested designs, several contributors expressed support for
the suggestion from Ivo
: Proposed flag by Lyn
: Proposed flag by Ivo
: Proposed flag by Jeremy
: Proposed flag by Jeremy
: Proposed flag by Jeremy
A symbols package for the
8.35 Several contributors took the opportunity of the Inquiry to provide
suggestions on how the Territory is symbolised generally.
These contributors
suggested that there should be a greater degree of unity in the symbols employed
by the ACT Government to represent
the Territory and various arms of the
government.
8.36 Speaking to the point about the need for greater unity of the symbols
for the Territory, Ivo Ostyn pointed to the example of
the Northern Territory,
‘which have their symbol package done to perfection’ (Figure 31). He
noted that:
All of the symbols are relevant. The NT CoA also includes the flora, fauna and
mammal symbols as part of its makeup. The NT flag
uses the floral emblem and the
NT Government logo also uses the floral emblem. It is an integrated set of
symbols which is graphically
appealing and technically correct, a better example
of correct symbols application is hard to find. As a template for what we should
do in the ACT, it is second to
: Northern Territory
8.37 Steven Squires’ submission to the Inquiry included a consideration
of how the symbols of ACT Government agencies could
be up-dated in-line with the
adoption of an ACT coat of arms and a new ACT flag. He submitted:
The emblems of some ACT agencies have the Canberra City Arms, which would also
require change during this process. While the City
Arms could simply be replaced
by a new Territory Arms, this is an opportunity to modify and refine these
symbols into logos more
fit for purpose to modern
Squires submission also included suggestions on how these agency symbols could
possibly be changed in a wide-ranging up-dating
of the Territory’s symbols
package. His suggestion is presented below (Figure 32).
: Agency symbols suggested by
Steven Squires
Committee Comment
8.39 The Committee heard evidence from a wide range of contributors, from
those both supportive and opposed to the adoption of a Territory
coat of arms,
that the current ACT Flag is problematic on heraldic and vexillological grounds.
Contributors expressed concern with
the flag’s depiction of the City of
Canberra Coat of Arms in a ‘modified’ form.
8.40 Given the wide-spread displeasure with the ACT Flag in its current form,
the Committee believes that the ACT Government should
update the design of the
ACT Flag in consultation with the community. The Committee notes that any
process undertaken to implement
a new Coat of Arms and Flag would be
complimented by developing a guideline for the appropriate use of the full range
of the ACT’s
Official Symbols.
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends that in
consultation with the community the ACT Government redesign the ACT Flag.
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends the ACT
Government develop a guideline on the appropriate use of the ACT’s
Official Symbols and make
this publicly available.
9 Conclusion
9.1 In conducting this Inquiry, the Committee has heard about the importance
of jurisdictional symbols in expressing the beliefs,
values and the collective
identity of the members of the community they serve to represent. A coat of arms
is one such symbol. The
Committee heard passionate arguments from those both
supportive and opposed to the adoption of a new Territory coat of arms and the
Committee thanks these people for their invaluable contribution to the Inquiry.
The Committee recognises that both sides of this
debate presented strong
arguments in support of their respective positions. It also notes, however, that
an overwhelming majority
of contributors supported the adoption of a new
Territory coat of arms. These contributors also provided numerous ideas on what
be considered for inclusion in any new Territory coat of arms.
9.2 At the same time, the Committee is cognizant that important procedural
questions remain to be answered. Chief among these are:
1) the legal standing
of the City of Canberra Coat of Arms; its corporate ownership and the legitimate
scope of its use in representing
the Territory, and 2) the most appropriate
process through which a new Territory coat of arms could be adopted or through
City of Canberra Coat of Arms could be revised. The Committee believes
that the ACT Government should clarify these questions before
proceeding with
further actions.
9.3 The proposition of adopting an ACT coat of arms has also brought to the
fore in the minds of many of the contributors the issue
of the symbology of the
ACT Flag. The Committee heard from those both opposed and supportive of a new
Territory coat of arms that
the current depiction of a ‘modified’
version of the City of Canberra Coat of Arms on the current ACT Flag is
problematic.
While some contributors suggested that the flag be amended to show
the full arms of the city, a majority of contributors suggested
that the city
coat of arms be entirely removed from the flag and replaced with more
appropriate imagery. The Committee agrees that
the ACT Government should review
and revise the current ACT Flag in consultation with the ACT community.
9.4 Based on the evidence the Committee received, the Committee makes five
recommendations.
Ms Suzanne Orr MLA
19 August 2019
A - Witnesses
21 May 2019
 Mr Tony Burton, Vice-President, Flags Australia
 Mr Matthew Sait, Branch Chairman, ACT and District Branch,
Australian Monarchist League
 Mr Ivo Ostyn
 Mr Richard Reddan, President, the Heraldry and Genealogy Society of
 Dr Joseph Johnson, Heraldry Special Interest Group, the Heraldry and
Genealogy Society of Canberra
 Mr Geoffrey Kingman-Sugar, Heraldry Special Interest Group, the
Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra
 Prof Janette Lindesay, Heraldry Special Interest Group, the Heraldry
and Genealogy Society of Canberra
 Mr Christopher Lindesay, Heraldry Special Interest Group, the
Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra
 Mr Richard d’Apice AM, President, the Australian Heraldry
 Mr David Hearder
 Mr Steven Squires
 Dr David Headon
Appendix B –
Submissions
Submission Number
Authorised for
Publication
Liam Craigie
Michael Cooney
Kristine Klugman
John Trotter
Darren Randall
Elizabeth Counsel
Sergio Sergi
Stephen Mills
Gerard De Ruyter
Bernie Murphy
Gino Passerini
Brendan Long
Stuart Galbory
Sally Koodiaroff
Codi Thomson
Dean Turner
Susanne Scott
Rosemary Murdock
Seamus Forde
Evan Dently
Albert White
Monica Sander
Pouros Bharucha
Jan Skorich
Gai Waterlow
Lauren Hutchison
Robin Bartrum
Hareesha Rangarajan
Lisa Thomas
Robyn Holder
Reuben Ingall
Andrew Marich
Vivienne Beddoe
Nicolle Burt
Steven Squires
Michael King
Geoffrey Kingman-Sugar
Joseph V Johnson
Brendan Whyte
Terry Fewtrell and David Headon
Brenda Coles
Maurice Austin
The Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra
ACT Government
Jeremy Matthews
Australian Monarchist League
Matthew Bray
Rob Calvert
The Heraldry Society of Australia
Bradley Saines
Aaron McDonnell
Flags Australia
Stephen Boyle
ACT Courts and Tribunal
Women for an Australian Republic
Douglas Hassall
David Hearder
Christopher Ryan
Frank Boyle
ACT Law Society
29 May 2019
Legislative Assembly for the
Minutes of Proceedings
No. 2, 13 December 2016, p. 13, accessible
https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/1017980/MoP002F1.pdf
Legislative Assembly for the
Minutes of Proceedings
No. 82, 29 November 2018, p. 1172, accessible
https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/1287357/MoP082F.pdf
Legislative Assembly for the
Minutes of Proceedings
, No. 82, 29 November 2018, p. 1172,
accessible at:
https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/1287357/MoP082F.pdf.
Legislative Assembly for the ACT,
Proceedings
, No. 98, 16 May 2019, p. 1465,
https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0011/1363925/MoP098F.pdf
and Legislative Assembly for the ACT,
Minutes of Proceedings
, No. 102, 30
July 2019, p. 1532, accessible at:
https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/1393892/MoP102.pdf
Legislative Assembly for the
ACT, Minutes of Proceedings No. 43, 30 November 2017, p. 632, accessible at:
https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/1133743/MOP043F1.pdf
Standing Committee on
Environment and Transport and City Services, Inquiry into a proposal for a
Mammal Emblem, accessible at:
https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/1226724/9th-ETCS-06-Inquiry-into-a-proposal-for-a-Mammal-Emblem.pdf
ACT Government Response to
the Standing Committee on Environment and Transport and City Services, Inquiry
into a proposal for a Mammal
Emblem for the ACT
, tabled in the Assembly on
29 November 2018, accessible at:
https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/1287441/9th-ETC-06-Proposal-for-a-Mammal-Emblem-for-the-ACT-GR-tabled-29-November-2018.pdf
Legislative Assembly for the
ACT, Minutes of Proceedings No. 82, 29 November 2018, p. 1176, accessible at:
https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/1287357/MoP082F.pdf
Legislative Assembly for the
Minutes of Proceedings
No. 82, 29 November 2018, p. 1172, accessible
https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/1287357/MoP082F.pdf.
Standing Committee on
Environment and Transport and City Services, Inquiry into Territory Coat of
Arms, accessible at:
https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/in-committees/standing-committees-current-assembly/standing-committee-on-environment-and-transport-and-city-services/inquiry-into-territory-coat-of-arms
Standing Committee on
Environment and Transport and City Services, Inquiry into Territory Coat of
Arms, accessible at:
https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/in-committees/standing-committees-current-assembly/standing-committee-on-environment-and-transport-and-city-services/inquiry-into-territory-coat-of-arms
Legislative Assembly for the
ACT, Hansard, accessible at:
http://www.hansard.act.gov.au/hansard/2017/comms/environment17a.pdf
The Australian Heraldry
Society, ‘Australian Heraldic Authority’,
https://www.heraldryaustralia.org/heraldic-authority
viewed 29 May 2019.
Fox-Davies, Arthur Charles,
A Complete Guide to Heraldry
, London: T. C. & E. C. Jack, 1909. pp.
College of Arms,
‘Granting of Arms’,
https://www.college-of-arms.gov.uk/services/granting-arms
viewed 29 May 2019.
Fox-Davies,
Fox-Davies.
. pp. 57-60, 303-448
Adapted from Wikimedia
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Elementy_herbu.jpg
viewed 9 August 2019.
Fox-Davies.
Legislative Assembly of
Nunavut, ‘The Coat of Arms of Nunavut’,
https://www.assembly.nu.ca/about-legislative-assembly/coat-arms-nunavut
, viewed 5 June 2019
Province of KwaZulu-Natal, ‘The KZN Coat of Arms’,
http://www.kznonline.gov.za/index.php/government/module-suffixes-2/kzncoa
viewed 18 July 2019.
Fox-Davies.
. pp. 363, 584-85
Fox-Davies.
Fox-Davies.
National Archives of Australia, CP188/1,1.
Seat of Government
(Administration) Act 1924
National Archives of
Australia, A1, 1932/215.
National Archives of
Australia, A1, 1932/215.
National Archives of
Australia, A1, 1932/215.
David Hearder,
National Archives of Australia, A1, 1932/215.
National Archives of
Australia, CP188/1, 1.
National Archives of
Australia, CP188/1, 2; and the Australian Heraldry Society,
, pp. 2, 5.
National Archives of
Australia, A1, 1932/215; and David Hearder,
Submission 65
, Attachment 3,
Commonwealth of Australia.
Department of the Capital Territory.
Armorial Bearings: The City of
. Canberra, ACT: Commonwealth Government Printer, pp. 2-3; ACT
Government,
Submission 52
Kingman-Sugar, Geoff,
‘The Arms of Canberra’,
The Australian Heraldry Society: Members
, Issue 159, March, April and May 2013, p. 13, the Australian
Heraldry Society,
Submission 57
, Attachment.
Transcript of
, 21 May 2019, pp. 41, 43; the Australian Heraldry Society,
Submission 57
, pp. 10, 18; and D Hearder,
Submission 65
Transcript of
, 21 May 2019, pp. 41, 44.
Perryman, John, ‘Ships Named Canberra’,
Royal Australian Navy,
http://www.navy.gov.au/history/feature-histories/ships-named-canberra
viewed 6 June 2019.
Australian War Memorial,
‘Sinking of HMAS Canberra in Battle of Savo Island’, October 20,
https://www.awm.gov.au/articles/encyclopedia/ww2_navy/savo
viewed 6 June 2019.
National Capital Authority,
’HMAS Canberra Memorial’, viewed 6 June 2019,
https://www.nca.gov.au/attractions-and-memorials/hmas-canberra-memorial
viewed 6 June 2019.
Perryman, John, ‘Ships
Named Canberra’, Royal Australian Navy,
http://www.navy.gov.au/history/feature-histories/ships-named-canberra
viewed 6 June 2019.
Royal Australian Navy,
‘HMAS Canberra (III)’,
http://www.navy.gov.au/hmas-canberra-iii
, viewed 1 August
Mr Geoffrey Kingman-Sugar,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p. 23; Dr David Headon,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p. 44; G Kingman-Sugar,
Submission 44
; T Fewtrell and D Headon,
Submission 48
National Archives of
Australia, CP188/1,1.
National Archives, A1,
City of Canberra Arms Act
City of Canberra Arms Act
Australian Government
National Capital Authority, ‘About the NCA’,
https://www.nca.gov.au/about-the-NCA/what-we-do
29 July 2019.
; G Kingman-Sugar,
Submission 44
; JV Johnson,
Submission 45
Submission 47
; T Fewtrell and D Headon,
Submission 48
The Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Submission 51
Government,
Submission 52
; R Calvert,
Submission 56
; and Women for
an Australian Republic,
Submission 63
The Heraldry and Genealogy
Society of Canberra,
Submission 51
Letter from Garter Principal
King or Arms, dated 4 July 2013, Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Submission 51
, Appendix 1.
Mr Geoffrey Kingman-Sugar,
Heraldry Special Interest Group, Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p. 24. Also see: Mr Geoffrey
Kingman-Sugar,
Submission 44
Mr Richard d’Apice AM, President, the
Australian Heraldry Society,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p.
Mr Richard d’Apice AM,
President, the Australian Heraldry Society,
Transcript of Evidence
May 2019, pp. 36-37.
Submission 49
; M Austin,
Submission 50
Australian Monarchist League, ACT and District Branch,
Submission 54
Australian Heraldry Society,
Submission 57
; A McDonnell,
; and D Hearder,
Submission 65
Mr Richard d’Apice AM,
President, the Australian Heraldry Society,
Transcript of Evidence
May 2019, p. 33.
Mr Richard d’Apice AM,
President, the Australian Heraldry Society,
Transcript of Evidence
May 2019, p. 36.
The Australian Heraldry
Submission 57
The Australian Heraldry
Submission 57
, pp. 2, 9.
National Archives of
Australia, A2910, 410/1/93.
National Archives of
Australia, A2910, 410/1/93.
T Fewtrell and D Headon,
Submission 48
, Attachment A, p. 9.
T Fewtrell and D Headon,
Submission 48
, Attachment B, p. 10.
Women for an Australian
Submission 63
, letter to the Chief Minister dated 23 May 2012,
Women for an Australian
Submission 63
, letter to the Chief Minister dated 23 May 2012,
Attachment.
JV Johnson,
, p. [1]. Emphasis in original.
Mr Geoffrey Kingman-Sugar,
Heraldry Special Interest Group, Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p. 23.
Mr Ivo Ostyn,
of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p. 17.
G De Ruyter,
L Hutchison,
T Fewtrell and D Headon,
Submission 48
Dr David Headon,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p. 41.
, pp. 11-12.
, pp. 14-15.
Mr Matthew Sait, Branch
Chairman, ACT and District Branch, Australian Monarchist League,
of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p. 9.
Mr Richard d’Apice AM,
President, the Australian Heraldry Society,
Transcript of Evidence
May 2019, p. 35.
, p. [1]. Emphasis in original.
Australian Monarchist
Submission 54
A McDonnell,
Mr Matthew Sait, Branch
Chairman, ACT and District Branch, Australian Monarchist League,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p. 9.
Australian Monarchist
Submission 54
and the Australian Heraldry Society,
Submission 57
Mr Matthew Sait, Branch
Chairman, ACT and District Branch, Australian Monarchist League,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, pp. 11-12.
Mr Matthew Sait, Branch
Chairman, ACT and District Branch, Australian Monarchist League,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p. 12. See: Hearing 1 - Exhibit 1 -
Australian Monarchist League.
, pp. [1-2].
, pp. [1, 2].
; and B Coles,
Submission 49
, p. 17. Also see:
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p. 45.
, p. 6. Emphasis in original.
ACT Government.
Submission 52
G Kingman-Sugar,
Submission 44
, p. [1]; T Fewtrell and D Headon,
Submission 48
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, pp. 16-17, 23, 46
G Kingman-Sugar,
Submission 44
, p. [1]. Also see: T Fewtrell and D Headon,
, p. 2; and
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, pp. 23, 46.
, p. 2. Also see: S Boyle,
Submission 61
Transcript of
, 21 May 2019, p. 45.
, p. [2]. Also see: M Austin,
Submission 50
, p. [1]; Australian
Monarchist League,
Submission 54
, p. 2; and
Transcript of
, 21 May 2019, p. 11.
National Archives of
Australia, CP188/1, 2.
National Archives of
Australia, CP188/1, 3.
, pp. 15-16.
The Heraldry and
Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Submission 51
, Appendix 2, p. 11; and the
Australian Heraldry Society,
Submission 57
, Attachment, Members Circular
– Issue 159.
J Matthews,
Mr Richard d’Apice,
President, the Australian Heraldry Society,
Transcript of Evidence
May 2019, p. 37.
. Also see: A White,
Submission 27
; T Fewtrell and D Headon,
Submission 48
, p. 2; The Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Submission 51
T Fewtrell and D Headon,
Submission 48
, p. 3. Also see: H Rangarajan,
Submission 34
Submission 37
; and S Squires,
Submission 42
P Bharucha,
L Hutchison,
Submission 32.
JV Johnson,
T Fewtrell and D Headon,
Submission 48
J Matthews,
JV Johnson,
, p. [2]. Also see: S Sergi,
Submission 11
T Fewtrell and D Headon,
Submission 48
, p. 2. Also see: L Thomas,
Submission 35
; E Counsel,
Submission 10
; and S Sergi,
Submission 11
Mr Richard d’Apice
AM, President, the Australian Heraldry Society,
Transcript of Evidence
21 May 2019, p. 37.
Douglas Hassall,
Submission 64
, p. [1]. Emphasis in original.
Mr Christopher Lindesay,
Heraldry Special Interest Group, Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p. 28.
Flags of Australia,
Submission 60
ACT Courts and Tribunal,
Submission 62
Douglas Hassall,
Submission 64
Mr Steven Squires and Dr
David Headon,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p. 47.
Douglas Hassall,
Submission 64
T Fewtrell and D Headon,
Submission 48
; and N Burt,
Submission 41
Mr Daivd Hearder,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p. 47.
; S Squires,
Submission 42
; G Kingman-Sugar,
Submission 44
Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Submission 51
; J Matthews,
Submission 53
; B Saines,
Submission 58
; and Flags of Australia
Submission 60
; and Flags of Australia,
Submission 60
Women for an Australian
Submission 63
ACT Government,
‘ACT Flags and Emblems’,
https://www.cmtedd.act.gov.au/communication/flags
6 August 2019; and ACT Government,
Submission 52
Submission 12
; S Galbory,
Submission 19
Hutchinson,
Submission 32
; V Beddoe,
Submission 40
Submission 41
; S Squires,
Submission 42
; G Kingman-Sugar,
Submission 44
; JV Johnson,
Submission 45
; T Fewtrell and D Headon,
Submission 48
The Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Submission 51
; ACT Government,
Submission 52
; J Matthews,
Submission 53
; R Calvert,
Submission 56
; B Saines,
, Flags Australia,
Submission 60
Submission 61
; D Hearder,
Submission 65
Submission 66
; and F Boyle,
Submission 67
Mr Tony Burton,
Vice-President, Flags Australia,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p.
The Heraldry and
Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Submission 51
, p. 5. Emphasis in
Mr Geoffrey
Kingman-Sugar, Heraldry Special Interest Group, Heraldry and Genealogy Society
of Canberra,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p. 26; I Ostyn,
Submission 47
, pp. [1, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10].
ACT Government,
‘ACT Flags and Emblems’,
https://www.cmtedd.act.gov.au/communication/flags
viewed 6 August 2019; and ACT Government,
Submission 52
Submission 12
; V Beddoe,
Submission 40
; S Squires,
Submission 42
Kingman-Sugar,
Submission 44
; JV Johnson,
Submission 45
Submission 47
; The Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Submission 51
; ACT Government,
Submission 52
; R Calvert,
Submission 56
Submission 61
; D Hearder,
; and F Boyle,
Submission 67
; and S Squires,
Submission 42
; and I Ostyn,
Submission 47
, pp. [6, 8].
Dr Joseph Johnson,
Heraldry Special Interest Group, Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p. 28; the Heraldry and Genealogy
Society of Canberra,
Submission 51
, p. 5; S Squires,
Submission 47
, pp. [1, 5, 7, 9].
Standing Committee on
Environment and Transport and City Services,
Inquiry into a Proposal for a
Mammal Emblem for the ACT
, Report 6, July 2018,
https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/1226724/9th-ETCS-06-Inquiry-into-a-proposal-for-a-Mammal-Emblem.pdf
viewed 6 August 2019.
Legislative Assembly for
the Australian Capital Territory,
Minutes of Proceedings
, 29 November
2018, p. 1176.
ACT Government,
‘ACT Flags and Emblems’,
https://www.cmtedd.act.gov.au/communication/flags
viewed 6 August 2019; and ACT Government,
Submission 52
; V Beddoe,
Submission 40
; S Squires,
Submission 42
Kingman-Sugar,
Submission 44
; JV Johnson,
Submission 45
Submission 47
; the Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Submission 51
; ACT Government,
Submission 52
; J Matthews,
Submission 53
; R Calvert,
Submission 56
; B Saines,
Submission 61
; D Hearder,
Submission 65
Submission 66
Submission 47
; the Heraldry and Genealogy Society of
Submission 51
; B Saines,
Submission 58
; and S Boyle,
Submission 61
; D Turner,
Submission 22
Submission 30
L Hutchinson,
Submission 32
; H Rangarajan,
Submission 34
Submission 37
; R Ingall,
Submission 38
; A Marich,
Submission 41
; S Squires,
Submission 42
Kingman-Sugar,
Submission 44
; JV Johnson,
Submission 45
Submission 47
T Fewtrell and D Headon,
Submission 48
Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Submission 51
Government,
Submission 52
Submission 61
; and D Hearder,
Submission 65
; and ACT Government,
Submission 52
T Fewtrell and D Headon,
Submission 48
Mr Steven Squires,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p. 42.
L Hutchinson,
Submission 32
H Rangarajan,
Submission 34
G Kingman-Sugars,
Submission 44
, p. [1]. Emphasis in original.
JV Johnson,
, p. 4. Also see: I Ostyn,
Submission 47
; and S Boyle,
Submission 61
The Heraldry and
Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Submission 51
Flags of Australia,
Submission 60
ACT Courts and Tribunal,
Submission 62
ACT Law Society,
Submission 68
Mr Richard d’Apice
AM, President, the Australian Heraldry Society,
Transcript of Evidence
21 May 2019, p. 37.
; S Koodiaroff,
Submission 20
G Kingman-Sugar,
Submission 44
; JV Johnson,
Submission 45
T Fewtrell and D Headon,
Submission 48
; the Heraldry and
Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Submission 51
; J Matthews,
; R Calvert,
Submission 56
; B Saines,
Submission 58
of Australia,
Submission 60
G Kingman-Sugar,
Submission 44
; JV Johnson,
Submission 45
; and the Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra,
T Fewtrell and D Headon,
Submission 48
The Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Submission 51
The Heraldry and
Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Submission 51
The Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Submission 51
; S Squires,
Submission 42
, Ivo Ostny,
Submission 47
Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Submission 51
Submission 58
and Flags of Australia,
Submission 60
The Heraldry and
Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Submission 51
Australian Monarchist
Submission 54
L Hutchison,
Submission 32
. Also see: S Koodiaroff,
Submission 20
; and A Kirk,
Submission 37
Flags of Australia,
Submission 60
. Christopher Ryan expressed support for this design. See: C Ryan,
Submission 66
Act Government,
Submission 52
Mr Richard d’Apice
AM, President, the Australian Heraldry Society,
Transcript of Evidence
21 May 2019, p. 38. Also see: the Australian Heraldry Society,
, pp. 9, 13.
T Fewtrell and D Headon,
Submission 48
T Fewtrell and D Headon,
Submission 48
The Australian Heraldry
Submission 57
Women for Australian
Submission 63
Women for Australian
Submission 63
ACT Government,
Submission 52
The South Australian
Government Gazette, 19 April 1984, pp. 950-951, contained in Exhibit 4 –
Australian Heraldry Society;
Richard d’Apice,
Australia’s
Constitution, s. 122.
Letter from the Northern
Territory Government, dated 3 May 2019.
Australia Act 1986
College of Arms,
https://www.college-of-arms.gov.uk/
, viewed 12
August 2019.
JV Johnson,
; and the Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra,
The Heraldry and
Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Submission 51
Email from Garter
Principal King of Arms, dated 23 February 2019.
T Fewtrell and D Headon,
Submission 48
Submission 55
; and the Australian Heraldry
Submission 57
T Fewtrell and D Headon,
Submission 48
, p. [2]. Emphasis in original.
Mr Geoffrey
Kingman-Sugar, Heraldry Special Interest Group, the Heraldry and Genealogy
Society of Canberra,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p. 29.
The Australian Heraldry
Submission 57
The Australian Heraldry
Submission 57
House of Representatives,
Questions in Writing, College of Arms (Question no. 806), 7 February 2018,
https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Hansard/Hansard_Display?bid=chamber/hansardr/8f7b4904-e5ab-452a-8736-6158744bd454/&sid=0301
viewed 12 August 2019. Several contributors referenced this statement: M Bray,
Submission 55
; the Australian Heraldry Society,
Submission 57
Submission 65
and Mr Steven Squires,
Transcript of
, 21 May 2019, p. 42. The ACT Government also paraphrased this
statement. See: ACT Government,
Submission 52
The Australian Heraldry
Submission 57
The Australian Heraldry
Submission 57
Dr Joseph Johnson,
Heraldry Special Interest Group, the Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p. 29.
Mr Geoffrey
Kingman-Sugar, Heraldry Special Interest Group, the Heraldry and Genealogy
Society of Canberra,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p. 29.
Transcript of
, 21 May 2019, pp. 29-30.
T Fewtrell and D Headon,
Submission 48
, p. 16. Also see: Mr David Hearder,
Transcript of Evidence
2019, p. 45
Mr Steven Squires,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p. 42.
The Australian Heraldry
Submission 57
City of Canberra Arms
State Arms, Symbols
and Emblems Act 2004
Unauthorised Documents
Proceedings
, No. 55, 25 March 1993, p. 7,
https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/750266/93MoP55.pdf#1
viewed 13 August 2019; Australian Capital Territory Gazette, No. 13, 31 March
1993, p. 272,
https://www.legislation.act.gov.au/View/gaz/1993-13/19930331-32913/PDF/1993-13.PDF
viewed 13 August 2019.
‘Australian Capital Territory’,
https://www.ausflag.com.au/australian_capital_territory.asp
viewed 25 July 2019.
ACT Government,
‘Guidelines for flying the ACT Flag’, 21 March 2018,
https://www.cmtedd.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0020/114815/Flag-Guidelines-2018.pdf
viewed 14 August 2019; and ACT Government,
Submission 52
; L Thomas,
Submission 35
Submission 41
; S Squires,
Submission 42
; G Kingman-Sugar,
Submission 44
; JV Johnson,
Submission 45
Submission 47
;T Fewtrell and D Headon,
Submission 48
; the Heraldry and Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Submission 51
; ACT Government,
Submission 52
; J Matthews,
Submission 53
; and Mr David Headon,
Transcript of Evidence
2019, pp. 41, 46, 49.
; and Mr Matthew Sait, Branch Chairman, ACT and District Branch,
Australian Monarchist League,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p.
ACT Government,
Submission 52
T Fewtrell and D Headon,
Submission 48
Mr Tony Burton,
Vice-President, Flags Australia,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p.
2; and Mr Ivo Ostyn,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p. 19.
ACT Government,
Submission 52
G Kingman-Sugar,
Submission 44
JV Johnson,
Mr Tony Burton,
Vice-President, Flags Australia,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p.
The Heraldry and
Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Submission 51
, p. 7. Emphasis in
Mr Ivo Ostyn,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p. 18.
Mr Ivo Ostyn,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, pp. 18, 19.
Mr Tony Burton,
Vice-President, Flags Australia,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p.
J Matthews,
The Heraldry and
Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Submission 51
, Appendix 2, p. 11.
J Matthews,
The Heraldry and
Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Submission 51
The Heraldry and
Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Submission 51
Flags Australia,
Submission 60
The Heraldry and
Genealogy Society of Canberra,
Submission 51
, p. 7. Emphasis in
Mr Ivo Ostyn,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p. 19.
Mr Tony Burton,
Vice-President, Flags Australia,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p.
J Matthews,
, p. 2. Also see: L Thomas,
Submission 35
; and ACT Government,
Submission 52
Flags Australia,
Submission 60
Submission 12
; S Squires,
Submission 42
Kingman-Sugar,
Submission 44
Submission 47
; J Matthews,
Submission 53
and Flags Australia,
Submission 60
J Matthews,
Tony Burton,
Vice-President, Flags Australia,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p.
Flags Australia,
Submission 60
Tony Burton,
Vice-President, Flags Australia,
Transcript of Evidence
, 21 May 2019, p.
; S Squires,
Submission 42
, Mr Steven Squires,
Transcript of
, 21 May 2019, pp. 42, 48; and Mr David Headon,
Transcript of
, 21 May 2019, p. 49.
J Matthews,
J Matthews,
J Matthews,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (13.8 MB)
PDF format (1.33 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter