URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUHRStaCEP/2017/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:07:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
House of Representatives Standing Committee on the Environment and Energy (45th Parliament) --- "Inquiry into flying-fox management in the eastern states" [2017] AUHRStaCEP 1 (27 February 2017)
Deputy Chair
Committee Secretariat
Conduct of the inquiry
Report structure
Flying-foxes in Australia
Nationally protected flying-foxes
Original listing
State protections
Ecology, population size and distribution
Ecological and ecosystem importance
Current populations
Distribution
Habitat requirements and roosting behaviour
Increased urban roosting
Impacts: social, economic, environmental and health
Social impacts
Economic impacts
Environmental impacts
Health impacts
Australian Bat Lyssavirus (ABLV)
Hendra virus (HeV)
Other health concerns
Committee comments
Current Commonwealth regulation
Conservation agreements, management strategies and national interest exemptions
Recovery plans
Current state regulation
New South Wales (NSW)
Effectiveness of the current regulatory framework
Current management actions: does ‘best practice’ exist?
Examples of regulatory pathways and management actions
Royal Botanic Garden Sydney
Eurobodalla Shire Council
Other regulatory and management issues
Committee comments
National coordination of management actions
Funding for priority actions, research and data
Decision framework for councils and other managing bodies
Public and community education
Committee comments
Thursday, 24 November 2016—Canberra
PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Living with fruit bats
Inquiry into flying-fox management in the eastern states
House of Representatives Standing Committee on the Environment and Energy
© Commonwealth of Australia
ISBN 978-1-74366-594-7 (Printed Version)
ISBN 978-1-74366-595-4 (HTML Version)
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 3.0 Australia License.
The details of this licence are available on the Creative Commons website:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/au/
Chair's Foreword
Executive Summary
Membership of the Committee
Terms of Reference
Abbreviations
List of Recommendations
1 Introduction
Report structure
2 Flying-foxes: background and
Flying-foxes in Australia
Nationally protected flying-foxes
Ecology, population size and
distribution
Impacts: social, economic, environmental
Committee comments
3 Regulation of protection and management
Current Commonwealth regulation
Current state regulation
Effectiveness of the current regulatory
Current management actions: does
‘best practice’ exist?
Examples of regulatory pathways and
management actions
Committee comments
4 Options for reform
National coordination of management
Funding for priority actions, research and
Decision framework for councils and other
managing bodies
Public and community education
Committee comments
A. List of submissions
B. List of exhibits
C. Roundtable public hearing
List of Figures
Figure 2.1 Distribution of Spectacled
Flying-foxes
Figure 2.2 Location of camps used by
Grey-headed Flying-foxes
Figure 3.1 Referral decision-making
process for management actions in Grey-headed or Spectacled Flying-fox
Chair's Foreword
The Minister for the Environment and Energy, the Hon. Josh Frydenberg MP,
first wrote to the Committee about the issue of flying-foxes
in mid-October
2016, asking that the Committee consider conducting an inquiry into the
increasing tensions being experienced by residents
affected by flying-fox camps.
The Committee considered this request and received briefings on the issue,
including from the Member for Hunter, the Hon. Joel Fitzgibbon
briefings provided a good insight into the tensions being felt in some parts of
the eastern states of Australia, where
nationally-protected flying-fox camps
impact on communities due to increased urban roosting.
Recognising that the impact of flying-foxes in the eastern states is an
important issue for affected communities in particular, the
Committee decided to
carry out a short inquiry to identify areas for improvement in the timeliest way
In order to gather evidence from the relevant stakeholders and experts within
the agreed timeframe, the Committee conducted a roundtable
public hearing in
Canberra. This enabled productive engagement with a wide range of experts and
representatives of affected communities.
The Committee also received a range of
written submissions and correspondence outlining stakeholder experiences and
community concerns
The Committee is grateful to all stakeholders for taking the time to
participate in the roundtable or provide written evidence to
the inquiry. The
breadth of expert knowledge on the complex relationship between flying-foxes and
humans made a particularly strong
contribution to the inquiry, and the Committee
appreciates the willingness of these experts to provide their insights to the
particularly within the necessarily tight timeframe.
The Committee considers that the recommendations made in this report will
plan the appropriate
actions required to effectively manage flying-foxes, and will deliver
much-needed coordination across all levels
of government.
I would like to thank Committee members for their enthusiastic engagement
with this inquiry and their commitment to facilitating timely
and meaningful
change in the management of nationally protected flying-foxes.
Andrew Broad MP
Executive Summary
Flying-foxes act as important pollen and seed dispersers for a wide range of
native vegetation across the east coast of Australia.
Due to their ecological
importance in maintaining some of Australia’s most significant ecosystems,
work needs to be undertaken
to ensure the preservation of flying-fox species
across the country.
The reduction in suitable foraging and roosting habitat, among other factors,
has impacted on the population size of several species,
leading the Spectacled
Flying-fox and Grey-headed Flying-fox to be listed as ‘Vulnerable’
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act
. The expansion of human populations across coastal New South Wales and
Queensland has led to flying-fox camps becoming increasingly
located in urban
and rural residential areas, possibly from movements of camps due to loss of
natural habitat, or the expansion of
human settlement into traditional
flying-fox habitats.
The growing propensity of flying-foxes to roost in urban areas has caused
more frequent interactions between the species and Australia’s
population. The location and size of these camps can have notable economic,
social and health impacts on residents, business
owners, and the agricultural
community. These impacts have increasingly affected residents’ quality of
life, and put pressure
on local government to take action.
There is uncertainty around the reasons for the increase in urban roosting
behaviour, and the accuracy of population estimates of
these flying-foxes. The
highly-mobile nature of flying-foxes—the Grey-headed Flying-fox in
particular—contributes to
difficulties in ensuring that data is accurate
and determining whether management actions will have lasting results.
Increased urban roosting in recent years has led councils to implement a
number of management techniques. These include actions to
deter flying-foxes
from returning to an established roosting spot, known as dispersals, in order to
reduce the impacts on affected
communities. Local councils are often tasked with
the difficult job of balancing their legislative responsibilities for the
conservation
of flying-foxes, with the needs of local communities.
This inquiry considered the Commonwealth and state protections afforded to
the two threatened flying-fox species, the interaction
between state and
Commonwealth regulatory frameworks, and the varied approaches to managing the
camps that cause tensions. Consistent
with the terms of reference, the focus of
the inquiry was to ensure that the regulatory framework enables the effective
of flying-fox camps, while securing the appropriate environmental
protections.
The recommendations outlined in the report are intended to complement the
existing efforts to protect, conserve and recover affected
populations, allowing them to be managed in the most appropriate and sustainable
way possible, while limiting the impacts
on the livelihoods of those in the
communities affected. The recommendations are designed to provide more immediate
support and guidance
for relevant stakeholders, taking into account the
longer-term recovery objectives set out in the draft recovery plans for the
Flying-fox and Grey-headed Flying-fox. Central to these aims is
national coordination, funding and research, clear guidance for decision
and community education.
To support these aims the Committee has recommended the establishment of a
cooperative body to coordinate and compile information
on the management actions
and priorities for reform relating to nationally protected flying-foxes across
Commonwealth, state and
local government jurisdictions. The Committee has also
highlighted the need to fund priority actions and research, and the development
of a decision tool for local governments when faced with flying-fox camps that
affect their residents. Finally, the Committee recommends
the development of
education resources to assist local councils in affected jurisdictions and
potentially affected jurisdictions.
Membership of the Committee
Mr Andrew Broad MP
Deputy Chair
Mr Pat Conroy MP
Hon Warren Entsch MP
Mr Trevor Evans MP
Mr Luke Howarth MP
Mr Craig Kelly MP
Mr Peter Khalil MP
Ms Anne Stanley MP
Secretariat
Ms Peggy Danaee
Inquiry Secretary
Mr Jeff Norris
Research Officers
Ms Dione Hodgson
Dr Ashley Stephens
Office Manager
Ms Sarah Brasser
Terms of Reference
The House of Representatives Standing Committee on the Environment and Energy
will inquire into and report on the impact of nationally
protected flying-foxes
on communities in the eastern states of Australia, with regard to the following
§ the circumstances and process by which flying-foxes are listed and
delisted as threatened species at both the state and Commonwealth
§ the interaction between the state and Commonwealth regulatory
frameworks;
§ strategic approaches to managing species at a regional
§ opportunities to streamline the regulation of flying-fox management;
§ the success or otherwise of management actions, such as dispersal of
problematic flying-fox camps.
Abbreviations
ABLV Australian Bat Lyssavirus
CBD Central Business District
CSIRO Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation
EDOs Environmental Defenders Offices
EHP Queensland Government Department of Environment and Heritage
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
HeV Hendra virus
IUCN International Union for Conservation of Nature
NESP National Environmental Science Program
NFFMP National Flying-fox Monitoring Programme
OEH New South Wales Office of Environment and Heritage
RBG Royal Botanic Garden
TSSC Threatened Species Scientific Committee
List of Recommendations
Recommendation 1
4.14 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government propose a
national or eastern states flying-fox consultative committee
or working group to
the Council of Australian Governments. The consultative committee or working
group would be responsible for centrally
compiling information on referrals and
management actions, and identifying priorities for legislative harmonisation,
research and
funding for future action in the management of nationally protected
flying-foxes.
Recommendation 2
4.28 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government establish a
dedicated funding pool for flying-fox research and conservation
actions, to
§ continued funding of the National Flying-fox Monitoring Programme for
at least the next 10 years;
§ committed funding for the priority actions outlined in the recovery
plans for both the Spectacled Flying-fox and Grey-headed
Flying-fox;
§ targeted national research into flying-fox roosting behaviours and
habitat loss impacts; and
§ any other research that allows for the timely evaluation of
flying-foxes under the
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation
, informed by rigorous data, at the earliest opportunity.
Recommendation 3
4.38 The Committee recommends that the Department of the Environment and
Energy develop, in consultation with relevant state and local
governments, a
tool that assists councils to make decisions on action, referral and education
in the most appropriate way, relevant
to the flying-fox impacts in their
Recommendation 4
4.49 The Committee recommends that the Department of the Environment and
Energy, in consultation with other relevant organisations,
develop a suite of
education resources for Australian communities regarding flying-fox ecology,
behaviour, environmental significance,
health impacts, and management options.
These resources should be promoted by the Australian Government to local
councils, communities,
businesses and all relevant stakeholders in affected
1. Introduction
1.1 Flying-foxes are a keystone species within Australia’s mammal
populations and the ecosystems that they affect. They are
an integral part of
the ecosystem and are important dispersers of pollen and seeds of a wide range
of Australian native plants across
the eastern seaboard.
1.2 Two species of mainland flying-foxes currently have a protected listing
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
(EPBC Act)—the Grey-headed Flying-fox (
poliocephalus
) and the Spectacled Flying-fox (
conspicillatus
1.3 While very important to the ecosystem within the eastern states of
Australia, the population of flying-foxes coincides with a
large proportion of
the Australian human population, inevitably leading to tensions. Flying-foxes
also have an increasing tendency
to roost in urban areas, or congregate in large
‘camps’ for short periods of time in urban areas, or close to urban
This behaviour has significant impact on residents, business owners and
the local government bodies left responsible for dealing
with the impacts of
these animals. Similarly, the fruit-eating nature of the flying-foxes causes
tensions with agricultural elements
of the community as well.
1.4 The Minister for the Environment and Energy, the
Hon. Josh Frydenberg MP, wrote to the Committee in mid-October
2016 regarding
representations to his office about the impact of flying-foxes in
the eastern states of Australia, and asked the Committee to consider
the issue in its work program.
1.5 The Committee received private briefings on the issue, including from the
Member for Hunter, the Hon. Joel Fitzgibbon MP.
1.6 Recognising the importance of the issue for affected communities and the
requirement to hear consolidated evidence from expert
stakeholders, the
Committee decided to conduct a short inquiry and wrote to the Minister
requesting relevant terms of reference.
1.7 On 10 November 2016, the Committee adopted the terms of reference for the
inquiry into flying-fox management in the eastern states
(the inquiry) referred
by the Minister.
Conduct of the
1.8 The inquiry was advertised on 10 November 2016 by media release and on
the Committee’s web page. Submissions were invited
from organisations and
individuals, addressing one or more of the terms of reference, with a closing
date of 18 November 2016.
1.9 The Committee, keenly aware of community concerns about the impacts of
flying-foxes and wishing to ensure timely identification
of a way forward,
sought to commence work on the inquiry before the end of the parliamentary year.
A short timeframe for submissions,
and the inquiry as a whole, was therefore
1.10 The Committee received 68 submissions and 4 supplementary submissions,
which are listed at Appendix A. The Committee also received
one exhibit, which
is listed at Appendix B.
1.11 The Committee received correspondence from several individuals in
affected communities, detailing their personal experiences
with flying-foxes in
proximity to their homes and businesses. This correspondence helped to highlight
the impacts that flying-foxes
can have on homes and families, and the importance
of wider understanding of the behaviours and ecology of flying-foxes across all
sectors of the community.
1.12 The Committee held a roundtable public hearing in Canberra on
24 November 2016, inviting experts in flying-fox ecology, distribution
management, representatives of some relevant communities, and government
agencies responsible for the protection and management
of flying-foxes. The
witnesses who gave evidence at the roundtable hearing are listed at Appendix C.
Submissions received and the
transcript of the roundtable public hearing are
available on the Parliament of Australia website at: <www.aph.gov.au>.
Report structure
1.13 The report is comprised of four chapters and outlines the evidence
received by the Committee, as well as the comments and recommendations
Committee in relation to the issue of the management of nationally protected
flying-foxes in the eastern states of Australia.
Specifically:
§ Chapter 2 provides background on flying-foxes and their impacts across
the eastern states of Australia.
§ Chapter 3 outlines the current regulatory framework for protection and
management of flying-foxes at a Commonwealth, state
and local government level,
as well as some examples of management actions that were brought to the
attention of the Committee.
§ Chapter 4 concludes by considering potential areas for future
investment, research and action regarding flying-fox management
in the eastern
states of Australia.
2. Flying-foxes: background and impacts
2.1 This chapter commences by providing background information about
flying-foxes in the eastern states of Australia, including their
distribution
and ecological importance, and how they are protected under federal and state
laws. The increasing incidence of urban
roosting of flying-foxes, and the
subsequent impacts on human communities and the environment, are then
considered.
Flying-foxes in
2.2 Flying-foxes (also known as fruit bats) are non-echolocating, fruit and
nectar-eating bats from the genus
2.3 There are four species of flying-fox in mainland Australia:
§ Grey-headed Flying-fox (
Pteropus poliocephalus
§ Spectacled Flying-fox (
Pteropus conspicillatus subsp.
conspicillatus
§ Black Flying-fox (
Pteropus alecto
§ Little Red Flying-fox (
2.4 Grey-headed and Spectacled Flying-foxes are nationally protected species
located in the south-eastern temperate and northern tropical
wet forests,
respectively.
The Black and Little
Red Flying-fox are not nationally protected species, and as such their
management is the responsibility of state
governments under their relevant
wildlife legislation. However, both species of unprotected flying-fox coexist
with the two nationally
flying-foxes.
2.5 Flying-fox species roost in large groups, known as camps, in the exposed
branches of trees. Camps generally remain in a similar
location, with some camps
noted as having been used for more than 100 years. The camps ‘provide
resting habitat, sites of social
interactions and refuge for animals during
phases of their annual cycle, such as birth, lactation and
conception’.
2.6 Tension between human communities and flying-foxes has been recorded for
hundreds of years, with various attempts made to manage
In recent years, increased
instances of urban roosting and decreases in the flying-fox population
nation-wide has seen the management
of the species once again become a concern
for relevant authorities.
Nationally protected
flying-foxes
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
(Cth) (EPBC Act) provides a legal framework to identify, protect and
manage nationally and internationally important flora, fauna,
communities, wetlands and heritage places—defined in the EPBC Act as
matters of national environmental
significance.
2.8 The Threatened Species Scientific Committee (TSSC) undertakes a
scientific assessment of a species’ threat status to determine
species is eligible for listing as a threatened species under the EPBC Act. When
the assessment is complete, the TSSC provides
its advice to the Minister for a
decision on whether to amend the threatened species
2.9 Both the Spectacled Flying-fox and Grey-headed Flying-fox were listed as
Vulnerable under the EPBC Act on the basis of Criterion
one of the Act (decline
in numbers). The Spectacled Flying-fox also met Criterion five (probability of
extinction in the wild is
at least 10 per cent in the
medium-term).
2.10 Population decline is measured as the ‘observed, estimated,
inferred or suspected reduction’ within a period of the
past 10 years or
three generations, whichever is
of 30 to 50 per cent within the period qualifies the species as
Vulnerable, of 50 to 80 per cent as Endangered, and of
greater than 80 per cent
as Critically Endangered.
2.11 In 2001, the TSSC considered available data from counts of Grey-headed
Flying-foxes conducted in 1989 and 1998–2001. A
comparison of these counts
showed a decrease from at least 566 000 individuals in 1989 to at most
400 000 in 1998–2001.
This qualified the species for inclusion in the Vulnerable category under the
EPBC Act in 2001.
2.12 Counts of Spectacled Flying-foxes undertaken between 1998 and 2000
indicated a decrease in the population from 153 000 individuals
approximately 80 000 in 1999 and
According to modelling,
the species was likely to be extinct in less than 100 years, ‘due to the
high levels of death associated
interactions’.
Spectacled Flying-fox was listed as ‘Vulnerable’ under the EPBC Act
2.13 When considering the available data, the TSSC acknowledged uncertainties
regarding the accuracy of population
Dr Peggy Eby noted that
only a small number of known camps were sampled during the counts in 1989 and
1998–2001, and the available
data was compiled to generate the total
population size.
population estimates were raised with the Committee as a point of contention
regarding the original listing of the flying-foxes
as Vulnerable. Issues
relating to potentially inaccurate population counts are discussed in the next
2.14 According to the Australian Government Department of the Environment and
Heritage (now the Department of the Environment and
Energy (the Department)),
the species were listed in the EPBC Act to recognise that the long-term survival
of the species was under
threat, to prevent their further decline, and to assist
community efforts toward the recovery of the
protections
2.15 In addition to national protection, several flying-fox species are
covered under state environmental protection legislation.
2.16 In Victoria, all native wildlife is protected under the
Wildlife Act
(Vic), including microbats and
In addition, species
can be nominated to the Threatened Species List under the
Victorian Flora and
Fauna Act 1988
(Vic). These species are assessed using the International
Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) criteria. The Grey-headed Flying-fox
listed as a threatened species under the Act in 2001.
2.17 In New South Wales (NSW), the NSW Scientific Committee assesses
nominations under the
Threatened Species Conservation Act 1995
based on IUCN criteria.
Grey-headed Flying-fox was listed as Vulnerable in 2001. The Scientific
Committee identified ‘habitat loss as the primary
reason for the decline
– particularly the important feeding habitat on the coastal plains of NSW
and southern Queensland’.
In addition, the Department of Environment and Conservation established the NSW
Flying-Fox Consultative Committee following the listing
in 2001 to provide a
means for balanced public input and to develop strategies to conserve and manage
flying-foxes in the state.
2.18 In Queensland, species are assessed by the Special Technical Committee
Nature Conservation Act 1992
They are assessed to
meet guidelines for each threatened species level, which include
‘reduction of state-wide population and/or
the existence of threatening
processes that could put the species at risk of
extinction’.
Grey-headed Flying-fox is listed as Least Concern under the Act, while the
Spectacled Flying-fox was listed as Vulnerable in
Ecology, population size and
distribution
Ecological and ecosystem
2.19 Flying-foxes play a significant role as seed dispersers and pollinators
for a wide range of native trees across Australia. In
particular, the
Grey-headed Flying-fox is considered a ‘keystone species’, with the
South East Region Conservation Alliance
describing the species as ‘highly
significant to the health and maintenance of many ecosystems in eastern
Australia’.
This includes
three World Heritage Listed Areas: Fraser Island, the Gondwana Rainforest, and
the Greater Blue Mountains.
2.20 The species has the ability to move freely among habitat types, allowing
it to spread genetic material across ‘fragmented,
degraded and urban
landscapes’.
estimates suggest a single Grey-headed Flying-fox can disperse up to 60 000
seeds in one night, travelling hundreds of kilometres.
Flying-foxes have been
recorded travelling more than 5 400 kilometres in two days between
2.21 Tamworth Regional Council described the importance of the Grey-headed
Flying-fox:
Long-distance seed dispersal and pollination makes flying-foxes critical to the
long-term persistence of many plant communities,
including eucalypt forests,
rainforests, woodlands and wetlands. Seeds that germinate away from their
parental plant have a greater
chance of growing into a mature plant. This
genetic diversity allows species to adapt to environmental change and respond to
pathogens. Transfer of genetic material between forest patches is
particularly important in the context of contemporary fragmented
landscapes.
These ecological services ultimately protect the long-term health and
biodiversity of Australia’s bushland and wetlands. In
turn, native forests
act as carbon sinks, provide habitat for other fauna and flora, stabilise river
systems and catchments, add
value to production of hardwood timber, honey and
fruit, and provide recreational and tourism opportunities worth millions of
2.22 Submissions
also noted the significant role the Spectacled Flying-fox has in maintaining the
flora of the Wet Tropics Heritage
The species feed on the
fruit of a number of trees ‘for which no other seed dispersers are
known’ and can spread seeds
kilometres.
2.23 Due to the ecological importance of flying-foxes, efforts to manage
critical habitat is likely to have a positive impact on hundreds
of vegetation
communities across Australia’s east coast, as well as nectar and
fruit-feeding bats, birds, mammals and other
Current populations
2.24 Determining accurate counts of current flying-fox populations, and
population trends, is essential for the monitoring of the
Grey-headed and
Spectacled Flying-foxes’ national distribution and conservation
2.25 Flying-fox population counts are currently undertaken by the
National Flying-fox Monitoring Programme (NFFMP), a collaboration
the Federal Government, state governments in New South Wales, Queensland,
Victoria, South Australia and the Australian Capital
Territory, and the
2.26 Since November 2012, the NFFMP has conducted quarterly counts across
eastern and parts of northern Australia, measuring the population
of all four
and all known camps of Grey-headed and
Spectacled Flying-foxes.
The data is managed by the CSIRO and is publicly available from the
Department.
2.27 Dr David Westcott, Senior Principal Research Scientist, CSIRO Land and
Water, told the Committee that results from the NFFMP
to date suggest:
... the Grey-headed population is stable at best. It is likely that it is
declining slightly. In the case of the Spectacled Flying-fox
there is no doubt
that it is declining, and has declined dramatically over the last 10 to 15
detailed a decline in the Spectacled Flying-fox population from 214 000 in
November 2005 to approximately 100 000 in November
2015, with no indications of
recovery in 2016.
The population
of Grey-headed Flying-foxes in November 2015 was estimated at 672 000, notably
with a margin of error of 229
2.29 Vegetation clearing or modification of critical habitat, occasional
extreme heat events and tropical cyclones such as Larry and
Yasi were implicated
in the decline of the species.
Flying-foxes are susceptible to extreme heat events, particularly when the
temperature exceeds 42 degrees Celsius. It was noted that
during a heat
wave in the summer of 2014 approximately 45 500 flying-foxes died. Extreme
heat events are likely to increase in frequency
Mass pregnancy loss and
premature births are known to occur in response to environmental stress, further
lowering the population
2.30 Black Flying-foxes have expanded their southern range limit, increasing
their geographic overlap with the Grey-headed Flying-fox.
The population decline
in Grey-headed Flying-foxes relative to Black Flying-foxes suggests that
indirect competition for resources
favours the latter species. The reasons
behind this range shift are unclear, as they are not readily explained by
climate or habitat
change, and further research is
2.31 These occurrences are exacerbated by the species’ limited capacity
to recover from large population losses ‘due to
their slow sexual
maturation, small litter size, long gestation and extended maternal
dependence’.
2.32 On the basis of these findings, the CSIRO suggested in April 2015 that
the Spectacled Flying-fox warranted being listed as Endangered
EPBC Act against Criteria one and
The Committee heard that
the TSSC was currently assessing the species for possible uplisting to a higher
threat category.
2.33 Evidence received by the Committee at the public roundtable hearing and
in various submissions drew attention to the challenges
associated with
obtaining accurate flying-fox population counts. Flying-fox monitoring is
considered to be prone to uncertainty and
errors, due to a number of attributes
of the animals. This includes their distribution over tens of thousands of
square kilometres
, the size of
roosts and camps, the location of camps (usually situated in areas with limited
access and visibility) and their rapid
movement between camps and
The Committee heard
that uncertainties regarding accurate population counts are a source of
frustration among communities affected
by flying-fox
2.34 Due to a lack of available technology, Dr Westcott noted that historical
data from flying-fox counts could not be considered
reliable, and an accurate
comparison between historical and current data could not be
He also noted that due to
methodological and other errors associated with the counts, the focus should not
be on absolute numbers,
but rather the long-term trends in numbers. It was
estimated that it would require an additional seven years (from 2016) of
to obtain counts accurate enough to provide robust scientific
evidence of population
Distribution
2.35 The Committee heard that flying-foxes are highly mobile species that
follow food sources and often gather in large groups in
response to significant
flowering events. Both the Spectacled and Grey-headed Flying-fox have complex
nomadic patterns, determined
by variable flowering and fruiting seasons. Both
species exist as continuous populations in Australia. The Grey-headed Flying-fox
is widespread throughout its range during summer, and becomes concentrated in
NSW during winter.
Spectacled Flying-fox is concentrated in the Wet Tropics of Queensland World
Heritage Area between Townsville and Cooktown, with
roosts located within six
kilometres of Mabi Forest
rainforest.
2.36 The two unlisted species, Little Red and Black Flying-foxes, are located
across northern and eastern Australia, with the Little
Red, the most widespread
megabat in Australia, likely to be found further inland than other
flying-foxes.
2.37 The distribution of Australia’s flying-foxes mainly corresponds
with the country’s human population, resulting in
on-going tensions
between the needs of human communities and
flying-foxes.
2.38 The distribution of known Spectacled Flying-foxes in Australia (in
2010), based on known camps, is illustrated in Figure 2.1.
2.39 The distribution of known Grey-headed Flying-foxes is illustrated in
Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.1 Distribution of Spectacled
Flying-foxes
Source Queensland Department of Environment and Resource Management,
National recovery plan for the spectacled flying fox Pteropus
conspicillatus,
2010, p. 15.
Figure 2.2 Location of camps used by Grey-headed
Flying-foxes
Source Department of the Environment and Energy, Draft Recovery Plan for
the Grey-headed Flying-fox (Pteropus poliophalus), January
2017, p. 14.
Habitat requirements and
roosting behaviour
2.40 The location and size of flying-fox camps depends on the availability of
resources within a 20 to 50 kilometre radius of the
camps. Although some camps
are inhabited continuously, camps are generally temporary and seasonal,
corresponding to the flowering
of flying-foxes’ preferred food
2.41 The main source of food for flying-foxes is the nectar and pollen of
flowering native trees, including a number of species of
eucalyptus,
turpentines, paperbarks and banksias. Dr Eby noted the Grey-headed Flying-fox
has a preference for the spotted gum, which
only flowers once every four
It was noted that this
flowering attracts large numbers of flying-foxes, as seen in Batemans Bay (in
Eurobodalla Shire) in 2012 and
2.42 Flying-foxes have complex habitat requirements and require
‘multiple populations of food trees dispersed over a large area’.
Consequently, the species is vulnerable to habitat degradation, as their
preferred food sources are unlikely to exist solely within
conservation
reserves, such as national
The difficulty in
predicting the locations of productive foraging habitat has resulted in the
inability to predict and plan for influxes
of flying-foxes to particular
Increased urban
2.43 The increase in flying-fox urban roosting and the subsequent effects on
communities located near urban camps was the subject
of a large number of
submissions to the inquiry. It was noted that communities were on occasions
faced with sudden influxes of flying-foxes,
hundreds of thousands in the case of
Batemans Bay
, without prior
warning. This has caused notable distress to residents of these communities.
2.44 The Committee heard that there has been ‘an exponential increase
in the number of flying-fox camps in urban areas over
the past 10 to 15
2.45 It was noted that while there were a number of hypotheses regarding why
flying-foxes have become more urbanised in Australia,
no conclusive answer had
been reached to date.
2.46 One of the most common hypotheses presented to the Committee was that
the rate of new urban camps had accelerated due to food
These food shortages
were primarily due to the ongoing loss of winter–spring food caused by
vegetation clearing, particularly
on the coastal plains of south-eastern
Queensland and northern New South Wales.
The Department considers the
loss of foraging habitat, particularly winter forage, the primary threat to
Grey-headed Flying-foxes.
2.47 Dr Eby described the effects of food shortages:
During food shortages, flying-foxes alter roosting and feeding behaviours in
predictable ways that allow them to ‘get by on
less’. They increase
their use of garden plantings; establish new camps in areas beyond their usual
range boundary while searching
for food; and they break into small roosting
groups, close to feeding sites.
In the past, the temporary camps flying-foxes formed during food shortages were
abandoned once conditions improved. However, in recent
years a portion of these
‘temporary’ camps have persisted—leading to an increase in the
number of camps in urban
areas and a more persistent presence in inland areas,
particularly in rural cities and towns. Many of these new camps have become
loss of native foraging habitat has been coupled with an increase in the
availability of reliable food sources in urban environments,
including parks,
gardens and backyards.
particular, there has been an increase in the planting of native and exotic
fruit-bearing trees which, while a suboptimal food
source for flying-foxes, has
attracted the species to urban areas in times of food source
2.49 The Committee heard that increased urban roosting had led to
misconceptions that flying-fox numbers were increasing dramatically
nationwide.
This further added
to the negative perception of flying-foxes overrunning local communities.
2.50 It was suggested that there needed to be a replacement of flying-fox
native foraging habitat in low conflict areas, in the hope
that it would reduce
the huge influxes in numbers to one particular
Impacts: social, economic,
environmental and health
2.51 Throughout the inquiry, the Committee received a range of evidence about
the negative impacts that increasing incidences of urban
roosting of
flying-foxes has had on individuals and businesses in affected communities. This
evidence is discussed in the remainder
of this chapter.
2.52 A number of correspondents and submitters to the inquiry noted the
negative social impacts on communities located near urban
flying-fox roosts,
some of which had significant effect on residents’ quality of life. The
Committee acknowledges that the
impacts that flying-foxes can have on residents
or businesses located close to a camp, or underneath a regular flight path, can
very challenging.
2.53 Nuisance is regarded as a particular issue, from the noise and
‘oppressive’ smell of flying-fox
Submissions from
residents detailed the impact on their lifestyle, including not being able to
utilise their backyards (especially
during evenings) for months at a
, being forced to live with
windows and doors constantly
, and children not able to
use playground equipment.
Schools have also limited the amount of time schoolchildren spend outdoors and
on play equipment, due to the presence of flying-fox
roosts in nearby and
adjacent areas.
2.54 Those living in areas near flying-fox roosting sites reported
significant issues with sleep disturbance, caused by the loud noises
camps. This is said to be particularly problematic early in the morning, when
flying-foxes return from
2.55 Submitters advised that flying-fox excrement has caused damage to
private property
, and public parks.
Residents in some areas were no longer able to leave clothing, cars, toys and
other household items outside, due
to the damage caused by flying-foxes. In some
instances, park amenity was disrupted and parks were closed to the public due to
and safety concerns.
2.56 It was noted that some affected residents felt they were not able to
access help when the impacts of flying-foxes became overwhelming.
Measures to
minimise the social impacts of flying-foxes, such as subsidised services and
awareness programs were not always
Furthermore, few
resources were available to proactively address the social impacts of
flying-foxes, resulting in actions only being
taken once large quantities of
flying-foxes had already become an
2.57 In addition to the social costs of flying-foxes in urban areas, the
Committee was informed that individuals, businesses and local
governments also
incur significant financial costs.
2.58 Flying-fox damage to commercial fruit crops was noted as an ongoing
problem for industry, causing economic and emotional distress
While netting is often
successful in protecting crops from flying-fox damage, the Committee was advised
that the process is costly
and not financially viable for all
The Committee heard
that damage to commercial crops may occur when flying-foxes are driven to
alternative food sources during periods
; therefore the
conservation of appropriate habitat, particularly during periods of fruit
maturation, is important for limiting commercial
losses and mortality of
flying-foxes.
2.59 As discussed above, homes and businesses incurred financial costs to
repair infrastructure damaged by flying-foxes. Added to
these costs was the
reported loss of revenue for businesses located near flying-fox roosts, due to
flying-fox excrement and excessive
noise. It was noted that the tourism industry
in particular has been
2.60 Batemans Bay residents experienced power outages caused by flying-foxes,
with some outages lasting for up to nine consecutive
nights. This had an
economic impact on domestic activities and businesses, and also resulted in the
loss of telephone and internet
2.61 The cost to local governments responsible for managing flying-foxes is
also significant. In a case study of 17 flying-fox dispersal
attempts, costs
ranged from tens of thousands to millions of dollars, in the case of active
dispersals.
This corresponds
with submissions from a number of councils, which estimated costs of up to $6.2
million in the long-term in the
case of Batemans
A number of councils noted
that despite the cost, there was a high degree of uncertainty regarding
long-term outcomes or success
dispersals.
Environmental
2.62 Several submissions noted the environmental impacts of increased
flying-fox roosting in urban and peri-urban areas. This included
the damage to
and eventual destruction of roost trees, or the ‘removal of mature
attractive or significant trees by councils
to provide separation from human
inhabitants’.
Technology highlighted the Royal Botanic Garden in Sydney, Singleton, Charters
Towers and Batemans Bay as examples of areas
that had seen damage to roosting
In the case of the Royal
Botanic Garden Sydney, Grey-headed Flying-fox roosting contributed to the death
of 33 trees and 35 palms
between 1989 and
The destruction of mature
trees in the Cairns CBD
Hunter Valley was also
2.63 Tamworth Regional Council stated that flying-fox roosting behaviour had
led to vegetation damage in the King George Avenue area,
with deterioration in
tall tree cover in that area. The larger trees in the area lost portions of
their crowns due to the damage,
leading to smaller roosting sites. The Council
suggested these smaller roost sites may have contributed to the movement of
flying-foxes
into a historical camp area opposite Bicentennial
2.64 Melbourne’s Royal Botanic Garden hosted a permanent colony of
Grey-headed Flying-foxes from 1986, with the numbers peaking
in the summer of
2002–03. The presence of such a large number of flying-foxes roosting all
year round in a small and sensitive
area damaged heritage-listed vegetation, and
the species was subsequently dispersed to a more suitable location in March
2.65 Concerns about the impacts of flying-foxes on public health have
contributed to negative public perceptions of the species in
Australia. An
increase in urban roosting has exacerbated these concerns, and has led to
extensive media coverage in affected areas.
2.66 A number of submissions discussed community concerns regarding the
public health risks associated with flying-foxes, particularly
where roosts were
located in urban areas. A public survey conducted by Tamworth Regional Council
regarding the presence of flying-foxes
in the region identified fear of disease
as a ‘major concern’, with 51 per cent of all respondents nominating
human health
as an issue.
2.67 In Australia, flying-foxes are natural hosts for a least three zoonotic
diseases: the rabies-like Australian Bat Lyssavirus (ABLV);
Hendra virus (HeV);
and Menangle virus.
disease outbreaks are generally managed by the relevant state agencies for
primary industry and health.
Australian Bat Lyssavirus
2.68 ABLV is found in all flying-fox species in mainland Australia. The
incidences of ABLV in flying-foxes is considered low (less
than one per cent),
however the Queensland Department of Agriculture and Fisheries suggests
incidences are higher (five to 10 per
cent) among sick, injured or orphaned
2.69 Since it was first identified in Australia in 1996, three people have
died as a result of ABLV infection (in 1996, 1998 and
, after being bitten or
scratched by bats.
2.70 According to Australian health authorities, ABLV poses a low public
health risk. The virus is transmitted from bats to humans
‘through a bite
or scratch, but may have the potential to be transferred if bat saliva directly
Exposure can be
reduced by not picking up flying-foxes when they are on the ground, and pre- and
post-exposure vaccinations are
Hendra virus (HeV)
2.71 HeV is transmitted from flying-foxes to horses, and can then be
transmitted from infected horses to other horses, humans and
dogs. There is no
evidence that HeV can be transmitted directly from flying-foxes to humans. The
disease is considered to have a
high mortality rate (over 79 per cent in horses
and 57 per cent in humans).
In humans, HeV presents as a serious and often fatal respiratory and/or
neurological disease, and treatment options are
2.72 Since 1994, 81 horses and four of the seven people infected with HeV
have died. There was a significant increase in outbreaks
of HeV between June and
August 2011 (18 outbreaks), which caused the death of 23 horses and the
euthanasia of the first dog infected
2.73 Following the outbreak of HeV in 2011, the Intergovernmental Hendra
Virus Taskforce was established to undertake long-term planning
for disease
management. As a result of the taskforce, a HeV vaccine for horses was released
2.74 The 2011 outbreak also resulted in the establishment of the National
Hendra Virus Research Program, which provided the initial
funding for the
The NFFMP intends to
provide data concerning trends in population size, structure and dynamics, which
may subsequently be used to
predict risk factors including disease transmission
and commercial crop
Other health
2.75 Menangle virus, first isolated in a NSW piggery in 1997, has been
recorded in pigs, humans and flying-foxes. The two recorded
cases of Menangle
virus in Australia caused severe flu-like symptoms in two workers at the same
piggery. Both made full recoveries.
The virus is thought to be transmitted to
pigs from flying-foxes via an oral–faecal matter
2.76 A number of submissions to the inquiry noted concerns regarding the
health impacts of flying-fox droppings in urban areas, particularly
backyards, schools, playgrounds and water
Health risks
associated with droppings primarily relates to the small risk to humans of
gastrointestinal disease. As with other animals,
flying-foxes may carry a range
of bacteria in their gut, and their droppings ‘may cause illness in humans
if swallowed’.
hygiene practices, including frequent handwashing and covering drinking water
supplies, is recommended to reduce the incidence
2.77 Northern Beaches Council reported that there were a number of issues
relating to public health that were not addressed by current
policies. These include a lack of monitoring of the spread of disease within the
flying-fox population in NSW; that chronic
issues such as sleep deprivation and
disturbance were specific to individuals and not well understood; and that
ongoing stress from
a lack of amenities and potentially reduced property values
are not easily monitored or readily accepted.
2.78 As noted above, Eurobodalla Shire Council described the impacts of power
outages attributed to flying-foxes as significant, occurring
for an extended
period of time and affecting the operation of medical equipment such as dialysis
2.79 Eurobodalla Council also noted reports from the community regarding
chronic immune and respiratory illness being caused or exacerbated
near flying-fox camps and incidence of mental illness caused by feeling
‘trapped’ indoors due to the smell
and noise of nearby
In particular, the
Committee was told that residents living near the camp at Batemans Bay reported
increased occurrences of asthma,
skin irritation and other medical
conditions.
Committee comments
2.80 Flying-foxes are ecologically important species, acting as seed
dispersers and pollinators for a wide range of Australian native
Committee recognises that it is essential that efforts are continued to gather
accurate population counts of flying-foxes,
particularly nationally protected
Grey-headed and Spectacled Flying-foxes, to provide accurate data regarding the
threats associated
with population decline. While noting the challenges inherent
in obtaining accurate population data, the Committee believes that
continuation of the NFFMP is required to obtain information about population
trends. This data can then be used to identify,
preserve and improve critical
foraging and roosting habitat, especially in areas away from affected urban
2.81 Grey-headed and Spectacled Flying-foxes were listed as Vulnerable under
the EPBC Act, due to a recorded decline in numbers. The
species were listed in
the Act to recognise that the long-term survival of the species was threatened,
to prevent a further decline
in numbers, and to encourage the recovery of the
species. However, in recent decades flying-foxes have become more urbanised in
leading to increases in tensions between flying-foxes and humans.
While food shortages, the loss of native habitat and increased
availability of
reliable food sources in urban areas have been highlighted to the Committee as
possible drivers for urban roosting,
no conclusive explanation has been found.
Further research is required to gain a better understanding of this
phenomenon.
2.82 The Committee recognises that the social, economic, environmental and
health impacts associated with flying-foxes can be significant,
with increased
urban roosting leading to adverse effects on residents’ quality of life.
In order to address these issues, additional
work is required to educate and
equip residents with measures to reduce the impact of flying-foxes on their
Community education programs may also improve
understanding of health risks and preventative measures.
2.83 These issues are discussed further in Chapter 4.
3. Regulation of protection and management
3.1 As discussed in Chapter 2, all levels of government in Australia have a
role in the protection and management of threatened species.
This chapter
outlines the current Commonwealth and state regulations relating to protected
flying-foxes and the effectiveness of
the current regulatory framework. Examples
of current management actions and regulatory pathways are then considered.
Current Commonwealth
3.2 At the Commonwealth level, the
Environment Protection and Biodiversity
Conservation Act 1999
(EPBC Act) provides for protection of the Grey-headed
and Spectacled Flying-foxes. Both are matters of national significance under
EPBC Act, and were listed as Vulnerable in 2001 and 2002
respectively.
3.3 These listings require any individual to gain approval from the Minister
for the Environment and Energy—delegated to the
Department of the
Environment and Energy (the Department)—for any action that ‘will
have or is likely to have a significant
populations of the flying-foxes covered by this inquiry.
3.4 Accordingly, the Department has developed a
Referral guideline for
management actions in Grey-headed and Spectacled Flying-fox
guide any proponents through the requirements to seek approval, or otherwise,
for any actions that may have significant impact
on the protected
flying-foxes.
3.5 This guideline seeks to make the regulation of camp management or
dispersal activities as smooth as possible. However, as noted
by many submitters
to the inquiry and by witnesses at the roundtable public hearing, the referral
requirements and management action
approvals process can be confusing or poorly
informed based on a number of complex factors. These factors are discussed later
this chapter.
3.6 The current referral decision-making requirements are summarised in the
guideline, and are outlined in the chart reproduced in
Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1 Referral decision-making process for
management actions in Grey-headed or Spectacled Flying-fox camps
Source Referral guideline for management actions in Grey-headed and
Spectacled Flying-fox camps, Commonwealth of Australia, 2015,
3.7 In essence, the referral guideline is designed to guide and inform
individuals and groups (including state and local governments)
on whether their
actions may impact on the protected flying-fox species and whether their
proposed action requires referral to the
Minister (via the Department).
Interestingly, proposed actions in flying-fox camps that are not
nationally-important do not require
referral. In these instances, planning and
mitigation measures are recommended, but not required.
3.8 The guideline seeks to outline clearly the considerations and processes
relevant to managing flying-foxes. However, evidence to
the Committee indicated
that stakeholders most in need of the guidance are either unaware of its
existence, unable to access the
relevant information or knowledge, or confused
Committee also heard that the guideline in its present form does not
sufficiently cater to the needs of those responding to an urgent
camp management
3.9 The Committee was told that local government has particular needs.
Dr Peggy Eby summarised the access and knowledge issues:
In my view, the process of devolving responsibilities for camp management has
fragmented approaches to management, and disadvantaged
local government. There
is a case for the processes to support these decisions to devolve to be
reviewed. Insufficient or no structure
for supporting local government was put
in place around the changes, in my understanding, and in many locations the
environment and
planning staff of individual councils are expected to manage and
resolve often intractable, highly controversial problems, having
very limited
personal experience with flying foxes, very little guidance from state and
federal agencies, poor access to information,
and limited financial and human
Local Government Association of Queensland also suggested that, with the
Queensland Government devolving responsibility to
local government, as well as
the exclusion of potential referrals by application of the federal referral
guideline, there is a lack
of relevant data about what unregulated actions are
being undertaken. The impact that those actions are having on flying-fox
and behaviours is also going unrecorded, or only being recorded on an
ad-hoc basis.
3.11 Additionally, Ecosure stated that the federal referral guideline defers
to state protection frameworks in certain circumstances.
Ecosure argues that, in
Queensland, this ‘provides very little protection for individual
flying-foxes, and next to no protection
against population or species-level
3.12 The Committee heard that the current system would benefit from greater
coordination and harmonisation across jurisdictions, especially
given the nature
of the flying-foxes affected. Potential solutions are considered in Chapter
Conservation agreements,
management strategies and national interest exemptions
3.13 At the Commonwealth level, the Minister for Environment and Energy can
enter into a Conservation Agreement with a body under
section 305(1A) of the
EPBC Act, where the agreement will result in ‘a net benefit to the
conservation of
biodiversity’.
power may be delegated to the Department.
3.14 In 2016, the Department entered into conservation agreements with the
Sunshine Coast Regional Council and the Eurobodalla Shire
Council to manage
Grey-headed Flying-foxes in their local government
These conservation
agreements negate the need for further referrals of individual management
actions, as the agreements define specified
classes of action and applicable
conditions for ongoing management of the flying-foxes in the applicable areas,
with conservation
at the core of any of those
activities.
3.15 Conservation agreements would seem like a logical mechanism for managing
flying-foxes in the longer-term. However, the small
number of agreements
currently in place does not allow a thorough assessment of the effectiveness of
this mechanism at the current
3.16 In addition to the conservation agreements, section 146 of the
EPBC Act allows for strategic assessments over a large geographic
timeframe, where research on population dynamics, past management actions and
future planning can be considered, to guide
development in a region to minimise
impact on species such as the protected flying-foxes. Such an assessment was
conducted in the
Lower Hunter region of NSW, which contains Grey-headed
Flying-fox camps, and has resulted in a management strategy being developed
October 2012 to guide actions in the
3.17 Finally, the Minister for the Environment and Energy can grant an
exemption from the requirements of assessment or approval under
section 158 of
the EPBC Act, if the Minister is satisfied that it is in the national interest
to grant such an exemption. Such an
exemption was granted to the Eurobodalla
Shire Council in May 2016, to allow urgent action to respond to the rapid
increase in Grey-headed
Flying-foxes in Batemans
More detail on this
occurrence is included later in this chapter.
3.18 The exemption allowed for a rapid response to a severe community problem
in Batemans Bay. The appropriateness of the exemption,
however, has been
questioned. Humane Society International contends that the provision to grant an
exemption is intended to respond
to extreme circumstances, and questions whether
this definition was satisfied in this
Furthermore, Ecosure
suggests that the intervention may have had a detrimental effect on the
reproductive cycle of the flying-foxes
dispersed or
3.19 The development of a national recovery plan under section 270 of the
EPBC Act is an essential element of the longer term recovery
and effective
management of flying-foxes.
3.20 The recovery plan for the Spectacled Flying-fox was developed by the
Department in partnership with the Queensland Government
and released in April
The stated objectives
of the plan are:
... to secure the long-term protection of the spectacled flying fox through a
reduction in threats to the species’ survival
and to improve the
availability of scientific information to guide
Department released a draft recovery plan for the Grey-headed Flying-fox in
January 2017, which is open for public comment
until April 2017. The plan gives
priority to the recovery of the species, through the reduction of threatening
processes. Priority
actions highlighted in the plan include:
§ the identification of key foraging areas and vegetation communities
used by Grey-headed Flying-foxes;
§ the improvement of winter and spring foraging habitat;
§ the protection and enhancement of native roosting habitat critical to
the survival of the species;
§ to work with local government and private landholders to identify
existing roosting habitat, land suitable for creating new
or rehabilitated
habitat, and areas that are unsuitable for development;
§ the continuation of the National Flying-fox Monitoring Programme
(NFFMP) in order to provide a more accurate picture of population
trends and the
development of robust models of Grey-headed Flying-fox life history and
population dynamics, to enable predictions
of likely threats to the species;
§ to improve the community’s ability to co-exist with Grey-headed
Flying-foxes, through improved stakeholder engagement,
research, policy and
education, and the promotion of practical and cost-effective non-lethal
protection measures for commercial
3.22 The recovery plans for the nationally protected species both reflect the
priorities for protecting, conserving and managing the
species into the future.
However, the long timeframes for action may lead to some frustration within
communities. As such, some
priorities for the interim are discussed further in
Current state
3.23 Significant differences exist in flying-fox management requirements
across the eastern states, relative to the impact in those
states and the
government priorities for the state in question. These differences can create
confusion and frustration for local
land managers and communities, given that
the Commonwealth management requirements may defer to differing state
frameworks, or actions
in one state area may impact on another state, due to the
mobile nature of flying-fox populations.
3.24 For example, Eurobodalla Shire Council described these inconsistencies
as inequitable, leading parts of the community to feel
that they did not have
access to management options that were available elsewhere, or that they were
being unduly impacted by flying-foxes
due to actions undertaken in other
3.25 Outlined below are the current requirements in the eastern states and
how they differ between each other and to the Commonwealth
requirements outlined
earlier in this chapter.
3.26 From 2013, the Queensland Department of Environment and Heritage
Protection (EHP) has issued a limited number of damage mitigation
permits each
year under the
Nature Conservation Act 1992
, allowing the ‘lethal
take’ of flying-foxes (not including the Spectacled Flying-fox) by
shooting to protect commercial
3.27 These permits are only granted after non-harmful control measures have
been utilised and proven to be ineffective. Fruit growers
are permitted to use
lethal measures only in conjunction with two non-harmful practices, such as
3.28 Each permit is considered on a case-by-cases basis, and the number of
flying-foxes to be taken is limited by quotas. These quotas
are based on wild
flying-fox population levels and the conservation status of relevant species.
Due to its ‘Vulnerable’
conservation status, permits are not issued
for the Spectacled
Flying-fox.
3.29 In terms of non-lethal management options, the Flying-Fox Management
Framework was introduced in Queensland in 2013, giving local
governments an
‘as-of-right’ authority to manage roosts in Urban Flying-Fox
Management Areas.
meeting the
Queensland Code of Practice—Ecologically sustainable
management of flying-fox
are authorised to
use non-lethal methods to drive away from, destroy and disturb flying-fox
Permission from
relevant landholders is required before management measures can be
undertaken.
3.30 Local governments may also apply for a Flying-fox Roost Management
Permit from EHP to undertake activities that do not meet the
Queensland code of Practice
and/or to develop a management plan that
covers the entire local government area. This permit provides a three-year
approval to manage
flying-fox roosts outside of urban
3.31 Additionally, individuals are authorised to undertake low impact
activities at flying-fox roosts in accordance with the
Queensland Code of
Practice—Low impact activities affecting flying-fox
3.32 These activities must be considered carefully, especially in relation to
the removal of trees to create buffer zones, as ‘the
removal of trees is
restricted to weed species in riparian areas classified by the State Government
Regulated Vegetation Matters of State Environmental
Significance
3.33 A number of submissions noted that regulatory changes in Queensland had
seen an increase in flying-fox roost
, some without
consultation with neighbouring management
authorities
, and in areas
that had not previously seen
dispersals.
3.34 The Committee heard that the devolution of flying-fox management
regulation to local government had led to unrealistic community
expectations
that councils can easily and effectively manage
flying-foxes.
This in turn
had increased pressure on local government to use dispersal methods, at times
without proper consideration of alternative
New South Wales
3.35 In NSW, the management of flying-fox populations is set out in the
NSW Camp Management Policy 2015
. The policy provides
a framework within which the NSW Office of Environment and Heritage (OEH) makes
regulatory decisions regarding
flying-fox camp management, and provides guidance
and advice to communities, local councils and other land managers regarding the
management of flying-fox
3.36 The policy focuses on a management approach ‘on which a hierarchy
of options is based on the principle of using the lowest
form of intervention
required.’ Routine camp management options are considered Level 1 actions,
the creation of buffer zones
Level 2 actions, and camp dispersal and disturbance
Level 3 actions.
3.37 As part of the policy, OEH has developed the
Flying-fox Camp
Management Plan Template
The template
provides guidance for land managers when developing a camp management plan,
reducing preparation and implementation
timelines. The document enables land
managers to input their own data into the template, which is then submitted to
OEH for consideration
and approval. Licensing of flying-fox camp management
actions is streamlined when a camp management plan is prepared in accordance
with the template. Approvals for camp management plans are issued by OEH for
five years.
3.38 The NSW Government has tightened regulations on the shooting of
flying-foxes for crop protection. Since 1 July 2015, OEH has
only issued
licences to shoot flying-foxes as a crop protection measure ‘where it
considers that flying-fox damage to orchards
is the result of special
circumstances’. Licences are only issued to shoot flying-foxes during the
duration of the incursion,
and are subject to strict
Biodiversity Conservation Act 2016
Services Amendment Act 2016
were passed by the NSW Parliament in November
2016. The bills will repeal the
Threatened Species Conservation Act 1995
Nature Conservation Trust Act 2001
in full (upon their
proclamation), as well as parts of the
National Parks and Wildlife Act
, creating a single piece of biodiversity legislation. The
Services Amendment Act 2016
will repeal the
Native Vegetation Act
The NSW Government
Office of Environment and Heritage expects the legislation to be in force by
mid-2017, but there are no firm dates
for the full repeal of the old Acts and
commencement of the new Acts at this stage.
3.40 The new legislation intends to enable the regulation of native
vegetation in rural and urban areas, facilitate ecological sustainable
development, and improve the effectiveness of conservation
3.41 Several submissions outlined concerns regarding the environmental impact
of the new legislation, including a possible increase
in the rate of land
clearing in NSW
impact the reforms will have on the Grey-headed
Flying-fox.
3.42 Conversely, Hunter Councils noted that provisions within the new
legislation may address concerns regarding the misalignment
of regulatory
frameworks between states and the Commonwealth and the lack of a trigger process
to move flying-fox camp management
applications from state to Commonwealth
consideration.
3.43 In Victoria, flying-fox camps are managed by the Victorian Department of
Environment, Land, Water and Natural Resources. The
City of Geelong is an
exception, and has developed its own camp management plan for the camp located
within its jurisdiction.
Committee only received three submissions from Victoria regarding the
Effectiveness of the current
regulatory framework
3.44 As outlined above, the EPBC Act requirements for referral of management
actions falls on any individual proposing to undertake
action that aligns with
the relevant categories of impact. In most situations, that responsibility will
fall on local government
bodies, businesses and producers that have flying-fox
camps that affect their residents, properties or businesses.
3.45 Evidence from a range of local councils, individuals, experts and
businesses emphasised that the management of flying-fox camps
can be onerous and
confusing, and often occurs when least expected.
3.46 Cessnock City Council highlighted the confusion that can arise from the
requirements to satisfy Commonwealth and state regulatory
requirements for
planning and management actions, while having to consider the EPBC Act
requirements as well. Ultimately, they described
the legislative framework as
‘confusing, duplicative and [a] complicated approach to threatened species
management’.
3.47 Eurobodalla Shire Council emphasised that the state and Commonwealth
regulatory frameworks can operate independently of each
other, leading to
duplication and confusion, and can result in lengthy delays to urgent management
actions (such as those undertaken
in Batemans
3.48 Other councils raised similar concerns, contending that duplication or a
lack of coordination cause delays or
3.49 However, some councils, such as the Sunshine Coast Council, did not
identify issues with coordination between state and Commonwealth
requirements.
It is unclear
whether this reflects favourable experiences with the regulatory system, or as
in Ku-ring-gai Council’s case,
an absence of experience with EPBC Act
3.50 Additionally, some councils identified the issues they have experienced
with state management or protection regulations, especially
in relation to the
Queensland Government’s devolution of flying-fox camp management
activities to local government. The Local
Government Association of Queensland
was especially critical of the 2013 move to introduce a Flying-Fox Management
Framework that
devolved all management responsibility to under-prepared and
under-resourced local
3.51 The Committee also received a number of pieces of correspondence from
affected community members, outlining the lifestyle impacts
of living in close
proximity to flying-fox camps (as outlined in Chapter 2). The importance of
making sure that communities are educated
the ecosystem, while also catering for the responsible management of the species
into the future,
is a key area for future focus.
3.52 A number of other submitters also expressed concern that devolution of
management regulation and coordination would have a detrimental
effect on the
effective protection and longer-term successful management of flying-fox
populations.
3.53 Sydney Coastal Councils Group also expressed concern that the proposed
relaxation of NSW environmental protections, such as repealing
Native Vegetation Act 2003
(NSW), could impact on
many species, including nationally protected
flying-foxes.
3.54 The requirement for clearer guidance, coordination, education and action
on these issues is discussed in Chapter 4.
Current management actions:
does ‘best practice’ exist?
3.55 The management practices that can be undertaken when a flying-fox camp
impacts on an urban environment, or a commercial interest,
are generally limited
to dispersal or habitat alteration. Technically, habitat alteration is a form of
dispersal, as the modification
of the roosting environment will generally
dissuade flying-foxes from returning.
3.56 Dispersal activities are generally categorised as either passive or
active. Passive dispersal occurs when the flying-fox is deterred
from landing in
a tree, either by installing a sprinkler system or netting, or by creating a
buffer zone where vegetation is removed
to create a separation between the camp
and residents or businesses.
3.57 Active dispersal refers to an action undertaken to physically disturb
the flying-foxes from an established roosting spot, using
light, noise, smoke or
other elements that will drive them from the current location.
3.58 The passive options are considered less stressful for the flying-foxes
as they replicate more closely occurrences in nature.
For example, ‘[a]
tree might fall down and that roost may not be available to them anymore when
they come back from
3.59 In an effort to gauge the effectiveness of dispersals, Ecosure provided
a summary of camp management activities in Queensland
from November 2013 to
November 2014. It noted that the incidence of dispersals had increased
considerably (25 attempted roost dispersals
in the year from November 2013
to November 2014, compared with an average of 0.4 dispersals per year between
1990 and June 2013).
3.60 Dispersal methods identified by Ecosure included ‘fog, birdfrite,
lights, noise, physical deterrents, smoke, extensive
vegetation modification,
water (including cannons), paintball guns and helicopters’. The most
common method was extensive vegetation
modification, sometimes combined with
other methods.
3.61 Ecosure questioned the effectiveness of dispersal methods used in
Queensland. It contended that in nine of the 24 roosts dispersed,
the actions
taken did not reduce the number of flying-foxes within the local government
area. When the flying-foxes were successfully
dispersed, they did not move
further than six kilometres away and, as of November 2014, repeat actions were
required in 18 cases.
3.62 In April 2015, the Northern Beaches Council adopted the Cannes Reserve
Flying-fox Camp Management Plan to alleviate the impacts
of Grey-headed
Flying-foxes on immediately adjacent residents. Dispersal commenced in July
2015, with numbers reduced to zero within
two weeks. Grey-headed Flying-foxes
returned to Cannes Reserve in November 2015 with young present. Maintenance
dispersal was attempted
but was not successful. Dispersal was not undertaken in
2016, with Council determining that the success of the program could be
with habitat modification, that dispersals would not completely
remove flying-foxes in the long term, and that dispersals required
significant
resources and took a toll on
3.63 The Committee heard that, while dispersals may be ineffective in some
cases, there are instances where they are the only management
option currently
available. In the case of Eurobodalla Shire Council, the sudden influx of
flying-foxes in Batemans Bay necessitated
the council to consider dispersal.
3.64 Mr Lindsay Usher, Director Planning and Sustainability Services,
Eurobodalla Shire Council, described the situation faced in
Batemans Bay in
We were forced into a situation where we had to look at dispersal. I am often
asked whether it was successful. I think that as to
the longer term I cannot
answer that question, but I can say it was very successful in the shorter term.
We were able to move the
flying foxes out of people’s backyards, we were
able to give those people some relief, we were able to give those people their
lives back and we were able to go in and establish some buffers which will
hopefully mitigate impacts in the
Committee heard that, while dispersals were necessary on occasion and had
alleviated some concerns, current management tools
were not sufficient to
resolve the problem of flying-foxes roosting in urban areas. In order to return
flying-foxes to their natural
habitats, greater long-term planning and research
were advocated.
Examples of regulatory
pathways and management actions
Royal Botanic Garden
3.66 The Royal Botanic Garden (RBG) in Sydney has had one of the
highest-profile and most successful longer-term dispersal and management
programs in place for a roost of Grey-headed Flying-foxes that established a
camp in the Palm Grove within RBG in 1989.
3.67 The Palm Grove is the oldest and most significantly planted area of the
RBG heritage site. Between 1989 and 2012, 33 trees and
35 palms in the Palm
Grove died as a result of sustained defoliation due to flying-fox camps. An
extra 60 trees and palms were considered
to be in a critical condition.
Dispersal and relocation approval was sought and granted prior to 2012 through
both the NSW and Commonwealth
governments.
3.68 The approved actions for the dispersal activities culminated in pre-dawn
and dusk noise dispersal activities and continued observation
and dispersal over
time whenever flying-foxes were observed trying to roost
3.69 Flying-foxes from the camp were fitted with satellite tracking collars
and their dispersal was monitored. Some of the animals
tracked dispersed to
other roosts within the greater Sydney area, however some tracked individuals
dispersed 1 100 kilometres to
the north in the Boyne Valley in Queensland, with
others extending nearly 780 kilometres to the south into Geelong in
This movement to
distant colonies is an example of the highly mobile nature of Grey-headed
Flying-foxes.
3.70 Ultimately, the complicated, highly-regulated and closely monitored
dispersal efforts in the RBG have been successful. The camp
was dispersed within
one week in 2012, and has been deterred from re-establishing since that
3.71 However, the example of the RBG case is not a good indicator of average
efforts with typical resources. Continued observation
and dispersal activities
are ongoing, though the RBG reports ‘in 2015-16 no management actions were
required to deter grey-headed
flying-foxes from resuming roosting within the
Royal Botanic Garden, following the dispersal in
3.72 While the RBG does not disclose the exact cost of the dispersal program
in their annual reports, the efforts in Sydney, and similar
efforts in the Royal
Botanic Gardens Melbourne have reportedly cost
‘millions’.
Ecosure estimate the costs of the dispersals at greater than $1 million and $3
million for Sydney and Melbourne
respectively.
Eurobodalla Shire
3.73 The high-profile dispersal and management action undertaken in Batemans
Bay in June and July 2016 illustrates a regulatory pathway
that can respond to
rapid and large-scale impact from an urban flying-fox roost.
3.74 The Water Gardens Reserve in Batemans Bay had recorded a Grey-headed
Flying-fox presence since 2012 and the council had adopted
Water Gardens Grey-headed Flying-fox Camp Management Plan
, in an attempt to manage impact and interaction with surrounding
3.75 However, in April 2016 the population of flying-foxes in the Gardens
expanded exponentially from ‘... virtually none to
estimates of 300,000
plus over a matter of a couple of
This appeared
to coincide with an extraordinary seasonal flowering event, culminating in
approximately 50 to 70 per cent of the entire
national population of Grey-headed
Flying-foxes roosting and foraging in Batemans Bay at that
3.76 The response to this extraordinary event was the issuing of the National
Interest Exemption outlined earlier in this chapter,
resulting in rapid
dispersal and mitigation activities (vegetation removal and buffer zone
creation). These actions came at a significant
, including a $2.5
million grant from the NSW
Government.
3.77 The Committee heard that the situation in Eurobodalla Council in 2016
was temporary, with heavy flowering of native trees attracting
an unusually high
number of flying-foxes to the
It was noted that when
the dispersal efforts began mid-2016, flying-foxes had already started to leave
the area, due to a reduction
availability.
3.78 This rapid response has been followed by the establishment of a
conservation agreement, as outlined earlier in this chapter.
However, the
factors leading to the Batemans Bay situation are not completely understood,
making it difficult to determine whether
a similar response would be necessary
or as effective in future. For example, the same flowering event may occur
again, or may occur
elsewhere, or the end of the flowering event may have led to
the flying-foxes naturally dispersing, as outlined above.
3.79 The information and tools required to understand these situations and
determine the appropriate response are discussed further
in Chapter 4.
Other regulatory and
management issues
3.80 The Committee received a number of submissions from local councils with
experience of the regulatory frameworks (either state
or Commonwealth) for
proposed or undertaken flying-fox management activities. As outlined earlier in
this chapter, a number of these
stakeholders expressed confusion or frustration
3.81 Cessnock City Council staff noted that the duplication of legislation
adds time and complexity to the process unnecessarily,
impacting adversely on
assessment turnaround times and often delaying applications for lengthy periods.
The assessment delay subsequently
places more risk on the viability of
Committee comments
3.82 Throughout the inquiry the Committee was presented with evidence that
flying-foxes are ecologically important and should be managed
appropriately to
ensure their protection and conservation. However, noting the genuine negative
effects that flying-fox camps can
have on communities, it is imperative that a
balance is struck between their social and environmental impacts, and their
conservation,
protection and environmental contributions. The Committee is keen
to ensure that the regulatory framework enables affected communities
effectively manage the impacts of problematic flying-fox camps, while still
ensuring that appropriate environmental protections
are in place.
3.83 In some cases, flying-fox camps may be temporary, and councils are
well-placed to assist affected residents to cope with any
issues during the
camp’s existence. The Committee notes the range of mitigation tools
offered by councils (including subsidised
cleaning equipment, access to high
pressure cleaners, clotheslines, car and boat
, providing
semi-covered walkways and assistance in netting backyard fruit trees) proved
beneficial in limiting some flying-fox
3.84 Communication between residents and councils is also important, and
councils are well-placed to proactively identify areas of
future tensions and
engage with local residents. This may include education
engagement tools, highlighting the importance of flying-foxes and the mitigation
options available to
There is a role
for the Commonwealth in providing resources and coordination services for local
councils, and this is discussed further
in Chapter 4.
3.85 In some situations, modification of the environment may be an efficient
and cost-effective means of managing flying-fox roosts.
Such measures include
improving roost habitats away from residential areas, removal of trees on
private property
creation of vegetation buffer zones and installing canopy sprinklers in
Swimming pools and
water tanks can be managed, visual/sound/smell barriers with fencing or hedges
can be installed
, and double
glazed windows and air conditioners should be considered, especially if the
flying-fox camp is of a temporary or seasonal
3.86 However, the Committee recognises that in severe cases the only option
may be dispersal.
3.87 The Committee is confident that the above resources, together with the
prioritisation of the other measures recommended in Chapter
4, can help achieve
an appropriate balance for communities in the eastern states affected by
flying-fox camps.
4. Options for reform
4.1 The Committee received multiple pieces of evidence from a range of
stakeholders that highlighted the need for national coordination
of management
actions with respect to flying-fox camps, as well as any future research or
efforts to educate stakeholders on flying-fox
ecology, roosting or behaviour. In
this chapter, the Committee proposes a range of measures to assist communities
in the eastern
states, while providing some actions that can be undertaken in
the shorter-term to provide improved protection and conservation for
National coordination of
management actions
4.2 The requirements for federal referral of some management actions, based
Referral guideline for management actions in grey-headed and
spectacled flying-fox camps
Environment
Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
(EPBC Act), coupled with the different state-based referral
requirements leads to confusion, potential duplication of effort and wasted
and resources, especially for local government bodies with limited
4.3 While the Department of the Environment and Energy (the Department) aims
to communicate with state governments and identified
local government bodies,
the message received by the Committee from individuals and other stakeholders is
that the information about
flying-foxes and their management is not known, or
poorly communicated or coordinated in some instances. The Department
acknowledged
that in the past few years, and especially in the last 12 months,
there have been increased efforts in coordinating with the responsible
agencies to avoid
duplication
Committee believes more can be done.
4.4 During the roundtable public hearing, a number of witnesses emphasised
that direct management of flying-foxes required local (or
site-level) expertise
and action, but needed to be better coordinated. The Committee heard that there
was a role for national coordination,
both in the referral and approval of the
actions, as well as the capture and management of the data or outcomes of the
actions undertaken, which could then be accessed or referenced for
similar actions
4.5 Equally, the mobile nature of the national population of flying-foxes
(especially the Grey-headed Flying-fox) requires national
coordination, as the
response in one state or local government area will often affect other areas.
The separation between state and
federal government management and monitoring
has led to disparate sources of action and knowledge about the actions
undertaken and
the subsequent population
4.6 It was noted these inconsistencies may be addressed through a common
assessment process, which is currently being considered as
part of the National
Review of Environmental
and efforts to
develop an integrated national listing of threatened
However, the
Committee believes more can be done in managing these kinds of reforms, as set
4.7 In a similar vein to the NSW Flying-Fox Consultative Committee referred
to in Chapter 2, the Committee sees merit in establishing
a national (or at
least eastern states) consultative committee or working group on flying-fox
management, research and education,
to ensure that efforts are not being
duplicated, nor knowledge lost.
4.8 Such a committee or working group could formalise the sharing of research
relevant to all stakeholders. The current disconnect
was evidenced at the
roundtable public hearing, where witnesses such as Dr Pia Lentini outlined
current or upcoming research which
other witnesses were unaware
4.9 While the Committee is aware that a lot of stakeholders within the
flying-fox academic and research community are aware of ongoing
activities or
developments, a national committee or working group could facilitate the central
capture and coordination of these
efforts and feed information into a concerted
education and communication campaign, as outlined later in this chapter.
4.10 For the creation of such a committee or working group to be
appropriately considered and given the attention it deserves, the
considers that the potential establishment of such a body needs to be raised at
the Council of Australian Governments,
to enable the appropriate priority and
resourcing to be discussed.
4.11 Central to this concept achieving its aim is the commitment of the
federal and relevant state governments to cooperation and
alignment on
flying-fox management and referrals, as well as centralised funding and research
coordination.
4.12 The Committee is conscious that the pressures from all flying-foxes,
including the Grey-headed and Spectacled Flying-foxes, are
often unique to the
region affected. However, the nature of the pressures on the flying-fox
populations and the increasing impact
that this is having on urban environments,
industry and individuals, means that a coordinated and concerted response is
4.13 This coordination is even more important in light of the identified
recovery objectives included in the draft recovery plan for
the Grey-headed
Flying-fox as outlined in Chapter 3.
Recommendation 1
4.14 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government propose a
national or eastern states flying-fox consultative committee
or working group to
the Council of Australian Governments. The consultative committee or working
group would be responsible for centrally
compiling information on referrals and
management actions, and identifying priorities for legislative harmonisation,
research and
funding for future action in the management of nationally protected
flying-foxes.
Funding for priority actions,
research and data
4.15 As outlined in the previous chapters, the research and monitoring of
nationally protected flying-foxes is central to understanding
the current
populations, conservation requirements, ecological importance and impacts of the
4.16 Through submissions and the roundtable public hearing, it was evident
that the National Flying-fox Monitoring Programme (NFFMP)
is important in
guiding the data for consideration of the listing of flying-foxes under the EPBC
Act, as well as for targeting other
activities and research.
4.17 The status of flying-fox populations, their movement between camps, and
the accurate estimation of different species’ abundance
and their breeding
and mortality is essential to being able to afford all species the appropriate
classifications under federal and
state legislation and the protections and
management protocols that come with those classifications.
4.18 Essential to this research is the established requirement that 13 years
of sustained population research is necessary to enable
a baseline measurement
to trigger EPBC Act threshold measurements (positive or
4.19 If accurate tracking and research into Grey-headed Flying-foxes
corroborates the population decline and pressures expected by
current population
estimates, then the basis for the afforded protections can be incorporated into
the education and communication
tools outlined later in this chapter. If the
population data suggest otherwise, then it can form the basis for appropriate
reclassification
or declassification as required.
4.20 Similarly, research is important in building the knowledge base on
flying-fox behaviour, environmental and habitat pressures,
and the drivers of
nectar production. Research is also vital for identifying appropriate management
activities to implement in affected
communities.
4.21 The Committee notes with interest that the behaviours of flying-foxes
causing the most conflict or concern (increasing urban
roosts, population
movements) are not well understood. As outlined at the roundtable public
hearing, there are many hypotheses around
why urban roosts are increasing, but
no conclusive answers
4.22 The Queensland Government outlined current satellite tracking research
into understanding flying-fox roosts in urban
, however this research
is currently limited to Little Red
Flying-foxes.
This disconnect
between the requirements for national research into such behaviours and the
limitations of current research into
the nationally protected species of
flying-foxes, strengthens the case for nationally-coordinated efforts into such
endeavours.
4.23 Research into understanding roosting behaviours and population dynamics
is necessary for achieving the recovery objectives stated
National Recovery Plan for the Grey-headed
The loss of
original habitat, identification of urban food sources and range overlap
investigation are also important research priorities,
to enable sufficient data
to inform future actions.
4.24 Continuing and guaranteed funding for research, as well as any resultant
actions, is crucial to guarantee meaningful data for
the relevant agencies or
stakeholders. The
Draft National Recovery Plan for the Grey-headed Flying-fox
states that the costs for implementing priority actions should be
incorporated into the core business expenditure of affected organisations
well as additional funds obtained for the explicit purpose of implementing the
recovery plan.
However, the
Committee believes that committed funding and resources from the Commonwealth
should be allocated, along with the coordination
efforts called for in
Recommendation 1.
4.25 The inconsistent funding basis for the NFFMP was discussed at the
roundtable public hearing
and disparate funding arrangements for efforts such as those being undertaken by
the National Environmental Science Program (NESP)
and its emerging priorities
funding, would benefit from a central, coordinated and larger funding pool for
research that could then
be utilised by a central coordinating body and
disseminated to stakeholders such as local councils.
4.26 Additional research is also required to look into incidental human
health impacts relating to flying-foxes. Some submissions
to the inquiry
suggested there were increased incidences in asthma, skin irritation and other
conditions associated with the presence
of flying-foxes in urban areas. Such
research is vital for providing certainty for the community and health
authorities.
4.27 Finally, in order to achieve the full range of priority actions
recommended in the national recovery plans for the Spectacled
and Grey-headed
Flying-foxes, as discussed in Chapter 3, the Committee believes further research
and funding commitments are required
to enable the protection and enhancement of
critical roosting and foraging habitat.
Recommendation 2
4.28 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government establish a
dedicated funding pool for flying-fox research and conservation
actions, to
continued funding of the National Flying-fox Monitoring Programme
for at least the next 10 years;
committed funding for the priority actions outlined in the recovery
plans for both the Spectacled Flying-fox and Grey-headed Flying-fox;
targeted national research into flying-fox roosting behaviours and
habitat loss impacts; and
any other research that allows for the timely evaluation of
flying-foxes under the
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation
, informed by rigorous data, at the earliest opportunity.
Decision framework for
councils and other managing bodies
4.29 As outlined in Chapters 2 and 3, the current framework for referring
management actions in nationally-important flying-fox camps
Grey-headed or Spectacled Flying-foxes is established by the
Referral guideline for management actions in grey-headed and spectacled
flying-fox camps.
4.30 This guideline, paired with the relevant state or territory requirements
for management actions where the nationally protected
flying-foxes are not
involved, satisfy the current legislative requirements for protection,
conservation and management of flying-fox
camps that may be impacting on human
populations. However, the legislative requirements can be confusing or not
appropriate as a
first port of call for individuals, affected communities,
businesses or local governments.
4.31 Accordingly, an easy-to-access, universal, decision making tool needs to
be developed to aid councils (as a primary target audience)
in navigating the
different requirements and sources of information they need to make decisions,
or steer people to the relevant
information. This decision making tool was
identified as a priority by the CSIRO during the roundtable public
The Committee notes
that researchers for the NESP identified that they were already developing such
a framework through the Threatened
Species Recovery
The Committee considers
this work can help inform the development of a nationally consistent framework,
to be used by all relevant
stakeholders.
4.32 The Committee believes that a framework developed in consultation with
the federal and state governments, informed by the relevant
research and
scientific bodies, could help councils:
§ identify flying-fox camps in their jurisdiction, through guided use of
the NFFMP viewer and other relevant sources;
§ assess whether the camps potentially include nationally protected
species and whether the populations are static or seasonal/transitional;
§ consider any past management actions undertaken locally or otherwise,
and their effectiveness;
§ decide on the most appropriate management options and refer matters
as appropriate (state, federal or both); and
§ provide education to affected communities (as covered in the next
4.33 This tool should be developed in consultation with the relevant
councils, as the primary land managers and stakeholders responsible
flying-fox management in most situations, to ensure that the language and
resources developed are appropriate and effective.
4.34 These resources should also be scalable to apply to the different
management scenarios that may arise, and reflect the appropriate
federal regulations. Councils should be provided with guidance on a wide range
of scenarios, including:
§ small, seasonal flying-fox camps which have minimal impact—with
effective mitigation strategies to be highlighted for
affected residents, such
as the use of car covers, health considerations, and so on;
§ flying-fox camps that are impacting on residents, and the regulatory
pathway that applies;
§ higher impact camps, and the considerations for councils and
communities, such as: management options available, communication
resources and
strategies available, regulatory pathways that apply, and appropriate actions
including dispersal activities and interventions
by the Minister for the
Environment and Energy.
4.35 Councils will be able to apply the decision tool to gauge these range of
situations, and allow communities to understand the
appropriate management
options available under a variety of circumstances.
4.36 Development of such a decision tool requires cooperation and open
communication, as well as a degree of alignment across states.
Such a tool will
enable councils to understand their obligations, identify possible options under
various scenarios, and communicate
this information easily to their
communities.
4.37 The Committee notes that the
NSW Camp Management Policy 2015
already establishes a hierarchy of options for actions within that state,
and could be used as a development starting point for a
national tool. The
development of this decision tool should be prioritised by the Department, and
could be informed by any national
coordination committee or working group
established as a result of Recommendation 1.
Recommendation 3
4.38 The Committee recommends that the Department of the Environment and
Energy develop, in consultation with relevant state and local
governments, a
tool that assists councils to make decisions on action, referral and education
in the most appropriate way, relevant
to the flying-fox impacts in their
Public and community
4.39 Throughout the inquiry, the Committee was presented with evidence that
demonstrated the varying levels of understanding and priorities
of different
sections of the community regarding flying-foxes in general, and their
conservation status.
4.40 Whilst there is a significant amount of publicly-available information
on flying-foxes and their ecology, behaviours and environmental
importance, many
people in the community do not access this information until a flying-fox camp
becomes a concern.
4.41 Some community members find the official advice on conservation status
to be at odds with their own experiences, having been
exposed to large camps of
flying-foxes and their impacts.
4.42 The Committee appreciates that problematic camps can cause distress and
damage to communities, businesses and community attitudes.
Part of this appears
to stem from a lack of information from the relevant levels of government and a
lack of available information
regarding the potential and perceived health risks
from flying-foxes.
4.43 The current requirement for interested stakeholders, including councils,
to access and synthesise the relevant information from
official sources often
leads to the delayed communication of relevant information to affected
households and businesses.
4.44 The Australasian Bat Society and Banana Shire Council recommend that the
inclusion of flying-fox information in the school syllabus,
or even as extra
information for students and
, can help counter
misconceptions about the nature and impact of flying-foxes.
4.45 Many other submitters outlined the value and importance of pre-emptive
or precautionary community education on the role of flying-foxes
ecosystem, as well as the range of options that can be expected if camp
management is required in their community.
4.46 This community education should extend to the dissemination of
information regarding the known human health risks associated
with flying-foxes
on humans. This includes an understanding of the likelihood of disease
transmission and the preventative measures
that should be taken. Additionally,
communities should be informed of the importance of standard hygiene practices
in alleviating
the risk of infection from flying-fox droppings.
4.47 Accordingly, the Committee considers that the Department should develop,
in consultation with state governments and the flying-fox
expert community, a
suite of education products that can be disseminated in affected (or potentially
affected) communities, and included
as part of the decision making tool referred
to in Recommendation 3.
4.48 Ideally, these education resources should be able to be used nationally
(acknowledging the differing ranges of some flying-foxes
and state frameworks),
and should be a priority consideration for any national coordination committee
or working group established
as a result of Recommendation 1.
Recommendation 4
4.49 The Committee recommends that the Department of the Environment and
Energy, in consultation with other relevant organisations,
develop a suite of
education resources for Australian communities regarding flying-fox ecology,
behaviour, environmental significance,
health impacts, and management options.
These resources should be promoted by the Australian Government to local
councils, communities,
businesses and all relevant stakeholders in affected
Committee comments
4.50 The Committee recognises the importance of flying-foxes to the
Australian environment and affirms their conservation, protection
and recovery
as a priority, in accordance with the EPBC Act. However, the Committee also
recognises that those protections should
be based on sound data and believes
that the research goals set out above will help establish that.
4.51 The Committee also recognises that flying-foxes can have significant
impacts on communities when camps are within the vicinity
of residents and
businesses.
4.52 Evidence points to the fact that tensions will increase if traditional
habitat and food sources are not restored and the pressures
on flying-foxes and
the changes in their behaviour are not better understood, by both the experts
and the general community alike.
4.53 The Committee believes that the recommendations contained in this report
will help to set a course for the relevant experts,
government bodies and
communities to better understand these important animals and our interactions
with them, while setting goals
to achieve while the relevant recovery plans are
enacted toward their 10 year goals. The Committee is confident its
recommendations
will allow for evidence-based protection and management to
coincide with better education and understanding of how humans and flying-foxes
can co-exist most effectively.
Andrew Broad MP
9 February 2017
A. List of submissions
Miss Alina Tipper
Mrs Carole West
Mr Steve Amesbury
Mr Roger Terrey
Maitland City Council
Northern Beaches Council
Mr Allan Brown
Ms Patricia Gardiner
Mrs Lynne Amesbury
Royal Zoological Society of NSW
Environmental Defenders Office of Northern Queensland
Mr Charlie Schroeder
Mrs Rochelle Meyrick
Mr Noel Castley-Wright
Ku-ring-gai Council
South East Region Conservation Alliance (SERCA)
Ms Deborah Pergolotti
Ms Lucy Norman
Mrs Melissa Paice
Mrs Verity Davis-Raiss
Sutherland Shire Council
Local Government Association of Queensland
Kempsey Shire Council
Ms Isabelle Wentworth
Eurobodalla Shire Council
EDOs of Australia
Mrs Carole Rochester
Lake Macquarie City Council
Cessnock City Council
§ 30.1 Supplementary to submission 30
Hunter Joint Organisation of Councils
Ms Susan Jenvey
Mrs Jan Anderson
Mr Gus Araya
Mr Mathew Bell
Sydney Coastal Councils Group
WWF-Australia
Ms Gail Vincent
Banana Shire Council
Mr John Shewan
Port Stephens Council
Singleton Council
Environment East Gippsland Inc
National Environmental Science Program
Moreton Bay Regional Council
Local Government NSW
Environment Institute of Australia and New Zealand – South
East Queensland Division
Tamworth Regional Council
Ms Dominique Thiriet
Humane Society International
Dr Alison Peel
Ms Maureen Brannan
Supplementary to submission 53
Sunshine Coast Council
Dr Jonathan Luly
Mrs Nancy Pallin
Charmian Eckersley
Mr David Timbury
Rhian Williams
Noosa Council
Australasian Bat Society
Dr Peggy Eby
§ 62.1 Supplementary to submission 62
Department of the Environment and Energy
Wildlife SOS – Save Our Species
Natural Resources Adelaide and Mt Lofty Ranges
Department of Environment and Heritage Protection Queensland
Seascape Technology
§ 68.1 Supplementary to submission 68
B. List of exhibits
Grey-headed Flying-fox relocation from the Royal Botanic Garden,
Sydney, First Annual Report, September 2013
, The Royal Botanic Gardens &
Domain Trust
C. Roundtable public hearing
Thursday, 24 November
2016—Canberra
Department of the Environment and Energy
§ Mr Stephen Oxley, First Assistant Secretary, Wildlife, Heritage and
Marine Division
§ Mr James Tregurtha, First Assistant Secretary, Environment Standards
§ Mr Geoff Richardson, Assistant Secretary, Protected Species and
Communities Branch
§ Ms Kim Farrant, Assistant Secretary, Assessments (NSW & ACT) and
Fuel Branch
§ Mr Gregory Andrews, Threatened Species Commissioner
CSIRO Land and Water
§ Dr David Westcott, Senior Principal Research Scientist
Private Capacity
§ Dr Peggy Eby, Consultant Wildlife Ecologist
Australasian Bat Society
§ Dr Pia Lentini, Secretary
Eurobodalla Shire Council
§ Councillor Liz Innes, Mayor
§ Mr Lindsay Usher, Director Planning and Sustainability Services
§ Ms Deborah Lenson, Divisional Manager Environmental Services
Ecosure Pty Ltd
§ Mr Phil Shaw, Managing Director
§ Mrs Jessica Bracks, Principal Wildlife Biologist
Submission 66
Environmental Defenders Offices
of Australia (EDOs of Australia),
Submission 27
Submission 66
Department of the Environment
and Energy,
Submission 63
Department of the Environment
and Energy,
Submission 63
Submission 66
Department of the Environment
and Energy,
Submission 63
Department of the Environment
and Energy,
Submission 63
Department of the Environment
and Energy,
Submission 63
Dr Peggy Eby,
National Environmental
Science Program,
Submission 44
Australasian Bat Society,
Submission 61
Department of the
Environment and Energy,
Submission 63
Department of the
Environment and Energy,
Submission 63
Australasian Bat Society,
Submission 61
Dr Peggy Eby,
Department of the
Environment and Heritage, ‘EPBC Act Administrative Guidelines on
Significance—Supplement for the Grey-headed
Flying-fox’,
<https://www.environment.gov.au/system/files/resources/50453032-5d0c-4352-a1a2-485faa77554f/files/grey-headed-flying-fox.pdf>
viewed 20 December 2016; Department of the Environment and Heritage, ‘EPBC
Act Administrative Guidelines on Significance—Supplement
Spectacled Flying-fox’,
<https://www.environment.gov.au/system/files/resources/0402f16a-6e59-493e-9a79-9c9d4ea6cb32/files/spectacled-flying-fox.pdf>
viewed 20 December 2016.
Victorian Government,
Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning, ‘Facts about flying
http://www.depi.vic.gov.au/environment-and-wildlife/wildlife/flying-foxes/facts-about-flying-foxes
viewed 20 December 2016.
Australasian Bat Society,
Submission 61
Australasian Bat Society,
Submission 61
NSW Government, Office of
Environment and Heritage, ‘Cumberland Plain Recovery Plan’,
http://www.environment.nsw.gov.au/threatenedspecies/Grey-headedFlying-foxVulnerable.htm
viewed 20 December 2016.
NSW Government, Office of
Environment and Heritage, ‘The NSW Flying-Fox Consultative
Committee’,
http://www.environment.nsw.gov.au/threatenedspecies/TheNSWFlying-FoxConsultativeCommittee.htm
viewed 11 January 2017.
Australasian Bat Society,
Submission 61
Department of the
Environment and Energy, ‘Species Profile and Threats Database: Pteropus
conspicillatus—Spectacled Flying-fox’,
http://www.environment.gov.au/cgi-bin/sprat/public/publicspecies.pl?taxon_id=185
viewed 20 December 2016.
South East Region
Conservation Alliance,
Submission 17
Environment Institute of
Australia and New Zealand,
Submission 47
Tamworth Regional Council,
Submission 48
Tamworth Regional Council,
Submission 48
Environmental Defenders
Office of Northern Queensland,
Submission 11
, p. 2; Noel Castley-Wright,
Submission 15
, p. [2]; Dr John Luly,
Submission 55
Mr Steve Amesbury,
Submission 3
Department of the
Environment and Energy, ‘Draft Recovery Plan for the Grey-headed
Flying-fox (
Pteropus poliocephalus)
’, January 2017, p. 9.
Submission 66
Submission 66
Dr David Westcott, Senior
Principal Research Scientist, CSIRO Land and Water,
Committee Hansard
Canberra, 24 November 2016, p. 6.
Submission 66
Submission 66
National Environmental
Science Program,
Submission 44
National Environmental
Science Program,
Submission 44
Department of the
Environment and Energy, ‘Draft Recovery Plan for the Grey-headed
Flying-fox (
Pteropus poliocephalus)
’, January 2017, p. 9.
Department of the
Environment and Energy, ‘Draft Recovery Plan for the Grey-headed
Flying-fox (
Pteropus poliocephalus)
’, January 2017, p. 10.
Tamworth Regional Council,
Submission 48
CSIRO, ‘Status and
Trends of Australia’s EPBC-Listed Flying-Foxes, April 2015, p. ii,
http://www.environment.gov.au/system/files/resources/9799051f-e0a2-4617-ba0d-8e2be2a364df/files/status-trends-australias-epbc-listed-flying-foxes.pdf
viewed 19 December 2016.
Mr Stephen Oxley, First
Assistant Secretary, Department of the Environment and Energy,
, Canberra, 24 November 2016, p. 6.
National Environmental
Science Program,
Submission 44
Submission 66
Councillor Liz Innes, Mayor,
Eurobodalla Shire Council,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24 November, p.
Dr Westcott, CSIRO Land and
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24 November 2016, p. 9.
Dr Westcott, CSIRO Land and
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24 November 2016, p. 14.
Department of the
Environment and Energy,
Submission 63
Department of the
Environment and Energy,
Submission 63
NSW Government, Office of
Environment and Heritage, ‘Flying-foxes’,
http://www.environment.nsw.gov.au/animals/flyingfoxes.htm
December 2016.
Submission 66
Tamworth Regional Council,
Submission 48
Dr Peggy Eby, Private
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24 November 2016, p. 20.
Mrs Jessica Bracks,
Principal Wildlife Biologist, Ecosure Pty Ltd,
Committee Hansard
Canberra, 24 November 2016, p. 21.
Department of the
Environment and Energy, ‘Draft Recovery Plan for the Grey-headed
Flying-fox (
Pteropus poliocephalus)
’, January 2017, p. 15.
Mr Lindsey Usher, Director
Planning and Sustainability Services, Eurobodalla Shire Council,
, Canberra, 24 November 2016, p. 8.
Dr Eby, Private capacity,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24 November 2016, p. 4.
Dr Westcott, CSIRO Land and
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24 November 2016, p. 6.
Dr Alison Peel,
Submission 51
, p. [1]; Australasian Bat Society,
Submission 61
pp. 3–10; Dr Peggy Eby,
Submission 62
, pp. 7–8; National
Environmental Science Program ,
Submission 44
, p. 4, World Wildlife Fund,
Submission 37
, p. 2; Sydney Coastal Councils Group,
Submission 36,
Tamworth Regional Council,
Submission 48
Department of the
Environment and Energy, ‘Draft Recovery Plan for the Grey-headed
Flying-fox (
Pteropus poliocephalus)
’, January 2017, p. 5.
Dr Peggy Eby,
Australasian Bat Society,
Submission 61
Dr Alison Peel,
Submission 51
Dr Westcott, CSIRO Land and
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24 November 2016, p. 6.
Mrs Bracks, Ecosure,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24
November 2016, p. 21.
Dr Alison Peel,
Submission 51
, p. [3]; Ms Susan Jenvey,
Submission 32,
Eurobodalla City Council,
Submission 26
, p. 2; Mrs Verity Davis-Raiss,
Submission 21
, pp. [2–5]; Sutherland Shire Council,
, p. 1; Mr Allan Brown,
Submission 7
Cessnock City Council,
Submission 30.1
Ms Gail Vincent,
Submission 38
Mrs Melissa Paice
Submission 20
Mr David Timbury,
Submission 58
Eurobodalla Shire Council,
Submission 26
, p. 2; Ms Melissa Paice,
Submission 20
Verity Davis-Raiss,
Submission 21
Eurobodalla Shire Council,
Submission 26
, p. 2; Cessnock City Council,
Submission 30.1,
Tamworth Regional
, Submission 48
Tamworth Regional Council,
Submission 48
, p. 5; Ms Susan Jenvey,
Submission 32,
Eurobodalla Shire Council,
Submission 26
Cessnock City Council Staff,
Submission 30.1
Mr Roger Terrey,
Submission 4
Dr Westcott, CSIRO Land and
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24 November 2016, p. 9.
Department of the
Environment and Energy, ‘Draft Recovery Plan for the Grey-headed
Flying-fox (
Pteropus poliocephalus)
’, January 2017, p. 17.
Eurobodalla Shire Council,
Submission 26
Eurobodalla Shire Council,
Submission 26
Ku-ring-gai Council,
Submission 16
Eurobodalla Shire Council,
‘Summary of Batemans Bay flying fox camp draft dispersal plan May
http://www.esc.nsw.gov.au/living-in/about/our-natural-environment/grey-headed-flying-foxes/summary-of-batemans-bay-flying-fox-camp-draft-dispersal-plan-may-2016
viewed 12 January 2017.
Northern Beaches Council,
Submission 6
, p. [2]; Ku-ring-gai Council,
Submission 16
Sutherland Shire Council,
Submission 22
, p. 3; Eurobodalla Shire Council,
Submission 26
, p. 8; Local Government NSW,
Submission 46
Seascape Technology,
Submission 68
Seascape Technology,
Submission 68
The Royal Botanic Gardens
& Domain Trust,
Hon. Warren Entsch MP,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24 November 2016, p. 5.
Mr David Timbury,
Submission 58
Tamworth Regional Council,
Submission 48
Victoria State Government
Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning, ‘Flying-foxes’,
http://www.depi.vic.gov.au/environment-and-wildlife/wildlife/flying-foxes
viewed 15 December 2016.
Tamworth Regional Council,
Submission 48
Queensland Government,
‘Bats and human health’
http://conditions.health.qld.gov.au/HealthCondition/condition/14/33/14/Bats-human-health
viewed 12 November 2016.
Queensland Government,
Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, ‘Australian bat lyssavirus
<https://www.daf.qld.gov.au/animal-industries/animal-health-and-diseases/a-z-list/australian-bat-lyssavirus/australian-bat-lyssavirus>
viewed 12 November 2016.
NSW Health, ‘Rabies
and Australian Bat Lyssavirus Infection’,
http://www.health.nsw.gov.au/infectious/factsheets/pages/rabies-australian-bat-lyssavirus-infection.aspx
viewed 17 January 2017.
Tamworth Regional Council,
Submission 48
Tamworth Regional
Submission 48
Rural Industries Research
and Development Corporation,
Compendium of Findings from the National Hendra
Virus Research Program
Rural Industries Research
and Development Corporation,
Compendium of Findings from the National Hendra
Virus Research Program
Rural Industries Research
and Development Corporation,
Compendium of Findings from the National Hendra
Virus Research Program
NSW Department of Primary
Industries, ‘Hendra virus vaccine information for vets’
http://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/animals-and-livestock/horses/health-and-disease/hendra-virus/vaccine-info-vets
viewed 13 November 2016.
Department of Environment
and Energy, ‘Monitoring Flying-Fox Populations,
http://www.environment.gov.au/biodiversity/threatened/species/flying-fox-monitoring
viewed 11 January 2017.
Department of the
Environment and Energy, ‘Draft Recovery Plan for the Grey-headed
Flying-fox (
Pteropus poliocephalus)
’, January 2017, p. 12.
Tamworth Regional
Submission 48
Mrs Verity Davis-Raiss,
Submission 21
, p. [3]; Eurobodalla Shire Council,
Submission 26
pp. 2–3; Cessnock City Council,
Submission 30.1
, p. 3; Tamworth
Regional Council,
Submission 48
, p. 4; Mr David Timbury,
, pp. [1–2].
Queensland Health,
‘Bats and human health’,
http://conditions.health.qld.gov.au/HealthCondition/media/pdf/14/33/14/bats-and-human-health-v7
viewed 13 November 2016.
Tamworth Regional
Submission 48
Northern Beaches Council,
Submission 6
Eurobodalla Shire
Submission 26
Eurobodalla Shire
Submission 26
Mr Usher, Eurobodalla
Shire Council,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24 November 2016, p. 25.
Department of the
Environment and Energy,
Submission 63
Department of the
Environment and Energy,
Submission 63
The guideline can be
http://www.environment.gov.au/biodiversity/threatened/publications/referral-guideline-management-actions-flying-fox-camps
Dr Peggy Eby,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24 November 2016, p. 4.
Local Government
Association of Queensland,
Submission 23
Department of the
Environment and Energy,
Submission 63
Department of the
Environment and Energy,
Submission 63
Department of the
Environment and Energy,
Submission 63
Department of the
Environment and Energy,
Submission 63
The management strategy
can be found at
http://www.environment.gov.au/sustainability/regional-development/lower-hunter#flyingfox
Eurobodalla Shire
Submission 26
Humane Society
International,
Submission 50
Department of the
Environment and Energy,
Submission 63
Queensland Department of
Environment and Resource Management,
National recovery plan for the
spectacled flying fox Pteropus conspicillatus,
2010, p. 5.
Department of the
Environment and Energy, ‘Draft Recovery Plan for the Grey-headed
Flying-fox (
Pteropus poliocephalus)
’, January 2017, pp. 20-27.
Eurobodalla Shire
Submission 26
Queensland Department of
Environment and Heritage Protection,
Submission 67
Queensland Department of
Environment and Heritage Protection,
Submission 67
Queensland Department of
Environment and Heritage Protection,
Submission 67
Local Government
Association of Queensland,
Submission 23
The Code of Practice can
be found at
http://www.logan.qld.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/332996/Code-of-Practice_Ecologically-sustainable-management_flying-fox.pdf
EDOs of Australia,
Submission 27
EDOs of Australia,
Submission 27
The Code of Practice can
be found at
<https://www.ehp.qld.gov.au/wildlife/livingwith/flyingfoxes/pdf/cp-wl-ff-low-impact-roosts.pdf>.
Moreton Bay Regional
Submission 45
Australasian Bat Society,
Submission 61
Ms Dominique Thiriet,
Submission 49
Local Government
Association of Queensland,
Submission 23
, p. 3; Sydney Coastal Councils
Group Inc.,
Submission 36
, p. 6; Moreton Bay Regional Council,
Submission 45
National Environmental
Science Program,
Submission 44
, pp. 8–9; Ms Dominique Thiriet,
Submission 49
NSW Government Office of
Environment and Heritage,
Flying-fox Camp Management Policy 2015
NSW Government Office of
Environment and Heritage,
Flying-fox Camp Management Policy 2015
The template can be found
http://www.environment.nsw.gov.au/publications/nativeanimals/flying-fox-camp-management-plan-template-160240.htm
NSW Government Office of
Environment and Heritage,
Flying-fox Camp Management Policy 2015
NSW Government Office of
Environment and Heritage, ‘Flying-foxes’,
http://www.environment.nsw.gov.au/animals/flyingfoxes.htm
January 2017.
NSW Parliamentary
Research Service,
Threatened species legislation in NSW: a recent
NSW Parliamentary
Research Service,
Biodiversity Conservation Bill 2016
Local Land Services
Amendment Bill 2016
WWF Australia,
Submission 37
Sydney Coastal Councils
Group Inc.,
Submission 36
Hunter Joint Association
of Councils,
Submission 31
Australasian Bat Society,
Submission 61
Cessnock City Council,
Submission 30.1
Eurobodalla Shire
Submission 26
Maitland City Council,
Submission 5
, p. [1]; Sutherland Shire Council,
Submission 22
2; Local Government Association of Queensland,
Submission 23
Kempsey Shire Council,
Submission 24
, p. [1]; Hunter Joint Organisation
of Councils,
Submission 31
, p. 4; Port Stephens Council,
, p. 2; Moreton Bay Regional Council,
Submission 45
Sunshine Coast Council,
Submission 54
Ku-ring-gai Council,
Submission 16
Local Government
Association of Queensland,
Submission 23
Royal Zoological Society
of New South Wales,
Submission 10
, p. 3; WWF Australia,
, p. 2; Ecosure,
Submission 53
, p. [3]; Dr John Luly,
Submission 55
, p. [2]; Dr Peggy Eby,
Submission 62
Sydney Coastal Councils
Submission 36
Mrs Jessica Bracks,
Principal Wildlife Biologist, Ecosure,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24
November 2016, p. 18.
Environment Institute of
Australia and New Zealand, ‘Cannes Reserve Flying-fox Camp
Management’, <https://www.eianz.org/document/item/3458>
January 2017.
Mr Lindsay Usher,
Director Planning and Sustainability Services, Eurobodalla Shire Council,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24 November 2016, p. 8.
Mr Phillip Patrick Shaw,
Managing Director, Ecosure,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24 November
2016, p. 18.
The Royal Botanic Gardens
& Domain Trust,
The Royal Botanic Gardens
& Domain Trust,
Annual Report 2013-2014
The Royal Botanic Gardens
& Domain Trust,
The Royal Botanic Gardens
& Domain Trust,
The Royal Botanic Gardens
& Domain Trust,
Annual Report 2015-2016
Dr Pia Lentini,
Secretary, Australasian Bat Society,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24
November 2016, p. 16.
Eurobodalla Shire
Submission 26
Mr Usher, Eurobodalla
Shire Council,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24 November 2016, pp.
Eurobodalla Shire
Submission 26
Councillor Liz Innes,
Mayor, Eurobodalla Shire Council,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24
November 2016, p. 21.
Mr Usher, Eurobodalla
Shire Council,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24 November 2016, p. 11.
Mrs Bracks, Ecosure,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24 November 2016, p. 17.
Mr David Amesbury,
Submission 3
Cessnock City Council
Submission 30.1
Tamworth Regional
Submission 48
, p. 23; Local Government NSW,
, p. [4]; Sydney Coastal Councils Group,
Submission 36
Environment East
Submission 43
Banana Shire Council,
Submission 39
Sydney Coastal Councils
Submission 36
Ku-ring-gai Council,
Submission 16
, pp. [4–11].
Mrs Bracks, Ecosure,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24 November 2016, p. 17.
Tamworth Regional
Submission 48
Mr Stephen Oxley, First
Assistant Secretary, Department of the Environment and Energy,
, Canberra, 24 November 2016, pp. 24-25.
Mr Phillip Shaw, Managing
Director, Ecosure; Mr Lindsay Usher, Director Planning and Sustainability
Services, Eurobodalla Shire Council;
Dr Pia Lentini, Secretary, Australasian Bat
Society; Ms Deborah Lenson, Divisional Manager Environmental Services,
Eurobodalla Shire
Council;Dr David Westcott, Senior Principal Research
Scientist, CSIRO Land and Water,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24 November
Local Government
Association of Queensland,
Submission 23
Department of the
Environment and Energy, ‘National Review of Environment Regulation,
<https://www.environment.gov.au/about-us/mem/environmental-regulation-review>
viewed 20 December 2016.
National Environmental
Science Program,
Submission 44
Dr Lentini, Australasian
Bat Society,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24 November 2016, pp.
Dr Westcott, CSIRO Land
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24 November 2016, pp. 6, 9.
Department of Environment
and Heritage Protection Queensland,
Submission 67
Queensland Government,
‘Satellite tracking to be deployed for flying fox management’,
http://statements.qld.gov.au/Statement/2016/6/11/satellite-tracking-to-be-deployed-for-flying-fox-management
viewed 16 January 2017.
Department of the
Environment and Energy,
Draft National Recovery Plan for the Grey-headed
Flying-Fox (Pteropus poliocephalus)
, January 2017, pp. 20–25.
Department of the
Environment and Energy,
Draft National Recovery Plan for the Grey-headed
Flying-Fox (Pteropus poliocephalus)
, January 2017, p. 26.
Mr Gregory Andrews,
Threatened Species Commissioner, Department of the Environment and Energy; Dr
Westcott, CSIRO Land and Water;
Mr Oxley, Department of the Environment and
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24 November 2016, pp. 9–11,
Dr Westcott, CSIRO,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24 November 2016, p. 23.
Dr Lentini, Australasian
Bat Society,
Committee Hansard
, Canberra, 24 November 2016, p. 16.
Australasian Bat Society,
Submission 61
, p. 10; Banana Shire Council,
Submission 39
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.18 MB)
PDF format (735 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter