URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJCHR/2025/38.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:08:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Telecommunications and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2025 - New and Ongoing Matters [2025] AUPJCHR 38 (2 October 2025)
Telecommunications and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2025206
Accessing communications for developing and testing interception capabilities
Preliminary international human rights legal advice
Rights to privacy and effective remedy
Committee view
Sharing personal telecommunications data under International Production Orders
Preliminary international human rights legal advice
Right to privacy
Right to an effective remedy
Right to life
Committee view
Broadening immunity from liability in controlled operations
Preliminary international human rights legal advice
Right to privacy, right to an effective remedy and rights of the child
Committee view
Telecommunications and
Other Legislation Amendment Bill
The bill would amend the
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
• enable the disclosure and use of protected network activity warrant
information and network activity warrant intercept information
disclosure obligations;
• transfer the statutory function of the Communications Access
Coordinator;
• permit limited access to stored communications to enable agencies
to undertake development and testing activities;
• amend the operation of interception international production
orders; and
• clarify the threshold for authorising and varying controlled
operations.
House of Representatives, 27 August 2025
Accessing communications for developing and testing
interception capabilities
1.266 Part 2–4 of the
Telecommunications (Interception and Access)
(TIA Act) currently provides for authorisations of intercepted live
communications for developing and testing capabilities. The relevant
authority may request the Attorney-General to authorise interception of
communications passing over a telecommunications
system for developing and
testing interception
capabilities.
1.267 The bill seeks to amend the TIA Act to provide that authorisations of
communications include access to stored communications,
if the authorisation
would have authorised interception of the communication if it were still passing
over a telecommunications system.
A stored communication is a communication that is not passing over a
telecommunications system; is held on equipment that is operated
by and is in
the possession of a carrier; and cannot be accessed on that equipment (by a
person who is not a party to the communication)
without the assistance of an
employee of the carrier.
amendment would in effect broaden the types of communication that may be
accessed for developing and testing interception capabilities.
Preliminary international human rights legal
Rights to privacy and effective
1.268 By expanding the power of an agency to access stored communications
under authorisations for developing and testing interception
capabilities,
rather than just live communications, this measure engages and limits the right
to privacy.
1.269 The right to privacy includes respect for informational privacy,
including the right to respect for private and confidential
information,
particularly the storing, use and sharing of such
information.
It also includes the
right to control the dissemination of information about one's private life. The
right to privacy may be subject
to permissible limitations where the limitation
pursues a legitimate objective, is rationally connected to that objective and is
a proportionate means of achieving that objective.
1.270 A legitimate objective is one that is necessary and addresses an issue
of public or social concern that is pressing and substantial
enough to warrant
limiting the right. The statement of compatibility states that the objective of
the measure is to ensure that agencies
are able to undertake development and
testing to stay ahead of advances in technology, and preserve their capacity to
prevent serious threats to Australia’s
Improving capabilities
to protect national security is likely a legitimate objective for the purposes
of international human rights
law, and expanding the power of an agency to
access information for the purposes of development and testing is likely
connected to (that is, effective to achieve) that legitimate
1.271 A key aspect of whether a limitation on a right can be justified is
whether the limitation is proportionate to the objective
being sought. In this
respect, it is necessary to consider a number of factors, including whether a
proposed limitation is sufficiently
circumscribed; whether it is accompanied by
sufficient safeguards; and whether there is the possibility of oversight and the
availability
1.272 In relation to whether the measure is sufficiently circumscribed, the
measure broadens the authorisation to access communications
for development and
testing interception capabilities from live communications to include stored
communications. While the scope
of communications is expanded, a condition of
the authorisation is that it does not allow information obtained to be used for
investigative
or intelligence collection
As the use of the
communications obtained is limited to development and testing interception
capabilities, it is more likely that
the measure is sufficiently circumscribed.
1.273 Further, a number of additional safeguards exist in the TIA Act to
ensure that the interception of stored communications is
limited and used
specifically for the purpose of development and testing interception
capabilities, including:
• the head of a security authority must make a request in writing to
the Attorney-General to authorise interception of communications,
include details of the development and testing technologies and the extent to
which it would involve, or likely involve,
interception of
communications;
• an authorisation cannot be in force for more than six
• a requirement to destroy the material once it is no longer
1.274 In relation to oversight and review, the statement of compatibility has
not identified what oversight powers exist in relation
to the communicating,
using or recording of intercepted communications.
1.275 The above provisions in the TIA Act offer some useful safeguard value.
However, as a foundational human rights assessment of
the TIA Act has not been
undertaken, it is not possible to fully assess the impact of this measure on the
right to privacy and the
sufficiency of safeguards provided in Part 2–4 or
the use and disclosure provisions in Part 2–6 of the TIA Act, and
it is not possible to assess the full privacy implications of this
1.276 Additionally, were an individual’s right to privacy violated
under an interception authorisation, this may engage the
right to an effective
remedy. The right to an effective remedy requires states parties to ensure
access to an effective remedy for
violations of human
This may take a variety
of forms, such as prosecutions of suspected perpetrators or compensation to
victims of abuse. While limitations
may be placed in particular circumstances on
the nature of the remedy provided (judicial or otherwise), states parties must
with the fundamental obligation to provide a remedy that is
1.277 The statement of compatibility does not identify that the right to an
effective remedy may be engaged. It is not clear that
a person who has their
communications intercepted or accessed would ever be made aware of that fact and
therefore it is not clear
how such a person could have access to an effective
remedy for any potential violation of their right to privacy.
Committee view
1.278 The committee notes that by expanding the power of an agency to access
stored communications, rather than just live communications,
authorisations for developing and testing interception capabilities in the
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
(TIA Act), this
measure engages and limits the right to privacy.
1.279 The committee notes that the measure seeks to achieve a legitimate
objective of national security, and is likely rationally
connected to that
objective. While the measure appears to be accompanied by some useful
safeguards, the committee notes that no foundational
human rights assessment has
been undertaken of the TIA Act, and therefore it is difficult to assess whether
the authorisations under
Part 2–4 of the TIA Act are a proportionate limit
on the right to privacy.
1.280 The committee further notes that if an individual’s right to
this may engage the
right to an effective remedy. The committee notes that it is not clear that a
person who has their communications
intercepted or accessed would ever be made
aware of that fact and therefore it is not clear how such a person could have
an effective remedy for any potential violation of their right to
1.281 The committee considers further information is required to assess the
compatibility of this measure with these rights, and as
such seeks the
minister's advice in relation to:
(a) what further safeguards are available, including the availability of
oversight and review, to ensure a proportionate limit on
the right to
(b) whether a person whose communications, including stored communications,
were intercepted under an interception authorisation,
will be made aware of
(c) if not, how such a person would effectively access a remedy for any
violation of their right to privacy.
Sharing personal telecommunications data under
International Production Orders
1.282 The International Production Orders (IPO) framework in Schedule 1 of
the TIA Act enables Australian law enforcement and national
security agencies to
obtain an IPO to allow them to seek content or data from a foreign
communications service provider (for example,
Verizon or Vodafone), where
Australia has a designated international agreement with the foreign country.
Currently, an agreement
exists between Australia and the United States (US); the
AUS-US CLOUD Act Agreement.
This means that Australian law enforcement and national security agencies can
ask communications service providers in the US to provide
content or data to
investigate or prosecute serious offences in Australia, and allows US law
enforcement and security agencies to
similarly request access to content or data
held by Australian-based communication service providers to investigate or
crimes in the US.
1.283 The bill seeks to amend Schedule 1 of the TIA Act to replace the term
‘intercepting’ with ‘accessing’
in relation to
The effect of this is to
broaden when an IPO may be issued—an eligible judge or nominated
administrative review tribunal member
must consider the agency’s
‘access’ to communications, messages, voice calls or video calls in
relation to IPOs,
rather than the technical method by which the information is
captured, stored or
1.284 The bill also seeks to provide that, in relation to B-party IPOs,
interception must be ‘as permitted under an international
rather than the
current definition of ‘intercept’ in the TIA
B-party IPOs are IPOs
aimed at services used by a person other than the target (for example, an
associate of a person of interest).
As ‘intercept’ is currently
defined to mean record, or live stream to a single destination, by amending the
of interception to mean ‘as permitted under an international
production order’, interception is able to include stored
communications.
The effect of this is that an eligible judge or nominated administrative review
tribunal member must consider whether
the agency could receive information on
the target by means of a provider complying with an interception IPO by
providing a copy
of stored communications of a person other than the target, not
just ‘recording’ or ‘live streaming’ those
voice calls or video calls.
1.285 The bill further provides that if a prescribed communications provider
is directed to intercept communications, messages, voice
calls or video calls,
they can do so by copying stored communications that consist of the
communications, messages, voice calls or
Preliminary international human rights legal
Right to privacy
1.286 By broadening the scope of when a target’s information can be
intercepted through an interception IPO, and by providing
for prescribed
communications providers to copy stored communications (rather than only
intercepting live communications), this measure
engages and limits the right to
1.287 The right to privacy includes respect for
informational privacy, including the right to respect for private and
confidential
information, particularly the storing, use and sharing of such
information.
It also includes
the right to control the dissemination of information about one's private life.
The right to privacy may be subject
to permissible limitations where the
limitation pursues a legitimate objective, is rationally connected to that
objective and is
a proportionate means of achieving that objective.
1.288 The committee has previously raised concerns regarding the
compatibility of the IPO framework with the right to privacy and
the right to an
effective remedy, both when this framework was introduced in 2020 and when the
agreement with the US was designated
in regulations in
Specifically, the
committee was concerned that while the IPO framework seeks to address the
legitimate objective of protecting national
security and public safety and
addressing crime and terrorism, the framework is not sufficiently circumscribed
and does not contain
sufficient safeguards to ensure it would not arbitrarily
limit the right to privacy.
committee also noted that as a person who is the subject of an IPO would rarely
know if an IPO had been issued in relation to
them, it does not appear that
individuals affected by an IPO would be able to access an effective remedy for
any violation of their
The committee further
considered that while a number of safeguards are included in the AUS-US CLOUD
Act Agreement, whether US orders
would arbitrarily interfere with the right to
US to this data. Without knowing the content of these laws and the
safeguards applicable (for example, whether judicial authorisation
is required
for the issuance of such orders), the committee was not able to conclude that
the agreement is compatible with the right
1.289 In relation to this measure, the statement
of compatibility identifies that it engages the right to privacy and states that
the amendments are necessary for combatting serious
While national security
may be a legitimate objective, it appears that these amendments are largely
designed to make it easier for
prescribed communications providers to comply
with IPO orders. The explanatory memorandum states:
prescribed communications providers may hold communications, messages, voice
calls and video calls on equipment that is operated by,
and is in the possession
of, the prescribed communications provider regardless of whether an interception
IPO is in place. By doing
so, the communications, messages, voice calls and
video calls may fall within the definition of ‘stored communication’
in clause 2 of Schedule 1 to the TIA Act. At the same time, the communications
may not be being ‘intercepted’ (because
the communications are not
recorded or live streamed to the agency).
In such instances, there is uncertainty that providing those communications,
messages, voice calls and video calls to an interception
agency in response to
an interception IPO would fall within the definition of
‘intercept’.
The amendment addresses that uncertainty by making it clear that prescribed
communications providers can comply with an interception
IPO by providing copies
of stored communications to the interception
1.290 It is unclear from the information provided why these particular
amendments are necessary. While the statement of compatibility
notes there is
currently uncertainty with how to comply with interception IPOs, it is unclear
whether the current operation of the
provisions frustrate the intention of the
IPO framework to an extent which would necessitate the measure, noting that the
appears to widely broaden the scope. No information has been provided as
to the current usage of IPOs and their efficacy. While the
explanatory
memorandum characterises these amendments as correcting a technical
it appears that in
practice it will make it more likely that an issuing authority will grant an IPO
and will allow for prescribed
communications providers to provide more personal
data. As there are questions around the necessity of the measure, it is unclear
whether the measure is aimed at a legitimate objective and rationally connected
to that objective for the purposes of international
human rights law.
1.291 In relation to proportionality, broadening when an IPO may be issued,
and allowing prescribed communication providers to share
stored communications,
exacerbates the previous concerns identified in relation to the IPO framework
and the right to privacy. In
particular, in relation to B-party orders where an
order is made in relation to services used by an individual who is not the
allowing a prescribed communications provider to provide stored
communications regarding this person appears to greatly broaden the
personal data that a provider can share even where the person is not the target
of the investigation. While safeguards
exist in the TIA Act and the AUS-US CLOUD
Act Agreement, as noted above, these appear limited and whether they would be
would depend on laws that apply in the US in relation to this data.
1.292 The statement of compatibility notes that in relation to oversight and
review, safeguards are independently overseen by both
the issuing authority who
issues the order and the Australian Designated Authority (the Secretary of the
Attorney-General’s
Department) which reviews the order for compliance with
the AUS-US CLOUD Act Agreement.
However, the issuing authority includes non-judicial officers such as members of
the Administrative Review Tribunal. The committee
has previously raised concerns
that enabling non-judicial officers to issue an IPO may be inadequate for the
purposes of safeguarding
the right to privacy, noting that judicial
authorisation is considered to be ‘best
in authorising
surveillance methods at internal
Public Interest Monitors
(who are independent lawyers who appear at a hearing of an IPO application in
certain jurisdictions) may
also assist with proportionality. As the suspect is
not able to be personally represented at the application for the IPO, having
independent expert to appear at the hearing to test the content and sufficiency
of the information relied on, to question any
person giving information, and to
make submissions as to the appropriateness of granting the application, is an
important safeguard
to protect the rights of the affected
However, Public
Interest Monitors are not available in all jurisdictions and it is unclear how
these amendments would interact with
the role of Public Interest Monitors in
relation to IPO requests.
1.293 The potential extent of the interference with privacy is also relevant
to the question of proportionality. Given these amendments
make it more likely
an issuing authority will grant an IPO and that prescribed communications
providers can provide more data, specifically
stored communications data, this
appears to broaden the IPO framework and will likely result in a greater
interference with the right
to privacy.
Right to an effective remedy
1.294 Were an individual’s right to privacy violated under an
interception authorisation, this may engage the right to an effective
The right to an effective remedy requires states parties to ensure access to an
effective remedy for violations of human
This may take a variety
of forms, such as prosecutions of suspected perpetrators or compensation to
victims of abuse. While limitations
may be placed in particular circumstances on
the nature of the remedy provided (judicial or otherwise), states parties must
with the fundamental obligation to provide a remedy that is
1.295 United Nations (UN) bodies and the European Court of Human Rights have
provided specific guidance as to what constitutes an
effective remedy where
personal information is being collected in the context of covert surveillance
activities. The UN High Commissioner
for Human Rights has explained that in the
context of violations of privacy through digital surveillance, effective
remedies may
take a variety of judicial, legislative or administrative forms,
but those remedies must be known and accessible to anyone with an
arguable claim
that their rights have been
The European Court of
Human Rights has also stated that if an individual is not subsequently notified
of surveillance measures which
have been used against them, there is
‘little scope for recourse to the courts by the individual concerned
unless the latter
is advised of the measures taken without his knowledge and
thus able to challenge their legality
retrospectively’.
court acknowledged that, in some instances, notification may not be feasible
where it would jeopardize long-term surveillance
activities.
However, it
explained that ‘[a]s soon as notification can be carried out without
jeopardising the purpose of the restriction
after the termination of the
surveillance measure, information should, however, be provided to the persons
concerned’.
1.296 The statement of compatibility does not identify that the right to an
effective remedy may be engaged. As such, no information
is provided as to
whether and how this proposed measure is consistent with the right.
1.297 An individual can likely only seek a remedy if they are aware that
there has been a violation of their right to privacy in the
first place. As to
whether a person who was the subject of an IPO will be made aware of that, even
after an investigation has been
completed, the committee has previously been
advised that persons subject to covert investigatory powers are not notified of
use of that power, unless there is a specific obligation to do so (for
example, where they are being prosecuted for a related
1.298 It is not clear that a person who has their communications intercepted
or accessed would ever be made aware of that fact, unless
they were being
prosecuted for an offence, and therefore it is not clear how such a person could
have access to an effective remedy
for any potential violation of their right to
Right to life
1.299 The TIA Act provides that an agreement with a foreign government cannot
be specified as a designated agreement unless the minister
has received a
written assurance from the foreign government relating to the use or non-use of
Australian sourced information in
connection with any proceeding by way of a
prosecution for a death penalty
1.300 The statement of compatibility states that:
[t]he amendments to the IPO framework promote the right to life by ensuring
that law enforcement agencies can access prospective content
that is necessary
for the investigation of serious criminal offences, which may pose a risk to
public safety and human life.
1.301 However, by providing that communications data can be shared with a
foreign country where there is a designated agreement to
investigate or
prosecute an offence, where that country has the death penalty, this measure
engages and may limit the right to
As noted, an agreement
exists between Australia and the US, a country which has the death penalty.
1.302 The right to life imposes an obligation on Australia to protect people
from being killed by others or from identified risks.
While the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights does not completely prohibit the
imposition of the death penalty,
international law prohibits States which have
abolished the death penalty (such as Australia) from exposing a person to the
penalty in another state.
The provision of information or assistance in the investigation of crimes that
may lead to the imposition of the death penalty in
another state is also
prohibited.
In 2009, the UN
Human Rights Committee stated its concern that Australia lacks 'a comprehensive
prohibition on the providing of international
police assistance for the
investigation of crimes that may lead to the imposition of the death penalty in
another state', and concluded
that Australia should take steps to ensure it
'does not provide assistance in the investigation of crimes that may result in
imposition of the death penalty in another
1.303 The committee previously raised concerns with the compatibility of the
AUS-US CLOUD Act Agreement with the right to life in
, noting that the US must obtain Australia’s permission to
use Australian sourced data obtained under the agreement as evidence
prosecution’s case for an offence in which the death penalty is sought,
and Australia will retain the discretion to
refuse permission, or to grant
permission, subject to such conditions as Australia considers
The committee
considered that this meant that the use of such data to investigate a death
penalty offence would not require Australian
government permission (only if it
was used as evidence in the case) and also that permission to use data as
evidence in a death penalty
case would rely solely on the discretion of the
Australia government. The committee considered that discretionary or
administrative
safeguards alone may not be sufficient for the purpose of a
permissible limitation under international human rights law. This is
administrative and discretionary safeguards are less stringent than the
protection of statutory processes. As such, the committee
considered there would
appear to be a risk that Australia could grant permission to use data obtained
under this agreement as evidence
in a death penalty trial, which would be
incompatible with Australia's right to life obligations.
1.304 These concerns about the use of Australian sourced data obtained under
the AUS-US CLOUD Agreement are likely exacerbated by
the current measure, as it
appears likely that more IPOs will be issued and stored communications can be
provided under an IPO, which
may then be used in a death penalty trial.
Committee view
1.305 The committee notes that the International Production Orders (IPO)
framework in Schedule 1 of the
Telecommunications (Interception and Access)
enables Australian law enforcement and national security agencies
to obtain an IPO to allow them to seek content or data from a foreign
communications service provider, where Australia has a designated international
agreement with the foreign country. The committee
notes that currently only one
agreement exists, between Australia and the United States (the AUS-US CLOUD Act
Agreement).
1.306 The committee notes that by broadening the scope of private
telecommunications data that can be intercepted through an interception
International Production Order (IPO), and by providing for prescribed
communications providers to copy stored communications, this
measure engages and
limits the right to privacy. Were an individual’s right to privacy
violated under an interception authorisation,
this may engage the right to an
effective remedy. The committee further notes that where information is shared
with a foreign country
where that country has the death penalty, as is the case
with the United States, this measure may engage and limit the right to life.
1.307 The committee has previously raised concerns regarding the
compatibility of the IPO framework with the rights to privacy and
an effective
remedy, and the right to life, both when this framework was introduced in 2020
and when the agreement with the US was
designated in regulations in 2022. In
relation to the right to privacy, the committee previously concluded that the
IPO framework
is not sufficiently circumscribed and does not contain sufficient
safeguards to ensure the measures do not arbitrarily limit the
In relation to the right
to life, the committee previously noted that there is nothing in the framework
that would prohibit mutual
assistance where it may lead to the imposition of the
death penalty and as such would be incompatible with Australia’s right
life obligations.
The committee
made recommendations to assist with the compatibility of the framework with the
rights to privacy and life.
committee notes that the explanatory materials do not refer to the
committee’s previous comments or recommendations in
relation to the IPO
1.308 The committee considers further information is required to assess the
compatibility of this measure with these rights, and as
such seeks the
minister's advice in relation to:
(a) why is it considered necessary to enable more IPOs to be made and for
prescribed communications providers to share stored communications
(a) how many IPOs have been issued since the framework was introduced;
(b) how does this measure effect the role of Public Interest Monitors in
relation to IPO requests;
(c) what safeguards exist to protect individuals subject to an IPO against
arbitrary interference with their right to privacy, particularly
in relation to
oversight and review;
(d) how the measure is compatible with the right to life in relation to
agreements with states that have the death penalty;
(e) why previous Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights
recommendations have not been implemented in relation to the right
and the right to life;
(f) what remedies are available to individuals whose human rights have been
Broadening immunity from liability in controlled
1.309 The bill seeks to amend Part IAB of the
Crimes Act 1914
clarify the threshold for authorising and varying controlled operations. A
controlled operation is an operation involving law
enforcement engaging in
unlawful conduct for the purposes of gathering evidence that may lead to the
prosecution of a serious Commonwealth
offence or a serious state offence with a
federal aspect.
Currently, an
authorising officer (which includes an authorising officer, appropriate
authorising officer or nominated Tribunal member)
must not grant an authority to
conduct a controlled operation unless the authorising officer is satisfied on
reasonable grounds that
any conduct involved in the controlled operation will
not seriously endanger the health or safety of any person; cause the death
or serious injury to, any person; involve the commission of a sexual offence
against any person; or result in significant loss
of, or serious damage to,
property (other than illicit
Participants are
protected from criminal and civil liability for conduct in accordance with the
authority to conduct the controlled
operation and where, among other matters,
the conduct does not involve the participant engaging in any conduct that is
involve the commission of a sexual offence against any
1.310 The bill seeks to provide that, when authorising or varying a
controlled operation, an authorising officer is only required
to be satisfied as
to the direct and reasonably foreseeable consequences of the unlawful conduct of
participants in the controlled
A consequence is a
‘direct consequence’ if the unlawful conduct causes or produces, and
is not merely a minor influence
on, the consequence without there being any
intervening conduct or events.
As currently an authorising officer must be satisfied on reasonable grounds that
certain things will not happen, this measure seeks
to clarify that an
authorising officer only needs to consider direct and reasonably foreseeable
consequences, and not indirect consequences
which a reasonable person may
consider foreseeable as well as those that are far-fetched or
1.311 The bill further seeks to provide that a participant is immune from
criminal and civil liability in relation to dealing with
material depicting,
describing, or otherwise involving a sexual offence against any person, or
facilitating a person to deal with
such material, where the participant is
participating in a relevant controlled
Preliminary international human rights legal
Right to privacy, right to an effective remedy
and rights of the child
1.312 Depending on the nature of a controlled operation, it may engage and
limit various human rights. For example, it may engage
and limit a
person’s right to privacy where their personal information is collected or
their private life interfered with;
the right to physical security where a
criminal act may involve physical contact; or the rights of the child to
protection from sexual
abuse and exploitation where child abuse material is
shared online.
1.313 A controlled operation cannot authorise participants to engage in any
conduct that will seriously harm a person or involve the
commission of a sexual
offence against a person. However, by providing that an authorising officer need
only consider direct and
reasonably foreseeable consequences before authorising
a controlled operation, this measure appears to mean that controlled operations
may be authorised even where indirect consequences (which may still engage and
limit human rights) may be reasonably
foreseeable.
For example, an
indirect consequence of a controlled operation relating to the importation and
sale of illicit drugs may be serious
harm to people who eventually buy and
consume those drugs. If the harm caused to people consuming the drugs was not
considered a
‘direct’ and ‘reasonably foreseeable’
consequence, then the current safeguard that the authorising officer
satisfied on reasonable grounds that any conduct would not seriously endanger
the health or life of a person would not appear
to apply. The safeguard that
currently exists in relation to when a controlled operation may be authorised is
therefore significantly
weakened by this measure and this means that the risk of
a violation of an individual’s human rights is likely greater.
1.314 Further, the conduct of a participant in a controlled operation may be
protected by civil and criminal immunity, which would
also be broadened to
include dealing with sexual offence material. Where an individual’s human
rights are violated in the course
of a controlled operation, this may engage the
right to an effective remedy.
1.315 The right to an effective remedy requires the availability of a remedy
which is effective with respect to any violation of rights
and freedoms
recognised by the International Covenant on Civil and Political
It includes the right
to have such a remedy determined by competent judicial, administrative or
legislative authorities or by any
other competent authority provided for by the
legal system of the state.
1.316 While limitations may be placed in particular circumstances on the
nature of the remedy provided (judicial or otherwise), States
parties must
comply with the fundamental obligation to provide a remedy that is
1.317 The statement of compatibility does not identify that the right to an
effective remedy is engaged. As such, no information is
provided as to whether
and how this proposed amendment is consistent with the right. It is not clear
whether a person whose rights
are violated by a controlled operation would have
access to an effective remedy. It is also not clear whether all persons affected
by a controlled operation would be informed of such. For example, if a
person’s rights were violated but they were not the
target of the
operation and were not subsequently charged and arrested (and presumably
informed of the controlled operation), it
is not clear that such a person would
be made aware of the fact that their rights were violated by police under a
controlled violation.
In such circumstances, it appears unlikely that a person
would have access to an effective remedy.
Committee view
1.318 The committee notes that the bill seeks to clarify the threshold for
authorising and varying controlled operations in the
Crimes Act 1914
providing that only direct and reasonably foreseeable consequences must be
considered. The committee notes that the bill further
seeks to provide that a
participant in a relevant controlled operation is immune from criminal and civil
liability in relation to
dealing with sexual offence material.
1.319 The committee notes that depending on the nature of the controlled
operation, this may engage and limit multiple human rights.
The committee
further notes that as the conduct of a participant in a controlled operation may
be protected by civil and criminal
immunity, where an individual’s human
rights are violated in the course of a controlled operation, this may engage the
to an effective remedy.
1.320 The committee considers further information is required to assess the
compatibility of this measure with the right to an effective
remedy, and as such
seeks the minister's advice in relation to:
(a) whether the measure is compatible with the right to an effective remedy;
(b) what remedies are available to individuals whose human rights have been
violated; and
(c) will persons whose rights are violated be informed that the violation was
perpetrated by police under a controlled operation.
This entry can be cited as:
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights,
Telecommunications and Other
Legislation Amendment Bill 2025
Report 5 of 2025
[2025] AUPJCHR
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act 1979
section 31.
Subsection 31(1)
that the ‘head (however described) of a security authority that has
functions that include activities relating to
developing or testing
technologies, or interception capabilities, or a person acting as that
head’ may make the request.
Schedule 3, proposed
subsection 31A(3)
and section 31AB.
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act 1979
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 17.
Statement of compatibility,
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act 1979
subsection 31A(2).
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act 1979
section 31.
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act 1979
, paragraph 31(2)(g).
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act 1979
section 31C.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 2(3).
UN Human Rights Committee,
General Comment No. 29: States of Emergency (Article 4)
(2001) [14].
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Amendment (International Production Orders)
Regulations 2022
Schedule 4, items 1, 2, 4,
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Schedule 4, items 3, 4, 7,
‘Intercept’
means record, or live stream to a single destination:
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act 1979
, Schedule 1,
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Schedule 4, items 5, 9 and
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 17.
See Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(9 April 2020) pp. 9–26;
(17 June 2020) pp. 87–129;
(25 March 2022) pp. 59–61.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(17 June 2020) p. 117.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(17 June 2020) p. 117.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(25 March 2022) pp. 60–61.
Statement of
compatibility, pp. 46–47.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Statement of
compatibility, p. 47.
Case of Big Brother
Watch and Others v The United Kingdom
, European Court of Human Rights,
Application Nos. 58170/13, 62322/14 and 24960/15 (13 September 2019) [320].
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(17 June 2020) p. 107.
See, for example,
Public Interest Monitor Act 2011
The Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights previously commented on the safeguard value of Public
Interest Monitors, stating
‘while there are Public Interest Monitors
available to IPO requests made in Queensland and Victoria, there is no
safeguard with respect to IPO requests made in the majority of
relation to access to stored communications (only in relation to interception of
communications)’. See Parliamentary
Joint Committee on Human Rights,
(17 June 2020) p. 113.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 2(3).
UN Human Rights Committee,
eneral Comment No. 29: States of Emergency (Article 4)
(2001) [14].
UN Human Rights Council,
Report of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
on the right to privacy in the digital age
, A/HRC/27/37 (2014) [40].
Roman Zakharov v
, European Court of Human Rights (Grand Chamber), Application No.
47143/06 (2015) [234]. See also,
Klass and Others v Germany
Court of Human Rights (Plenary Court). Application No. 5029/71 (1978) [57].
Roman Zakharov v
, European Court of Human Rights (Grand Chamber), Application No.
47143/06 (2015) [287].
Roman Zakharov v
, European Court of Human Rights (Grand Chamber), Application No.
47143/06 (2015) [287]. See also,
Klass and Others v Germany
Court of Human Rights (Plenary Court). Application No. 5029/71 (1978) [58].
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(17 June 2020) pp. 115-117.
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act 1979
, Schedule 1, section 3.
Statement of
compatibility, p. 48.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 6.
Second Optional Protocol
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
UN Human Rights Committee,
Concluding observations on the fifth periodic report of Australia
CCPR/C/AUS/CO/5 (2009) [20].
UN Human Rights Committee,
Concluding observations on the fifth periodic report of Australia
CCPR/C/AUS/CO/5 (2009) [20].
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(25 March 2022) p. 62.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(17 June 2020) pp. 114-115.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(17 June 2020) p. 123 and
(25 March 2022) p. 64.
The committee previously
recommended that it may be more likely to be compatible with the right to
for independent experts (such as a Public
Interest Monitor) to appear at the hearing for an IPO in all jurisdictions; the
AAT members in issuing IPOs is removed or at least restricted to senior
members; all IPOs issued are required to have regard as to
whether this method
of surveillance would likely have the least interference with any person’s
to the prohibition on the use, recording and
disclosure of protect information obtained pursuant to an IPO were removed. In
to the right to life, the committee recommended that information only
be provided to a foreign government where an assurance has
been received that
the information will not be used in relation to proceedings for an offence which
may be punishable by the death
penalty, or may only be used in circumstances
where such a penalty will not be sought. See Parliamentary Joint Committee on
(17 June 2020) pp. 114-115 and 123; and
(25 March 2022) p. 64.
See Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(17 June 2020) pp. 114-115 and 123; Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(25 March 2022) p. 64.
Crimes Act 1914
subsection 15GD(1).
Crimes Act 1914
paragraph 15GI(2)(g).
Crimes Act 1914
subparagraph 15HA(2)(d)(ii) and paragraph 15HB(d)(ii).
Schedule 5, items 1-3,
subsections 15GI(2A)
Schedule 5, items 1-3,
subsections 15GI(2B)
Statement of
compatibility, p. 41.
Schedule 5, items 4 and 6,
subsections 15HA(3)
Explanatory memorandum, p.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 2(3). See
Kazantzis v Cyprus
Human Rights Committee Communication No. 972/01 (2003) and
, UN Human Rights Committee Communication No. 1036/01 (2005):
states parties must not only provide remedies for violations of the
must also provide forums in which a person can pursue arguable if unsuccessful
claims of violations of the ICCPR. Per
C v Australia
, UN Human Rights
Committee Communication No. 900/99 (2002), remedies sufficient for the purposes
of article 5(2)(b) of the ICCPR
must have a binding obligatory effect.
See UN Human Rights
General Comment No. 29: States of Emergency (Article 4)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (242 KB)
PDF format (150 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter