URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBRp/2016/53.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:14:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Narcotic Drugs Legislation Amendment Bill 2016 [2016] AUSStaCSBRp 53 (9 November 2016)
Narcotic Drugs Legislation Amendment Bill 2016
Delegation of legislative power
Schedule 1, item 1, proposed subsection 4(1)
Trespass on personal rights and liberties—procedural fairness and disclosure of sensitive law enforcement information
Schedule 1, items 4, 7, 16, 18, 20 and 21
Trespass on personal rights and liberties—reversal of evidential burden of proof
Schedule 1, item 11, proposed subsection 14MA(2)
Delegation of legislative power and parliamentary scrutiny
Schedule 2, item 28, proposed subsection 26B(2)
Narcotic Drugs Legislation Amendment Bill
This bill amends the
Narcotic Drugs Act 1967
(the Act) to provide
protection of sensitive law enforcement information used in licencing decisions
under the Act
House of Representatives on 14 September 2016
The committee dealt with this bill in
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016
Minister responded to the committee’s comments in a letter received on
27 October 2016. A copy of the letter is attached
to this report.
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
Delegation of legislative
Schedule 1, item 1, proposed subsection
This item includes two new entries in the definition section of the
Narcotic Drugs Act 1967
to define ‘law enforcement agency’
and ‘sensitive law enforcement agency’. Both of these definitions
of critical importance to achieving the principal purpose of this bill,
namely, to protect sensitive law enforcement information
provided by relevant
agencies for the purpose of regulatory actions in relation to licences for the
cultivation and use of cannabis
for medicinal and research purposes.
‘Law enforcement agency’, is defined broadly to include any
‘body, agency or organisation that is responsible for,
or deals with, law
enforcement, criminal intelligence, criminal investigation, fraud or security
intelligence in, or in a part of,
Australia’. Paragraph (b) of this
definition, however, provides that further entities can be prescribed by the
regulations.
The need for this regulation making power is not elaborated in the
explanatory materials despite the breadth of the definition of
law enforcement
agency and the central role of the definition in the legislative scheme.
The committee therefore seeks the Minister’s advice as to why the
definition of a ‘law enforcement agency’ can be
expanded by
regulation and seeks a justification as to the appropriateness of this
delegation of legislative power.
Minister’s response - extract
The Committee sought the Minister’s advice as to why the definition of
a ‘law enforcement agency’ can be expanded
by regulation and seeks
justification as to the appropriateness of this delegation of legislative
Law enforcement agency is defined broadly under
subsection 4(1)
Narcotic Drugs Act 1967
(the ND Act) as a body, agency or organisation
that is responsible for, or deals with, law enforcement, criminal intelligence,
investigation, fraud or security intelligence in, or in a part of,
Australia. A body, agency or organisation that is prescribed in
the regulations
for the purposes of paragraph (b) of this definition would also be a law
enforcement agency.
The Australian Federal Police, the Australian Criminal Intelligence
Commission and State and Territory Police are clearly within the
scope of the
definition of a ‘law enforcement agency’. Government agencies such
as the Australian Border Force and the
Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission would not traditionally be known or be clearly covered by the
definition as a law
enforcement agency. These agencies may be investigating and
hold sensitive law enforcement information about natural persons and
corporate that may be relevant to the granting or holding of a licence, or being
associated with the holder of a licence,
under the ND Act. The information may
be about importation and exportation activities, or in relation to commercial
activities of
a person and association of that person with other bodies
corporate in Australia. In order to protect sensitive law information provided
by these agencies, it would be appropriate to prescribe them as a law
enforcement agency in the regulations made for the purposes
of paragraph (b) of
the definition of a law enforcement agency.
The regulation is therefore proposed to prescribe Commonwealth agencies that
are not specifically covered by the definition of a law
enforcement agency, but
is generally involved in the investigation of persons and hold information that
may be relevant to law enforcement
and regulatory actions in relation to
licences under the Act and is within the scope of the definition of sensitive
law enforcement
information. The list would not be comprehensive and there would
only be a few bodies or agencies that are proposed to be included
regulation.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Minister for this response. The committee notes the
Minister’s advice that there are agencies that
would not be specifically
covered by the definition of a law enforcement agency and so there is a need to
include these additional
bodies. The committee also notes the Minister’s
advice that ‘there would only be a few bodies or agencies that are
to be included in the regulation’.
The committee accepts that there may be a need to include other agencies
in the definition of a ‘law enforcement agency’,
however, it is not
clear why these additional agencies (such as the Australian Border Force and the
Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission) cannot be listed in the primary
legislation to allow for full parliamentary scrutiny, rather than enabling the
regulations
to prescribe any body, agency, or organisation.
The committee draws its concerns to the attention of Senators and leaves
the appropriateness of the proposed approach to the delegation
of legislative
power to the consideration of the Senate as a whole.
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
Trespass on personal rights and
liberties—procedural fairness and disclosure of sensitive law enforcement
information
Schedule 1, items 4, 7, 16, 18, 20
Various proposed amendments in Schedule 1 have the effect of precluding the
disclosure of sensitive law enforcement information to
various persons, prior to
a hearing being granted in relation to regulatory actions or as part of the
statement of reasons for such
an action being taken (see items 4, 7, 16, and 18
of Schedule 1).
Relatedly, item 19 of Schedule 1 makes a number of amendments relating to the
protection and use of sensitive law enforcement information
in Administrative
Appeals Tribunal (AAT) applications. Proposed section 15M allows for the
Secretary to request that the AAT make
orders directing a hearing or part of a
hearing take place in private, orders about the persons who may attend a hearing
prohibiting or restricting the publication or disclosure of
information relating to the AAT’s review of the matter. Such orders
made if the Tribunal is satisfied the order is necessary for purposes listed in
proposed subsection 15M(3) (which relate to
protecting the integrity of law
enforcement investigations and the safety of persons involved in those
activities). Proposed section
15N would have the effect that the AAT’s
general power to ensure that an adequate statement of reasons for a reviewable
is provided to an applicant is varied, so that an applicant is not
entitled to sensitive law enforcement information as part of the
Finally, item 20 of Schedule 1 provides that if ‘the natural justice
hearing rule would, but for the provisions of this Act,
require the disclosure
of information identified as sensitive law enforcement information under
subsection 14LA(1) or (2), this Act
is taken to be an exhaustive statement of
the requirements of the natural justice hearing rule in relation to the
disclosure of that
information’. The explanatory memorandum states that
this measure is ‘intended for consistency with the provisions relating
non-disclosure of sensitive law enforcement information, and to ensure that the
natural justice hearing rule does not undermine
the safeguards in the
Narcotic Drugs Act 1967
in relation to the non-disclosure of sensitive
law enforcement information’ (at p. 15). The statement of
compatibility (at
p. 7) also states that the non-disclosure of such
sensitive information is considered necessary to protect the integrity of the
cannabis framework and the manufacture of narcotic drugs framework by
ensuring that persons who are not fit and proper persons are
not able to hold
licences. The explanatory memorandum argues that ‘[w]ithout the assistance
of law enforcement agencies, relevant
information to support that objective may
not be available to the decision-maker’ (p. 15).
It may be accepted that there is a need to balance a person’s interest
in receiving a fair hearing with the public interest
of protecting law
enforcement operations and intelligence (see explanatory memorandum, pp
2–3). Nevertheless, it is not clear
that the exclusion of the fair hearing
rule is necessary to accomplish this objective. The common law rules of
procedural fairness
are applied with sensitivity to the statutory context. There
is no doubt that the courts would recognise that there was a public
interest in
the Secretary and the AAT receiving sensitive law enforcement information and
that the disclosure of such information
may undermine the efficacy of the
regulatory scheme. The common law rules of procedural fairness are, however,
flexible and this
flexibility may often mean that an individual’s interest
in a fair hearing is promoted through the disclosure of some, but
not all, of
the information in which there is a broad public interest in non-disclosure. For
example, it may be possible to give
the ‘gist’ of allegations or
information without revealing particular details that may compromise sensitive
law enforcement
information.
The committee seeks the Minister’s advice as to why it is necessary
to exclude the natural justice hearing rule, given that
the courts apply that
rule by reference to a particular statutory scheme and its underlying
Minister’s response - extract
The Committee sought the Minister’s advice as to why it is necessary to
exclude the natural justice hearing rule, given that
the courts apply that rule
by reference to a particular statutory scheme and its underlying purposes. The
Committee notes that the
provision may be considered to trespass unduly on
personal rights and liberties, in breach of principle l(a)(i) of the Committee
terms of reference.
Illegal cultivation of cannabis plants, trafficking of drugs (including
cannabis) and manufacture of drugs are serious criminal offences
and attract
very high level penalties and long periods of imprisonment. Due to limited
sources of lawfully manufactured medicinal
cannabis products in Australia, some
patients or their families have been sourcing cannabis products from illicit
sources. Persons
who have been unlawfully cultivating and supplying cannabis
products may decide to continue to pursue these activities under the
Commonwealth cannabis licence under the ND Act. It is possible that law
enforcement agencies may have been investigating
or have information about these
The ND Act now allows for the cultivation of cannabis plants and the
production of cannabis and cannabis resins under a national licensing
For a long time, only the cultivation of cannabis plants for industrial purposes
(also known as industrial hemp) is allowed
in Australia under State or Territory
regulatory frameworks. Cultivation of cannabis plants and production of cannabis
and cannabis
resins carry a particularly high risk of diversion because the
product can be readily be used in its raw state and is likely to be
to organised crime seeking to hide illegal activities under cover of a
Commonwealth licence. In contrast, the cultivation
of opium poppies and
production of opium alkaloids regulated under State and Territory laws have
lower diversion risk as the plant
and alkaloids cannot be readily used in their
raw state. The fit and proper person requirement under the ND Act is designed to
and manage the risks that unsuitable persons may be granted a licence.
This requirement also applies to a manufacture licence.
The protection and non-disclosure of sensitive law enforcement information
provided to, or held by, the Secretary of the Department
of Health (Secretary)
is absolutely necessary to protect the integrity of the national medicinal
cannabis regulatory framework and
the manufacture of drugs under the ND Act so
that persons who are not fit to hold a licence are prevented from holding a
to carry out activities under that Act. Sensitive law enforcement
information is provided to the Secretary by Commonwealth, State
or Territory law
enforcement agencies, or from other sources.
The law enforcement agencies and other sources of sensitive law enforcement
information must have confidence that when they provide
sensitive law
enforcement information it would be protected from disclosure and unauthorised
use. Similarly, sensitive law enforcement
information held by the Secretary and
obtained from other sources must also be protected from disclosure and
unauthorised use. Mere
recommendations by law enforcement agencies to the
Secretary not to grant a licence on the basis that they hold adverse information
in relation to the suitability of a person, without providing supporting adverse
information and providing reasons for such a refusal,
would not be adequate and
acceptable for the Secretary to make a decision under the Act. The Secretary
must be able to consider that
information and assess the relevance of that
information before making a final decision.
It would be therefore important that the law enforcement agencies, in
particular State and Territory law enforcement agencies, have
confidence that
sensitive law enforcement information would be protected from disclosure to the
applicant or the public. Otherwise,
from our consultations with law enforcement
agencies, they will not be willing to provide sensitive law enforcement
information to
the Secretary. In this case, the objective of ensuring that only
fit and proper persons are able to hold a licence and exclude individuals
have criminal history or part of an organised crime syndicate to use medicinal
cannabis framework as cover for illegal activities
may be frustrated.
Specifically excluding the natural justice hearing rule in the protection of
that information under proposed section 21A of the ND
Act (Item 20, Schedule 1
of the Bill) would provide confidence to law enforcement agencies and other
persons who would be providing
vital information for the integrity of the
regulatory framework set out in the ND Act. Without the specific provision,
likely to be legal challenges through the courts to seek access to the
information and there would be uncertainty about the ability
of the Secretary to
protect sensitive law enforcement information.
The novelty of the Commonwealth medicinal cannabis scheme, which allow for
the cultivation of cannabis plants and production of cannabis
or cannabis resins
that are supplied and carried out illicitly by organised crime networks require
new measures for the protection
of sensitive law enforcement information, such
as the exclusion of the natural justice hearing rule in specified
circumstances.
Uncertainties in the ability of the Secretary to protect this information
from disclosure to the applicant or the public would adversely
effectiveness of the framework to exclude persons who are unsuitable to hold a
licence, frustrate the objective of the
scheme to ensure that cannabis
cultivated, produced and manufactured in Australia for medicinal and scientific
purposes, not for
illicit purposes, and compromise the effective investigations
and operations of law enforcement and other agencies.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Minister for this detailed response.
The committee notes the Minister’s advice that law enforcement
agencies, particularly from the States and Territories, need
to be confident
that sensitive law enforcement information would be protected from disclosure to
the applicant or the public, and
if it is not so protected, consultations with
those agencies suggest they will not be willing to provide such information to
Secretary of the Department of Health.
The committee requests that the key information provided by the Minister
be included in the explanatory memorandum, noting the importance
documents as a point of access to understanding the law and, if needed, as
extrinsic material to assist with interpretation
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
In light of the information provided, the committee leaves the
appropriateness of excluding the natural justice hearing rule to the
consideration of the Senate as a whole.
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
Trespass on personal rights and
liberties—reversal of evidential burden of
Schedule 1, item 11, proposed subsection
This subsection provides for a number of exceptions to the offence created in
subsection 14MA(1) for the disclosure or use of sensitive
law enforcement
information. A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to establishing
the matters relevant for each of
these exceptions. The explanatory memorandum
provides no explanation as to why it is appropriate to reverse the evidential
of proof in this instance. Explanatory material should directly address
these matters as outlined in the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences,
Infringement Notices and Enforcement Powers
In light of the importance of any reversal of the evidential burden of
proof, the committee seeks the Minister’s detailed justification
proposed approach that addresses each of the instances in the bill against the
principles outlined in the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences,
Infringement Notices and Enforcement Powers
Minister’s response - extract
The Committee sought the Minister’s detailed justification for the
proposed approach that addresses each of the instances in
the bill against the
principles named in the Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences, Infringement
Notices and Enforcement Powers.
The Committee noted that this provision may be
considered to trespass unduly on personal rights and liberties, in breach of
l(a)(i) of the committee’s terms of reference.
Subsection 14MA(2) provides that a person does not commit the offence set out
in subsection 14MA(l) if:
(a) the disclosure or use by the person for the purposes of, or in connection
with, the performance of a function or the exercise
of a power under the
Narcotic Drugs Act 1967
(b) the disclosure or use by the person in compliance with a requirement
under a law of the Commonwealth; or
(c) the person or agency that gave information consents to the disclosure or
(d) the disclosure or use is required by a court or tribunal for the purposes
of giving effect to this Act or another law of the Commonwealth;
(e) the information or a document or advice that included the information was
given to the Secretary by a person or an agency under
section 14K
the use or the disclosure by that person or agency.
The drafting of the above provision took into account the requirements under
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences, Infringement
Notices and Enforcement
Subsection 14MA(2)
creates exceptions that trigger subsection 13.3 of the
Criminal Code Act. The burden of proof for the defence is evidential, and
prosecution still bears a legal burden to prove its case beyond reasonable
The facts set out in the defences set out in paragraphs (a) to (e) of
subsection 14MA(2) are peculiarly within and remain wholly within
defendant’s knowledge and not generally available to the prosecution. At
the same time, it would be significantly more
difficult and costly for the
prosecution to disprove than for the defendant to establish the matter. For
example, in relation to
paragraph 14MA(2)(c), consent provided by a person or
agency that gave the information for the disclosure or use by a specified person
would be peculiarly within the defendant’s knowledge and would be better
placed to prove that a consent was provided to the
Committee response
The committee thanks the Minister for this response.
The committee requests that the key information be included in the
explanatory memorandum, noting the importance of these documents
as a point of
access to understanding the law and, if needed, as extrinsic material to assist
with interpretation (see
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act
In light of the explanation provided the committee make no further comment
on this matter.
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
Delegation of legislative power and parliamentary
Schedule 2, item 28, proposed
subsection 26B(2)
Proposed new subsection 26B(2) provides that in making legislative standards
for the purposes of the Act, the standards may incorporate
any matter contained
in an instrument or other writing as in force or existing from time to time. The
effect of this provision is
to deprive parliamentary oversight of legislative
standards as they may be amended by virtue of changes made to any incorporated
instrument or other writing.
At a general level, the committee has scrutiny concerns where provisions in a
bill allow the incorporation of legislative provisions
by reference to other
documents because such an approach:
• raises the prospect of changes being made to the law in the absence
of parliamentary scrutiny;
• can create uncertainty in the law; and
• means that those obliged to obey the law may have inadequate access
to its terms (in particular, the committee will be concerned
where relevant
information is not publicly available or is available only if a fee is
The explanatory memorandum provides no reason for the need for this
provision, nor does it indicate whether any such standards will
be publicly and
freely available.
The committee therefore seeks the Minister’s advice as to:
why it is necessary to rely on material incorporated by reference
(including details about any measures taken to identify alternatives
incorporating material by reference and why such alternatives are not
appropriate in this instance); and
if the approach is still considered necessary:
how persons interested in, or likely to be affected by, any
changes will be notified or otherwise become aware of changes to the law;
whether a requirement specifying that any material incorporated
by reference must be freely and readily available can be included
Minister’s response - extract
The Committee sought the Minister’s advice as to why it is necessary to
rely on material incorporated by reference (including
details about any measures
taken to identify alternative to incorporating material by reference and why
such alternatives are not
appropriate in this instance) and if the approach is
still considered necessary:
• how persons interested in, or likely to be affected by, any changes
be notified or otherwise become aware of changes to the law; and
• whether a requirement specifying that any material incorporated by
reference must be freely available and readily available
can be included in the
Recent amendments to the ND Act implement the national licensing scheme
allowing the lawful cultivation in Australia of cannabis plants
for medicinal
and scientific purposes. This would enable a sustainable, high quality and safe
supply of locally grown and manufactured
medicinal cannabis products to
Australian patients.
Subsection 26B(1) of the ND Act authorises the Minister for Health to issue
standards for the purposes of the Act. The standards issued
under subsection
26B(1) are legislative instruments. Decisions under that Act, such as the
granting, suspension or revocation of
a licence (medicinal cannabis licence,
cannabis research licence and manufacture licence) would take into account
whether applicable
standards issued by the Minister under subsection 26B(l) have
been met, or will be met as the case requires. These decisions are
legislative in nature.
A reliable source of high quality and safe cannabis plants, cannabis and
cannabis resins for the manufacture of medicinal cannabis
products for supply to
patients in Australia is crucial for the success of the Australian medicinal
cannabis framework. As the ultimate
products are to be used for pharmaceutical
and medical research, the overall process involving cultivation, production and
manufacture
of drugs derived from cannabis plants must be carried out to produce
a product of acceptable pharmaceutical quality and safety standards
Suitable collection, cultivation, harvesting, drying, fragmentation and
storage conditions are essential to the quality of the dried
cannabis products.
They must be free from impurities, such as soil, dust, dirt, and other
contaminants (such as fungal, insect, bacterial
contamination and other animal
contamination). The dried cannabis products must also comply with requirements
for pesticide residues,
heavy metals content, aflatoxin content and microbial
contamination. Most of these standards and requirements are set out in
Pharmacopoeial
Monographs such as the European Pharmacopeia and British
Pharmacopeia. These Pharmacopoeias are amended from time to time.
In addition to pharmaceutical quality and safety standards in relation to
medicinal cannabis products derived from cannabis plants,
standards relating to
security of the premises, packaging and transport may also be relevant to ensure
that any storage, or movement
or cannabis plants, cannabis, cannabis resins,
drugs and narcotic preparations are protected from unauthorised access and to
diversion risks for illicit purposes.
The allowance for the Ministerial standards to refer to other documents or
instruments is therefore appropriate where the standard
seeks to apply
specifications or restrictions for a given activity or product in relation to
cannabis that are applicable to similar
activities or products overseas. It will
be appropriate to the emerging industry to comply with these international
standards as
the end products are for therapeutic use and that any inferior or
poor quality products should be not be supplied to patients. Allowing
such references and standards as they change from time to time ensures that
Australia’s regulatory framework in
the cultivation, production and the
manufacture of medicinal cannabis products from cannabis plants remain in step
or is comparable
with other pharmaceutical products internationally. This will
also provide export opportunities for the industry in the future if
medicinal cannabis products manufactured in Australia are of high quality and
comply with overseas regulatory standards.
International standards and Pharmacopeias are not freely available. Any
access or copying requires copyright licensing from the owners
instruments, including for the use by Commonwealth Departments and agencies.
While the provision appears to be very wide in its application, the number
and extent of documents that will be included in the issuing
of standards will
be limited and be mostly in relation to Pharmacopoeial monographs and Australian
and international standards. In
addition, before a standard is finalised and as
part of the requirement for consultation under the
Legislation Act 2003
proposal will undergo consultation with the industry and other relevant
stakeholders to ensure that the industry is informed
and provided time to adhere
to the relevant standards proposed to be issued. Any changes to the referenced
material will be communicated
to industry to ensure that they become aware and
are able to get ready to comply with any amendments to the incorporated
instrument.
As the standards to be issued by the Minister under subsection 26B(1) is a
legislative instrument, the instrument is required to be
tabled in Parliament
after registration, and undergo Parliamentary scrutiny.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Minister for this detailed response.
The committee notes the Minister’s advice that the ‘cultivation,
production and manufacture of drugs derived from cannabis
plants must be carried
out to produce a product of acceptable pharmaceutical quality and safety
standards like any medicine’
and that ‘most of these standards and
requirements are set out in Pharmacopoeial Monographs such as the European
Pharmacopeia
and British Pharmacopeia’ which are amended from time to
time. The committee also notes the Minister’s advice that
‘international
standards and Pharmacopeias are not freely available’
and that ‘any access or copying requires copyright licensing from
owners of these instruments, including for the use by Commonwealth Departments
and agencies’.
While the committee understands the need to ensure that medicinal cannabis
products conform with pharmaceutical quality and safety
standards, the committee
takes this opportunity to reiterate its scrutiny concerns in relation to
provisions such as proposed subsection
26B(2) which allow the incorporation of
legislative provisions by reference to other documents. In particular, the
committee will
be concerned where incorporated information is not publicly
available or is available only if a fee is paid as persons interested
affected by the law may have inadequate access to its terms.
A fundamental principle of the rule of the law is that every person subject
to the law should be able to freely and readily access
its terms. The issue of
access to material incorporated into the law by reference to external documents
such as Australian and international
standards has been an issue of ongoing
concern to Australian parliamentary scrutiny committees. Most recently, the
Joint Standing
Committee on Delegated Legislation of the Western Australian
Parliament has published a detailed report on this issue:
Australian Standards Adopted in Delegated Legislation
(June 2016). This
report comprehensively outlines the significant scrutiny concerns associated
with the incorporation of material
by reference, particularly where the
incorporated material is not freely available. The committee draws this report
to the attention
of Senators as the matters raised are relevant to all
Australian jurisdictions.
The committee also takes this opportunity to highlight the expectations of
the Senate Standing Committee on Regulations and Ordinances
that delegated
legislation which applies, adopts or incorporates any matter contained in an
instrument or other writing should:
- clearly state the manner in which the documents are incorporated—that
is, whether the material is being incorporated as in
force or existing from time
to time or as in force or existing at the commencement of the legislative
instrument. This enables persons
interested in or affected by the instrument to
understand its operation without the need to rely on specialist legal knowledge
advice, or consult extrinsic material (see also
Legislation Act 2003
- contain a description of the documents and indicate how they may be
obtained (see paragraph 15J(2)(c) of the
Legislation Act 2003
The committee requests that the key information provided by the Minister
be included in the explanatory memorandum, noting the importance
documents as a point of access to understanding the law and, if needed, as
extrinsic material to assist with interpretation
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Noting the above comments, the committee also requests the
Minister’s further advice as to whether material incorporated by
under proposed subsection 26B(2) can be made available to persons interested in
or affected by the law.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (123 KB)
PDF format (226 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter