URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBAD/2016/214.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:12:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hazardous Waste (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Amendment Bill 2016 [2016] AUSStaCSBAD 214 (30 November 2016)
Hazardous Waste (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Amendment Bill 2016
Parliamentary scrutiny—removing requirement for particulars to be specified in the regulations
Schedule 1, item 4, proposed new subsection 18A(2)
Delegation of legislative power—setting level of fee by regulation
Schedule 1, item 6, subsection 32(1)
Delegation of legislative power—indexation of fee by regulation
Schedule 1, item 7, proposed new subsection 32(7)
Insufficiently defined administrative power—delegation of administrative powers
Schedule 1, item 14, section 60
Parliamentary scrutiny—removing Convention text from the Act
Schedule 1, item 17
Hazardous Waste (Regulation of Exports and Imports)
Amendment Bill 2016
This bill seeks to:
• allow for cost recovery for permitting activities under the
Hazardous Waste (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Act 1989
• make a number of administrative amendments
Environment and Energy
House of Representatives on 24 November 2016
Parliamentary scrutiny—removing requirement for
particulars to be specified in the
regulations
Schedule 1, item 4, proposed new
subsection 18A(2)
Under current provisions the particulars of an export application must be
specified in the regulations before a decision can be made
to grant a Basel
export permit for final disposal of hazardous waste in exceptional
circumstances. This item seeks to remove this
requirement. Removing this
precondition to the grant of a permit has the potential to reduce parliamentary
scrutiny because currently
any amendment to the regulations is subject to
disallowance by either House of Parliament.
The explanatory memorandum (at p. 6) states that the current provisions have
the potential to impose unnecessary delays on business
and removing this
requirement will therefore reduce potential delays for industry. Furthermore,
the explanatory memorandum suggests
that the intent of the current provision was
largely to ensure that particulars of an application are clearly set out prior
grant of a permit (to ensure that the public is made aware of the details
of an application) and that this intent is achieved by
the requirement in
for particulars of applications to be published in the
Commonwealth Gazette
(item 9 of this bill would enable this information
to be published on the Department’s website rather than in the
In light of the detailed explanation provided, the committee leaves the
question of the appropriateness of removing the requirement
to specify the
particulars of an export application in the regulations to the Senate as a
The committee draws Senators’ attention to the provision, as it may
be considered to insufficiently subject the exercise of
legislative power to
parliamentary scrutiny, in breach of principle 1(a)(v) of the committee’s
terms of reference.
Delegation of legislative
power—setting level of fee by
Schedule 1, item 6, subsection
Item 6 will remove the current $8000 cap on the fee amount that may be
prescribed under the regulations for permit applications for
the export, import
and transit of hazardous waste.
The explanatory memorandum (at pp 6–7) states that the amendment will
allow the permit fees to be adjusted to reflect the costs
incurred by the
department in assessing permit applications and that removing the cap will allow
the fee to be fully cost recovered
in the future.
The committee notes this explanation that the intention of the amendment is
to allow a level of fee to be set that is linked to cost
recovery. However, the
committee notes that there is no limit on the amount of fee that may be
prescribed on the face of the bill.
As the setting of the amount of fees is a significant matter, the
committee seeks the Minister’s advice as to whether the bill
amended to provide greater legislative guidance as to how the fee amount is to
be determined and/or to limit the fee that
may be imposed.
In this regard, the committee notes that a higher cap could be introduced
rather than simply removing the $8000 cap altogether. For
example, the committee
notes that there is statutory cap on the amount of levy able to be imposed on
permit applications in paragraph
9(1)(b) of the related
Hazardous Waste
(Regulation of Exports and Imports) Levy Bill 2016
, and seeks the
Minister’s advice as to why a similar approach cannot be adopted in
relation to placing a limit on the permit
Pending the Minister’s reply, the committee draws Senators’
attention to the provision, as it may be considered to delegate
legislative
powers inappropriately, in breach of principle 1(a)(iv) of the committee’s
terms of reference.
Delegation of legislative power—indexation of
fee by regulation
Schedule 1, item 7, proposed
new subsection 32(7)
Item 7 proposes to insert a new subsection 32(7) which will allow the fees
referred to above to be indexed by a method prescribed
in the regulations.
The explanatory memorandum (at p. 7) states that the annual indexation of the
application fees will be based on the Consumer Price
Index (CPI) to ensure that
fees remain up to date. However, there is no guidance in relation to the method
of indexation to be used
on the face of the bill.
As different methods of indexation can result in different rates of
increase in the level of fees, the committee seeks the Minister’s
as to whether the bill can be amended to specify the method of indexation to be
In this regard, the committee notes that subclauses 9(2)–(7) of the
Hazardous Waste (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Levy Bill 2016
provide a statutory basis for calculating indexation by CPI in relation to the
levy on permit applications and seeks advice as to
why a similar approach cannot
be adopted in relation to the indexation of the permit fee.
Pending the Minister’s reply, the committee draws Senators’
attention to the provision, as it may be considered to delegate
legislative
powers inappropriately, in breach of principle 1(a)(iv) of the committee’s
terms of reference.
Insufficiently defined administrative
power—delegation of administrative
Schedule 1, item 14, section
Item 14 of the bill seeks to amend section 60 so that the Minister may
delegate any or all of the Minister’s functions and powers
under the Act
to an Australian Public Service employee who holds, or is acting in, an
Executive Level 2 position in the Department.
As such, Executive Level 2
officers will be able to exercise all of the Minister’s functions and
powers under the Act (previously
this delegation was limited to the Secretary
and Senior Executive Service (SES) employees). In addition, item 14 also seeks
a new subsection 60(2) which provides that in performing functions or
exercising powers under a delegation the delegate must comply
directions of the Minister. The explanatory memorandum (at p. 8) states that the
purpose of this provision is to allow the
Minister to direct an Executive Level
2 employee that they may only exercise decision-making powers in relation to
certain types
of decisions.
The committee has consistently drawn attention to legislation that allows
delegations to a relatively large class of persons. Generally,
the committee
prefers to see a limit set either on the scope of powers that might be
delegated, or on the categories of people to
whom those powers might be
delegated. While this provision does limit the category of people to Executive
Level 2 officers in the
department, the committee’s preference is that
delegates be confined to the holders of nominated offices or to members of the
Senior Executive Service.
The committee notes that the explanatory memorandum (at p. 9) states that the
rationale for broadening the category of persons to
whom the Minister’s
powers and functions under the Act may be delegated is to ‘ensure that
permit processing and decisions
can be made more efficiently and effectively,
and reduce any delay costs to business’.
While the committee notes this explanation, the desire for administrative
efficiency may not, of itself, be a sufficient justification
for delegating
administrative powers to a broad range of people. The committee notes that the
rationale for proposed new section
60(2) in the explanatory memorandum seems to
indicate that it may be possible to limit the decision-making powers of
Executive Level
2 officers to certain types of decisions.
The committee therefore seeks the Minister’s advice as to whether a
limitation on the categories of powers and functions that
may be exercised by
Executive Level 2 officials can be included on the face of the bill.
Pending the Minister’s reply, the committee draws Senators’
attention to the provision, as it may be considered to make
rights, liberties or
obligations unduly dependent upon insufficiently defined administrative powers,
in breach of principle 1(a)(ii)
of the committee’s terms of
Parliamentary scrutiny—removing Convention text
from the Act
Schedule 1, item 17
This item repeals the Schedule to the
Waste (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Act 1989
(the HW Act) so that a
copy of the full English text of the
Basel Convention on the Control of
Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal
Convention) is no longer scheduled to the Act.
The committee previously commented on a provision in the
Omnibus Repeal Day
(Spring 2014) Bill 2014
which sought to implement this change (see pages
96–98 of the committee’s
First Report of 2015
). At that time
the committee noted that under the current provisions, where the text of the
Basel Convention changes it is necessary
for a regulation, which can be
disallowed by either House of the Parliament, to be made under subsection 62(2)
of the HW Act. Removing
this process may therefore be said to have the potential
to impact on parliamentary scrutiny. It may also make the terms of the law
accessible given that readers of the legislation would be directed to another
source (the AustLII website—which may not
be permanently available) to
access the full terms of the Convention.
The committee sought the then Parliamentary Secretary’s advice in
relation to how often it has been necessary to update the
text of the Basel
Convention using the mechanism in subsection 62(2). The committee also sought
advice as to the original rationale
for providing that the text of the
Convention be included as a Schedule to the Act (rather than providing a
reference to the Convention
as is proposed in this bill).
The then Parliamentary Secretary advised the committee that:
Regulations amending the text of the Schedule to the Hazardous Waste Act have
been made three times, although this is not as often
as amendments have been
made to the Basel Convention. This discrepancy is a result of the resources
required and process involved
to make a legislative instrument to amend the
Schedule to the Hazardous Waste Act, which has meant that the Schedule no longer
with the current text of the Basel Convention.
The text of the Basel Convention was set out in a Schedule to the Hazardous
Waste Act, as part of a suite of amendments made by the
Hazardous Waste
(Regulation of Exports and Imports) Amendment Bill 1995
. The explanatory
memorandum gives the rationale that inclusion of the Convention text enables
convenient reference and transparency
by eliminating the need for the reader to
refer to another source. It was also considered common practice in legislation
implementing
international Conventions.
However, as noted the inclusion of the text of the Basel Convention adds
unnecessary length to the Hazardous Waste Act. In addition,
making regulations
to update the text is resource intensive in practice, and as these resources are
not always available, the Schedule
is currently out of date. As a result, the
current arrangement has not provided greater transparency or convenience to the
than that which is provided through other sources. The proposed
amendment would refer the reader to the Australian Treaties Library
which receives financial funding and provision
of content by the Department of
Foreign Affairs and Trade.
The proposed amendment would not impact on parliamentary scrutiny, as
Australia’s consent to any change to the text of the Basel
would continue to be considered by the Joint Standing Committee on Treaties.
In light of the detailed explanation previously provided to the committee,
the committee leaves the question of the appropriateness
of removing the text of
the Basel Convention from the
Hazardous Waste (Regulation of Exports and
Imports) Act 1989
to the Senate as a whole.
The committee draws Senators’ attention to the provision, as it may
be considered to insufficiently subject the exercise of
legislative power to
parliamentary scrutiny, in breach of principle 1(a)(v) of the committee’s
terms of reference.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (79.9 KB)
PDF format (128 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter