URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBSD/2025/79.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:14:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Legislation Amendment (Improved Medicare Integrity and Other Measures) Bill 2025 - Commentary on Ministerial Responses [2025] AUSStaCSBSD 79 (29 October 2025)
Health Legislation Amendment (Improved Medicare Integrity and Other Measures) Bill 2025346
Abrogation of privilege against self-incrimination347
Minister for Health and Aged Care response352
Committee comment
Strict liability offences354
Minister for Health and Aged Care response360
Committee comment
Broad delegation of administrative powers361
Minister for Health and Aged Care response 365
Committee comment
Health Legislation
Amendment (Improved Medicare Integrity and Other Measures) Bill
Health Legislation Amendment (Improved Medicare Integrity and Other
Measures) Bill 2025
seeks to amend the
Health Insurance Act 1973
National Health Act 1953
Human Services (Medicare) Act 1973
Dental Benefits Act 2008
Therapeutic Goods Act 1989
Public Health (Tobacco and Other Products) Act 2023
to implement
a number of public health measures.
Health, Disability and Ageing
Senate on 23 July 2025
Bill status
Received Royal Assent on 4 September 2025
Abrogation of privilege against
self-incrimination
Section 106ZPQ
Health Insurance Act 1973
abrogates the privilege against self-incrimination by providing that persons are
not entitled to refuse to produce documents
on the grounds that production of
documents might tend to incriminate them. A person may be required under the
Health Insurance Act
to produce information or documents as part of a review
into the provision of services involving a Medicare or dental benefit.
2.18 However, use and derivative use immunity is applicable in relation to
documents and information obtained except for proceedings
for an offence of
providing false or misleading documents. A use immunity provides that
information or documents produced are not
admissible in evidence in most
proceedings. By contrast, a derivative use immunity provides that anything
obtained as a direct, or
indirect, consequence of the information or documents
is not admissible in most proceedings.
2.19 Item 19 of Schedule 1, amendment (2) sought to amend this provision to
limit when and how the existing use and derivative use
immunities would apply.
The intended effect of this amendment would be to make any information, document
or other material obtained
under this provision able to be admitted as evidence
in the following proceedings:
• for offences for failing to produce documents or give information or
for producing false or misleading documents;
• before a Committee or the Determining Authority;
• to recover an amount that is recoverable as a debt to the
Commonwealth or otherwise required to be repaid to the Commonwealth;
• any other proceedings in relation to compliance with a requirement
Health Insurance
2.20 In addition, item 20 of amendment (2) sought to provide circumstances
when information and certain derivative materials would
be admissible as
evidence in the proceedings listed above. These circumstances include where
information, documents or other material
is obtained by an appropriate person or
body (as prescribed by the regulations) under
sections 106XA
Health Insurance Act
for proceedings that are for the purposes of the Health
Practitioner National Law.
Derivative materials may also be admissible in proceedings even if they are not
obtained by compulsion under the relevant sections
Health Insurance Act
but were the result of the production of documents under those sections and are
obtained by an appropriate person or
Scrutiny Digest 4 of 2025
, the committee requested the
minister’s advice as to:
• why it is necessary and appropriate that the exceptions to the
application of use and derivative use immunities be expanded
to include any
proceedings in relation to compliance with a requirement under
Health Insurance Act 1973
(noting this can include criminal
proceedings);
• why it is necessary and appropriate that derivative use immunity not
apply to documents that are obtained by regulatory bodies
or other appropriate
persons under
sections 106XA
Health Insurance Act 1973
allowing these documents or information to be admissible as evidence in certain
proceedings; and
• whether the Criminal Justice Division of the Attorney-General’s
Department has been consulted in relation to this
Minister for Health and Aged Care
2.22 In relation to the proposed expansion of exceptions to use and
derivative use immunity under
Health Insurance Act 1973
the Minister for Health and Aged Care advised that the amendment is intended to
permit the use of such information in proceedings
concerning registration under
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
. The minister further
stated that it is appropriate for information obtained for the purpose of a
Professional Services Review (PSR)
director’s review or a PSR
committee’s inquiry to be admissible in proceedings that support or relate
to those processes.
2.23 The minister advised that one of the key circumstances that can lead to
a practitioner being referred to the Australian Health
Practitioner Regulation
Agency or a relevant Health Practitioner Board under
sections 106XA
Health Insurance Act
is when a PSR Director, committee, or determining
authority identifies either:
• a serious risk to a person’s life or health, or
• a failure to comply with professional standards.
2.24 The minister noted that the inability to admit such information in
regulatory proceedings would frustrate the purpose of referring
such relevant
information to such regulatory bodies and thereby may elevate risks of harm to
patients. The minister advised that
the amendments are therefore directed at
protecting the public interest in ensuring patient safety in health
2.25 The minister’s response further noted that the amendments are
consistent with the Attorney-General’s Department’s
Framing Commonwealth Offences, Infringement Notices and Enforcement Powers
and that the Criminal Justice Division of the Attorney-General’s
Department was consulted and consider the proposed measures
appear reasonable
and targeted towards a legitimate policy aim.
Committee comment
2.26 The committee thanks the minister for this response.
2.27 The committee acknowledges the minister’s advice regarding the
public interest in abrogating the privilege against self-incrimination
relation to information, documents or other things obtained by appropriate
persons or bodies for the purposes of the Health Practitioner
National Law. In particular, the committee notes the minister’s advice
that material relevant to a significant risk
to life or health or a
practitioner’s non-compliance with their professional standards
–including information that has
been compelled by the PSR Director or a
PSR committee
– should be
made admissible in regulatory proceedings about the registration of a health
practitioner who has been the subject
of PSR review given that they support, or
relate to, those PSR processes.
2.28 The committee also acknowledges the minister’s advice that the
proposed abrogation is limited to specific proceedings relevant
to the integrity
of the PSR process and health practitioner regulation. It is also noted that the
Criminal Justice Division of the
Attorney-General’s Department was
consulted in the development of these amendments.
2.29 The committee reiterates that the privilege against self-incrimination
is a fundamental common law right and that any abrogation
of that right
represents a significant loss to personal liberty and the presumption of
innocence. The committee continues to expect
that the explanatory memorandum for
a bill will address in detail the circumstances that would justify the
abrogation of both use
and derivative use immunities with respect to particular
proceedings. The committee notes that had further information been included
the explanatory memorandum the committee may not have needed to correspond with
the minister on this matter.
2.30 In light of the fact that the bill has now passed both Houses of
Parliament, the committee makes no further comment.
Strict liability
Therapeutic Goods Act 1989
(TG Act) currently provides for a
number of offences, which the bill sought to consolidate into a set of tiered
offences in proposed
These offences include
doing an act or omitting to do an act that breaches a condition of an exemption,
approval or authority granted
under various sections of the TG Act. The first
‘tier’ is where the act or omission has resulted in, will result in
is likely to result in harm or injury to any person. The maximum penalty for
this tier is imprisonment for 5 years or 4000 penalty
The second tier captures
fault-based offences with the same conduct that do not result in harm or injury
and carries a maximum penalty
of 12 months imprisonment or 1000 penalty units or
The third tier is in
relation to the same conduct but creates strict liability offences with a
maximum penalty of 100 penalty
Scrutiny Digest 4 of 2025
, the committee drew its scrutiny
concerns to the attention of senators and left to the senate as a whole the
appropriateness of the
strict liability offence under proposed subsection
32CP(3) of the bill carrying a maximum penalty of 100 penalty units (which is
inconsistent with the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Minister for Health and Aged Care
2.33 The minister noted that while the proposed penalty of 100 penalty units
exceeded the threshold for strict liability offences,
this is justified by the
heightened risk to public health arising from unlawful dealings with biologicals
that are not included in
the Australian Register of Therapeutic Goods. Indeed,
the seriousness of the conduct is such that, if prosecuted under the fault-based
offence in subsection 32CP(2), a significantly higher penalty (including a
significant term of imprisonment) could apply.
2.34 The minister also stated that the penalty is consistent with existing
penalties for breaching a condition of an exemption, approval,
or authority to
access medicines and medical devices as outlined in subsections 22(7AA) and
Committee comment
2.35 The committee thanks the minister for the additional advice and
information in relation to this provision, including comparable
penalties for
similar offences.
2.36 In light of the fact that the bill has now passed both Houses of
Parliament, the committee makes no further comment.
Broad delegation of administrative
2.37 The TG Act currently provides that the Secretary can delegate specified
powers and functions under the TG Act to state and territory
The bill seeks to
amend this provision of the TG Act to expand the powers that may be delegated.
These include powers in relation
to requiring information or documents,
inspecting and copying documents and retaining
Scrutiny Digest 4 of 2025
, the committee requested the
minister’s advice as to whether the amendments to subsection 57(1A) of the
TG Act proposed in
the bill could be amended to either:
• limit the persons to whom the powers to require a person to provide
information or documents (section 45AB), inspect or copy
such information or
documents (section 45AF) or retain such information or documents (section 45AG)
can be delegated, such as to
senior investigating officers or to specified
persons of sufficient seniority in state and territory departments and offices;
• provide that the Secretary may only delegate the specified powers to
the heads of relevant departments or agencies and that
those heads may only
subdelegate when satisfied the subdelegate possesses the appropriate skills,
qualification or experience to
exercise the powers or to perform the
Minister for Health and Aged Care
2.39 In relation to the committee’s enquiry as to constraining the
Secretary’s power to delegate specified powers and
functions under the TG
Act, the minister’s response advised that the delegation framework is
designed to support a nationally
consistent and effective enforcement approach
under the federal cooperative scheme for regulating therapeutic and vaping goods
relies on close collaboration between the Commonwealth and state and
territory governments, including in relation to shared enforcement
responsibilities across jurisdictions.
2.40 The minister’s advice noted that the ability to delegate powers,
including those under sections 45AB, 45AF, and 45AG, to
a range of appropriately
qualified state and territory officers is essential to ensuring timely,
effective and nationally consistent
enforcement. The minister further advised
that restricting delegations to senior officials or requiring sub-delegation
would significantly limit the practical operation of the scheme and
could delay or prevent timely evidence gathering and enforcement
undermining public health objectives.
2.41 The minister’s response highlighted that the Therapeutic Goods
Administration (TGA) monitors the exercise of delegated
powers and can issue
binding directions, or withdraw delegations, if necessary. Further, it noted
that sub-delegation is not supported
under the cooperative scheme, as some
of the TG Act. Sub-delegation would therefore be legally ineffective
in such jurisdictions, and inconsistent with the national framework.
Committee comment
2.42 The committee thanks the Minister for Health and Aged Care for this
response and acknowledges that similar information was provided
in relation to
Health Legislation Amendment (Improved Medicare Integrity and Other
Measures) Bill 2024
. The committee appreciates the minister’s advice as to
why flexibility is desirable with respect to the delegation of the
secretary’s
powers to state and territory officials without limitations on
the seniority of the official. In particular, it is noted that delegation
powers to lower levels of seniority may be required where there is an
operational need, to ensure effective enforcement of regulations
accommodate titles and position levels for differing state and territory
2.43 The committee also notes the minister’s advice that delegations
made by the Secretary are only conferred on officers who
are actively involved
in compliance and enforcement and who have appropriate training and experience.
The committee also acknowledges
the minister’s advice that the TGA is
well-equipped to advise on the classes of persons to whom delegations in states
and territories
would be appropriate and that the TGA monitors the exercise of
delegated powers, which it may address by issuing binding directions
withdrawing delegations where necessary.
2.44 In light of the fact that the bill has now passed both Houses of
Parliament, the committee makes no further comment.
This entry can be cited as:
Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Health Legislation
Amendment (Improved Medicare Integrity and Other Measures) Bill 2025
Scrutiny Digest 6 of 2025
; [2025] AUSStaCSBSD 79.
Amendment (2) items 19 and
20, government sheet [FL102]. The committee draws senators’ attention to
these provisions pursuant
to Senate standing order 24(1)(a)(i).
Amendment (2), item 19,
proposed subsection 106ZPQ(2).
Amendment (2), item 20,
proposed subsection 106ZPQ(3).
Amendment (2), item 20,
proposed subsection 106ZPQ(4).
Senate Scrutiny of Bills
Digest 4 of 2025
(27 August 2025), pp. 40–43.
The minister responded to
the committee’s comments in a letter dated 10 September 2025. A copy of
the letter is available
on the committee’s
(see correspondence included with the committee’s assessment of this
Health Insurance Act
subsections 89B(2)
Schedule 2, item 78,
proposed section 32CP. The committee draws senators’ attention to this
provision pursuant to Senate standing
order 24(1)(a)(i).
Proposed section 32CP.
Proposed subsection
Proposed subsection
Proposed subsection
Senate Scrutiny of Bills
Digest 4 of 2025
(27 August 2025), pp. 44–45.
The minister responded to
the committee’s comments in a letter dated 10 September 2025. A copy of
the letter is available
on the committee’s
(see correspondence included with the committee’s assessment of this
Schedule 2, item 51,
subsection 57(1A).
The committee draws senators’ attention to
this provision pursuant to Senate standing order 24(1)(a)(ii).
Therapeutic Goods Act
subsection 57(1A).
Senate Scrutiny of Bills
Digest 4 of 2025
(27 August 2025), pp. 45–47
The minister responded to
the committee’s comments in a letter dated 10 September 2025. A copy of
the letter is available
on the committee’s
(see correspondence included with the committee’s assessment of this
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (129 KB)
PDF format (137 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter