URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBRp/2016/70.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:13:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Trespass on personal rights and freedoms—reversal of evidential burden of proof
Schedule 1, item 5, proposed subsections 16D(2)–(5), 16E(3)–(6)
Reversal of evidential burden of proof
Rights and liberties unduly dependent on insufficiently defined administrative powers—breadth of discretion to exempt
Schedule 1, item 5, proposed section 16G
Breadth of discretion to exempt—proposed section 16G
Trespass on personal rights and freedoms—retrospective application
Schedule 1, item 5
Retrospective application
This bill seeks to
to introduce
prohibitions on the re-identification of de-identified information and
disclosure of re-identified information
Attorney-General
Senate on 12 October 2016
The committee dealt with this bill in
Alert Digest No. 8 of 2016
Attorney-General responded to the committee’s comments in a letter dated
23 November 2016. A copy of the letter is attached
to this report.
Alert Digest No. 8 of 2016 - extract
Trespass on personal rights and
freedoms—reversal of evidential burden of
Schedule 1, item 5, proposed subsections
16D(2)–(5), 16E(3)–(6)
These provisions provide for various defences to offences for re-identifying
de-identified personal information and the disclosure
of re-identified
information. The defences require an accused entity to demonstrate that their
behaviour is consistent with relevant
defences, namely that:
• The entity is an agency and either the act was done in connection
with performing the agency’s functions or activities
or the agency was
required or authorised to do the act under Australian law or court order;
• The entity was a contracted service provider for a Commonwealth
contract to provide services for a responsible agency and
the act was done for
the purposes of meeting (directly or indirectly) an obligation under the
• The entity has entered into an agreement with the responsible agency
to perform functions or activities on behalf of the agency,
and the act was done
in accordance with the agreement; or
• The entity is an exempt entity for the purposes of a determination in
force under section 16G and the act was done for a purpose
specified in the
determination and in compliance with any conditions specified in the
determination.
The statement of compatibility contains a detailed explanation for placing an
evidential burden on defendants in relation to the matters
in the various
defences (p. 8):
However, for each of the three defences it is expected that each limb of the
defence will not be unreasonably difficult for an entity
to prove. That is, it
is expected that it will not be unreasonably difficult for an entity to
demonstrate that it is a contracted
service provider for a Commonwealth contract
to a responsible agency, has entered into an agreement to perform functions or
on behalf of a responsible agency, or is an exempt entity for the
purpose of a determination in force under section 16G. It follows
that, given a
Commonwealth contract, agreement to perform functions or activities on behalf of
an agency or a determination under
section 16G would all be expected to be
focused on achieving specific outcomes, it should not be unreasonably difficult
for an entity
to prove that the act falling under the defence was done for
purposes of achieving those outcomes. This also reflects the seriousness
conduct that is otherwise prohibited under section 16D, 16E or 16F, where the
above defences do not apply.
Given the nature of these defences, it is expected that prosecutions will not
proceed where it is clear to authorities that the entity
will be able to rely on
an applicable defence during the proceedings.
For these reasons the reverse burden offences contained in the Bill are a
reasonable and appropriate response to the behaviours the
penalties are intended
to discourage.
In general, the committee has accepted that a reversal of the burden of proof
is justified only where it can be argued that the defence
might be said to be
peculiarly within the knowledge of the defendant and/or where a particular
matter would be extremely difficult
or expensive for the prosecution to prove
whereas it could be readily and cheaply provided by the accused. In approaching
this question
it appears that the statement of compatibility has applied a less
exacting standard, namely, to ask whether it would be unreasonably
difficult for
an accused to prove a particular matter.
Therefore, the committee seeks a further justification from the
Attorney-General as to the appropriateness of reversing the burden
of proof and
asks that the Attorney General’s advice specifically addresses the
principles set out in the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences,
Infringement Notices and Enforcement Powers
(at pp 50-52).
Attorney-General’s response - extract
Reversal of evidential burden of proof
As the Committee has noted, the Bill provides for various exceptions to the
offences for
re-identifying de-identified personal information (subsections 16D(2) to (5))
and disclosing re-identified information (subsections
16E(3) to (6)). An accused
entity bears the evidential burden for each of these exceptions, which reverses
the criminal law principle
that the prosecution must prove every element of the
This reversal is justified on the basis that an accused entity is in the best
position to discharge the burden of proof for these
exceptions. This is because
knowledge of, for example, an agency’s functions or activities, the terms
of a contract for services
or the existence of an agreement to perform specific
functions will generally be peculiarly within the knowledge of the defendant.
This is particularly the case where a contract or agreement between an entity
and Commonwealth agency is not publicly available.
It would therefore be
significantly more difficult and costly for the prosecution to prove that the
exception did not apply, as it
would require the prosecution to first enquire
and establish whether such a contract or agreement exists and, if so, then
that the conduct was not consistent with that contract or agreement.
By contrast, this information would be readily and cheaply available
accused entity: I therefore consider this reversal of evidential burden of proof
to be consistent with the principles set
Guide to Framing
Commonwealth Offences, Infringement Notices and Enforcement Powers.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Attorney-General for this response.
The committee notes the Attorney-General’s advice that the relevant
matters will be peculiarly within the knowledge of the defendant,
particularly
where a contract or agreement between an entity and Commonwealth agency is not
publicly available. The advice states
that in such cases it would be
‘significantly more difficult and costly for the prosecution to prove that
the exception did
not apply, as it would require the prosecution to first
enquire and establish whether such a contract or agreement exists’,
that such information would be readily and cheaply available from the accused
The committee notes that the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences,
Infringement Notices and Enforcement Powers
that the fact that it is difficult for the prosecution to prove a particular
matter has not traditionally been considered in
itself a sound justification for
placing a burden of proof on a defendant (p. 50).
In this case, it is not apparent to the committee that it would be
particularly onerous for the prosecution to prove the existence
of an agreement
or contract with the Commonwealth, given there does not seem to be any
impediment on the Commonwealth supplying evidence
of that agreement or contract
to the prosecution. It is also not apparent, on the information provided to the
committee, that such
matters would be
within the knowledge of
the defendant.
As such, it appears that the reversals of the evidential
burden of proof in proposed subsections 16D(2)–(5) and 16E(3)–(6)
may not be framed in accordance with the relevant principles set out in the
The committee requests that the key information provided by the
Attorney-General be included in the explanatory memorandum, noting
importance of these documents as a point of access to understanding the law and,
if needed, as extrinsic material to assist with
interpretation (see
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
The committee draws its scrutiny concerns to the attention of Senators and
leaves the appropriateness of the reversal of the evidential
burden of proof to
the consideration of the Senate as a whole.
Alert Digest No. 8 of 2016 - extract
Rights and liberties unduly dependent on
insufficiently defined administrative powers—breadth of discretion to
Schedule 1, item 5, proposed section
Proposed section 16G provides a power for the Minister to determine that an
entity or an entity included in a class of entities is
exempt for the purposes
of the criminal and civil penalty provisions relating to the re-identification
of personal information and
its use. The explanatory memorandum (at p. 26)
indicates that the purpose of the power:
...is to provide a mechanism by which entities engaging in valuable research
in areas such a testing the effectiveness of de-identification
techniques,
cryptology or information security...can be granted an exemption from sections
16D, 16E or 16F so that this legitimate
research may continue’.
The power to make an exemption is to be exercised on the basis of a single
criterion, namely, whether the Minister is satisfied it
is in the public
interest to exercise the power. The need for such a broad power of exemption may
indicate that the offence and civil
penalty provisions have been drawn too
broadly. In general, the committee considers that it is appropriate that
Parliament define
the boundaries of criminal wrong-doing rather than leaving
these boundaries to be depend (even in part) on executive decision-making.
The committee seeks further justification from the Attorney-General as to the
breadth of this discretionary power and whether consideration
has been given to
whether it is possible to more narrowly define the offence and civil penalty
provisions so that research which
is in the public interest is less likely to
fall within them.
Attorney-General’s response - extract
Breadth of discretion to exempt—proposed
It is my view that the offence and civil penalty provisions in sections 16D,
16E and 16F of the Bill are appropriate and narrowly
defined as currently
The offence for re-identification in section 16D only applies to intentional
re-identification of personal information. That is, the
entity must have done an
act with the specific intention of re-identifying the dataset. Unintentional
re-identification that occurs
by-product of other public interest research using a government dataset, for
example through data matching, would not constitute an
offence under section
16D. While the offence for disclosure in section 16E applies to information
which is intentionally or unintentionally
re-identified, the offence itself is
confined to the intentional disclosure of re-identified information only.
Merely disclosing that a de-identified dataset published by Government could
re-identified, or speculating about the possibility of re-identification,
would therefore not constitute an offence under section
16E. Similarly,
inadvertent disclosure of re-identified information where the entity is not
aware that the information is re-identified
would also not constitute an
offence. Further, it is difficult to envisage circumstances where the
prohibition against disclosure
of re-identified information in section 16E and
the obligation to notify the responsible agency of any re-identification under
16F would interfere with the ability to conduct research which is in the
public interest such that an exemption would be required.
I note that the provisions in the Bill do not apply to universities or any
other authorities established under State and Territory
legislation. This is
because the Privacy Act generally does not apply to State and Territory
authorities (see subsection 6C(1) of
the Privacy Act, which states that an
organisation for the purposes of the Privacy Act does not include a State or
Territory authority):
Under subsection 16CA(2) of the Bill this exemption also
applies to acts done in the course of employment or service by individuals
employed by, or engaged to provide services to, those exempt universities.
As the Committee has noted, section 16G of the Bill provides the Minister
with a general power to determine that a particular entity
or class of entities
is exempt from one or more of · sections 16D, 16E or 16F for particular
purposes if an exemption is in
the public interest. This is intended to provide
an appropriate balance between protecting the privacy of individuals and
for legitimate research to continue. Specific research purposes
involving cryptology, information security and data analysis are
identified in
paragraphs 16G(2)(a) to (c), and paragraph 16G(2)(d) provides a general ground
for any other purpose the Minister considers
appropriate. It is my expectation
that the predominant reason for an exemption determination under section 16G
will be in relation
to the specific research purposes involving cryptology,
information security and data analysis which is in the public interest. However,
the ability to grant exemptions for ‘any other purpose’ ensures
there is appropriate flexibility in the event that other
legitimate reasons to
grant exemptions arise in the future which are not currently contemplated.
In view of the narrow scope of the proposed offences noted above, I do not
expect there will be a large number of entities who will
need exemptions for
research in the public interest which requires the intentional re-identification
of de-identified personal information
published by a government agency. I am
therefore satisfied that the current breadth of the exemption in section 16G is
appropriate.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Attorney-General for this response.
The committee notes in particular the Attorney-General’s advice that
the general power for the Minister to exempt an entity
from the offence and
civil penalty provisions ‘is intended to provide an appropriate balance
between protecting the privacy
of individuals and allowing for legitimate
research to continue’. The committee also notes the
Attorney-General’s advice
that it is difficult to envisage circumstances
where the relevant provisions would interfere with the ability to conduct
which is in the public interest, such that an exemption would be
required. Further, the committee notes the Attorney-General’s
advice that
the ability to grant exemptions for ‘any other purpose’ ensures
there is appropriate flexibility. However,
the Attorney-General’s advice
does not address the committee’s comments that the need for the exemption
power indicates
that the offence provisions may have been drawn too broadly or
that the exemption is to be exercised on the basis of a single criterion,
that the Minister is satisfied it is in the public interest to exercise the
The committee reiterates its previous comments that, in general, the
committee considers that it is appropriate that Parliament define
the boundaries
of criminal wrong-doing rather than leaving these boundaries to depend (in part)
on executive decision-making.
The committee requests that the key information provided by the
Attorney-General be included in the explanatory memorandum, noting
importance of these documents as a point of access to understanding the law and,
if needed, as extrinsic material to assist with
interpretation (see
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
The committee draws its scrutiny concerns to the attention of Senators and
leaves the appropriateness of the broad ministerial discretion
entities to the consideration of the Senate as a whole.
Alert Digest No. 8 of 2016 - extract
Trespass on personal rights and
freedoms—retrospective application
Schedule 1, item 5
The proposed new offences relating to the re-identification of de-identified
information operate from 29 September 2016 (see proposed
paragraphs 16D(1)(c),
16E(1)(c), and 16F(1)(c)). This makes the offences retrospective. The statement
of compatibility contains the
following justification for this approach (p.
Retrospective offences challenge a key element of the rule of law —
that laws are capable of being known in advance so that
people subject to those
laws can exercise choice and order their affairs accordingly.
The Bill provides that new offences relating to the re-identification of
de-identified information operate from 29 September 2016.
The Government does
not propose to make these offences lightly.
The retrospective application of the offences is reasonable and necessary.
The Government has made it abundantly clear that it is
pursuing this course of
action. The Attorney‑General’s media release (‘Amendment to
the Privacy Act to further
protect de‑identified data’,
28 September 2016) states unequivocally that the offences will take effect
from the date
of announcement. Re-identification of de-identified information
and associated conduct undertaken before the announcement is not
prohibited by
This action is necessary because releases of private information can have
significant consequences for individuals beyond their privacy
and reputation,
which cannot be easily remedied. This warrants swift and decisive action by the
Government to prohibit such conduct.
Further, the retrospective commencement of
the offences creates a strong disincentive for entities to engage in such
conduct while
the Parliament considers the Bill.
The retrospective application of the offences is proportionate as it is for a
short time period, and steps have been taken to ensure
it is no more
retrospective than required. The Government has introduced this Bill in the
Parliament at the earliest available opportunity.
These measures in the Bill are consistent with the prohibition on
retrospective criminal laws.
The explanatory materials recognise that the retrospective application of a
criminal offence ‘challenges a key element of the
rule of law’. The
key justification provided for imposing these offences retrospectively is that
the government announced by
media release that legislation would be introduced
to provide for these offences and that the offences would take effect from the
date of that announcement.
In most instances the introduction of new offences is justified on the basis
of the public interest in prohibiting certain behaviour.
While the committee
acknowledges the importance of protecting privacy and reputation this is not, in
itself, sufficient to override
this general principle. For these reasons, the
rationale provided for the retrospective application of these offences appears
be overly broad.
The committee has consistently commented on provisions that back-date
commencement to the date of announcement, i.e. ‘legislation
release’. The committee’s scrutiny concerns in this regard are
particularly acute in relation to provisions
which create new offences. As a
result, the committee considers that the conclusion expressed in the statement
of compatibility that
the measures in the bill are consistent with the
prohibition on retrospective criminal laws has not been adequately explained.
committee therefore seeks further advice from the Attorney-General as to the
appropriateness of making these offences retrospective
in light of the
committee’s comments.
Attorney-General’s response - extract
Retrospective application
The Committee has also raised questions about the retrospective application
of the offences in the Bill. These are legitimate queries,
as retrospective
offences challenge a key element of the rule of law—that laws are capable
of being known in advance so that
people subject to those laws can exercise
choice and order their affairs accordingly. However, in the circumstances the
considers that these narrowly prescribed offences should have a
limited retrospective effect.
The recently identified vulnerability in the Department of Health’s
Medicare and Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme dataset brought
Government’s attention the existence of a gap in privacy legislation
regarding the re-identification of de-identified
data. Once aware of this gap,
the Government acted immediately to strengthen protections for personal
information against re-identification
by introducing these offences. The
offences will only take effect in relation to conduct occurring on or after
29 September 2016,
which is the day after I announced the proposed
amendments to the Privacy Act. This retrospective application was made very
in my statement of 28 September 2016. As a result of my
statement, entities were clearly given notice that this particular conduct
be made subject to offences from that time.
The release of personal information can have significant consequences for
individuals which cannot be easily remedied. In particular,
once personal
information is made available online it is very difficult—in many cases
impossible—to fully retract that
information or prevent further access.
Applying the offences to conduct occurring from the day after I announced the
Government’s
intention to introduce this Bill provides a strong
disincentive to entities who, upon hearing of this intention, may have been
to attempt re-identification of any published datasets while the
Parliament considers the Bill. The Government has also taken swift
introduce the Bill in the Parliament at the earliest available opportunity to
ensure the retrospective application is for
a short time period only.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Attorney-General for this response.
The committee notes the Attorney-General’s advice that the
retrospective application of the bill is intended to provide a strong
disincentive to entities who ‘may have been tempted to attempt
re-identification of any published datasets while the Parliament
considers the
bill’. The committee also notes the Attorney-General’s advice that
the retrospective application was made
clear in the Attorney-General’s
media statement announcing the proposed amendments.
The committee reiterates its long-standing scrutiny concern that
provisions that back-date commencement to the date of the announcement
bill (i.e. ‘legislation by press release’) challenges a basic value
of the rule of law that, in general, laws
should only operate prospectively (not
retrospectively). While the committee acknowledges the importance of protecting
reputation this is not, in itself, sufficient to override this
general principle. The importance of laws operating only prospectively
particularly acute in relation to the criminal law, where conduct should only be
criminalised from the date the law making the
conduct criminal commences. This
supports long-recognised criminal law principles that there can be no crime or
punishment without
The committee draws its scrutiny concerns to the attention of Senators and
leaves the appropriateness of the retrospective application
of the criminal
offence and civil penalty provisions to the consideration of the Senate as a
Senator Helen Polley
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (117 KB)
PDF format (168 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter