URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/ACTLAStaCEP/2019/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:05:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ACT Legislative Assembly Standing Committee on Planning and Urban Renewal ( Parliament) --- "Draft Variation to the Territory Plan No 355 - Calwell Group Centre: ZoneChanges and Amendments to the Calwell Precinct Map and Code" [2019] ACTLAStaCEP 11 (19 September 2019)
Draft variation No. 355 – Calwell Group Centre: Zone Changes and amendments to the Calwell Precinct Map and Code
The Committee
Committee Membership
Secretariat
Resolution of appointment
Terms of reference
Recommendations
2 Introduction
Conduct of the Inquiry
Acknowledgements
3 Planning in the Australian Capital Territory
4 The Draft Variation
Changes to the Territory Plan
Changes to the Territory Plan Map
Amendments to the Calwell Precinct Map and Code
Consultation by Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate
Comments on Consultation
Understanding Of Draft Variation
5 Calwell Group Centre Master Plan
6 Key Issues
Rules and Criteria – Block 41 Section 787
Commercial versus Residential Use
Building Height and Overshadowing
Rules and Criteria – Block 12 Section 787, Calwell
Residential Use
Committee Comment
Rules and Criteria – Other
Car Parking
7 Conclusion
Appendix A – Witnesses
Wednesday 29 May 2019
Appendix B – Submissions
Appendix C – Questions taken on Notice/
Questions on Notice
Draft variation No. 355 – Calwell Group Centre:
Zone Changes and amendments to the Calwell Precinct Map and Code
Standing Committee on Planning and Urban Renewal
September 2019
Caroline Le Couteur MLA Chair
Ms Suzanne Orr MLA (until 23 August 2019) Deputy Chair (until 23
August 2019)
Mr Mark Parton MLA Deputy Chair (from 28 August 2019)
Mr Michael Pettersson MLA (from 24 August 2019)
Secretariat
Ms Annemieke Jongsma Secretary
Ms Lydia Chung Administrative Officer
Information
Telephone 02 6205 1253
Post GPO Box 1020, CANBERRA ACT 2601
committees@parliament.act.gov.au
www.parliament.act.gov.au
of appointment
13 December 2016 the Legislative Assembly for the ACT, when it created Standing
Committees for the Ninth Assembly, resolved at
Part 1(f) of the Resolution that
there would be a:
Standing Committee on Planning and Urban Renewal to examine matters relating to
planning, land management, the planning process,
amendments to the Territory
Plan, consultation requirements, design and sustainability outcomes including
energy performance and
policy matters to support a range of housing
On the same
day, the Legislative Assembly also resolved at Part 3 of the Resolution
If the Assembly is not sitting when the Standing Committee on Planning and Urban
Renewal has completed consideration of a report
on draft plan variations
referred pursuant to
Planning and Development Act 2007
draft plans of management referred pursuant to
section 326
Planning and
Development Act 2007
the Committee may send its report to the Speaker, or, in
the absence of the Speaker, to the Deputy Speaker, who is authorised to
directions for its printing, publication and
circulation.
Terms of reference
In relation to a draft plan variation to the Territory Plan,
Planning and Development Act 2007
The Minister may, not later than 20 working days after the day the Minister
receives the draft plan variation, refer the draft plan
variation documents to
an appropriate Committee of the Legislative Assembly together with a request
that the Committee report on
the draft plan variation to the Legislative
The Minister for Planning, Mr Mick Gentleman MLA, referred
Draft Variation
355: Calwell Group Centre – Zone Changes and amendments to the Calwell
Precinct Map and Code
to the Standing Committee on Planning and Urban
Renewal on 2 April 2019.
Australian Capital Territory
Community Facilities Zone
Commercial Zone
Draft Variation to the Territory Plan
Environment, Planning and Sustainable Directorate
Urban Open Space
Residential Zone
Transport and Services
Table of Contents
Recommendations
2 Introduction
of the Inquiry
2.1 On 2 April 2019 pursuant to
Planning and Development
(the Act), the Minister for Planning and Land Management, Mr Mick
Gentleman MLA, referred
Draft Variation 355: Calwell Group Centre –
Zone Changes and amendments to the Calwell Precinct Map and Code
Planning an Urban Renewal (the Committee) for consideration and report to the
Legislative Assembly (the Assembly).
2.2 The Committee circulated a media release announcing the inquiry on 15
April 2019 as well directly emailing those who had provided
submissions to the
public consultation process and others who may be affected by the draft
variation. The Committee received one
submission and this is listed at Appendix
2.3 The Committee held one public hearing and heard from six witnesses. A
list of witnesses who appeared before the Committee is provided
at Appendix A.
The transcripts of proceedings are accessible at:
http://www.hansard.act.gov.au/hansard/2017/comms/planning16a.pdf
2.4 There was one question taken on notice at the public hearing and one
question on notice asked in relation to the hearing. These
are listed in
Appendix C. Answers to these questions are available on the inquiry webpage:
https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/in-committees/standing-committees-current-assembly/standing-committee-on-planning-and-urban-renewal/draft-variation-to-the-territory-plan-no-355-calwell-group-centre
Acknowledgements
2.5 The Committee would like to thank the Minster for Planning and Land
Management and officials from the Environment, Planning and
Sustainable
Development Directorate (the Directorate) for their time appearing before the
Committee and responding to its questions.
2.6 The Committee would like to extend its thanks to those who took the time
to make written submissions and to those witnesses who
appeared before the
in the Australian Capital Territory
Introduction
3.1 This chapter outlines the planning framework in the Australian Capital
Territory (ACT) and briefly outlines the evolution of the
Territory Plan from
its inception, through a series of reviews and restructures.
Australian Capital Territory (Planning and Land Management) Act
(Cth) sets out the overarching legal framework for the planning of, and
management of the land in, the Australian Capital
It establishes the
National Capital Authority, one of the functions of which is to prepare and
administer a National Capital Plan.
The objective of the National Capital Plan is to ensure that Canberra and the
Territory are planned and developed in accordance with
their national
significance.
Australian Capital Territory (Planning and Land Management) Act
also provided for the ACT Legislative Assembly to make laws to
establish a Territory planning authority, and to confer on that authority
function of preparing and administering a Territory
These requirements were
incorporated into the
Interim Planning Act 1990
and subsequently, with
expanded environmental assessment and heritage provisions, into
(Planning and Environment) Act 1991
3.4 In 2008, as part of the reform of the ACT planning system, the
(Planning and Environment) Act 1991
was replaced by the
Planning and
Development Act 2007
which includes the provision for the Planning and Land
and the Territory
3.5 The Territory Plan commenced operation on 31 March 2008 and provides the
policy framework for the administration of planning in
The object of the territory plan is to ensure, in a manner not inconsistent with
the national capital plan, the planning and development
of the ACT provide the
people of the ACT with an attractive, safe and efficient environment in which to
live, work and have their
recreation.
3.6 Under section 50 of the Act, the:
Territory, the Executive, a Minister or a territory authority must not do any
act, or approve the doing of an act, that is inconsistent
with the territory
Act requires the Territory Plan to set out the planning principles and policies
for effecting its objective in a way that
gives effect to sustainability
principles, including policies that contribute to achieving a healthy
environment in the ACT.
3.8 The Territory Plan includes:
 a statement of strategic directions;
 objectives and development tables applying to each zone;
 a series of general, development and precinct codes; and
 structure plans and concept plans for the development of future
urban areas.
3.9 The Territory Plan graphically represents the applicable land use zones
under the following categories:
 Residential;
 Commercial;
 Industrial;
 Community Facility;
 Parks and Recreation;
 Transport and Services; and
 Non-Urban.
3.10 Recognising that land use policies may change over time, the Act
provides for variations to the Territory Plan, which are prepared
Planning and Land Authority, currently under the auspices of the Directorate,
for stakeholder consultation and
3.11 Under the Act the Minister must refer a draft plan variation documents,
within 5 working days of the notification of the public
availability
to an appropriate
committee of the ACT Legislative Assembly (the Assembly) for consideration and
3.12 The Minister must not take action in relation to the draft plan
variation until the committee of the Assembly has reported on
has decided not to report on
has not informed the
minister within 20 working days of the referral as to whether it will prepare a
or the committee of the
Assembly has not reported on the draft plan variation by the end of the period
of six months starting the
day after the day on which it was referred to the
3.13 The Minister must take any recommendation of the committee into account
before making his decision in relation to the draft plan
If the Minister
approves it, the proposed plan variation and associated documents will be
presented to the Assembly.
Unless wholly or partially rejected by the Assembly, on a motion for which
notice has been given within five sitting days of the
plan variation being
presented to the Assembly, the plan variation will commence on the date
nominated by the Minister.
4 The Draft Variation
4.1 The Draft Variation to the Territory Plan 355 Calwell Group Centre
(Calwell Draft Variation) seeks to vary the Territory Plan
and incorporate the
recommendations of the Calwell Group Centre Master Plan 2016 (Calwell Master
Plan). It proposes changes to zones
within the Calwell Group Centre and
amendments to the Calwell precinct map and code that:
 rezone part of block 41, section 787 from CZ3 to CZ1 to ensure the
entire block in included in one zone;
 rezone part of block 8, section 788 from TSZ to CFZ;
 remove provisions allowing additional merit track commercial
services uses in CZ1;
 introduce a site specific building height allowance of up to four
storeys towards the eastern edge of the centre; and
 introduce new rules and criteria such as awnings on active building
frontage; solar access and passive surveillance measures
to improve public
spaces, pedestrian places and
thoroughfares.
4.2 The Calwell Draft Variation has interim
Planning and Development Act 2007
effect enables the provisions of Draft Variation No 355 to apply during the
defined period which begins the day the Calwell
Draft Variation given to the
Minister is notified (notification
4.4 The effect of
during the defined period means that the
Territory, the Executive, a Minister or a territory authority must not do or
approve anything
that would be inconsistent with the Territory Plan as if it
were amended by the draft variation. Where there is an inconsistency
provisions in the current Territory Plan and provisions in the draft variation,
then the draft variation takes precedence
for the extent of the
inconsistency.
4.5 Interim effect will end on the day the earliest of the following happens:
i. the day the corresponding plan variation, or part of it, commences;
ii. the day the corresponding plan variation is rejected by the Legislative
iii. the day the corresponding plan variation is withdrawn in accordance with a
requirement under
(2)(b)(v) or
iv. the period of 1 year after notification day
4.6 The area affected is the Calwell Group Centre which is located
approximately 5 kilometres south east of Tuggeranong Town Centre.
It is bounded
by Johnson Drive to the north; Were Street to the west and south; and playing
fields to the east.
4.7 The Calwell Group Centre consist of a central single storey commercial
mall surrounded on three sides by surface car parking.
A service station,
sporting club and car wash are also nearby in separate stand-alone single storey
4.8 The following Territory Plan map zones currently apply to the Calwell
Commercial Area:
 Commercial Core - CZ1
 Commercial Services - CZ3
Residential Area:
 Residential Suburban - RZ1
 Residential Suburban Core - RZ2
 Residential Medium Density Residential - RZ4
 Public Open Space - PRZ1
 Transport - TSZ1
 Services – TSZ2
 Community Facility - CFZ
4.9 In addition to general codes that may apply the following codes currently
apply to the Mawson Group Centre under the Territory
 Commercial Zone development code;
 Calwell precinct map and code;
 Residential Zones development code;
 Single Dwelling Housing Development code;
 Multi-Unit Housing development code; and
 Parks and Recreation Zone development code.
Changes to the Territory
Changes to the Territory Plan Map
4.10 Land in the ACT is divided into sections and blocks.
4.11 Planning ‘zones’ are applied to land and the zoning
determines what kind of development is allowed on the land.
4.12 As illustrated in Figure 1 and Figure 2 the Calwell Draft Variation
would make changes to the existing Territory Plan Map, including:
 rezone a portion of block 8 section 788 from TSZ2 Transport Services
Zone to CFZ Community Facilities Zone; and
 rezone a portion of block 41 section 787 from CZ3 Services Zone to
CZ1 Core Zone.
Figure 1: CURRENT CALWELL TERRITORY PLAN MAP
Figure 2: PROPOSED CALWELL TERRITORY PLAN MAP
Amendments to the Calwell Precinct Map and Code
4.13 Precinct maps identify areas where there are additional planning
4.14 As outlined in the Territory Plan, Precinct codes provide additional
planning, design and environmental controls for individual
blocks and may also
contain references to provisions in other codes.
4.15 Precinct codes contain additional rules and/or criteria for particular
blocks or parcels identified on the precinct map, to be
read in conjunction with
the relevant development code. Each element has one or more rules and, unless
the respective rule is mandatory,
each rule has an associate criterion. Rules
provide quantitative, or definitive, controls whereas criteria are chiefly
qualitative
4.16 The Calwell Draft Variation would make changes to the existing Calwell
precinct map and codes including:
 remove the following additional merit track MT1 development from
within the Commercial CZ1 Core Zone: industrial trades,
municipal depot and
 permit development up to four storeys over part of block 12 section
787 Calwell and block 41 section 787 Calwell;
 nominate active frontage areas where development will be required to
provide glazing, public access to buildings and awnings;
 introduce setbacks for taller building elements to retain solar
access to public spaces;
 require residential development two storeys and above to provide
balconies and windows to habitable rooms overlooking public
 nominate pedestrian paths to be provided or retained as part of any
development; and
 specify design requirements for new
Figure 3: CURRENT CALWELL PRECINCT MAP
Figure 4: PROPOSED CALWELL PRECINCT MAP
Consultation
by Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate
4.17 The Directorate released the Calwell Draft
Variation for public comment on 10 August 2018. The closing date for comment was
September 2019.
4.18 The Directorate received 3 written submissions.
4.19 The key issues of public concern included:
 Building heights;
 Implications for redevelopment on block 41 section 787 Calwell;
 Commercial services;
 Planning process and consultation;
 Car parking within the group centre;
 Solar access to pedestrian pathways;
 Plot ratio;
 Focus on the Calwell group centre;
 Community uses;
 Playground and pedestrian path upgrades within the group centre; and
 Upgrades and provisions for area outside the group
4.20 In response to public comments the following changes were made to the
exhibited version of the Calwell Draft Variation:
 Removal of ground floor residential uses at Calwell part of section
787 block 41 consistent with the recommendations of the
Calwell master plan and
upon advice of Transport Canberra and Community Services Directorate. This
includes updates to proposed Rule
2 and Figure 1 of the Calwell precinct map and
 Update of proposed criterion 5 of the Calwell precinct map and code
to ensure reasonable solar access to surrounding publicly
accessible areas;
 Correction of reference to the public spaces on Figure 4; and
 Clarification of the total width of the expanded public pedestrian
path onto block 41 section 787
4.21 The Directorate’s report on the consultation was made available on
their website.
Comments on
Consultation
4.22 The Committee notes that given the large amount of planning reports,
codes, plans and strategies, it can be extremely complicated
for individuals and
community organisations who wish to participate meaningfully in public
consultation.
4.23 The Committee also noted the length of time it took for the Calwell
Draft Variation to progress following public consultation.
This was of concern
to the Committee as it brought with it the risk of changes in community
expectations, changes in population and
demographics and new development
considerations.
Understanding
Of Draft Variation
4.24 The Territory Plan is a complex document. Draft variations to the
Territory Plan can reflect this complexity and it can be difficult
persons to understand exactly what the existing rules are and how they will be
changed by a draft variation.
4.25 The Committee notes that extensive sourcing and cross matching of
relevant documentation is required to ascertain what has been
amended in the
Territory Plan or what is being referenced within the draft variation.
Recommendation 1
The Committee
recommends that, subject to the following recommendations, Draft Variation 355:
Calwell Group Centre – Zone changes
and amendments to the Calwell Precinct
Map and Code is approved.
Recommendation 2
The Committee
recommends that the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development
Directorate consider a review of references to
Planning and Development Act
in Draft Variation 355: Calwell Group Centre – Zone changes and
amendments to the Calwell Precinct Map and Code.
5 Calwell Group Centre
Master Plan
5.1 A master plan is a non-statutory document that sets out how a particular
area can (as opposed to will) develop and redevelop into
the future. It sets out
objectives and strategies to manage development and change over time and defines
what is important about
a place and how its character and quality can be
conserved, improved and
5.2 In Canberra, the EPSDD prepares and periodically reviews master plans for
all group centres, key transport corridors and areas
adjacent to town
5.3 The community and industry are engaged throughout the process, to ensure
local issues and community values are
considered.
5.4 Implementation of a master plan may involve:
 Territory Plan variations;
 Sale of territory owned land;
 Capital works;
 Realisation of industry opportunities identified within the master
 Further community
consultation.
5.5 The Calwell Group Centre Master Plan was prepared in response to actions
outlined in the ACT Planning Strategy (2012) which included
the need to
investigate opportunities for urban intensification around the Calwell Group
5.6 Work began on the Calwell Group Centre Master Plan in 2015, with
consultations beginning in May 2015. Following another round
of community
consultations in early 2016 the final Calwell Group Centre Master Plan was
released in September 2016.
Recommendation 3
The Committee
recommends that the ACT Government finalises the development of master plans in
a more timely fashion.
6 Key Issues
Rules and Criteria –
Block 41 Section 787
6.1 The Committee noted that the Calwell Draft Variation makes changes to the
rules and criteria that are applicable to any development
on Block 41, Section
787. This block currently operates as a car wash facility. This area is
identified as Area A in Figure 5.
6.2 The lessee and Canberra Town Planning indicated that they had concerns
apply to this block
under the Calwell Draft Variation.
Commercial versus Residential Use
6.3 It was indicated to the Committee by the lease and Canberra Town Planning
that there were significant concerns about the feasibility
of any development on
Block 41 with no residential allowed on the ground floor of any development in
Area A. In their submission
Canberra Town Planning indicated that:
The expression of development potential in Area A is unlikely to permit
residential development at Block 41 given the other planning
controls that
dictate a very specific and narrow planning outcome that is unlikely to render a
viable development outcome at the
lessee and Canberra Town Planning indicated that their earlier investigations
had indicated that development on the site had
looked feasible about 12 months
earlier, particularly with the ‘opportunities that could be ready for
residential, looking
towards the green space where the flood infrastructure and
the pathways are, they get the passive surveillance and the like that
into these spaces, and the really good
interfaces.
6.5 However, they went on to state that:
We are not going to get that from commercial opportunities. We are really
concerned that, even if we can make a building feasibly
stack up on that site
with a ground floor commercial space, we just will not be able to rent it. So
you basically get for sale signs
on your primary walkways into the space, or the
areas where people potentially would really want to live and have some relief in
looking over the green spaces
lessee and Canberra Town Planning emphasised the issues that would arise with
more commercial space as ‘there is a lot
of retail for the size of the
centre and the catchment as it is already.’ They indicated that:
We had some concern that the extension of more retail space was potentially
problematic. As Arthur said, it is cannibalising the
offering that is there at
the moment with further competition, and there is not an ability to really
support that
requirement.
lieu of full residential use, Canberra Town Planning proposed the option of any
development in Area A being commercially adaptive
residential as:
Allowing commercially adaptable residential use captures the future potential
for a building to be repurpose to commercial if required
but will facilitate a
development outcome in the Master Plan term that will support the
went on to explain to the Committee that commercially adaptive residential:
It is quite a common concept that we see in land such as this. An example of
where this has happened is up and down Anthony Rolfe
Drive in Gungahlin, where,
initially, when the critical mass of the centre did not support a larger
commercial offering, you built
a space that is initially allowed to be used for
residential use but with the ability that, when the market forces change, it can
be retrofitted, without breaking the building down, into commercial space.
On Anthony Rolfe, opposite the core Gungahlin town centre, the two and
three-storey developments were initially designed as apartments.
When you go
there now they are small, often professional, suites. There are some beauty
parlours and the like. When the critical
mass in the centre becomes large enough
to require that commercial services offering, it is able to translate it. The
flipside is
that we build it and it sits vacant until such time as it becomes
viable. That is what happened to the Jamison centre on Eastern
Valley Way. I
think for a long time those ground floors were vacant, with “for
sale” signs. They are just not a good
outcome for space and outcome in the
Directorate indicated that concerns about traffic noise and lights shining in
residential windows were a notable factor in
deciding against residential on the
ground floor of any development on Block 41:
It was really for the street that is in front of it, and the traffic and trucks
that use that area, and I suppose the amenity of
the residents. If it is
residential you are going to have windows to living areas. That is not
considered as appropriate use for
that situation with that traffic arrangement.
That is what TCCS were
Directorate also indicated that the loading docks in combination with the
traffic turning in the dead end were significant
issues, particularly with the
number of trucks:
There was the issue of the loading docks and consultation with the EPA about the
noise, and issues of conflicting uses with residential
and trucks turning,
particularly given the beeping they make. It is a concern in a lot of commercial
centres where you have that
mix of uses. Their advice was that they would not
support the higher residential in that north-western
was also indicated in both the Calwell Draft Variation and in evidence given to
the Committee that the removal of ground floor
residential uses is consistent
with the recommendations of the Calwell Master
I believe there was a lot of direct consultation through the master planning
process, the development of the draft master plan and
then the following steps,
which is why, to begin with, the master plan recommended no residential at the
base of the building on
block 41. Following those discussions with the lessee,
that was considered to have residential, and then we got the feedback. That
why it went out for consultation with residential in it, and then we got the
6.12 In terms of Building Design, Canberra Town Planning indicated that
proposed Rule 6 as it applied to primary and secondary frontages
would, for a
mixed-use development, ‘result in an inefficient design that would be
difficult to construct and therefore development
of the site would not be
6.13 Additionally they felt that the proposed Rule 14 would also cause issues
in terms of design, stating:
The control as described remains overly prescriptive and this would prevent
innovative design outcomes on the site which may make
pursuit of redevelopment
on Block 41 unfeasible, meaning future development of the Centre may not occur,
especially with the prohibition
of residential use at ground level at Block
Directorate explained that having all residential and an active frontage would
not be viable and that the rules and criteria
were ‘to take into
consideration the issue of the viability of the development having commercial
and then only one level of
residential above:’
I think there was concern because of wanting to have the active frontage, not to
just have a blank wall. That would be difficult
with a residential development
because people would not want people walking past, particularly since the space
between the car park
and the property boundary is very little. There are
conflicts of views and people walking past, the need to not have blank walls.
Well, you could not have a blank wall if it is residential anyway because that
would make a horrible living
environment.
6.15 Canberra Town Planning also expressed concern about the requirement
under Rule 12 to require the lessee to surrender part of
their land to meet the
requirement to have the pedestrian access path adjacent to Block 41 at the
requisite width of 6 metres. In
their submission they indicated that:
The 6 metre path will be the total distance between the north boundary of Block
33 Section 787 and the development on Block 41, this
will require a minimum 2.2
metre setback for development on Block 41; land that is currently leased with
development potential.
It appears unreasonable to require the Lessee to provide a 6m path within Block
41 along the circa 4m wide pathway block and remove
development rights from this
further comments to the Committee, Canberra Town Planning indicated that while
they believed the pedestrian link to the Centre
is important they told planners
that it was:
a real concern. We have got a block of land that we purchased off the government
for commercial use and it appears that this plan
variation is severing off some
of that land which we are not being paid for but we are paying rates on it and
have the quiet enjoyment
also indicated to the Committee that they believed that:
Proposed pedestrian pathways would ordinarily be provided by TCCS unless the
upgrade to the pathways is an off-site works requirement
of a development
application. In these circumstances the proponent would provide the necessary
pathways to the standards required
response the Directorate told the Committee that:
It is looking, particularly with developing the site, at the amenity of the
pedestrians walking down that path. Six metres is the
standard that is used for
those sorts of paths. It is, I think, just over four at the moment. It was
considered that that was going
to have increased amenity. It was discussed
during the master plan process and put into the
it was queried as to whether it was standard to require that public access ways
be provided within privately leased land
the Directorate indicated:
Yes, we have it in some of the other precinct codes. If they are getting an
uplift of development on the site, they are providing
something back; it might
be provision of a road or something similar to that. In this case it is widening
the existing path just
to improve that amenity, particularly since otherwise it
could have zero setback and seem like an alleyway. That increase to the
would improve that.
Building Height and Overshadowing
6.20 In their discussion with the Committee the lessee and Canberra Town
Planning queried why any future development could not be
consistently four
storeys or even higher across the whole centre with appropriate management of
impacts such as overshadowing:
It is an interesting concept in that we see in group centres developments of up
to six storeys being considered and approved, and
I think the opportunity to
create activity in the centre with residential living is a really good idea. Why
would we not, in appropriate
areas, look at opportunities and abide by other
impacts? Whether it is overshadowing and the like being properly managed, if it
okay for Giralang or it is okay for Curtin why would we not think the
same...But it is a principle that if you are going to have
more density in town
we really should be looking at areas of high activity where these matters can be
properly managed and not that
that site be
restricted.
response the Directorate indicated that following consultation on the master
plan, community comment had led to the reduction
of the proposed height limit in
Block 41 from six storeys to four
A range of building heights were considered during the development of the master
plan. The master plan recommended building heights
of 2-4 storeys in response to
the need for solar access to public places and to minimise the bulk and scale of
taller building elements.
Six storey elements were considered as part of the
master planning process but following community feedback and further
consideration
centre it was considered that lower heights were more
appropriate.
terms of there being a consistent four storeys across the whole block as opposed
to half being four storeys and half being
two storeys the Directorate indicated
It’s the same as for the rest of the centre. Looking at things like solar
access and the impact on the centre as a whole, it
was considered that the
northern part of the site was more appropriate in not having a detrimental
impact on the rest of the centre.
So it reduces the height down because the rest
of the centre will be two storeys as
If we had put four storeys across the whole centre, the public spaces to the
south and to the street would have quite significant
overshadowing from
midwinter when we define it— between 9 am and 3 pm. Because of the
orientation of the block, it would not
give a welcoming public domain in that
location. Basically, where the four-storey part is, the overshadowing it would
create would
be on the roof of the eventually two-storey building. Some of it is
single-storey at the moment, of course. That would minimise that
Overshadowing from a two-storey building is not considered to be as significant
as from a four-storey
asked if they could view the relevant overshadowing diagrams the Committee was
informed in an Answer to a Question on Notice
Shadow diagrams specific to the indicative development were not considered
necessary during the Territory Plan variation process,
as the impact of
potential overshadowing from future development within the Calwell group centre
was assessed as part of the master
planning process. Locating taller building
elements to the rear {north side) of the centre was recommended to minimise the
of overshadowing onto existing and future public spaces at the front
{southern end) of the existing shopping centre and to reduce
the bulk and scale
of the development when viewed from the front of the centre and from the public
Rules and Criteria –
Block 12 Section 787, Calwell
6.24 The Committee noted that the Calwell Draft Variation makes changes to
the rules and criteria that are applicable to any development
on Block 12,
Section 787. This area is identified as Area B in Figure 5.
6.25 The lessee and Canberra Town Planning indicated that they had concerns
residential development
under the Calwell Draft Variation.
Residential Use
6.26 Whilst the lessee and Canberra Town Planning were very supportive of
residential in the centre they had significant concerns
identified by the Calwell Draft Variation in Block 12 which placed the
residential area (Area B) primarily on
top of the current Woolworths Supermarket
(Woolies). Canberra Town Planning indicated in their submission that:
The location of Area B at Block 12 will not result in a development opportunity
in the term of the master plan (15 years) given the
tenancy arrangements with
the anchor tenant. To realise the master plan development objective and
potential expressed in area B,
an alternative opportunity would be
6.27 The lessee and Canberra Town Planning told the Committee
that their own earlier investigations indicated that Block 12 presented
primary opportunity for residential, however their assessment was that other
parts of the Block were more suitable and are not
affected by the long-term
lease arrangement with Woolworths:
We explored opportunities to look under and around the loading dock, to
potentially enclose that and build on top of that. It is
on the club part of the
site, which has got infinitely more chance of actually happening because we
control the shorter leases, the
space underneath, where that part is completely
locked away. If we were to have a residential offering in the centre, that would
be the area where we would think that was much more likely to
also informed the Committee that they had expressed these concerns to the
relevant planners:
Our concerns at the time, which we expressed to the strategic planners, related
to the investment that Woolworths has done recently
in refurbishing the shop and
signing long lease agreements which basically locked up the residential
opportunity on top of the supermarket
box for up to 20 years. So to have a
master plan that has a component for residential that is a really good idea in
the centre but
is sitting at a 20-year horizon at least is semi-nonsensical.
We were at the time talking to the authority, saying, “That’s a good
idea. There are other opportunities in the centre
which, if we understand the
issues in terms of overshadowing and this, that and the other, can be really
easily managed. But if you
insist on having the residential box on top of the
supermarket, that is a bit of a problem, because we cannot get access to it
Woolworths will not allow us to build on top of them and we will not be
able to access car parking underneath them as long as they
are operating, and
they have got a 10 to 15-year lease. So the master plan is all good and well,
but that is not a realistic
lessee and Canberra Town Planning indicated that despite these conversations
they did not feel that their suggestions for
alternate locations for residential
were well received:
Once the draft master plan came out, we entered into a number of discussions
with the authority to talk about our concerns, the commercial
issues with having
the B space shown on top of the block, and our opportunities on other parts of
block 12. The matter of overshadowing,
especially in the public forecourt and
the play area, was expressed and we felt that we were able to demonstrate that
there would
be opportunities to mitigate that to either have no impact or very
little impact. But even though we got hearings it appears that
considerations were not well received, for whatever reason, and they did not
lessee also felt that they were not consulted adequately about the location on
Block 12 and did not understand the reasoning
for the residential being placed
on top of Woolworths:
I did ask the question of her: “Why are you putting it on top of
Woolworths?” They said, “It is because of the
overshadowing.”
I said, “What overshadowing? There is no other high rise around. It is not
going to affect
6.31 Although
no shadow diagrams were
the Directorate
explained that overshadowing was a key factor in their decision making:
During the master plan process, where in the centre would be appropriate for
higher buildings was looked at. The impact of overshadowing
was taken into
consideration. If it was too far to the south of those blocks, the overshadowing
into the street and the public spaces
would have been an issue. There is also
the location of the loading docks and that issue of what is considered to be
some incompatible
uses with residential. It was a matter of going through any of
the constraints on the site and then determining the
Committee was also informed that the overshadowing was not the only factor taken
into consideration when determining the
location for the residential in the
centre, including Block 12:
As I mentioned before, solar access, the loading docks, the loading areas, the
traffic arrangements—all those things—were
taken into consideration
to work out practically whether you could do it and to avoid the conflict of
uses. Yes, the centre was looked
at as a whole. They were some of the areas that
were determined to be able to have increased height without affecting the
response to question from the Committee as to whether the community was informed
to be redeveloped soon because of
the long-term lease and the recent renovations the Directorate also indicated
I do not believe that it was specifically mentioned. It was not said,
“This is the time frame when that might happen.”
But when master
plans are put forward, in the discussion we have about them we say that this is
a 15 or 20-year plan for the area.
I do not believe it was specifically said
that because it has already had a redevelopment this will not be happening soon,
master plan would have talked about the need to look at the centre for
6.34 During
ongoing discussions about Block B, the Committee conveyed to the Directorate the
perception of Canberra Town Planning
and the lessee ‘that Strategic
Planning in the EPSDD shows little interest in the commercial reality that
underpin development
of a Master Plan outcome on the said
In response the
Directorate indicated:
I think the comment is unduly harsh. We look at these problems analytically. We
sift through a number of different issues. Alix has
talked about overshadowing.
We also look at the current state of play within the centre and we look at the
opportunity in the future
to potentially stage development. It may mean that
part of the centre is not functional whilst the area of uplift is being
but there is always that opportunity. We are trying to be practical.
We are trying to look at ways that there could be an uplift,
where that uplift
is most appropriate and ways that the centre could still trade in some way,
shape or form whilst redevelopment
is occurring. We feel like we have a balance,
where we have enabled that.
Figure 5: PROPOSED REDEVELOPMENT AREAS
Committee Comment
6.35 The Committee shares the concerns of the lessee that the proposed rules
and criteria for the two redevelopment areas (marked
A and B on Figure 5) do not
provide enough development potential for redevelopment to occur.
6.36 Redevelopment area B is located above the supermarket. Given the layout
of the centre and other planning rules, there is no
clear alternative site the
supermarket could be relocated into while redevelopment area B is re-built.
Area B will therefore not
be effective as currently outlined.
6.37 Redevelopment area A has more potential, however as it is earmarked for
primary active frontage, any redevelopment would need
to be mixed-use rather
than residential. Given the ageing catchment population of the shopping centre,
the Committee agrees with
proponent that there is unlikely to be demand for more
shopfronts in future.
6.38 As a result, the Committee believes that the rules and criteria
applicable to both redevelopment areas need to be changed whilst
addressing issues of dwelling amenity, overshadowing, privacy, noise management
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends that for
redevelopment area A (as indicated in Figure 5 on page 24 of the
Committee’s report), only,
proposed Rule 1 is amended so that residential
uses is permitted on the ground floor in areas where there is no designated
active frontage.
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends that
redevelopment area B (as indicated in Figure 5 on page 24 of the
Committee’s report), is extended
as far as the western end of Blocks 12
and 29, Section 787, with rules and criteria included to protect solar access
and protect
future residents from amenity issues arising from the loading
Recommendation 6
The Committee recommends that the ACT
Government ensure that shadow diagrams are provided to the Committee and the ACT
Community for
all similar future variations.
Rules and Criteria –
Car Parking
6.42 Canberra Town Planning also expressed concern about the wording of
Criteria 3 which it believed was ‘loosely defined’
and did not
‘provide certainty about the about the ongoing provision of publicly
available parking within the
The consideration of the criteria that says that the developer just needs to
demonstrate that that is enough is, in our opinion,
a really strong concern. It
gives quite a strong opportunity. In terms of timing, the shops might go through
a period where there
are fewer tenants. Somebody may do a car parking assessment
showing that only half the car park is used and leave those in a
redevelopment.
6.43 Canberra
Town Planning indicated that this presented concerns to the lessee of the
Calwell Group Centre:
Without clarity on the protection of car parking, the Lessee of Section 787 is
concerned that available parking (which is highly
utilised) will be reduced by
development of the carpark in the future – this is an important
consideration for the centre and
especially the anchor tenant that require both
convenient and quantum of parking to service the use.
Many visitors to the Centre will choose alternative shopping centres in the area
if convenient parking is not available, and this
will be to the detriment of the
Centre’s commercial viability which will result in a loss of amenity to
the local residents
in surrounding
their response the Directorate told the Committee that the:
...provision is an existing one. It is the same one that we have in all of the
group centres, just saying that whatever car parking
spaces might be taken up by
development are to be replaced, as well as whatever the development is creating.
There is a bit of flexibility
if it meets the requirements of the parking code,
but that would need to demonstrate that the parking needs of the centre are
met. It is consistent with other codes that we
7 Conclusion
7.1 The Committee has made six recommendations
7.2 The Committee would like to reiterate its thanks to the Minister,
officials, witnesses and submitters who contributed their time
and effort to
this inquiry.
Ms Caroline Le
Couteur MLA
27 August 2019
A – Witnesses
Wednesday 29 May 2019
 Pieter van der Walt – Canberra Town Planning
 Arthur Tsoulias
 Amanda Flack
 Mr Mick Gentleman MLA, Minister for Planning and Land Management
 Ms Kathy Cusack, Executive Director, Planning Policy, EPSDD
 Ms Alix Kaucz, Manager, Planning and Urban Design Policy, EPSDD
Appendix B –
Submissions
Submission Number
Canberra Town Planning
20 May 2019
C – Questions taken on Notice/
Questions on Notice
Questions Taken on Notice 29 May 2019
Hearing date
Directorate/
Answer date
29 May 2019
Ms Suzanne Orr MLA
Replication of section of multi-unit code
13 June 2019
Questions on Notice relating to hearing on 29 May 2019
Hearing date
Directorate/
Answer date
31 May 2019
Ms Caroline Le Couteur MLA
Replication of section of multi-unit code
13 June 2019
Legislative for the ACT,
, 13 December 2016,
Proof Transcript of Evidence,
2017, p.,40.
Legislative for the ACT,
, 13 December 2016,
Proof Transcript of Evidence,
2017, p.,41.
Accessible at
https://www.legislation.gov.au/Details/C2016C00482
Australian Capital Territory
(Planning and Land Management) Act 1988
Australian Capital Territory
(Planning and Land Management) Act 1988
Australian Capital Territory
(Planning and Land Management) Act 1988
section 25.
Accessible at
http://www.legislation.act.gov.au/a/1990-59/default.asp
Accessible at
http://www.legislation.act.gov.au/a/1991-100/default.asp
Accessible at
http://www.legislation.act.gov.au/a/2007-24/current/pdf/2007-24.pdf
Planning and Development
Planning and Development
section 46.
Planning and Development
section 48.
Planning and Development
section 50.
Planning and Development
section 49.
Territory Plan, Accessible
https://www.legislation.act.gov.au/ni/2008-27/Current
Planning and Development
Planning and Development Act 2007
, the planning and land authority must
prepare a public availability notice advising that draft variation documents,
which have been
provided to the minister, are available for public inspection.
This notice, which is a notifiable instrument, may be accessed via
Legislation Register website at http://www.legislation.act.gov.au/.
Planning and Development
; The Standing Committee on Planning and Urban Renewal
is currently the appropriate committee.
Planning and Development
section 74.
Planning and Development
section 73A.
Planning and Development
section 73.
Planning and Development
section 75.
Planning and Development
subsection 76(3).
Planning and Development
section 79.
Planning and Development
section 83.
Draft Variation 355 Calwell
Group Centre – recommended version, March 2019, p. 1.
https://www.planning.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0010/1344691/DV355-recommended-to-the-Minister-s69.pdf
Draft Variation 355 Calwell
Group Centre – recommended version, March 2019, p. 6.
https://www.planning.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0010/1344691/DV355-recommended-to-the-Minister-s69.pdf
Draft Variation 355 Calwell
Group Centre – recommended version, March 2019, p. 6.
https://www.planning.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0010/1344691/DV355-recommended-to-the-Minister-s69.pdf
Draft Variation 355 Calwell
Group Centre – recommended version, March 2019, p. 6.
https://www.planning.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0010/1344691/DV355-recommended-to-the-Minister-s69.pdf
https://www.planning.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0010/1344691/DV355-recommended-to-the-Minister-s69.pdf
Planning and Development Act 2007
Planning and Development
Draft Variation 355 Calwell
Group Centre – recommended version, March 2019, p. 2.
https://www.planning.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0010/1344691/DV355-recommended-to-the-Minister-s69.pdf
Draft Variation 355 Calwell
Group Centre – recommended version, March 2019, p. 2.
https://www.planning.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0010/1344691/DV355-recommended-to-the-Minister-s69.pdf
Draft Variation 355 Calwell
Group Centre – recommended version, March 2019, p. 4.
https://www.planning.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0010/1344691/DV355-recommended-to-the-Minister-s69.pdf
Draft Variation 355 Calwell
Group Centre – public consultation version, August 2018, p. 6.
https://www.planning.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/1344738/Att-A-DV355-Calwell-Notifiable-Instrument-public-consultation-notice-s63-and-s64-A14952987.pdf
Draft Variation 355 Calwell
Group Centre – public consultation version, August 2018, p. 6.
https://www.planning.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/1344738/Att-A-DV355-Calwell-Notifiable-Instrument-public-consultation-notice-s63-and-s64-A14952987.pdf
Draft Variation 355 Calwell
Group Centre – recommended version, March 2019, p. 5.
https://www.planning.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0010/1344691/DV355-recommended-to-the-Minister-s69.pdf
Draft Variation 355 Calwell
Group Centre – recommended version, March 2019, p. 5-6.
https://www.planning.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0010/1344691/DV355-recommended-to-the-Minister-s69.pdf
Draft Variation 355 Calwell
Group Centre – Report on Consultation, February 2019,
https://www.planning.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0011/1344674/Report-on-consultation.pdf
Master plans,
http://www.planning.act.gov.au/tools_resources/legislation_plans_registers/plans/master_plans
Master plans,
http://www.planning.act.gov.au/tools_resources/legislation_plans_registers/plans/master_plans
Master plans,
http://www.planning.act.gov.au/tools_resources/legislation_plans_registers/plans/master_plans
Master plans,
http://www.planning.act.gov.au/tools_resources/legislation_plans_registers/plans/master_plans
Calwell Group Centre Master
Plan, September 2016,
https://www.planning.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/983115/20160505-Calwell-Masterplan-Web.pdf
Calwell Group Centre Master
Plan, September 2016,
https://www.planning.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/983115/20160505-Calwell-Masterplan-Web.pdf
https://www.planning.act.gov.au/tools-resources/plans-registers/plans/master_plans/calwell_group_centre_master_plan
Canberra Town Planning,
Submission 01.
Mr van der Walt,
Transcript of Evidence,
29 May 2019, p. 3.
Mr van der Walt,
Transcript of Evidence,
29 May 2019, p. 3.
Mr van der Walt,
Transcript of Evidence,
29 May 2019, p. 3.
Canberra Town Planning,
Submission 01.
Mr van der Walt,
Transcript of Evidence,
29 May 2019, pp. 9-10.
Transcript of
, 29 May 2019, p. 14.
Transcript of
, 29 May 2019, p. 16.
Draft Variation 355 Calwell
Group Centre – recommended version, March 2019, p. 5.
https://www.planning.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0010/1344691/DV355-recommended-to-the-Minister-s69.pdf
Transcript of
29 May 2019, p. 16.
Canberra Town Planning,
Submission 01.
Canberra Town Planning,
Submission 01.
Transcript of
29 May 2019, p. 17.
Canberra Town Planning,
Submission 01.
Mr van der Walt,
Transcript of Evidence,
29 May 2019, p. 9.
Canberra Town Planning,
Submission 01.
Transcript of
, 29 May 2019, pp. 14-15.
Transcript of
, 29 May 2019, p. 15.
Mr van der Walt,
Transcript of Evidence,
29 May 2019, p. 7.
Transcript of
, 29 May 2019, p. 13.
Answer to Question On
Notice No 1
, answered 12 June 2019.
Transcript of
, 29 May 2019, p. 15.
Transcript of
29 May 2019, pp. 15-16.
Answer to Question On
Notice No 1
, answered 12 June 2019.
Canberra Town Planning,
Submission 01.
Mr van der Walt,
Transcript of Evidence,
29 May 2019, p. 4.
Mr van der Walt,
Transcript of Evidence,
29 May 2019, p. 3.
Mr van der Walt,
Transcript of Evidence,
29 May 2019, p. 5.
Mr Tsoulias,
of Evidence,
29 May 2019, p. 5.
Answer to Question On
Notice No 1
, answered 12 June 2019.
Transcript of
29 May 2019, pp. 12-13.
Transcript of
29 May 2019, p. 14.
Transcript of
29 May 2019, p. 16.
Canberra Town Planning,
Submission 01.
Transcript of
29 May 2019, p. 13.
Canberra Town Planning,
Submission 01.
Mr van der Walt,
Transcript of Evidence,
29 May 2019, p. 6.
Canberra Town Planning,
Submission 01.
Transcript of
29 May 2019, p. 18.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.07 MB)
PDF format (523 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter