URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUHRStaCARFF/2014/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:06:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Agriculture and Water Resources (45th Parliament) --- "Making every drop count: Inquiry into water use efficiency programs in agriculture" [2014] AUHRStaCARFF 2 (27 October 2014)
Deputy Chair
Committee Secretariat
Conduct of the inquiry
Other water policy reviews
Scope of this report
Structure of the report
Definitions of water use efficiency
National Water Initiative
Commonwealth water use efficiency programs
Sustainable Rural Water Use and Infrastructure Program
Irrigation infrastructure projects
On-farm irrigation upgrades
Off-farm irrigation upgrades
Improved water knowledge
Water purchase projects
Supply measures
South Australian River Murray Sustainability Program
National infrastructure programs
Distribution of funding across Australia
Committee comment
WUE programs and water productivity
An alternative approach: water buybacks
Environmental flow-on effects
Unintended consequences of WUE programs
Arguing benefits of efficiencies
Crop production
Committee comment
Program design and water objectives
Program administration, delivery and evaluation
Committee comment
Improving environmental flows and river health
Committee comment
Improving the development and implementation of irrigation efficiencies
Research on water efficiency technologies
Committee comment
Impediments to efficiencies
Energy pricing
Meteorological forecasting
Committee comment
Benefitting regional communities
Committee comment
Infrastructure for the future
Committee comment
Submissions
Thursday, 30 March 2017
Private capacity
Wednesday, 5 April 2017
Border Rivers Food and Fibre
Cotton Australia
Central Downs Irrigators Ltd
Thursday, 6 April 2017
Namoi Water
Private capacity
Gwydir Valley Irrigators Association
NSW Department of Primary Industries
Thursday, 25 May 2017
Department of Agriculture and Water Resources
Thursday, 1 June 2017
Murray–Darling Basin Authority
Thursday, 22 June 2017
National Irrigators' Council
Thursday, 10 August 2017
National Farmers' Federation
Tuesday, 22 August 2017
Government of Western Australia
Harvey Water
Southern Forests Irrigation Scheme
Collie Shire
Wednesday, 23 August 2017
Private capacity
Thursday, 24 August 2017
Environment Victoria
Southern Rural Water
Netafim Australia Pty Ltd
Private capacity
Australian Academy of Technology and Engineering
Greater Shepparton City Council
Goulburn Broken Catchment Management Authority
Thursday, 7 September 2017
Department of Agriculture and Water Resources
Friday, 15 September 2017
Ricegrowers' Association of Australia
Murrumbidgee Irrigation
Coleambally Irrigation Co-operative Limited
Murray Irrigation
AgriFutures Australia
Macquarie River Food & Fibre
PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Making every drop count
Inquiry into water use efficiency programs in agriculture
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Agriculture and Water
© Commonwealth of Australia
ISBN 978-1-74366-757-6 (Printed Version)
ISBN 978-1-74366-758-3 (HTML Version)
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 3.0 Australia License.
The details of this licence are available on the Creative Commons website:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/au/
Terms of Reference
Abbreviations
List of Recommendations
1 Introduction
Conduct of the inquiry
Other water policy reviews
Scope of this report
Structure of the report
2 Water use efficiency
Definitions of water use
National Water Initiative
Commonwealth water use efficiency
Committee comment
3 Assessing WUE program
effectiveness
WUE programs and water
productivity
An alternative approach: water
Environmental flow-on effects
Crop production
Committee comment
4 Reviewing program design, delivery and
administration
Program design and water
Program administration, delivery and
Committee comment
5 Improving environmental flows and
irrigation efficiencies
Improving environmental flows and river
Committee comment
Improving the development and implementation
of irrigation efficiencies
Committee comment
Impediments to efficiencies
Committee comment
6 Sustaining communities and
infrastructure
Benefitting regional communities
Committee comment
Infrastructure for the future
Committee comment
Appendix A. Submissions and
Appendix B. Public
Mr Rick Wilson MP
Deputy Chair
Ms Meryl Swanson MP (until 15 June 2017)
Ms Justine Keay MP (from 19 June 2017)
Mr Matt Keogh MP
Hon Joel Fitzgibbon MP (from 15 June 2017)
Mr Andrew Broad MP
Dr John McVeigh MP
Mr Tony Pasin MP
Mr Rowan Ramsey MP
Committee Secretariat
Committee Secretary Dr Anna Dacre
Inquiry Secretary Mr Anthony Overs
Researcher Mr Peter Pullen
Office Manager Ms Jessica Hargreaves
Inquiry Secretary Dr Joel Bateman
Terms of Reference
The Committee will inquire into and report on water use efficiency in
Australian agriculture. The inquiry will have particular regard
§ adequacy and efficacy of current programs in achieving irrigation
water use efficiencies
§ how existing expenditure provides value for money for the
Commonwealth
§ possible improvements to programs, their administration and
§ other matters, including, but not limited to, maintaining or
increasing agriculture production, consideration of environmental
adoption of world's best practice.
Abbreviations
ACRI Australian Cotton Research Institute
ATSE Australian Academy of Technological Sciences and Engineering
BI Barossa Infrastructure
BOM Bureau of Meteorology
CEWH Commonwealth Environmental Water Holder
COFFIE Commonwealth On-farm Further Irrigation Efficiency
CSIRO Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation
DAWR Department of Agriculture and Water Resources
EOI Expression of interest
GBCMA Goulburn-Broken Catchment Management Authority
GVIA Gwydir Valley Irrigators Association
HWIA Harvey Water Irrigation Area
IIOs Irrigation infrastructure operators
MDBA Murray-Darling Basin Authority
MI Murrumbidgee Irrigation
MIA Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area
NCEA National Centre for Engineering in Agriculture
NFF National Farmers’ Federation
NIC National Irrigators’ Council
NWC National Water Commission
NWI National Water Initiative
NSW-DPI New South Wales Department of Primary Industries
OFIEP On-farm Irrigation Efficiency Program
PIIOP Private Irrigation Infrastructure Operators Program
PIIP-SA Private Irrigation Infrastructure Program – SA
RD&E Research, Development and Extension
RGA Ricegrowers’ Association of Australia
RIC Regional Investment Corporation
SARMSP South Australian River Murray Sustainability Program
SRW Southern Rural Water
SRWUIP Sustainable Rural Water Use and Infrastructure Program
STBIFM Sustaining the Basin – Irrigated Farm Modernisation program
WUE Water use efficiency
List of Recommendations
Recommendation 1
4.51 The Committee recommends that the Department of Agriculture and Water
Resources conduct an internal review of water use efficiency
(WUE) programs to
address the following issues:
§ minimising delays following submission of expressions of interest to
securing agreement and approvals,
§ assisting program delivery partners to determine administrative costs
and consider mechanisms to reduce up-front costs borne
by those delivering
§ reducing impediments for smaller irrigators to participate in
§ providing mechanisms for irrigators to apply for an extension to
program timelines, given the impact of weather and other uncertainties,
§ undertaking baseline measuring of regional ground or surface water
systems at the commencement of each program, and then ongoing
measuring to
determine impacts of changed water practices resulting from WUE funded projects,
§ ensuring that the assessment process includes consideration of the
project life cycle contribution to the financial independence
and long-term
resilience of the irrigated agriculture sector, and does not skew market crop
decisions or create reliance, and
§ ensuring defined regular evaluation points to monitor and assess
achievement against a long term objective of financial independence
irrigated agricultural sector.
The Department should provide the results of this review to this Committee no
later than 1 June 2018.
Recommendation 2
4.54 The Committee recommends that the Auditor-General consider conducting a
performance audit of Australian Government funded water
use efficiency programs
to assess the design process, evaluation arrangements, and effective and
efficient administration of these
programs. The Committee recommends that the
audit take place in 2018.
Recommendation 3
4.60 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government act
expeditiously in response to the final report of the Productivity
Commission’s Review of the National Water Initiative (due to be provided
to Government by 31 December 2017) and ensure that:
§ the final report is promptly made available for public release,
§ the recommendations are considered and an Australian Government
response is made public by 31 March 2018, and
§ recommendations requiring national agreement are considered by COAG at
its first meeting of 2018.
Recommendation 4
5.54 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government establish and
provide seed funding for a coordinating Research, Development
and Extension
(RD&E) body to work with the agriculture sector in order to:
§ Accelerate the adoption of existing cutting-edge irrigation
technologies, and
§ Promote innovation and the development of new water efficiency
technologies.
Recommendation 5
5.79 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government investigate
mechanisms to address factors such as the rising cost of
electricity and cost of
alternative energies which may act as impediments to the adoption of water use
efficiency technologies in
irrigated agriculture.
5.80 The Committee suggests that this research be conducted by the Research,
Development and Extension (RD&E) body set out in
Recommendation 4.
Recommendation 6
5.83 The Committee recommends that the Bureau of Meteorology make additions
to its weather radar services to ensure up to date forecasting
and coordinated
information is available in all required irrigated areas.
Recommendation 7
6.26 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government establish an
integrated taskforce to assist Regional Development Authorities
§ develop targeted initiatives to assist regional communities which are
impacted by the local irrigated agriculture sector transitioning
to water use
efficiencies, and
§ ensure ongoing monitoring of the social and economic health of these
communities.
Recommendation 8
6.39 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government require any
water efficiency infrastructure funding or assistance provided
to set out:
§ the defined public good benefit,
§ detailed plans for the full lifecycle costings of the infrastructure,
including asset depreciation and replacement, and
§ a detailed intention of how these lifecycle costings will be funded.
1. Introduction
1.1 Water is a ‘fugitive
, but also critical
to the sustainability of our environment, urban and regional communities, and
agricultural production. Effectively
calibrating the efficient use of water as a
resource is a complex and continuous task.
1.2 Growing demand for water and fluctuating weather patterns mean we are
required to do more with less – to maximise water
productivity for the
balanced benefit of the environment, communities and agriculture.
1.3 To this end, successive Australian Governments have made substantial
investments in water use efficiency programs. The efficacy
of these programs,
their administration and achievement of long term sustainability goals for the
environment and for agricultural
production is the subject of this inquiry.
Conduct of the
1.4 On 9 February 2017, the Standing Committee on Agriculture and Water
Resources (the Committee) agreed to conduct an inquiry into
water use efficiency
(WUE) in Australian agriculture. The inquiry was referred by the Minister for
Agriculture and Water Resources,
the Hon. Barnaby Joyce MP.
1.5 The terms of reference for the inquiry were as follows:
The Committee will inquire into and report on water use efficiency in Australian
agriculture. The inquiry will have particular regard
§ adequacy and efficacy of current programs in achieving
irrigation water use efficiencies
§ how existing expenditure provides value for money for the
Commonwealth
§ possible improvements to programs, their administration and
§ other matters, including, but not limited to, maintaining or
increasing agriculture production, consideration of environmental
adoption of world's best practice.
1.6 The Minister for Agriculture and Resources, the Hon. Barnaby Joyce MP,
also noted that the House of Representatives Standing Committee
on Environment
and Energy would be conducting an inquiry into the management of Commonwealth
environmental water resources and therefore
suggested that the Committee on
Agriculture and Water Resources ‘may wish to limit its consideration of
environmental flows
in order to avoid duplication’.
1.7 The inquiry was advertised on the Australian Parliament House website and
on social media. The Committee sought submissions from
State and Territory
governments, agricultural and irrigation representative groups, environmental
groups, academics, and interested
individuals.
1.8 The Committee received 50 submissions, six supplementary submissions and
one exhibit. The submissions and exhibits are listed
at Appendix A.
1.9 The Committee held 12 public hearings in Canberra, Toowoomba, Narrabri,
Harvey in Western Australia, Adelaide, Melbourne and Griffith
in New South
Wales. A list of hearings and the people who participated in them is at Appendix
1.10 The Committee held a number of site inspections which provided valuable
insights into the implementation of water efficiency
initiatives and new
technologies. These are outlined in a number of text boxes throughout the
Other water policy reviews
1.11 Water policy is one of the most heavily scrutinised policy areas in
Australia, which is appropriate given its vital importance
to regional Australia
and the broader Australian economy.
1.12 As such, in addition to this inquiry, there are a number of reviews of
different aspects of Australia's water policy underway
or nearing conclusion.
One of the most significant is the Productivity Commission's triennial review of
the National Water Initiative
1.13 The NWI is Australia’s ‘blueprint’ for ongoing water
reform and management. It was agreed by the Council of
Australian Governments in
2004, and aims to bring a nationally-consistent approach to the management,
measurement, pricing and trading
of water. In its submission, the Department of
Agriculture and Water Resources (DAWR) noted that:
Under the NWI, governments have made a number of commitments, including
§ Prepare comprehensive water plans
§ Achieve sustainable water use in over-allocated or stressed water
§ Introduce registers of water rights and standards for water accounting
§ Expand trade in water rights
§ Improve pricing for water storage and delivery
§ Better manage urban water
1.14 The NWI was initially reviewed by the National Water Commission (NWC)
every two years. However, after completing reviews in 2007,
2009, 2011, and 2014
(following a change to triennial reviews), the NWC was abolished in 2015 and its
assessment functions transferred
to the Productivity Commission.
1.15 The Productivity Commission is currently conducting its 2017 review of
the NWI. A draft report was released for comment in September
2017, and the
final report will be presented to the Government by 31 December 2017. It will be
published in the first half of 2018.
1.16 The Productivity Commission is also required to conduct a review of the
effectiveness of the implementation of the Murray-Darling
Basin Plan at
five-year intervals, the next of which must be completed by 31 December
1.17 In addition, the Murray-Darling Basin Authority (MDBA) is conducting an
interim evaluation of the progress of the Murray-Darling
Basin Plan. In its
submission the MDBA said that the review:
will be broad-ranging, including analysis of: environmental water planning,
management and outcomes; implementation of water trade
rules and the water
quality and salinity management plan; implementation of the adaptive management
elements of the Basin Plan (such
as the Sustainable Diversion Limit Adjustment
Mechanism); the progress with Commonwealth water recovery (including the on-farm
off-farm infrastructure improvement programs); and the social, economic and
cultural outcomes from all these
activities.
MDBA submission also noted that the Murray-Darling Basin Ministerial Council
agreed in March 2017 to commission an independent
analysis of efficiency
measures – that is, measures which aim to recover water for the
environment in ways that have no adverse
social or economic impacts. The MDBA
advised that the report is due to be presented in December
1.19 The Committee also notes that a number of administrative and judicial
reviews commenced in 2017 in relation to alleged maladministration
allocations.
Scope of this report
1.20 Collectively, the Australian Government’s WUE programs total more
than $15 billion in spending.
this report the Committee considers the operation of these Australian Government
funded WUE programs. In particular, the Committee
is focussed on the efficacy
and cost-benefit returns for irrigators, primary producers, communities and the
environment.
1.21 The Committee considers the administration of these programs, and
whether there are improvements that may be made to increase
their effectiveness
and efficiency.
1.22 It is important to note that while this report necessarily refers to
irrigation in the Murray-Darling Basin area, this is a national
inquiry and
considers the implementation of and impediments to water efficiency across
agricultural production in Australia. The
Committee has sought the views of
irrigators from around Australia, and the report includes wide ranging
discussions of water use
efficiency initiatives and issues experienced in both
the Murray-Darling Basin and other areas of the country.
1.23 It is also important to note that this report does not examine the
Murray-Darling Basin Plan. The inquiry has been conducted
Plan’s implementation period, which is set to conclude in 2020. The
Committee supports the Plan and encourages all
Basin stakeholders to work
towards its goals and assist in its implementation. While the Committee has
reviewed WUE programs which
are designed to recover water under the Plan, its
recommendations go to systemic operational issues of WUE programs,
administration
concerns and long-term achievement and sustainability
objectives.
Structure of the
1.24 Chapter 2 considers the definitions of WUE and outlines the rationale
for Government spending on water use efficiency programs.
It provides a brief
outline of water use efficiency programs funded by the Australian
Government.
1.25 Chapter 3 describes the objectives of WUE programs, and summarises the
various views on the effectiveness of this approach.
1.26 Chapter 4 considers the efficacy of WUE programs, particularly the
design, delivery, administration, and evaluation of the programs.
1.27 Chapter 5 considers improvements that may be made to gain greater
environmental flows and drive implementation of WUE technologies.
1.28 Chapter 6 addresses sustainability concerns of regional communities
impacted by the transition to WUEs and the future effects
infrastructure.
2. Water use efficiency programs
2.1 This chapter sets out some key understandings of the term water use
efficiency (WUE), and outlines the purpose of various Government
funded water
use efficiency programs. It provides an overview of the types of programs in
operation, and the distribution of funding
across Australia.
Definitions of water use
2.2 The term WUE can refer to many different approaches, and submissions to
the inquiry have used the term in a range of contexts.
2.3 The Department of Agriculture and Water Resources (DAWR) noted that WUE
can be defined in two main ways – efficiency in
the use of water, and in
the production of crops:
There are a number of different ways in which water use efficiency can be
defined including technical efficiency and economic efficiency.
Technical efficiency can arise from improvements in technology or the
methodology employed by farmers or water delivery bodies, including
for example
moving from flood irrigation to spray or drip irrigation which results in
maintaining or increasing production levels
with less water.
Economic efficiency where higher value crops can be grown, multiple crops can be
grown over a year or through the operation of water
markets whereby supply and
demand forces enable water to be traded and used to achieve higher value
David Adamson, Dr Adam Loch, Associate Professor Sarah Wheeler and Professor
Jeff Conner provided a range of definitions relating
to irrigation:
Water-use efficiency can be defined via agronomic, engineering or economic
approaches. Irrigation efficiency is the ratio between
water diverted and water
consumed by crops; field application efficiency is the ratio of crop irrigation
water requirements and water
delivered to fields; water-use efficiency is crop
yield per unit of water diverted (e.g. kg/m3); while water-use productivity
to the dollar value of water produced per unit of water applied. From an
economic and farm perspective, water-use productivity is
probably the most
important measure as it represents the actual net dollar value earned by the
2.5 Professors
Quentin Grafton and John Williams discussed this topic by reference to
irrigation efficiency, which permits like-for-like
comparisons:
For the purpose of this submission we define water use efficiency as irrigation
efficiency. Irrigation efficiency is the physical
ratio of the amount of water
beneficially consumed by growing crops to the volume of water either extracted
from the water resource
or the volume of water actually delivered to a
Gwydir Valley Irrigators Association, by contrast, defined WUE in terms of the
amount of crop that can be produced per unit
Irrigation water use efficiency is best defined as production per megalitre of
applied water. To enable equitable comparisons between
irrigation systems in
assessing their ability to provide water use efficiency outcomes whilst
maintaining production, the GVIA utilised
and therefore, recommends the adoption
of Gross Production Water Use Index (GPWUI). This index combines total seasonal
(rainfall and irrigation) with soil moisture and yield. This index
means that comparisons can be made across years and across farms.
The higher the
GPWUI the more water efficient the
2.7 Similarly,
Mr Peter Smith characterised WUE in terms of production per megalitre of water
applied to a crop:
Water use efficiency is defined as the amount of production per unit of water
applied. (It is not really a true ‘efficiency’
because it does not
compare categories with the same units – it is better termed a
‘water use index’.) Irrigation
efficiency is defined as the amount
of water applied compared to the amount of water used productively (it is a true
‘efficiency’).
The quest for improved irrigation efficiency as a way
to improve water use efficiency is premised on the notion that too much water
currently being used in the production of produce i.e. that overwatering or
excessive losses are occurring. Where this is the
case, improving irrigation
efficiency will be achieved by reducing water use while maintaining or perhaps
improving productivity,
which amounts to an improvement in water use efficiency
(or water use
Committee has the view that the primary purpose of this inquiry is to assess the
efficacy and value for money of the WUE programs
funded and implemented by the
Government. As such, this report will consider how those programs have affected
irrigators’ production
per megalitre of water (their water use efficiency)
as well as the ratio of water consumed to water diverted (irrigation
efficiency).
This approach takes into account the balance of environmental,
community and agricultural outcomes and cost-benefit returns.
National Water
2.9 The National Water Initiative (NWI) aims to bring a nationally-consistent
approach to the management, measurement, pricing and
trading of water. As
mentioned in chapter 1, it has been subject to ongoing reviews since its
agreement in 2004. The Productivity
Commission is currently conducting a review
of the NWI, with its draft report released for comment in September 2017 and the
report due to be presented to the Government by 31 December 2017.
2.10 The Productivity Commission has been tasked with the role of monitoring
the progress of the NWI. The current review is the first
activity in an ongoing
program of work which includes assessing progress against the objectives and
outcomes of the NWI every three
years. The Productivity Commission has noted
For this first review the terms of reference have been widened to consider
future reform priorities and the scope for improving the
NWI to enable necessary
Intergovernmental Agreement on a NWI sets out the objective of the Initiative,
stating that:
Full implementation of this Agreement will result in a nationally-compatible,
market, regulatory and planning based system of managing
surface and groundwater
resources for rural and urban use that optimises economic, social and
environmental outcomes by achieving
the following:
i. clear and
nationally-compatible characteristics for secure water access entitlements,
ii. transparent, statutory-based water planning,
iii. statutory provision for environmental and other public benefit outcomes,
and improved environmental management practices,
iv. complete the return of all currently overallocated or overused systems to
environmentally-sustainable levels of extraction,
v. progressive removal of barriers to trade in water and meeting other
requirements to facilitate the broadening and deepening of
the water market,
with an open trading market to be in place,
vi. clarity around the assignment of risk arising from future changes in the
availability of water for the consumptive pool,
vii. water accounting which is able to meet the information needs of
different water systems in respect to planning, monitoring, trading,
environmental management and on-farm management,
viii. policy settings which facilitate water use efficiency and innovation in
urban and rural areas,
ix. addressing future adjustment issues that may impact on water users and
communities, and
x. recognition of the connectivity between surface and groundwater resources
and connected systems managed as a single
2.12 The Intergovernmental Agreement also sets out the following eight key
elements to achieving these objectives:
i. Water Access Entitlements and Planning Framework,
ii. Water Markets and Trading,
iii. Best Practice Water Pricing,
iv. Integrated Management of Water for Environmental and Other Public Benefit
v. Water Resource Accounting,
vi. Urban Water Reform,
vii. Knowledge and Capacity Building, and
viii. Community Partnerships and
Adjustment.
2.13 The Productivity Commission’s draft report concludes that, as a
result of past water reform, there have been significant
improvements to
‘the way in which water resources are managed and water services are
delivered, and this has resulted in significant
benefits for the
community’.
2.14 In regards to current progress, the Commission notes that
‘progress has slowed [which] is inevitable given that many key
reforms have, to a large extent, already been implemented’. However the
Commission goes on to add that ’there are
key areas of reform that remain
unfinished’. The draft report provides a summary of progress which is set
out in Box 2.1.
1. Water access entitlements and planning frameworks
All jurisdictions, except Western Australia and the Northern Territory,
have created statutory based, clear and secure long term water
consumptive uses.
Water planning arrangements have been established for the majority of areas
of intensive water use across Australia. Most jurisdictions
have more than 80
per cent of water use managed under water plans. This means the sharing of water
resources between consumptive
uses and the environment has been established in
consultative processes, informed by scientific and other assessments.
2. Water markets and trading
Water markets have been established that have allowed water to be traded to
higher value uses and other steps have been taken to improve
the efficiency of
water markets, most notably in the Murray Darling Basin.
3. Best practice water pricing and institutional arrangements
Urban service providers are generally pricing at the levels required by the
NWI, despite some instances of underpricing.
Independent economic regulators set prices or revenues for major urban
water suppliers in New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia,
Tasmania and the
ACT. Western Australia, the Northern Territory, Queensland and regional New
South Wales are exceptions in various
Cost reflective pricing outcomes are generally being achieved for most
existing irrigation infrastructure, but new irrigation infrastructure
to be underpriced. Queensland, Western Australia and Tasmania could make better
use of economic regulation.
There is inconsistent recovery of water planning and management costs from
users across Australia.
4. Integrated management of water for environmental and other public
benefit outcomes
Environmental sustainability has been supported by formal provisions of
water for the environment and progress has been made on rebalancing
overallocated systems.
All jurisdictions have managers with responsibility for environmental
flows, and some arrangements are in place to coordinate water
use in shared
5. Water resource accounting
Water metering, accounting and compliance systems are in place in all
6. Urban water reform
Water reuse, water use efficiency, water sensitive urban design and
innovation has improved since the introduction of the NWI.
evidence of success.
7. Knowledge and capacity building
There have been advances in knowledge and capacity across areas identified
in the NWI.
8. Community partnerships and adjustment
All jurisdictions have set in legislation, or policy, minimum requirements
for stakeholder engagement and consultation when developing
and reviewing water
State and Territory Governments have delivered improved decision making
through open and timely consultation with stakeholders. This
has been supported
by the publication of supporting information at key decision
Commonwealth water use
efficiency programs
2.15 DAWR argued that ‘Australian Government policies and programmes to
promote improved water use efficiency, which are underpinned
by NWI principles,
almost invariably lead to improvements in the productivity of water, with
consequent improvements to local and
regional economic
performance’.
2.16 Water productivity is a key element of WUE programs which are designed
to address the twin problems of environmental sustainability
and declining water
delivery infrastructure in rural Australia. In demonstration of the importance
of water efficiency gains, DAWR
cites the estimate that, in 2008-09, 34 per cent
(1 888GL) of water supplied by irrigation in the Murray-Darling Basin was
Reducing that proportion
will serve to allow more water for environmental purposes or to be used
productively on farms in the region.
As DAWR notes, ‘More efficient use of
available environmental water allows for higher [Sustainable Diversion Limits],
hence a reduction in the Basin Plan’s 2 750GL environmental
water recovery target, thereby reducing the social and economic
impacts of water
2.17 DAWR stated that Australian Government investment in WUE programs is
designed to follow three primary themes:
§ ‘Reducing existing over allocation of water systems through more
efficient use of available water resources’,
§ ‘Capturing surplus water in systems to enable irrigation
agriculture to expand through programmes’, and
§ ‘Enhancing water security and resilience to meet the challenges
associated with system and flow
variability’.
2.18 This section outlines some of the main categories of WUE programs in
Australia and the level of funding they receive. Collectively,
the Australian
Government’s WUE programs total more than $15 billion in
Sustainable Rural Water Use
and Infrastructure Program
2.19 The $10 billion Sustainable Rural Water Use and Infrastructure Program
(SRWUIP) is an umbrella program funding over 50 individual
programs with the
objective of helping to ‘secure a long term sustainable future for
irrigated agriculture and communities,
deliver substantial and lasting returns
to the environment and improve the health of rivers, wetlands and freshwater
ecosystems’.
2.20 Projects funded under SRWUIP include on- and off-farm irrigation
upgrades and projects supporting rivers and wetlands, as well
as those that
improve water knowledge and market
The DAWR website
identifies three components of the SRWUIP:
§ Irrigation infrastructure projects,
§ Water purchase measures, and
§ Supply measures.
2.21 Mr John Robertson, an Assistant Secretary in DAWR’s Water
Division, explained that SRWUIP has ‘a high-level monitoring
evaluation plan’ for the program as a whole, as well as specific
monitoring and evaluation processes for the individual
projects which make up
Irrigation infrastructure
2.22 While irrigation infrastructure works can be classified as either
on-farm or off-farm, many of the projects funded by the Australian
involve elements of each. That is, different programs may fund not only
over-arching off-farm infrastructure (such as
network supply channels) but also
projects for specific upgrades on individual farms.
On-farm irrigation
2.23 Over 2 000 projects designed to improve on-farm water efficiency have
been funded in the Murray-Darling Basin under SRWUIP. Examples
of the types of
works included are ‘laser levelling, reconfiguration of irrigation
layouts, installation of new infrastructure
such as recycling systems, piping,
and drip or spray systems to improve in-field application
2.24 DAWR notes that on-farm projects ‘have made it possible to access
significant volumes of water that would have otherwise
been lost to seepage and
evaporation’.
2.25 Irrigators receive funding under SRWUIP for on-farm projects and then
provide a proportion of the consequential water savings
to the Australian
Government for environmental watering. DAWR noted that irrigators, on average,
retain approximately 30 per cent
of the water saved through the
2.26 Overall water efficiency, as calculated from over 1 000 projects funded
under the On-Farm Irrigation Efficiency Program, is expected
to increase by an
average of 18 per cent.
program has funded over 1 500 individual projects (to October 2017) and total
Australian Government funding across five rounds
Off-farm irrigation
2.27 DAWR detailed the purpose of off-farm irrigation projects:
Australian Government off-farm programmes delivered in the Basin aim to improve
the efficiency and productivity of water use and
management of private
irrigation networks. These programmes deliver water savings by reducing the loss
of water from irrigation networks
and farms through seepage, evaporation and
escapes and contribute to the Australian Government’s water recovery
work undertaken under such projects includes, in the Murray-Darling Basin, the
modernisation of over 900 kilometres of irrigation
2.29 The nearly $1 billion Goulburn-Murray Water Connections Project Stage 2
is the largest Australian Government irrigation infrastructure
project under
SRWUIP. DAWR estimates that the upgrades – including the modernisation of
supply channels and establishment of
direct connections for customers –
will increase system delivery efficiency from 70 per cent to 85 per
2.30 The New South Wales State Priority Project – Private Irrigation
Infrastructure Operators Program in NSW has received $879
Commonwealth funding for a combination of on- and off-farm projects including
channel modernisation, improved irrigation
delivery infrastructure and upgrading
of pumps and on-farm infrastructure. Fourteen overall projects and 514
individual irrigator
projects have been
Improved water
2.31 A further form of project funded under SRWUIP serves to increase water
efficiency through improved water knowledge and science.
2.32 The Irrigation Hotspots Assessment Program ($2 million) and the
Irrigation Modernisation Planning Assistance Program (over $6
million) are
funded through the SRWUIP. The programs served to identify ‘key areas of
water loss’ and provide the basis
for modernisation
2.33 The Irrigation Hotspots Assessment Program ran from 2008 until 2011, and
funded 12 projects.
The funding
was provided to nine irrigation water providers to identify their sources of
water loss; all providers received funding
under the Irrigation Modernisation
Planning Assistance Program to develop a plan to respond to the identified
hotspots of water loss.
the projects received funding from the Private Irrigation Infrastructure
Operators Program in New South Wales to implement
2.34 The Irrigation Modernisation Planning Assistance Program began in 2008
and concluded in 2013, in which time it funded 23
Project funding
enabled the providers to receive independent expert assistance in developing a
modernisation plan.
Water purchase
2.35 The Water Purchase Programme (previously known as Restoring the Balance
in the Murray-Darling Basin Program), provides funding
($2.973 billion) to
purchasing water entitlements in the Murray-Darling
2.36 Water purchase limits are capped at 1 500GL. As DAWR’s
submission noted, the Australian Government has shifted its focus
water entitlement purchases towards spending on infrastructure projects, and
stated that ‘Government investments
in the Basin go beyond water recovery;
they are strategic investments in the future of irrigation in the
2.37 DAWR defines supply measures as ‘works, river operations or rule
changes that enable the use of less water while achieving
environmental outcomes’. $1.265 billion has been committed to supply
measures projects, with the aim of saving 650GL
from the Basin Plan’s
recovery target.
South Australian River
Murray Sustainability Program
2.38 Funded by the Australian Government and delivered by the South
Australian Government, the South Australian River Murray Sustainability
(SARMSP) is funded to $265 million, including $120 million for irrigation
efficiency improvements and water purchase and
$120 million towards irrigation
industry assistance. The remaining $25 million is for regional economic
development.
2.39 One hundred and eighty six proposals have been assessed to September
The South Australian
Government is responsible for the assessment process, including technical due
diligence to ensure that the proposed
works will result in water savings and
that the works are properly costed and fit for
National infrastructure
2.40 Beyond SRWUIP, the Australian Government has committed $2.5 billion
towards two national programs to fast-track the construction
infrastructure: the National Water Infrastructure Development Fund ($500
million) and the National Water Infrastructure
Loan Facility ($2
2.41 The Development Fund is a ten-year program consisting of a feasibility
component and a capital component. $59.5 million was committed
to 39 feasibility
studies – including approximately $40.4 million for northern Australian
projects – to inform investment
decisions on new or augmented water
infrastructure programs including dams, pipelines, weirs and managed aquifer
2.42 The capital component ($440 million) of the Development Fund is
available for state and territory governments ‘to accelerate
and co-fund
the construction of economically viable water infrastructure that will provide
water to underpin the growth of regional
economies and
communities’.
2.43 Seventy six expressions of interest (EOI) to the Development Fund had
been assessed (to September 2017). DAWR noted that EOIs
are assessed by the
Department, an independent panel of technical experts and an Australian
Government interdepartmental governance
2.44 To October 2017, six projects, totalling $293.1 million, had received
funding commitments under the National Water Infrastructure
Development
2.45 The Loan Facility provides access for state and territory governments to
concessional loans to co-fund the construction of economically
viable water
infrastructure.
currently assessed in the same way as for the Development Fund; in 2018
management of the EOI and assessment process will
be transferred to the Regional
Investment Corporation
Distribution of funding
across Australia
2.46 DAWR noted that ‘There is no specific pool of funding for
activities outside the Murray-Darling Basin; funding is allocated
government policy
objectives’.
billion allocated to water infrastructure modernisation and efficiency
improvements by the Australian Government since
September 2013, $1.8 billion has
been on projects in the Murray-Darling
2.47 However, the National Water Infrastructure Development Fund and National
Water Infrastructure Loans Facility are both available
for projects where
As noted above, $40.5
million of the $59.5 million allocated to feasibility studies under the
Development Fund has gone to projects
in northern Australia.
2.48 DAWR also noted that funding under SRWUIP has been used in
non-Murray-Darling Basin projects, including 13 irrigation schemes
in Tasmania,
two pipelines in Western Australia and several urban water
Committee comment
2.49 There is no doubt that Australian Government investment in WUE programs
is substantial. While funding is concentrated in certain
regional areas, water
use efficiency is a national issue and a range of different programs are funded
across the country.
2.50 With such a substantial and ongoing financial investment, measuring and
evaluating the impacts of these programs is critical.
However this is also a
complex and shifting task. The next chapter sets out evidence received regarding
the effectiveness of water
use efficiency programs – in particular in
achieving long term sustainable environmental, community and agricultural
3. Assessing WUE program effectiveness
3.1 As outlined in chapter 2, Australian Government expenditure on water use
efficiency (WUE) programs is substantial, and forms part
of the National Water
Initiative framework. Given the extent of this expenditure and its concentration
in certain regions and to
certain segments of the agricultural sector, the
Committee sought to assess the overall effectiveness of WUE programs as an
to drive water agricultural productivity, and so recover adequate water
for the environment.
3.2 The Committee received a divergent range of evidence on the effectiveness
of WUE programs against these objectives. This chapter
summarises the following
range of evidence received, including:
§ increases in on-farm water productivity from WUE programs,
§ alternative approaches, such as water buybacks,
§ environmental flow-on effects from WUE measures, and
§ impacts on cropping decisions.
WUE programs and water
productivity
3.3 Submissions from governments, irrigators, irrigation infrastructure
operators (IIOs) and agricultural groups were almost uniformly
positive when
describing the efficacy of WUE programs. Evidence from these groups has focused
on the efficiency gains made by irrigators
and IIOs as a result of the
Australian Government’s programs, and pointed to environmental benefits
arising from the water
entitlements transferred to governments under the
3.4 The Department of Agriculture and Water Resources (DAWR) argued that WUE
programs have wide-ranging positive impacts:
Australian Government policies and programmes to promote improved water use
efficiency ... almost invariably lead to improvements
in the productivity of
water, with consequent improvements to local and regional economic performance.
This can range from more reliable
crop production in the face of variable water
supply, improved management of water resources including through water metering;
land-use planning; better use of information for improving business
efficiencies (such as use of medium-term weather forecasts);
improved irrigation
or industrial process scheduling to account for rainfall
variability.
3.5 Similarly,
the South Australian government submission argued that:
Case studies of on-farm efficiency projects show that participating
agribusinesses are now benefiting from greater productivity,
diversification and quality. Many agribusinesses now have increased flexibility
and resilience, which will enable them to adapt
more easily to future climate
change and market conditions. Improved irrigation efficiency has also led to
land management benefits,
such as reduced water logging and improved salinity
management.
New South Wales Department of Primary Industries (NSW-DPI) highlighted the
following benefits of WUE programs:
It has been estimated that increasing the water productivity of NSW rain-fed and
irrigated agriculture by 2% by 2020 could contribute
up to $226 million annually
to the NSW economy. The majority of this increase would be due to productivity
gains resulting from improvements
in water use efficiency and adoption of best
management practices ... Water recovered as a result of infrastructure
modernisation
is shared between the irrigator and the environment, providing
farm scale productivity and profitability outcomes in addition to
environmental
outcomes sought by the Basin
3.7 NSW-DPI
also drew the Committee’s attention to improvements in WUE which have
already been made under the Sustaining the
Basin – Irrigated Farm
Modernisation program (STBIFM):
Positive local and regional social and economic outcomes have been achieved
through investment by STBIFM proponents in irrigation
related industries ... An
analysis of STBIFM’s expected benefits has indicated
§ capacity building activities will result in a $6.3
million per annum increase to productivity across the irrigation industry
the northern valleys,
§ an increase in productivity on modernised irrigation area by $24.7
million (15 percent per annum) as a result of improved water
use efficiency,
§ an increase in production of $11.9 million per annum as a result of
water savings retained by the
participants.
3.8 Farmers and irrigator groups also argued that WUE programs are generally
effective in improving farm efficiency and productivity,
although some
questioned the value of returning water to the environment as part of the
programs. The Queensland Farmers Federation,
for example, noted simply that:
Financial support provided by the Queensland Government has been effective in
encouraging irrigators to invest to make system and
practice changes on
National Irrigators’ Council (NIC) similarly argued that WUE programs have
had a substantially positive impact on productivity:
NIC contends that the on the ground evidence shows conclusively that Australia
is gaining the benefit of increasingly efficient use
of water for irrigated
production, and the sector should be acknowledged as being among the most
efficient and productive users of
water in the world ... Evidence from industry
is that farmers have significantly improved their per hectare
3.10 Murray
Irrigation, an IIO which provides irrigation water to more than 2 000 farms in
southern NSW, was certain that WUE programs
have been effective:
There is no doubt that the efficiency programs that Murray Irrigation has been
involved in have contributed to greater water use
efficiency for both the
company itself and our
Goulburn-Broken Catchment Management Authority (GBCMA) argued that the programs
have helped to modernise irrigation infrastructure
and have improved the
operation of many farms:
[Irrigators] have been able to take advantage of modernised regional delivery
systems to improve technology on their properties,
resulting in water savings,
increased productivity and labour
noted irrigators’ view that the improvements made under WUE programs have
led directly to improvements in irrigators’
confidence and resilience:
Irrigators reported improved confidence in the future, such as increased farm
succession, business expansion, improved farm business
resilience and the
ability to take advantage of higher service levels from the GMW [Goulburn-Murray
Water] Connections Program ...
Many farmers have indicated that they would not
be able to do the works without the funding
assistance.
3.13 Outside
the Murray-Darling Basin, Southern Rural Water (SRW) also argued that government
programs have improved productivity
and reduced the amount of wasted irrigation
Off farm WUE programs in the Macallister Irrigation District have generated
significant improvements, and when ongoing and planned
investments in WUE
programs are completed, SRW expects to see total system efficiencies improve
from 60 per cent before the works
to beyond 85 per cent ... In the Weribee and
Bacchus Marsh irrigation districts, SRW notes that upgrades are planned to
address substantial
seepage and leakage problems caused by ageing
infrastructure.
also noted that on-farm water savings in its district have been substantial. Its
submission highlighted studies which have
found that on-farm irrigation
efficiency programs have ‘led to water use savings of up to 30% on
3.15 SmartRivers, representing irrigators in Queensland’s
Condamine-Balonne catchment in the northern Basin, noted that the
expects that irrigators will not waste water, and argued that WUE programs have
There is private and public benefit gained in the implementation of water saving
measures which deliver good value for money for
our region and beyond ...
Irrigators believe the availability of funding and cost share ratio of the
program is fair. The initiative
offers support for a suite of water use
efficiency mechanisms that modernize our irrigation systems, aligning to
community standards
as being as efficient as
3.16 Growcom,
the organisation representing Queensland’s horticulture industry, has been
a provider of WUE programs since the
late 1990s. It has been funded under
programs like the Rural Water Use Efficiency Initiative. Growcom argued that the
program has
been a success:
The program has been very successful both in delivering measurable water savings
but has also greatly improved the output of many
of the growers involved in the
program. The program has been held up as one of the most successful government
and industry partnerships
with clear benefits to industry and the broader
3.17 Growcom
noted that the program has generated $200 million of value in water savings and
increased productivity, with very broad
uptake and widespread adoption of
industry best practice among
participants.
3.18 Cotton Australia noted the importance of WUEs in its submission, arguing
The success of the Australian cotton industry to date, and its future, is to a
large extent dependent on continual improvement of
water use efficiency (WUE).
As an industry we are focused on “More Crop Per Drop”, and this is
achieved through improved varieties, improved management
and the adoption of
cutting edge WUE techniques and
technology.
Ricegrowers’ Association of Australia (RGA) argued that the Australian
rice industry ‘leads the world in improving
water use efficiency’,
including ‘using 50 per cent less water than the global average to produce
each kilogram of
3.20 The RGA noted that the On-Farm Irrigation Efficiency Program has
‘led to the adoption albeit by a relatively small proportion
of irrigators
of improved management systems. It has incentivised participants to upgrade
their water infrastructure, often within
a shorter time-frame than would
otherwise have been achievable for many
participants’.
3.21 Individual farmers in the rice industry have therefore ‘reported
either a reduction in average water use (per tonne of
crop) and/or an increase
to yields and are generally pleased with the outcome of their respective
reasons, and noting the aim of recovering water for environmental purposes, the
RGA described infrastructure spending programs
as ‘a more palatable
alternative’ to government water
Box 3.1 The Murrumbidgee Irrigation
On 21-22 February 2017, the Committee visited Griffith, NSW, to conduct
site inspections in and around the Murrumbidgee Irrigation
Area (MIA) at the
invitation of Murrubidgee Irrigation (MI). MI is the irrigation infrastructure
operator that supplies farmers in
the MIA with water.
The MIA is one of Australia's largest and most diverse irrigation areas.
Large amounts of wine grapes, rice and other cereals, and
citrus fruits are
grown there, and in recent years new industries including cotton and aquaculture
have been grown in the region.
The Committee's visit to the MIA highlighted the importance of irrigation
modernisation, as well as some of the complications it can
cause. MI has been an
active participant in the Government's recent water use efficiency programs and
the Committee viewed some of
its recently upgraded channels and storages. MI
explained how, in addition to reducing losses to evaporation and seepage, it has
implemented better monitoring, management and automation systems to improve its
supply of water to farmers. Although MI must wait
7 days for water it orders to
move downriver from the storage at Burrinjuck Dam, its system is sufficiently
flexible to supply its
farmers on 48 hours’ notice.
During the visit, the Committee also met with broadacre rice and cotton
farmers, citrus growers, winemakers and acquaculturists. Committee
members were
impressed with the improvements irrigators have made to their water
productivity. However, the visit also highlighted
the difficulty irrigators may
face when upgrading to more efficient but more energy intensive irrigation
systems. Irrigators explained
to the Committee that high energy prices can make
more water efficient systems uneconomical to use, particularly in years of
constrained
water supply. This was to become a common theme at site inspections
around the country as the inquiry progressed.
An alternative approach:
water buybacks
3.22 The evidence from irrigators and groups representing them argued that
WUE programs represent the better approach to providing
that sufficient water is
allocated towards environmental purposes, rather than the policy of
‘buybacks’ where governments
purchase water rights off irrigators.
They argue that investing in irrigation infrastructure offers a more
comprehensive approach
than buybacks, with flow-on effects such as positive
socio-economic consequences for regional Australia.
3.23 The NIC, for instance, pointed to research which has found that buybacks
have negative economic and social results for the broader
Independent studies conducted to inform the development of the Basin Plan showed
that buybacks have greater localised negative social
and economic impacts on
irrigation dependent communities than investment in water efficiency projects.
Past Governments’ ‘no
regrets’ water buyback regime was ill-
considered and is leaving a social and economic legacy that will need to be
Murray-Darling Basin Authority (MDBA) also noted research, via the Northern
Basin Review, which found that ‘environmental
water recovery through
investments in more efficient water use can lead to very different social and
economic outcomes compared with
3.25 This Review, the MDBA said:
... has served to reinforce the MDBA’s view that water recovery from
improvements to water use efficiency – both off-farm
and on-farm –
should be prioritised over buybacks. A water recovery strategy built around this
position will allow for the
re-balancing of water use in the Murray-Darling
Basin and deliver the best outcome for communities by keeping the social and
impacts to a
explained that Australian Government spending has been developed in line with
the approach that infrastructure spending
is a superior way of recovering water
for the environment:
... prioritised investment in productivity-enhancing water infrastructure rather
than purchase of water entitlements, with more than
$8 billion being invested in
infrastructure and water efficiency measures. This policy aims to minimise any
adverse impact of water
recovery as a result of the Basin Plan, as well as
increasing the sustainability of irrigated agriculture across the
MDBA, while in favour of investment in infrastructure and other WUE programs
rather than buybacks, noted that the former
is considerably more expensive:
... water recovery through investment in infrastructure will generally be
preferable to purchasing entitlements from a perspective
of maintaining
productive capacity in a given region. However, the cost to taxpayers of this
method of water recovery is high –
in the order of 2 to 3 times as much
per gigalitre – so governments need to strike a balance as to the overall
mix of recovery
3.28 Likewise,
the NIC acknowledged that water purchases are cheaper in dollar terms than
infrastructure investment, but argued that
the direct price is only one factor
in the equation:
If you consider the simplistic litre for dollar equation, then Government would
just go ahead and purchase water on the water market,
thereby removing it from
the productive pool. To do that on the basis of ‘value for money’
however, would be to completely
ignore the responsibility of Government to the
people it serves.
Investment in infrastructure is in the short term more expensive, but if well
targeted and designed, it will avoid the massive negative
impacts on communities
and can produce long term gains for a region’s productive capacity and
National Farmers’ Federation also argued that criticism of infrastructure
spending is based on a too-narrow recognition
of the impacts of the
This narrow view fails to acknowledge that in addition to just water recovery,
other benefits are “purchased” or other
costs avoided by investing
in infrastructure rather than straight buyback. These additional benefits
include a more productive and
efficient irrigation business, maintained
productivity with associated benefits for input suppliers and downstream
processing, and
the social and economic flow on benefits associated with the
witnesses, however, argued that buybacks, in addition to costing substantially
less than investments in infrastructure,
are a more reliable way of ensuring
that water is allocated for environmental use. They argue that the environmental
benefits of
WUEs have tended to be overstated and in any event are difficult to
accurately quantify.
3.31 The Inland Rivers Network also pointed to the comparative costs of
buybacks and WUE programs to argue that the latter essentially
represents a
transfer of wealth from governments to private irrigators:
... current expenditure, while providing significant private benefit, is a very
expensive method of returning water for environmental
and broader public
benefit. The cost per ML returned to the Macquarie River system through water
efficiency measures was more than
three times the market
was asked by the Committee to explain the rationale for preferring
infrastructure investment programs over buybacks. Their
response argued that
infrastructure investment serves to fill three policy aims: increasing
agricultural productivity, supporting
the socio-economic viability of regional
communities, and allocating water to environmental purposes:
Since 2014, the government has prioritised investment in efficient water
infrastructure as a means to return water to the environment
over the purchase
of water entitlements (or ‘buyback’). In part, this is because
community and industry stakeholders
have expressed clear and strong concerns
with the potential adverse social and economic impacts of non-strategic water
undertaken through broad public tender processes. For example,
stakeholders have raised concerns that purchasing creates a 'Swiss
effect' in irrigation communities, potentially putting cost pressures on
remaining water holders because of gaps in water
delivery in the surrounding
regions. We note that the government legislated a 1 500 GL cap on surface water
purchasing in response
to such concerns in
Environmental flow-on
3.33 The evidence from irrigators, IIOs and governments demonstrated a strong
view that WUE programs are effective in recovering water
for the environment
while assisting irrigators to reduce water wastage and improve water
productivity.
3.34 However, evidence provided by economists, environmentalists and
academics questioned the overall benefit of WUE programs and
whether gains were
limited to the agricultural sector with the environment effectively receiving
less water.
Unintended consequences of
WUE programs
3.35 While acknowledging that increased productivity and less wasted water
were desirable outcomes, the evidence focused primarily
on the effect WUE
programs have had on water flows at the Basin scale, and on whether they are
meeting the government’s environmental
policy objectives. Viewed through
this lens, it was suggested that the outcomes being generated by WUE programs
are much less uniformly
3.36 Professors Quentin Grafton and John Williams argued that WUE programs
are not typically associated with reduced water use or
increased environmental
There are many myths related to irrigation efficiency. One of the greatest myths
is that increased irrigation efficiency associated
with more capital intensive
irrigation methods always results in: (1) farmers either applying or consuming
less water and(2) water
‘savings’ that flow back to the environment
in the form of increased stream
their submission, Grafton and Williams distinguished between beneficial
consumptive water use (water used by the plant to
grow, or transpiration),
non-beneficial consumptive use (water lost to evaporation), and runoff or stream
flows, which they characterise
as beneficial non-consumptive use since the water
is 'relocated to another part of the basin system (for potential re-use)'. They
also characterised seepage as a beneficial non-consumptive use, since it
recharges groundwater
3.38 According to Grafton and Williams, the problem with WUE programs is that
they tend to reduce ‘beneficial’ losses:
Higher irrigation efficiency is, typically, associated with reduced runoff and
seepage to groundwater, especially in stressed river
basins. This is because
water that previously was able to infiltrate soils and seep past crop root zone
to replenish groundwater
and base flow of stream flows after being applied to
farmers’ fields (such as through flood irrigation) is diminished with
capital-intensive methods of irrigation, such as drip
irrigation.
3.39 Professors
Grafton and Williams argued that the academic evidence strongly suggests that
WUE programs do not help to achieve
environmental outcomes:
The overwhelming evidence from Australia and many other places in the world is
that providing subsidies to increase irrigation efficiency
does not, by itself,
result in water ‘savings’ at a basin scale ... Indeed, if
maintaining stream flow is an important
goal then such subsidies, by themselves,
can result in unintended consequences and actually reduce stream flows and
groundwater
Professors argued that the 2016 Australian State of the Environment report
supports this proposition.
report found ‘poor or deteriorating’ trends in Australia’s
inland water ecological processes and ‘widespread
loss of ecosystem
function’ in the Murray-Darling
3.41 Along similar lines, the Australian Academy of Technological Sciences
and Engineering (ATSE) submission provided a thorough argument
indicating that
WUE programs may be having counterproductive effects on environmental flows:
Water conservation technologies have been promoted as a practical means of
improving WUE and maintaining environmental flows in river
systems. However,
there is increasing evidence that, somewhat paradoxically, WUE gains often
contribute to intensification of water
use by irrigators and a reduction in
return flows to streams and groundwater. This occurs when one or more of the
following outcomes
§ increased crop yields
coupled with increased consumptive water use (transpiration);
§ improved efficiency, productivity, and profitability encourages
farmers to increase the area cropped, or adopt multiple crop
cycles per year or
dual cropping systems.
In both cases, the net effect is an increase in annual evapotranspiration that,
particularly in areas of increasing water scarcity,
can reduce environmental
noted that unless these increases in evapotranspiration are taken into account
in the design of WUE programs, the programs
may have detrimental effects on
river ecosystems:
An increase in beneficial water consumption in crop transpiration is usually
associated with reductions in deep-drainage that recharges
groundwater and in
return flows to streams. Unless WUE savings are reflected in an equivalent or
greater reduction in extraction
from the water resource, downstream flows will
actually be
further argued that WUE programs are unlikely to provide solutions to the
over-allocation of water:
Due to the complex interactions between agricultural and water systems it is
essential that the Committee considers the broader impacts
of WUE programs at
system/basin-wide scales. WUE can help to reconcile trade-offs between tensions
in the food-water nexus. However,
it is unlikely to resolve the overuse of water
and maintain, or more importantly, improve environmental
3.44 Consequently,
ATSE recommended research into WUE programs so that we gain a better
understanding of their effect on river and
groundwater ecosystems:
It is essential to establish the hydrological impacts of WUE on surface and
groundwater systems, and to ensure that policy development
is informed by sound
hydrological
the same vein, the submission by Dr David Adamson, Dr Adam Loch, Associate
Professor Sarah Wheeler and Professor Jeff Conner
argued that WUE programs like
the Sustainable Rural Water-use Investment Program (SRWUIP) can have unintended
impacts on environmental
The SRWUIP is a process where submissions are made to upgrade water
infrastructure (new or existing). Funded submissions will eventually
efficiency savings 50-50 between farmers and the government. Where nothing is
known about prior losses, the true quantity of
water recovered will be unknown.
When combined with the rebound effect (i.e. where total irrigated area
increases) and reductions
in return flows, total river system flows decrease.
This net reduction in flows means:
§ The Plan goals are
placed under increased risk; and/or
§ There is downward pressure on the reliability of all water
entitlements.
3.46 At a public hearing in Adelaide, Dr Adamson noted that in the past
inefficient irrigation systems have effectively returned some
of their water to
the environment through ‘beneficial’ losses, and that WUE programs
might be disrupting that process:
We don't always use all the water we apply for irrigation. This has a benefit to
the non-farmers, to the soil profile, to the groundwater,
to the return flows
back into the system. As we encourage people to become more efficient, we are
actually drying up the system.
This is not just our issue; it happens around the
world. We've done plenty of studies on this sort of stuff. We can see it in
and we can see it in America. To become more efficient, we stop those
flows going back into the river, which other people will be
Adam Loch noted that the DAWR submission, while listing WUE programs’
benefits in terms of agricultural productivity
and rural socio-economic factors,
does not advance a strong argument that the programs are actually beneficial to
the environment:
I look with great interest at the Department of Agriculture and Water Resources'
submission to the inquiry. It's full of wonderful
examples of how we've invested
a great deal of money and recovered a great quantum of water, but I see all of
that, funnily enough,
talking about productive gains—irrigators,
socioeconomic value et cetera. There is not a lot of any detail in here about
environmental gain. In fact, there are no details, that I was able to find
through a reread of it today, suggesting how this has
been demonstrably
beneficial for the
environment.
Adamson noted that in time Governments will be asked to justify the amounts of
money they are spending on WUE programs:
The Murray-Darling Basin Plan is what was in the national interest. The national
interest is wider than irrigators—it is the
community, the society and the
environment. As Adam [Loch] has alluded to, we are not 100 per cent sure what
benefit we have gained
from water use efficiency, but sooner or later someone is
going to ask what we got and if there is a better way of getting
order to address this issue, Dr Loch argued that the Government should conduct a
cost-benefit analysis to ‘get at the
heart of what was being lost before
we begin to assess whether we have made genuine savings through these
I don't say that these [programs] are not returning savings, but we have no idea
of what was being lost. If as our literature would
suggest it is around 30 per
cent on average across different production systems et cetera, the environment
would have been getting
a good healthy slug of
3.50 Professor
Lin Crase also raised concerns about the benefits of WUE programs. He noted that
because policymakers are not informed
by a detailed hydrological picture,
investments in WUE can have unintended consequences:
The published literature in this area shows that investments in water use
efficiency in most parts of the world usually lead to an
expansion of
irrigation, not a contraction. That's usually because we don't fully understand
where the water goes when we start to
efficiency.
3.51 Further,
Professor Crase argued that WUE programs in Australia have not been built on a
firm empirical foundation:
[I]f you look at what we've done with water accounting in this country, you see
we've done a very poor job of counting where it goes.
Even though we've invested
very large sums of money through the Bureau of Meteorology to improve our
accounting systems, largely
we don't account for a lot of water that
3.52 Professor
Crase argued that the Government’s lack of data on the extent of
beneficial losses is a consequence of conscious
policy decisions made by past
governments:
[In Australia] the focus is very much just on observing consumptive use,
whereas, if you look at the US system, you see that, if
the person on the end of
the table sells water to the person at the other end of the table, there are all
sorts of investigations
that have to occur around that trade to understand any
other impacted parties between those trades. In Australia, largely we don't
that, and that's largely because we took a view that increasing the volume of
trade would be better ... I think overwhelmingly
it's more efficient, but what
we haven't done is build sufficiently robust instruments around those trades to
account for where the
3.53 Professor
Crase also noted that while the trade in water has been of great benefit to
irrigators, enabling many to survive drought
or other shocks, it is
fundamentally undermined by the lack of accurate water measurements:
[M]arkets only work well to the extent that governments are able to validate the
resources that are exchanged. What I'm suggesting
to you is we're not doing as
good a job as we might in measuring some of those
submission provided by the NIC pointed out that the study used to provide
baseline data and justify the need for the Murray-Darling
Basin plan (the
sustainable Rivers audit) was one of the first activities cut by the
Murray-Darling Basin Authority when faced with
3.55 Given the amount of money being spent on WUE programs, Professor Crase
suggested that a better understanding of the effects WUE
programs are having
should be a priority:
These are non-trivial sums of money that we're spending on this. To do so
without actually measuring where the water's going and
where we're taking it
from seems to me bizarre, particularly at a time when governments simply don't
have a lot of money at their
disposal to
a public hearing in Canberra, Professor Grafton also concluded that in
implementing WUE programs as it is, the Government
may not be achieving the
environmental outcomes which are their primary purpose:
[W]ith water policy we are in danger of carrying on with business as usual,
spending billions more dollars for no public purpose
and no result. Sadly, the
challenges and past mistakes made in water policy and water use efficiency are
not isolated. They represent
a bigger problem and malaise in Australia, where
bold statements are poorly implemented and the public good is captured by
Arguing benefits of
efficiencies
3.57 Governments and irrigators responded to these arguments of diminished
returns and reduced environmental benefits in a number
of ways. The Committee
asked DAWR to provide a detailed response to the claim that WUE programs are not
meeting their primary goal
– that is, that they are not functioning to
increase the amount of water available to the environment. DAWR responded:
The department is aware of recent claims that the Australian Government’s
water use efficiency programs are not returning water
to the environment because
they are reducing ‘return flows’ to rivers. The department does not
agree with these claims
and does not consider that the evidence supports the
conclusion. Return flows are when excess water from irrigation runs off the
surface and back into the river system or leaks into the ground. The claim made
is that more efficient water infrastructure means
there are less excess water
and therefore there is less return flows available for the environment.
While return flows can be reduced by more efficient irrigation infrastructure,
this is usually a good thing. Return flows can cause
environmental damage,
particularly where irrigation surface run-off contains high levels of nutrients,
salt or other pollutants;
or seepage due to inefficient watering causes rising
water tables and salinisation of our rivers and landscape.
The Australian Government’s irrigation efficiency programs in the
Murray-Darling Basin recover at least 50 per cent of water
savings as water
entitlement held by the Commonwealth Environmental Water Holder (CEWH). The CEWH
is able to use this water when
and where it can have the most benefit to the
environment. This represents a much better environmental outcome than
flows’, which are typically of poor quality and by their
nature are not able to be directed to best environmental effect.
As we have seen over time, irrigators who strive to improve their efficiency
have less wastage and reduced salinity and water quality
issues. Irrigators
could fund these efficiency improvements themselves and retain all of the water
savings. Instead, through Australian
Government-funded programs, we are ensuring
that water savings are shared between farmers and the
environment.
the Committee’s public hearing in Narrabri, Dr David Mitchell from NSW-DPI
argued that it is difficult to know whether
the criticisms of WUE spending have
[WUE] might not give you any more water in the system, but it will probably give
you more product. It is a multifaceted concept which
is probably a bit nuanced
in that respect. From a global situation or that whole basin approach, you have
a certain amount of water
going in and a certain amount of water coming out and
then the transpiration and the product produced ... The trick there is really
trying to figure out where the losses are occurring within a spatial system.
Water cuts across lots of spatial layers, from a basin
level through to a farm
and field level. Trying to account for losses between those spatial scales can
be quite a difficult concept.
You can improve water efficiency at a field scale,
but that may not increase water use efficiency at a farm scale. It is just the
way the system works—a series of nested spatial scales. It can be quite
complex to measure those different particular water
balances at those particular
Mitchell also noted that, although it is complicated, the concept of
‘beneficial’ losses is not helpful in a practical
sense, since the
water referred to is officially allocated to productive use and should not
therefore be counted on for environmental
Real water savings are when you can actually recover water and reuse it. An
unreal water saving would be if there is a return flow.
So, if you extract water
from a river and you irrigate and there is a return flow somehow, through
groundwater or some sort of irrigation
offtake, and you save that water, then
that is not a real water saving, because you are double dipping, or there is an
3.60 Similarly,
the NIC argued that farmers using their water more efficiently is just good
business practice, and that farmers should
not be expected to pay for water
which they are not using:
Where critics of WUE programs suggest that 'reducing run off has negative
consequences': Irrigators would suggest that was in fact
an indicator of good
economic management from farmers and that given the high prices they now pay for
water, they cannot be expected
to pay for water that is excess to their
requirement.
GBCMA submission was the only submission which suggested that it is doing the
necessary work to understand the catchment-level
impacts of WUE measures:
An important part of this planning process has been to assist irrigators to
understand their place in their local catchment, the
region and the
Murray-Darling Basin. Planning helped them appreciate the potential impact of
their actions on their own properties,
the local catchment and the wider region
(particularly downstream).
Irrigators have been encouraged and supported to develop Whole Farm Plans for
their properties which include the natural features
of the property together
with details of the improvements planned for their irrigation systems. This
ensures the efficient application
and movement of water across the land, meeting
the required crop water use.
Planning for these changes provides an opportunity for irrigators to take
advantage of advice and recommendations from irrigation
designers and Government
extension officers through incentive programs to encourage the adoption of
planning and best
way of response to Professors Grafton and Williams, the Cotton Australia
submission argued that their contention that WUE
had not resulted in reduced
total water use or a reduction in water applied per hectare were ‘two very
flawed metrics’:
[T]he amount of water applied per hectare is irrelevant. The measure must be:
what production is being achieved per megalitre of
water? ... [T]he Australian
cotton industry can show a 40% improvement in WUE over the past decade.
Secondly, the amount of total water applied in any one year is largely driven by
climatic conditions. When water is plentiful, normally
more will be used, either
in that year or in the years following, similarly a dry sequence will reduce
total water use. The Professor’s
short-term snapshot was insufficient to
overcome these variations. What is completely and undeniably true is that the
Commonwealth
purchased and WUE programs have as of now collectively reduced the
amount of water available to agriculture on average by
Crop production
3.63 While water use efficiency is generally regarded as a positive, some
witnesses highlighted that increased efficiency of irrigation
can also have
potentially negative outcomes, including intensification and a shift to high
water-use, high-value perennial crops.
3.64 Intensification refers to irrigators taking advantage of improved
infrastructure and efficiency of water to increase the size
or frequency of
their crop. While this process improves the productivity of both land and water,
some witnesses argued that there
is evidence of it consequently reducing
beneficial environmental run-off.
3.65 The National Farmers’ Federation noted that, while it may seem
counter-intuitive, WUE programs can lead to an intensification
of agriculture as
farmers seek to grow their business using their new infrastructure;
The implicit assumption behind programs that invest in on-farm water use
efficiency is that demand for water decreases as the farmer
can produce the same
with less water. Straight buybacks were often associated with people either
exiting the industry or scaling
back operations – thus demand for water
was equally offset by the reduction in supply. Participants in on-farm programs
tend to be those farmers that are in the industry for the long haul, and
keen to make capital improvements and to grow their businesses.
So demand for
allocation may actually be unchanged by the program, adding pressure to an
already tight market as supply falls without
a change in demand. Furthermore, to
ensure a return on the capital investment made in on-farm improvements means
that many growers
are now willing to pay more for
the same lines, the Chair of Murrumbidgee Irrigation Mr Frank Sergi told the
Committee that investment in WUE programs
has led to intensification and
therefore higher demand for water:
Without a doubt, the investment has enabled a quantum change in how water is
delivered and utilised in the area. With increased efficiency
has come increased
production and, ironically, a greater demand for high flow rates and water for
further production. What this means
is that we are seeing less water per tonne
of product and, as we had expected—or as we had not expected—more
production.
3.67 Environment
Victoria also noted this trend, arguing that ‘Efficiency upgrades can also
have the perverse impact of driving
up water use even as it is used more
efficiently’.
3.68 As the Committee also heard, there is a concern that increased water use
efficiency will change the nature of the Australian
agriculture sector as more
irrigators turn from annual crops to higher value perennial crops. As perennial
crops tend to be less
flexible and more water-intensive, this may put upward
pressure on water prices and could reduce resilience or heighten the risk
shock during the next extended dry period.
3.69 The problem was outlined by Dr Adamson et al:
As efficiency increases, an irrigator’s ability to adapt to future
‘bad’ (e.g. drought) shocks decreases, particularly
if they invest
in or already irrigate higher-valued perennial crops. Perennial crops require
water every year to maintain capital
investments.
Growing global demand for high value perennial crops has been driving a
structural change in the Basin at the same time as irrigation
investment by the Commonwealth.
If entitlement reliabilities decrease in response to prolonged drought shocks,
but the total area of perennials in the MDB has increased
in response to growing
demand and commodity returns, demand for water from high value perennials could
be higher than in previous
droughts; where loss to perennial capital stock in
the Millennium drought (2000-2010) was already
If farmers transition towards perennial production systems that require water in
all years and states of nature (i.e. dry, wet or
conditions):
§ Constant water requirements will reduce
irrigator capacity to adapt to adverse climatic conditions (drought) through
to water trade supporting yield preservation;
§ Below yield preservation, if there is insufficient water to maintain
the root stock, capital investments in perennial crops
will rapidly become
exposed to loss; and
§ If perennial crops are lost across an increased total area coverage,
there is the potential for rural debt to significantly
increase in a relatively
short period.
3.70 At the Committee’s hearing in Adelaide, Dr Adamson further
explained the consequences of a shift from annual to perennial
crops, noting
that the increased costs of the latter are subsidised by irrigation
infrastructure programs:
A perennial producer requires a volume of water every year just to keep the
rootstock alive. As we increase the number of hectares
associated with
perennials, so does our fixed water supply increase. We need that water. Without
that water, the capital invested
in that rootstock dies. We can't replace that
overnight. It leads to irreversible losses in a community.
Annuals, on the other hands, provide great flexibility within the system. We can
rip them in; we can rip them out. When water supply
is plentiful, we can expand
our irrigation area up north overnight. We respond to those conditions.
Irrigation efficiency, however,
can leave us in a situation where we overinvest
in perennials, especially when we are subsidising the capital
investments.
further consequence is that, having taken advantage of subsidised infrastructure
to invest in higher-value perennial crops,
irrigators will be willing to spend
more to secure water rights during droughts, thus driving up the price of water
in the region.
3.72 Mr John Robertson of DAWR commented on this issue too, noting that the
inflexibility of perennial crops means that irrigators
will be forced into
purchasing water at whatever price the market has decided:
The other factor is that, in a drier period, if you are growing annual crops you
can decide not to put the crop in this year—you
lose a year's profit but
that's about it. But if you have permanent plantings of fruit trees, citrus or
stone fruit, you need to
keep them alive because of the investment. Therefore,
when water is short, they are willing to pay premiums; it is the market
was asked about whether WUE programs have encouraged irrigator investment in
perennial over annual crops. The Department
The government’s investments in water use efficiency have benefited both
annual and perennial production systems. For example,
co-investments with rice
growers under the government’s On-Farm Irrigation Efficiency Program have
and cropping flexibility. Cotton growers have
also benefitted from investments on on-farm infrastructure, allowing them to
more efficiently
store and apply water for annual cotton
3.74 Further,
DAWR argued that the market result of increased water for high-value (including
perennial) crops was to the benefit
of both high and low value crop irrigators:
the former were able to keep irrigating their crops, the latter to sell their
water entitlements
for greater profit that their crops would have brought:
The increase in prices experienced in dry years did allow a shift in the
allocation of water resources from low to higher value producers.
occurred as the opportunity cost/benefit from selling allocations became greater
than on-farm revenue, typically for lower
value, labour intensive
operations.
For example, annual crop producers and pasture irrigators who retained permanent
water rights were able to sell their annual water
allocations, allowing them an
income stream during the drought. Conversely, higher value, capital-intensive
operations with a greater
capacity and willingness to pay, acquired allocations
and entitlements for crops, such as permanent tree nut plantings, that needed
the water to survive.
Water markets are fulfilling their intended role to allocate scarce water
resources to higher value uses, as intended in the National
Water Initiative
(NWI) and as recommended in the Productivity Commission’s recent draft
report on the NWI, refer to Question
1. As water moves economically, it also
moves between industries and regions, and some industries and regions experience
3.75 However,
noting that there has been a shift in crop types, DAWR recognised that longer
term effects should be monitored:
While the current policy arrangements provide considerable flexibility for water
users to respond to climate, market and other events,
we recognise that some
recent expansions of perennial production may impact on the system. Relevant
have commenced consideration of issues that
Committee comment
3.76 The Committee notes that there are divergent views on the effectiveness
of WUE programs, and particularly whether water efficiencies
are providing a
benefit to environmental water levels.
3.77 Increasing water productivity is a necessity – we must value water
as a resource that sustains our environment and our
agricultural sector.
However, whether increasing water productivity and reducing water wastage should
be taken to mean ‘increasing
yields from current water allocations’,
or whether it should be ‘producing using less water’ has divided
the evidence received to this inquiry.
3.78 It is the Committee’s view that national water objectives should
not subscribe to this simplistic dichotomy. The long-term
objective must be to
both ‘produce more’
‘reduce water use’ if we
are to have a thriving agricultural sector into the future, and a thriving water
environment
surrounding it.
3.79 In pursuit of these long-term objectives, the Committee concludes that
WUE programs are an effective approach to drive change
in irrigation practices
and implement efficiencies. While this may reduce water run-off and returns in
some instances, this brings
with it both positive and negative impacts, and
monitoring these impacts should be a key element of the holistic management of
3.80 Similarly, intensification or changes to perennial crops must be
monitored to ensure short-term cropping gains are not sought
at the expense of
long-term water efficiency gains. While acknowledging and in many instances
agreeing with some of the concerns
raised, the Committee considers that the
current approach of funding WUE programs is effective in driving water
efficiencies and
productivities. However, there are a number of environmental
impacts which must be closely monitored, and a number of complementary
which should be in place to improve environmental outcomes. These are discussed
in Chapter 5. A focus of this inquiry is
that the design and administration of
WUE programs are well aligned with long term objectives of environmental water
flows and agricultural
productivity, and do not give rise to unintended
consequences.
3.81 Issues of WUE program design, delivery and monitoring to ensure
sustainability of long term objectives are considered in the
4. Reviewing program design, delivery and
administration
4.1 The evidence received to this inquiry indicates the complexity and
interdependence of water systems – adjustments to water
allocation, water
returns, water pricing and water productivity can have a range of dynamic and
both positive and negative impacts.
Further, it is essential that water use
efficiency (WUE) programs and Government intervention do not skew commercial
market decisions,
but rather establish a pathway towards long-term balanced
sustainability for the environment, the irrigated agricultural sector,
regional communities.
4.2 The suite of Australian Government funded WUE programs is extensive and
represents a significant ongoing investment. There are
a number of reviews
underway to assess some of the regional water plans in place and to assess the
operation of the National Water
Initiative.
4.3 The focus of this inquiry is on how Government program investment is best
provided to achieve the balance of long-term goals i.e.
achieving adequate and
sustainable water levels for the environment though the implementation of
efficient agricultural irrigation
methods. In addition, there is the expectation
that WUE programs will assist in building a productive and financially
independent
irrigated agriculture sector which is resilient and adaptable to
fluctuating weather patterns.
4.4 This chapter outlines evidence the Committee has received in relation to
the efficacy of WUE programs in meeting these objectives,
with particular regard
§ program design and alignment with national water objectives, and
§ program administration, monitoring and evaluation.
Program design and water
4.5 Evidence from Federal and State Governments expressed the view that WUE
programs are generally effective, and highlighted the
effort governments go to
in order to ensure the efficacy of programs, particularly in regards to
designing programs to meet national
water policy objectives.
4.6 The Department of Agriculture and Water Resources (DAWR) noted that data
from completed on-farm WUE programs such as the On-farm
Irrigation Efficiency
Program (OFIEP) indicates that they have had a positive impact:
Data from over 1,000 individual projects funded through OFIEP indicates that
on-farm water use efficiency is expected to increase
by an average of 18 per
cent, based on the annual average volume of water used before project works were
undertaken compared with
the volume that would be required following
infrastructure
pointed to a range of specific positive outcomes the program has generated:
Irrigators are evidencing increases to water use efficiency through a variety of
outcomes including producing the same output with
less water, through
flexibility in the type of crop they are able to produce and/or through the
quality of the produce grown. Infrastructure
investments are also delivering
tangible benefits at the farm gate beyond water use efficiency, such as
increased ability for crop
rotation, increasing crop diversification and
improved soil
management.
South Australian Government submission argued that the level of interest from
market participants is a good way to measure
the adequacy of WUE program
A key piece of evidence that demonstrates the adequacy and efficacy of current
funding programmes is the level of demand from proponents.
Ultimately, the best
judges of the merit of a programme will be the market participants themselves.
If businesses see it as a good
deal, then they will
participate.
submission went on to note that demand for WUE programs has been and continues
to be strong in South Australia, which it argues
is a positive signal:
On-farm efficiency funding programmes have received a strong level of interest
in South Australia to date:
§ Private Irrigation
Infrastructure Program – SA (PIIP-SA) provided grants to a total value of
$14.4 million for 28 projects.
These projects delivered over 3 GL of water
entitlements to the environment.
§ On-farm Irrigation Efficiency Program (OFIEP) invested $60.4 million
in 362 projects. In aggregate, these projects delivered
17.3 GL of water to the
environment.
§ SARMS Industry Improvement Programme (3IP) is committed to investing
$240 million for 40 GL of water entitlements for the environment.
Around $177
million has been committed to over 180 projects so far. Existing projects have
already recovered around 35 GL in water
entitlements for the environment.
§ While the COFFIE pilot programme only commenced in September 2016, the
revised programme design has been well received by the
irrigation community with
over 50 expressions of interest received to date. Significantly, a number of
these expressions of interests
have been received from potential proponents in
other Basin states.
4.10 The South Australian Government submission also drew the
Committee’s attention to post-implementation assessments of WUE
which are showing positive outcomes:
Case studies of on-farm efficiency projects show that participating
agribusinesses are now benefiting from greater productivity,
diversification and quality. Many agribusinesses now have increased flexibility
and resilience, which will enable them to adapt
more easily to future climate
change and market conditions. Improved irrigation efficiency has also led to
land management benefits,
such as reduced water logging and improved salinity
management.
Box 4.1 Barossa Infrastructure, South
On 23 August 2017 the Committee travelled to the Barossa Valley in South
Australia. The Committee met with Barossa Infrastructure
(BI), a private
irrigation company which supplies water sourced from the Murray River to
vineyards across the Barossa. Committee
members were briefed on the history of
the BI irrigation system, which was constructed in the late 1990s.
The visit highlighted the benefits that can be derived from an open water
trading market. Uniquely among those seen by the Committee
during this inquiry,
the Barossa Infrastructure irrigation scheme was funded and built privately,
without any substantial government
investment.
Prior to the system’s construction, BI's customers relied on
groundwater to irrigate their grapes. As that groundwater depleted
more saline, irrigators in the area came together to build a pressurised
irrigation system. BI was able to purchase additional
water entitlements from
the Murray River to make use of the system.
Access to additional water provided economic security for Barossa Valley
winemakers and enabled BI to construct nearly 200 kilometres
of irrigation
pipelines over a 450 square kilometre distribution area, including four pumping
stations. The BI network represents
a substantial achievement.
4.11 The New South Wales Department of Primary Industries (NSW-DPI)
submission pointed out that improvements in WUE have the potential
large economic benefits to the state:
It has been estimated that increasing the water productivity of NSW rain-fed and
irrigated agriculture by 2% by 2020 could contribute
up to $226 million annually
to the NSW economy. The majority of this increase would be due to productivity
gains resulting from improvements
in water use efficiency and adoption of best
DAWR submission highlighted evidence of socio-economic benefits for irrigation
operators arising from WUE programs:
In addition, there is early evidence that infrastructure modernisation
programmes are having positive socio-economic outcomes for
farmers who
participate. Lifestyle benefits and labour savings reported by irrigators
§ remote system operation eliminating the need to
get up at night to manually manage watering
§ the ability to take advantage of night time off-peak electricity
§ reduction in maintenance requirements
§ increased labour
efficiency.
4.13 In addition, the South Australian Government submission highlighted the
broad economic benefits WUE programs can have, pointing
out that they benefit
more than irrigators alone:
The benefits of water efficiency investment are accrued by more than just
individual irrigators ... Many funding recipients are making
it a priority to
engage local firms to assist with their redevelopment and local suppliers and
construction firms are seeing the
benefits. This in turn is creating increased
demand in other sectors, such as retail and
hospitality.
argued that WUE program design prioritises value for money for the Australian
Value for money is a core principle that underpins Australian Government
investment in water programmes. Funding under these programmes
is provided in
accordance with the
Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013
that requires public monies to be used in an effective, efficient, economical
and ethical
Department submission described its program delivery structure, noting firstly
that programs may be delivered through State
Governments:
Funding is provided through a range of delivery models, including through States
as part of the Intergovernmental Agreement on Murray-Darling
Basin Reform 2008
and the Intergovernmental Agreement on Implementing Water Reform in the Murray
Darling Basin
submission noted that WUE funding provided to State Governments comes with the
requirement to meet pre-determined performance
standards to ensure program goals
Funding to State governments is provided in accordance with Federal Financial
Relations arrangements which aim to support the delivery
of specified outputs or
projects. This is achieved through the requirement for States to meet
pre-determined projects milestones
or performance benchmarks before an
associated payment is provided by the Australian
Government.
Program administration,
delivery and evaluation
4.17 The Department and governments argued the strength of WUE programs and
their sound processes for administration and evaluation,
and this view was
generally supported by irrigators, agricultural groups, irrigation
infrastructure operators (IIOs) and WUE program
delivery partners. However there
was also significant evidence that suggested further improvements could be made,
particularly with
regard to some administrative processes and
monitoring/evaluating impacts.
4.18 DAWR noted that it funds some projects directly, with responsibility for
delivery spread across a range of bodies:
... the Australian Government also runs its own programmes which are delivered
through a wide range of project partners including
irrigation infrastructure
operators, irrigation industry associations, industry commodity bodies,
individual irrigators, catchment
management (resource management) authorities
governments.
South Australian Government argued that the delivery model adopted by
governments has been one of its best attributes:
A key strength of programmes such as PIIP-SA, OFIEP and COFFIE has been the
delivery partner model which has enabled regional staff
to act as an effective
conduit between the Commonwealth and irrigation community. The ability for
regional staff to assist proponents
through all stages of the project has
contributed to administrative efficiencies. Regional staff have also received
positive feedback
from proponents about the simplicity of the application
process associated with these
programmes.
argued that the assessment and validation processes applied to project
applications are robust and successful:
Applications submitted by State governments or proponents under Australian
Government water programmes are assessed in accordance
with programme guidelines
that align Australian Government objectives and anticipated programme outcomes.
Applications are subject
to robust due diligence processes that may include
technical input from other Australian Government agencies, such as modelling
from the MDBA, and private
consultants.
addition, the Department argued that its use of best-practice project management
processes has helped to ensure that WUE programs
are well administered:
At the project level, the department oversees the delivery of projects through
established project management processes. Proponents
that receive Australian
Government funding must meet reporting requirements outlined in project
agreements, including in many instances,
reporting on potential ways to improve
the delivery of the project. These lessons are captured by the department and
are used to
inform the design and delivery of subsequent
programmes.
4.22 Further,
the Department argued that it has processes in place to monitor project
implementation and incorporate lessons learned
into future project design and
The department recognises the importance of continuous improvement and monitors
programme delivery to identify and implement improvements
to the design,
methodology and administration of its programmes ... The department has
Monitoring, Evaluation, Review and Improvement
frameworks in place for all its
programs including those that support the Basin Plan. The monitoring and
evaluation in place for
SRWUIP supports the objectives of the program and
includes monthly reporting on water entitlements, collection of program
information
and statistics and case studies. It also includes opportunities to
apply lessons learnt in previous grant rounds or
also argued that the Commonwealth On-farm Further Irrigation Efficiency (COFFIE)
program, which was in the pilot project
phase at the time the Department’s
submission was prepared, has benefited from this improvement process:
As part of the design of COFFIE, the department has sought feedback from
industry and participants in earlier programmes. Specific
the elements of previous programmes that had worked well, as well as those
elements that could be improved
in managing and undertaking projects. This
incorporated
into the design of
Department noted that the COFFIE program design process involved substantial
stakeholder feedback, which it argued was then
taken into account to good effect
at the pilot phase:
The department released the draft design of COFFIE for public consultation and
received 12 submissions and held 30 meetings with
a range of stakeholders.
Stakeholders at a number of these meetings noted that their previous feedback
had been incorporated into
the design of COFFIE and considered it to be an
improvement on previous programmes. The department has subsequently initiated a
programme in South Australia, with initial feedback from participants
indicating that the programme design is far more appealing
of the most frequently noted problems was the substantial delays program
participants faced in securing government approval
of proposed projects. The
Ricegrowers’ Association of Australia (RGA), for example, noted that:
Most rounds of the OFIEP experienced a significant delay between the
participants’ submitting the expressions of interests
to the Commonwealth,
and the Commonwealth approving the projects and funding (up to and longer than
12 months). This time-lag was
particularly problematic for participants as the
project budget (including both the value of water and project costs) was
‘locked-in’
at the expression of interest stage and could not be
reviewed at time of contract signing. Hence participants were exposed to cost
increases incurred during this period. This lead[sic] to many participants
either significantly over-spending or otherwise withdrawing
South Australian Government submission likewise noted that the long delays in
some programs have caused problems for participants:
... a key limitation of OFIEP has been the long, drawn out timeframes between
submission of an initial expression of interest and
execution of a formal
agreement. This process has taken up to 18 months and industry circumstances,
such as water prices and commodity
prices, can change quite significantly during
submission goes on to note that the Australian Government’s decision to
recover water at prices determined using a
volume-weighted average price (a
measure of the average price at which water is valued over a given time) caused
Use of a Volume Weighted Average Price was also cited as a concern for many
stakeholders and considered to undervalue water access
entitlements. This issue,
in addition to the lengthy approval time, significantly impacted on
participation in later rounds of OFIEP
South Australian Government noted, however, that its feedback on these problems
was taken into account by DAWR in the design
of subsequent programs, and
reported that many of the ‘limitations’ of the OFIEP have been
addressed in the program design
for COFFIE, which is in its pilot phase at
4.29 The National Farmers’ Federation (NFF) argued that WUE programs
were a better way to recover water for the environment
than the direct purchase
of water entitlements (or ‘buybacks’) from irrigators:
...investment in WUE for both on-farm and off-farm distribution systems has
provided the least-worst outcome for recovering water
to implement the
Murray-Darling Basin Plan. For this reason, the sector has been a very active
participant in past efficiency programs,
both as farmer participants, and as
delivery partners with the
Commonwealth.
4.30 However,
the NFF argued that much of the ‘low-hanging fruit’ of WUE has been
taken by the earlier rounds of WUE programs,
and that irrigators will have a
much lower appetite for future programs. It pointed to the following factors
limiting irrigator involvement:
§ temporary water prices are higher, which can make a capital investment
in WUE technology uneconomical
§ energy prices have increased dramatically, and since more efficient
irrigation systems generally consume more energy, they
cost more to operate
§ water prices are higher, making irrigators more reluctant to sell an
appreciating asset
§ irrigators have generally been profitable in recent years, increasing
the likelihood that they will self-fund WUE
improvements.
4.31 The NFF argued that to be successful, future WUE programs should
§ include smaller irrigators by lowering the minimum volume requirement
of water that can be recovered
§ broaden the types of water entitlements that can be recovered, and
§ minimise the administrative demands placed on WUE program
participants.
4.32 A number of submissions drew the Committee’s attention to the
requirement for program delivery partners to determine their
administrative
costs when applying for project funding, before actual administration costs can
be determined. For example, the RGA
submission said:
Delivery Partners are required to determine their administration cost at the
expression of interest stage of the program. The total
administration cost a
Delivery Partners can claim is up to 8% of the value of the project delivered
... the actual administration
funding received is determined by both the number
of projects approved and the value of those projects.
However at the expression of interest stage, the Delivery Partner cannot
determine which of the proposed projects will receive funding
Commonwealth. This means it is very difficult to determine whether or not the
administration fee received will adequately
compensate the Delivery Partner for
the cost of delivery the
RGA therefore suggested that the Government should change the way it reimburses
administrative costs:
It is therefore suggested that the Commonwealth investigate opportunities to
limit the impact of the value of the projects on the
total administration
funding received by the delivery partner. One option for consideration is to
provide the delivery partners with
a base (start-up) administration fee and then
pay the delivery partner on a project basis, rather than a flat percentage of
4.34 Murrumbidgee
Irrigation (MI), an IIO that serves the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area in southern
NSW, noted that its experience
with WUE programs had been positive overall. It
highlighted the expertise and continuity of program staff as a particular
arguing that this made it easier to adjust program scope as needed
throughout the project’s implementation period. MI noted,
however, that
the ‘policy-constrained timelines’ of WUE programs were a
Our current program of works is complex and integrated requiring significant
effort and construction hours. Being driven by a political
deadline (June 2019)
adds cost risk and increases customer impacts. For example, this year we have
extended our usual winter maintenance
period from 6 to 11 weeks in order to
upgrade all the regulating structures on our Main Canal. The works cannot be
done ‘in-season’
because dry site access is required. Additionally
the works cannot be staged over several winter maintenance periods because of
significant program of works that must be completed by June
Lindsay Krieg from Central Downs Irrigators Ltd was similarly positive on WUE
programs overall, but told the Committee at
its public hearing in Toowoomba that
constrained program timelines can limit uptake:
Not everybody is going to have the money this year. Not everyone has a good year
this year. It may take five or 10 years for somebody
to have the opportunity to
utilise that offer. Having it one budget process is probably not enough. It is
probably something that
needs to be longer term, particularly in agriculture
with our ups and downs in
production.
the same vein, Mr Steven Carolan from Namoi Water told the Committee at its
Narrabri hearing that his personal experience
as a participant in WUE programs
had been positive, but that inflexible deadlines can be unhelpful for
irrigators:
Being able to have a longer time frame to complete projects would facilitate
larger projects being started. The reality is that moving
dirt is complex, and
if weather conditions are adverse then the time frame for doing so can blow out
significantly.
RGA noted that the administrative burden of participating in WUE programs could
at times be too high:
There is a real risk of micro-management of the delivery partner by the
Commonwealth, rather than being prepared to contract an outcome
(evidenced by
processes such as the technical review of projects, the payment processes, the
delivery partner audits etc.). It is
suggested that the Commonwealth should
investigate opportunities to reduce the reporting/administration demands placed
on delivery
partners , and to provide more guidance regarding the administration
costs that can be claimed, and the process of claiming these
4.38 Barossa
Infrastructure Ltd also argued for a less ‘exhaustive’
administrative burden, but noted that the staff administering
WUE programs had
made the process easier to navigate:
What has been the best part of the administration has been the strong support
from the agency staff and their support in completion
of all necessary
documentation. However, the tender process has been exhaustive and is likely to
exclude worthy projects. The very
nature of it being competitive discourages
cooperation and isolates the grower/operator from the technical support from
during the project development
4.39 Netafim
Australia cited research indicating that many irrigators were unaware of the
water savings that can be achieved by adopting
drip irrigation technologies. It
therefore argued that WUE programs should include an education component to
address this problem:
Given that significant funds are provided to farmers by Governments for on-farm
irrigation development, if farmers are not fully
aware of the benefits of
alterative irrigation technologies that might be applied to their properties
using on-farm support funds,
the economic and other outcomes of the use of the
funds may not be optimal. ... Netafim accordingly wishes to bring it to the
of the inquiry that there could be justification for some form of
education resourcing as part of the process of providing on-farm
support decision-making by farmers on the alternative irrigation technologies
that are available, and the most appropriate
selection of technology for their
on-farm irrigation
development.
number of submissions noted that rising water prices are making WUE programs
less attractive to irrigators, as participation
would require them to relinquish
what is an appreciating asset. To address this problem, the Goulburn-Broken
Catchment Management
Authority argued that WUE programs should not require
participants to surrender any water entitlement:
There is evidence that irrigators in the GMID are increasingly concerned about
the impact of reducing their volume of Victorian High
Reliability Water Shares
through being involved with a FWP project (a minimum of 55 % of agreed water
savings are to be transferred
as part of the offer under the FWP for Round 5,
and this has ranged from 50-60% depending on what was negotiated for each
Some irrigators have decided that the value of the water is greater than
the benefits and have decided not to submit or proceed with
projects ...
To offset negative impacts from the Basin Plan ... a modification of the water
use efficiency program is strongly recommended. The
new program would provide
funding to improve farm irrigation water use and allow the irrigator to retain
all of the water savings
its submission, Cotton Australia noted the impact high energy prices could have
on the adoption of more water efficient irrigation
technologies. As a
consequence, it recommended that the scope of WUE programs be expanded to take
this into account:
The scope should include funding of energy efficiency or generation capacity as
a way of helping irrigators manage the WUE/Energy
nexus. In some case WUE
achievement comes at the cost of needing to pressurise water. Increasing energy
costs have in some cases
completely negated the WUE gains. This is a matter that
needs to be addressed
National Irrigators’ Council noted that under the Murray-Darling Basin
Plan water recovered for the environment must
be socio-economically neutral, as
per section 7.17(2) of the Plan:
(b) The efficiency contributions to the proposed adjustments achieve neutral or
improved socio-economic outcomes compared with the
outcomes under benchmark
conditions of development as evidenced by:
(i) the participation of consumptive water users in projects that recover water
through works to improve irrigation water use efficiency
on their farms; or
(ia) the participation of consumptive water users in projects that recover
water through works to improve water use efficiency off-farm;
(ii) alternative arrangements proposed by a Basin State, assessed by that State
as achieving water recovery with neutral or improved
socio- economic
Council argued that this test is inadequate as it does not take community
impacts into account. It therefore recommended
that the test should be
[T]he socio-economic impact test must be improved for the efficiency projects as
part of any spending on achieving 450 GL ‘up-water’
... this test is
completely inadequate being effectively a ‘single person’ test
rather than a community impact test.
In effect an individual’s willingness
to accept the money is the only community impact test this
4.44 Finally,
the RGA noted that the level of Government spending on WUE programs has at times
inflated the cost of works by distorting
markets in irrigation areas:
the program resulted in inflated supplier/contractor costs for participants.
This is due to there being a very large increase in
the demand for irrigation
products and services at the time when participants were required to undertake
the individual projects.
Hence suppliers/contractors were able to take advantage
of this increase in demand by increasing prices. Hence the cost of the on-farm
works significantly increased at the time of undertaking the
Committee comment
4.45 The Committee notes the range of evidence received regarding the
efficacy of WUE programs. In general, evidence confirmed that
programs were
broadly effective in meeting national water objectives and the alignment between
program design and policy objectives
was generally sound. However, the Committee
observes that the primary financial beneficiaries of WUE are irrigators, and the
achievement
of WUE programs must be considered across environmental and
agricultural objectives.
4.46 The focus of this inquiry has not been to assess individual WUE programs
or to assess their contribution to the different components
of the NWI. The
Committee notes the comprehensive work of the Productivity Commission Review of
the NWI, which released its draft
report in September 2017 and is due to provide
its final report to Government on 31 December 2017.
4.47 Evidence that the Committee received to this inquiry focussed on aspects
of the Australian Government’s WUE program administration,
delivery and
monitoring. The Committee is satisfied that WUE programs are robust in their
design and that their administration and
delivery is generally efficient and
effective. However, some issues were raised in regards to:
§ delays following submission of expressions of interest,
§ program delivery partners determining administration costs,
§ impediments for smaller irrigators, and
§ constrained program timelines.
4.48 In addition, and noting concerns regarding environmental water flows
that were discussed in Chapter 2, the Committee is concerned
to ensure that the
appropriate priority is placed on environmental water and accordingly that there
is suitable baseline and ongoing
environmental water monitoring. To ensure
accountability to the primary policy objective of sustainable environmental
water levels,
the Committee recommends that, at the commencement of each
program’s funding, baseline and then ongoing measuring of regional
or surface water systems is undertaken to determine impacts of changed water
practices resulting from WUE funded projects.
4.49 Further, the end objective must be the long-term completion of WUE
programs, and the achievement of ongoing efficient irrigation
methods which
operate independently, without government assistance and which are sustainable
through fluctuating weather patterns.
4.50 The Committee has some concerns that appropriate end of life cycle
consideration is being designed into programs, and notes the
need to ensure that
programs are building resilience – not reliance – into the future.
Given the range and scope of various
WUE programs, the Committee sees value in
reviewing existing Australian Government funded programs to ensure alignment
with key principles
and outcomes, and to address administrative concerns raised
by submitters.
Recommendation 1
4.51 The Committee recommends that the Department of Agriculture and Water
Resources conduct an internal review of water use efficiency
(WUE) programs to
address the following issues:
minimising delays following submission of expressions of interest
to securing agreement and approvals,
assisting program delivery partners to determine administrative
costs and consider mechanisms to reduce up-front costs borne by those
reducing impediments for smaller irrigators to participate in
providing mechanisms for irrigators to apply for an extension to
program timelines, given the impact of weather and other uncertainties,
undertaking baseline measuring of regional ground or surface water
systems at the commencement of each program, and then ongoing measuring
determine impacts of changed water practices resulting from WUE funded projects,
ensuring that the assessment process includes consideration of the
project life cycle contribution to the financial independence and
resilience of the irrigated agriculture sector, and does not skew market crop
decisions or create reliance, and
ensuring defined regular evaluation points to monitor and assess
achievement against a long term objective of financial independence
irrigated agricultural sector.
The Department should provide the results of this review to this Committee
no later than 1 June 2018.
4.52 The Productivity Commission has reviewed the policy and program
framework of the NWI and is due to release its final report.
Further to this,
the Committee has recommended above that the Department review existing
Australian Government WUE programs to address
administration concerns, undertake
baseline and ongoing monitoring of water impacts, and ensure proper lifecycle
4.53 In addition, given the scale of Australian Government expenditure, the
Committee considers that detailed external performance
scrutiny of WUE programs
is warranted. This would provide the public, the Department and the Australian
Government with further reassurance
regarding the overall efficacy of its WUE
programs. While recognising the independence of the Auditor-General in
determining audit
priorities for any year, the Committee recommends that the
Auditor-General give consideration to conducting a performance audit of
programs in 2018.
Recommendation 2
4.54 The Committee recommends that the Auditor-General consider conducting
a performance audit of Australian Government funded water
use efficiency
programs to assess the design process, evaluation arrangements, and effective
and efficient administration of these
programs. The Committee recommends that
the audit take place in 2018.
4.55 The Productivity Commission’s 2017 draft report for its review of
the NWI makes 24 recommendations and 14 findings. The
Committee notes that a
number of the Productivity Commission’s draft recommendations propose
adjustments to Australian, State,
and Territory government programs to improve
alignment to national water objectives. The Committee notes its support for the
review process and, in particular, for the Productivity
Commission’s draft recommendation for further progressing reform:
Productivity Commission Draft Recommendation 9.1
Australian, State and Territory Governments should recommit to a renewed
National Water Initiative through COAG by 2020. This should:
a. maintain the achievements in water entitlements and planning, water markets,
water accounting, water pricing and governance, knowledge
and capacity building,
and community engagement delivered by the current National Water Initiative as
the key foundations underpinning
sustainable water resource management and
efficient infrastructure service delivery
b. revise a number of policy settings:
- incorporating extractive
industries and alternative water sources into water entitlement frameworks
- water planning to take account of climate change and enable ongoing
optimisation
- Indigenous access to water for economic purposes
- arrangements for water trading between irrigation and urban sectors
- better targeted adjustment assistance
c. significantly enhance policy settings relating to:
water management to ensure innovative and efficient provision of services in the
future under the combined pressures of population
growth and climate change
- environmental water management to ensure maximum return on government
investment in this area
- decision making on building and supporting new infrastructure for
agriculture.
4.56 The Committee urges the Australian Government to give close
consideration to these future steps.
4.57 The Productivity Commission also makes draft recommendations in relation
to environment water management, infrastructure funding,
and community
structural adjustment. The Committee notes that submitters to this inquiry
raised similar concerns. Further concerns
were also raised regarding the
limitation of WUE in relation to the promotion of water efficient irrigation
technologies, the prohibitive
cost of energy and its impact on the
implementation of irrigation technologies, and managing community social and
economic health
through this transition. These issues are considered by the
Committee later in the report.
4.58 The Committee considers the scope of the Productivity Commission draft
findings and recommendations to be positive. National
policy coordination and
monitoring, and the rebalancing of initiatives should be a dynamic and continual
process, given the complexity
of water objectives and the multitude of factors
at play. Regular reviews and adjustments are vital processes guiding new
and achieving lasting change.
4.59 However, the Committee also notes that policy and program adjustments
can give rise to uncertainty, particularly in the contested
area of water policy
where they can affect livelihoods and influence commercial decisions with
long-term consequences. Accordingly,
the Committee urges the Australian
Government to act expeditiously in response to the Productivity
Commission’s final report
to ensure that:
§ the final report is promptly made available for public release,
§ the recommendations are considered and an Australian Government
response is made public by 31 March 2018, and
§ recommendations requiring national agreement are considered by COAG at
its first meeting of 2018.
Recommendation 3
4.60 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government act
expeditiously in response to the final report of the Productivity
Commission’s Review of the National Water Initiative (due to be provided
to Government by 31 December 2017) and ensure that:
the final report is promptly made available for public
the recommendations are considered and an Australian Government
response is made public by 31 March 2018, and
recommendations requiring national agreement are considered by COAG
at its first meeting of 2018.
5. Improving environmental flows and irrigation
efficiencies
5.1 Previous chapters have discussed the effectiveness of the approach of
Water Use efficiency (WUE) programs to increase water productivity
changed irrigation practices. The efficacy of the administration of WUE programs
has also been examined. This chapter considers
how further gains for the
environment and improvements for water efficiencies may be achieved.
5.2 Critical to the long term achievement of WUE programs is sustainable
levels of environmental water flows, and in-ground and river
water health. WUE
programs target how water is used and the quantity of water used for irrigation,
in order to maintain or increase
levels of water available to the environment.
5.3 Improving water levels for the environment and the productivity of that
environmental water is a vital objective. However, in
the context of this
inquiry, the Committee is mindful that consideration of environmental flows is
broader than the focus of this
inquiry on WUE programs in the irrigated
agriculture sector. At the time of referring the inquiry, the Minister for
Agriculture and
Resources, the Hon. Barnaby Joyce MP, noted that the House of
Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Energy would
be conducting
an inquiry into the management of Commonwealth environmental water resources and
therefore the Minister suggested that
this Committee ‘may wish to limit
its consideration of environmental flows in order to avoid
duplication’.
5.4 Accordingly, the first section of this chapter provides a summary review
of evidence received regarding environmental flows and
complementary measures,
and also notes concurrent work being conducted in this field.
5.5 The second part of this chapter considers how further improvements to WUE
can be driven in the agricultural sector through ongoing
research and addressing
impediments to implementation, such as energy pricing and improved
meteorological forecasting.
Improving environmental
flows and river health
5.6 In addition to promoting agricultural water productivity through WUE
programs, improvements to environmental outcomes can also
be sought through
making better use of this water. The range of activities to improve
environmental water productivity is referred
to as ‘complementary
measures’. This section explains how these complementary measures form
part of the Australian Government’s
water use efficiency framework.
5.7 DAWR defined ‘complementary measures’ as ‘a wide range
of non-flow related measures that are focused on delivering
environmental
outcomes’ and gave examples such as ‘the installation of fishways,
fish diversion screens, release of the
carp herpes virus, works to address cold
water pollution and riparian management activities and habitat
restoration’.
5.8 The Sustainable Rural Water Use and Infrastructure Program (SRWUIP)
provides funding for several environmental programs, including
the installation
of low flow devices, salinity management, water level management and riverine
management.
5.9 More broadly, DAWR noted that the Murray-Darling Basin Authority (MDBA)
has an Environmental Watering Plan for the Basin:
The plan is an environmental management framework that sets out key components
of environmental watering management, and principles
and methods to be applied
in environmental watering. Environmental watering is coordinated to achieve the
maximum benefit through
Southern Connected Environmental Watering Committee
(SCBEWC), an organisation of state and Commonwealth bodies with interests in
environmental watering.
We note that supply measure projects under the Sustainable Diversion Limit
Adjustment Mechanism (SDLAM) will enable more efficient
use of environmental
water to reduce water recovery from consumptive purposes while achieving
equivalent environmental outcomes.
Supply measures may include environmental
works such as installation of levee banks, changes in river operations and
evaporative
savings through storage systems. More efficient use of environmental
water allows for higher sustainable diversion limits and hence
a reduction in
the environmental water recovery
DAWR explained, there is ongoing commitment at an intergovernmental level to
facilitating these measures:
Murray-Darling Basin water ministers have agreed that complementary measures can
provide real environmental benefits and have sought
advice from officials on how
to better embed complementary measures as an element of Basin Plan
implementation. Ministers are regularly
updated as this work progresses. Basin
water ministers have also made an in-principle commitment, subject to funding
availability,
to the implementation of a comprehensive suite of complementary
measures and other projects (collectively known as ‘toolkit’
measures) that target improved water management and environmental outcomes
across the northern Basin in support of the outcomes of
Northern Basin
part of the MDBA’s Northern Basin Review, the MDBA developed a
‘toolkit’ of complementary measures intended
to improve water
management in the northern basin.
5.12 This toolkit will require commitments from the Australian, Queensland
and New South Wales governments. The MDBA suggests that
these measures will be a
‘means of reducing the social and economic implications of the Basin Plan
while also providing opportunities
for improved water management to enhance the
use of environmental
5.13 The aim of the toolkit measures proposed by the MDBA is to ‘help
achieve river health with less
§ protection of environmental flows,
§ undertaking targeted recovery of water,
§ a range of event-based mechanisms (including one-off temporary water
trade, options over water pumping, and store and release
mechanisms),
§ promoting the coordination and delivery of environmental water,
§ removing constraints in the Gwydir catchment which prevent flows from
reaching the Gwydir wetland, and
§ targeting environmental works and measures to promote fish movement
and habitat in the northern basin, including construction
of fishways and
control of cold water
5.14 Irrigator groups in particular argued that complementary measures, and
more broadly the more efficient use of water allocated
for environmental use,
should remain a high priority for governments.
5.15 The National Irrigators’ Council (NIC) advocated for increased
attention to non-flow efficiency measures, including carp
control, management of
cold water pollution, improved fish migration measures and increased capacity
for the Commonwealth Environmental
Water Holder (CEWH) to trade water. The NIC
argued that the implementation of such measures:
... to achieve environmental outcomes (rather than the recovery of more water
entitlement) and proper measurement of long term environmental
outcomes, is
critical to the sustainability of communities throughout the Murray-Darling
Basin. This will optimise every opportunity
to deliver real environmental
5.16 Cotton
Australia, for instance, argued that ‘much more can be done for the river
environment by adopting other measures
than simply water acquisition’, and
suggested that complementary measures ‘would leverage significant
environmental outcomes
without the need for further water
acquisitions’.
5.17 Therefore, Cotton Australia argued that the focus should be ‘on
the implementation of complementary measures rather than
further water
5.18 Cotton Australia suggested the following complementary measures:
‘mitigating the effect of cold water pollution from headwater storages,
improving fish passage, controlling feral animals
in riparian and wetland areas,
removing carp from our waterways, and properly managing significant
National Farmers’ Federation (NFF) recommended that the Government
‘explore to the full extent possible non-flow
complementary
measures’ to improve outcomes from environmental water. The NFF noted the
‘significant investment that
has been made in procuring water entitlements
for environmental water holders, and the ongoing costs associated with holding
and argued that ‘prudent and efficient management must be a
5.20 The NFF went on to suggest that:
[b]etter outcomes can be achieved if ‘non-flow’ issues such as
addressing cold water pollution and fish passage, controlling
feral animals in
key wetland and floodplain areas, and tackling carp infestations. Improving land
management in valued ecosystems
NFF criticised the proposed MDBA toolkit of complementary measures as
‘narrow in focus’, and noted that ‘realistic
alternatives to
achieve environmental outcomes remain largely
unexplored’.
on this, Ms Knowles of the NFF stated:
There are six measures in that toolkit in total. We thought that there was
potential for it to be broader to address issues like
carp control and cold
water pollution, particularly in something like the Gwydir River, for example.
If you've ever swum downstream
of Copeton Dam—I wouldn't advise
it!—it's pretty cold to expect native fish to be able to breed in that
environment.
The Environmental Water Holder holds significant parcels of water
in that system. For that to be most effective, addressing something
water pollution in Copeton Dam is really critical to achieving native fish
outcomes in that part of the world. That's why
we were somewhat disappointed
with the MDBA's recommendation around the toolkit, because there was potential
for it to have gone
further than what it
NFF acknowledged that monitoring efficiency of water usage is still a
‘relatively new endeavour for Governments, and
continuous improvement has
been a focus for agencies such as the Commonwealth Environmental Water Holder,
and state based equivalent
5.23 However, the NFF argued, ‘continued concerted effort is required
to ensure that we make the most of the water that has
been recovered from
production for the benefit of the environment’.
5.24 Smartrivers asserted that infrastructure projects to improve
environmental water efficiency were just as important as those to
irrigation water efficiency:
The environmental water belonging to the Environmental Water Holder is just as
precious as the entitlements held by irrigators. Therefore,
unreasonable to spend money on infrastructure that will increase the efficacy of
environmental water. This could include
infrastructure that enables access to
private storages to store and release environmental water and mechanisms to
divert environmental
water to where it will have the most environmental
5.25 Alongside
irrigators, other experts drew attention to the importance of efficient
management of environmental water allocations.
Dr Adamson stated:
You can treat the environment exactly the same as an irrigation problem. We've
got certain wetlands there that always require water,
and that makes them like a
perennial crop. We've got other wetlands that require a watering every now and
then, so they become like
an annual crop. When you understand the portfolio of
entitlements you have by region, you'll work out, roughly, your water supply
the variability across different times: in droughts and in wet states. When you
know what the environmental objectives are by
those regions, you can work out if
can we actually water these things correctly.
When you start doing this you can then start asking those lovely questions
associated with trade. Can we make this system more efficient?
Can we trade
between the environment and farmers to get maximum
Committee comment
5.26 The Committee supports the evidence that complementary measures to
improve the efficient use of environmental water allocations
are an important
element in the overall management of environmental outcomes. Given the scale of
government investment in water efficiency
projects and purchases, the Committee
considers it of the utmost importance that this water is used efficiently to
achieve its purpose
of maintaining the environment.
5.27 The Committee also notes and endorses recent work in the area by other
bodies, such as the Productivity Commission and the CSIRO.
The Committee draws
attention to the extensive set of draft recommendations and findings in regards
to environmental management made
by the Productivity Commission in their
September 2017 draft report, and in particular:
Productivity Commission Draft Recommendation 5.1
Australian, State and Territory Government should ensure that their policy
frameworks provide for the efficient and effective use
of environmental water to
maximise environmental outcomes and, where possible provide additional community
outcomes relating to water
quality, Indigenous values, recreation and economic
benefit ...
Productivity Commission Draft Recommendation 5.6
Australian, State and Territory Governments should improve monitoring,
evaluation, auditing and reporting to demonstrate the benefit
of allocating
water to the environment, build public trust in its management, keep managers
accountable and make better use of environmental
water over time
Committee also notes the CSIRO report released 2 November 2017 on complementary
This report
provided a scoping study on the assessment of complementary water measures in
the Murray-Darling Basin. While its focus
was on that region, the application is
broader and it provides a valuable addition to holistic environmental water
management.
5.29 The Committee notes the work that has been undertaken in this area, and
also the further inquiry reviews that are anticipated.
The Committee encourages
the DAWR to take note of the evidence summarised here, and reiterates the
importance of considering complementary
measures in achieving long-term
sustainability and productivity of environmental water.
5.30 The Committee will continue to monitor the outcomes of these
Improving the development
and implementation of irrigation efficiencies
5.31 Achieving more water efficient irrigation frequently requires
implementing more advanced technologies and techniques. These can
pressurised or sub-surface irrigation systems, lateral move or centre-pivot
irrigation systems, or may simply involve refinements
to existing irrigation
techniques that will save water.
5.32 Given the unpredictable and drying Australian climate, the irrigation
sector increasingly relies on producing more with less
water, and the
development and deployment of cutting-edge irrigation technologies is critical
to that endeavour. This section will
outline the evidence the Committee has
received on the state of irrigation research and development, and will discuss
some of the
factors that can slow the adoption of more water efficient
irrigation technology.
Box 5.1 Australian Cotton Research Institute,
On 6 April 2017 the Committee conducted site inspections at the Australian
Cotton Research Institute (ACRI) located between Narrabri
and Wee Waw, NSW. ACRI
is jointly operated by the New South Wales Department of Primary Industries
(NSW-DPI) and the CSIRO. The Committee
heard that staff at ACRI conduct research
to improve cotton production in Australia through the development of advanced
cotton and the development of better agronomic practices.
The Committee's visit to ACRI highlighted the benefits of collaborative and
integrated research, development and extension. The Committee
was briefed on
industry, government and academic cooperation to develop new and better strains
of cotton, improve yield, water productivity,
and fibre quality, and to develop
and promote better technologies and agronomic practices.
Committee members heard how effective this research and development work
has been for the Australian cotton industry. Australia's
cotton farmers
consistently achieve world-leading yields and have improved their WUE by more
than 40 per cent in the last 15 years.
Research on water efficiency
technologies
5.33 DAWR told the Committee that it is satisfied with the level of research
and development work being undertaken in the irrigation
space. Its submission
referred to the National Water Use in Agriculture Research, Development and
Extension Strategy, a project developed
under COAG’s National Primary
Industry Industries Research, Development and Extension (RD&E) Framework.
The framework aims
to ‘encourage greater collaboration and promote
continuous improvement in the investment of research, development and extension
resources nationally.’
In relation to WUE, the strategy’s aim is to:
... more effectively deliver research, development and extension outcomes for
irrigated and rain fed agricultural industries seeking
to maximise water
productivity, adapt to decreasing water availability, and increase the
capability of water managers and users to
agriculture.
Department argued that WUE research and development is well provided for under
existing arrangements, and that there is a
good degree of collaboration to
ensure that innovation in the area is shared between stakeholders. Ms Mary
Colreavy from the Department
There is a high level of cooperation already existing between relevant people
from those different institutions, especially when
they are focused on pieces of
research that are similar or have related aspects. There are many cross-cutting
committees and wards
across government where we come together and share updates
on where things are
Malcolm Thompson from DAWR noted that a key part of the Government’s
RD&E policy settings is that they permit irrigators
and industries to set
their own research agenda:
... the government's science and technology and research priorities are driven
through the policies that we have through rural research,
development and
extension priorities, and they include soil and water ... I don't think we,
certainly in the department, would feel
that we are stage managing all of that
research and development ... That allows the R&D corps, which are typically
based, as I said, to get on and have the growers and the farm sector
priorities.
to irrigation, Mr Thompson warned that it
ran the risk of being lost in an
already crowded field:
...a CRC would be another entity in a very wide landscape of entities that are
involved. I don't think any of those other entities
that I have talked to,
whether it is CSIRO, the Bureau of Met or the R&D corps, would cede their
authority to a new CRC ... I
am not sure that it would be a decisive step in
trying to coordinate
5.37 Similarly,
Mr Phillip Glyde, Chief Executive of the MDBA, told the Committee that he was
encouraged by the RD&E work being
undertaken in the WUE field via the
research and development corporation model:
The thing I have taken some comfort from is the existing research development
corporation structure. That is an ongoing enduring
thing, as you would probably
be aware, funded in part by the government and in part by levies on the
farmers—or, in this case,
irrigators. I would observe that cotton RDCs and
Dairy Australia—all of that structure—are looking at every possible
way they can maintain their profitability and find efficiency gains ... what we
can observe is there is a lot of work going into
water use efficiency right
through that whole enduring RDC complex. We are certainly encouraged by
irrigation industry was also satisfied with the current level of irrigation
RD&E. Industry groups noted in their submissions
that the irrigation
industry has worked hard in recent years to improve water use efficiencies, and
continues to do so. Ms Jacqueline
Knowles from the NFF explained that current
gains in water efficiencies are a result of previous research and development
investments
made by industry and governments:
... investments that we've made in water use efficiency, whether it's about crop
varieties, or farming systems, or technologies on
farm, or sensors in fields, or
technologies that reduce evaporation from storages—whatever it is—a
lot of that has come
from those past investments in CRC. The opportunity for
governments to recover water through water use efficiency was really taking
opportunity that that R&D had created and provided. We'd like to see a
continued bipartisan commitment to that rural research
and development model.
It's one that we cherish and that has delivered huge successes both for the ag
sector and for the Australian
economy more
NFF submission noted that past and present industry investment (often in
partnership with government) continues to drive
improvements:
While the agriculture sector has invested significantly in recent decades to
drive improved water use efficiency, the Australian
industry continues to strive
to better. Under the Government’s Rural R&D for Profit Program, the
Commonwealth, in partnership
with 6 Research and Development partners and 19
farmer irrigation technology learning sites are aiming to improve the profit of
cotton, dairy, rice and sugar irrigators by $20,000 - 40,000 per annum by
improving water productivity, efficiency and farmer profitability
by 10- 20% ...
The project will focus on:
§ Practical, reliable irrigation
scheduling technologies,
§ Precise, low cost automated control systems for a range of irrigation
§ A network of farmer managed learning sites located in major regions
referred to as “optimised irrigation”
Box 5.2 ‘Keytah’ farm,
On 6 April 2017 the Committee travelled to 'Keytah', a large cotton farm
near Moree in NSW. The property is owned by the Sundown Pastoral
Company. The
Committee met with Keytah's General Farm Manager and staff from the Gwydir
Valley Irrigators Association (GVIA) who
facilitated the visit.
The Committee conducted inspections of Keytah's cropping operations and was
briefed on WUE research conducted at Keytah between 2009
and 2016 as part of the
Grower Led Irrigation System Comparison Research project led by GVIA. The
project trialled various methods
of growing cotton in order to determine their
relative advantages and disadvantages.
The research conducted at Keytah compared traditional furrow siphon
irrigation methods with more advanced bankless channel, lateral
subsurface drip irrigation systems. It found that while the more advanced
lateral move and drip systems could reduce labour
costs and provide increased
yield per hectare and per megalitre, these gains were offset by increased
capital and operating costs
(particularly electricity). GVIA concluded that,
overall, bankless channel systems provided the best overall balance, combining
and yield improvements with lower labour, energy, maintenance, and capital
The Keytah site inspection once again raised the issue of increased
operating costs - particularly electricity costs - and highlighted
some of the
impediments to the adoption of more water efficient technologies.
5.40 The National Irrigators’ Council also referred to the contribution
that the irrigation industry makes, and has made, to
gains in water use
efficiency innovations:
Australian farmers have always been innovators; they have looked for solutions
when faced with tough climatic conditions. Irrigators
are no exception and over
recent decades have overcome sometimes inefficient historical designs of
irrigation districts to become
more efficient. Those substantial efficiency
improvements have been both Government and self-funded. Irrigators have embraced
and development and taken advantage of technological change and
broadened their knowledge to improve their bottom line, while at
the same time
increasing their water use
efficiency.
5.41 Further,
the cotton and rice industries noted the substantial improvements their
industries have made in recent years to water
use efficiency developments. Ms
Rachel Kelly from the Rice Growers’ Association (RGA) told the Committee
They [ricegrowers] are constantly striving for efficiencies in their water use
on their crops. The efficiencies are generally achieved
through irrigation
practices but also through research and development. In particular, the rice
breeding program and irrigation efficiency
use is the key objective of the rice
industry's R&D program. In addition to the On-farm Irrigation Efficiency
Program and the
PIIOP—Private Irrigation Infrastructure Operators
Program—there has been much private investment in irrigation efficiency
across our valleys and for our membership. It is important that this is
recognised because people are doing that off their own
Cotton Australia submission stated that the industry has ‘increased its
WUE by 40 per cent in the decade leading up
to 2012’ through a combination
of better technology, management expertise and improved
The Gwydir Valley
Irrigators Association similarly highlighted cotton research conducted at the
‘Keytah’ property to
the west of Moree in NSW which has sought to
compare different cotton cropping systems to assess their strengths and
weaknesses.
The testing is part of the Smarter Irrigation for Profit program,
which arises from National Water Use in Agriculture Research, Development
Extension Strategy.
5.43 While extensive research and development was noted across many sectors,
some inquiry participants indicated that there are also
gaps in Australia's land
and water research program. Much of the research mentioned above focusses on
shorter term gains and on the
deployment of existing technologies.
5.44 Evidence to the inquiry from academic sources indicated that there are
substantial gaps in our understanding of Australia’s
water systems, and
that it is simply unknown how our current WUE policies are affecting those
systems, highlighting the need for
more research. Professor Edward
‘Snow’ Barlow from the Australian Academy of Technological Sciences
and Engineering (ATSE)
told the Committee that:
... from the academy's point of view, in terms of the basic hydrological system
that we're playing with here—and irrigation
is just one part of that
hydrological system—we need to establish what are the actual impacts of
irrigation water use efficiency
programs on the surface and groundwater systems
and the agricultural ecosystems that depend on
5.45 Likewise,
Professor Lin Crase told the Committee that regulators do not measure water use
sufficiently well in Australia, and
that this undermines the operation of the
national water market:
The simple fact is ... that, if you look at what we've done with water
accounting in this country, you see we've done a very poor
job of counting where
it goes ... largely we don't account for a lot of water that leaks ... We just
don't measure this thing very
...markets only work well to the extent that governments are able to validate
the resources that are exchanged. What I'm suggesting
to you is we're not doing
as good a job as we might in measuring some of those
5.46 Professor
Barlow explained that information-based measurement is critical to the
management of Australia’s water resources,
and there is room for
improvement in this regard:
Where we are a bit poor at present is the infrastructure to actually do it on a
basin scale to know what every stream is doing, what
every irrigation channel is
doing, and what the water loss characteristics and the crop uses have been.
We'll get there, but that's
in the big sense. So I'm saying that there are
strong opportunities to use technology effectively to measure our water use and
effectiveness coming forward. It will take time, but we need to have the
regulatory authorities in possession of this information
... It has to be an
information-based management rather than a finger in the
Box 5.3 Darling Downs, QLD
On 5 April 2017 the Committee conducted site inspections in Toowoomba,
Queensland. The Darling Downs is one of Australia’s leading
agricultural
regions, generating approximately 25 per cent of Queensland’s annual
agricultural production, and irrigated agriculture
- primarily cotton and
horticulture - is prominent in the Central Downs. Toowoomba is home to the
National Centre for Engineering
in Agriculture (NCEA), located at the University
of Southern Queensland. Staff from the NCEA accompanied Committee members on
visits to properties in the Toowoomba region.
The Committee's inspections focused on the technology under development by
NCEA staff and irrigators in the area. The Committee visited
a cotton farm at
Yargullen, west of Toowoomba and heard about the design and testing of centre
pivot irrigation systems, field sensors,
soil and crop models, and the
development of autonomous irrigation systems. These kinds of technologies have
the potential to greatly
improve irrigation efficiency, and new data gathering
and analysis tools can help inform decision-making. Smarter, more autonomous
irrigation systems can provide time and labour savings of great value to
irrigators, as well as providing opportunities for greater
precision in the
application of water and fertilisers.
The Committee also appreciated the opportunity to visit the NCEA campus in
Toowoomba and thanks NCEA staff for taking the time to
brief members on their
5.47 In terms of the structure of Australia’s RD&E institutions,
Professor Guy Roth indicated that there is a stop-start
Australia’s research efforts that has prevented Australia from being a
true world leader in WUE technologies:
... we have had a CRC that did its time and finished, and we lost momentum.
Eventually we had the National Program for Sustainable
Irrigation, and that
finished. The Rural R&D for Profit program, the Smarter Irrigation for
Profit project, finishes in the middle
of next year; it may get another year,
but we do not know. We always seem to be doing this, and I think there is great
to, if we want to be, be real world leaders in this sort of
technology.
5.48 Professor
Roth argued that the distributed nature of the organisations contributing to
Australia’s irrigation research
made collaboration more difficult, in
spite of the participants’ best efforts:
If you look at how agricultural research is done in Australia, it is largely
done by departments of primary industries, or whatever
they are called in each
state, the CSIRO and the universities, and public organisations as well. They
are fiercely independent. They
do try to collaborate, but that is easier said
5.49 Similarly,
Professor Barlow told the Committee that:
... there are 15 commodity-based rural industry R&D corporations at present;
they are all commodity-based. There was another,
which was Land and Water
Australia, which was disbanded probably seven or eight years ago. That had
responsibility for soil and water.
Soil and water are the basis of all those
systems. So I think government does have a role in coordinating this ... there
there that hasn't been adequately filled by the individual
corporations. You can see that. The cotton guys or the beef guys would
do we need to fund all of the water research?' There needs to be someone who
5.50 Professor
Roth also argued that WUE research in Australia is negatively impacted by the
absence of an overarching or coordinating
organisation which has a longer-term
There are a lot of things on the agenda with water use efficiency: the
Murray-Darling Basin Plan, environmental buybacks, the irrigation
modernisation
programs, there used to be a national groundwater research strategy, and there
used to be an urban water research strategy.
But there is not the longer term.
There is the national RD&E strategy, but it is not resourced long term. ...
having a longer
term approach to it would use government resources more
efficiently.
Committee comment
5.51 Ongoing improvements to irrigation efficiencies are vital – while
there is scope to innovate and develop, progress should
not be impeded by gaps
in research or a lack of shared knowledge. The Committee was impressed by the
breadth of RD&E work being
undertaken across Australia and the investments
being made by irrigators and industry groups. The drive to innovate was also
demonstrated
time and again to the Committee during its inspections around
Australia. Some of the highlights of these demonstrations are described
Boxes through this report.
5.52 However, while current irrigation techniques research and innovation is
substantive, the Committee notes the importance of coordinating
this research
and notes that there are some gaps in research areas. Demonstration and
dissemination of new research technologies
is also critical to drive uptake and
implementation.
5.53 Given the vital importance of gaining water efficiencies, and the
substantial investment undertaken in WUE programs, the Committee
considers there
is a clear role for a coordinating research body to develop technologies, drive
future innovations, disseminate information
and assist in the uptake and
implementation of new technologies. This would provide an important longer term
focus and ensure continuing
water use efficiencies across the sector.
Recommendation 4
5.54 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government establish and
provide seed funding for a coordinating Research, Development
and Extension
(RD&E) body to work with the agriculture sector in order to:
Accelerate the adoption of existing cutting-edge irrigation
technologies, and
Promote innovation and the development of new water efficiency
technologies.
Impediments to
efficiencies
5.55 Evidence to the inquiry highlighted two issues which are currently
impeding water use efficiencies. The first issue relates to
electricity pricing
and the prohibitive cost of accessing alternative energy sources. Farmers are
obliged to make commercial decisions
that will ensure the financial viability of
their enterprises. At times, new irrigation technologies may deliver water
savings, but
the associated energy costs may be prohibitive.
5.56 The second issue relates to access to accurate meteorological long-range
weather and rainfall forecasting. Accurate forecasting
enables farmers to
utilise water irrigation only when this is required. While most areas are well
serviced, the Committee received
evidence that there are gaps in some areas
which severely impact farmers’ capacity to irrigate efficiently.
Energy pricing
5.57 Agricultural businesses are necessarily focused on financial viability,
and any increase to operating costs is rightly viewed
with concern. In many
instances, the operation of WUE technologies may reduce water usage and so the
price paid for water, however
energy operating costs may increase to levels
which make the implementation of water efficient technologies uneconomic.
5.58 In relation to the adoption of WUE technologies, several submitters
noted that farmers must decide whether or not to invest in
upgrades based on
overall business profitability. In this context, the efficient use of water is
only one factor among many. As the
Gwydir Valley Irrigators Association
To present a balanced perspective of irrigation and water use efficiency in
Australian agriculture, consideration must be given to
all the production
parameters; soil, crop, and climate, the reliability of the irrigation water
resource, the cost to establish infrastructure
and to the resources of labour
and energy, as well as the key driver for many growers, productivity or
5.59 Similarly,
Professor Guy Roth explained:
It is not all about water. For example there are complex interactions between
water, energy, labour, nutrient use, crop agronomy,
soils, salinity and the
water balance that need to be better
understood.
submitters noted that adopting more water efficient technologies involved
trade-offs, primarily associated with higher energy
costs. Cotton Australia
called this the ‘water/energy nexus’:
Farmers are changing to alternative irrigation systems such as centre pivots and
lateral move systems and it is expected there will
be an increasing number of
these machines in the future. These systems can achieve labour savings and with
some soil types, water
savings (about 30 percent), but have significantly higher
energy costs associated with water pumping and machine
Peter Smith reiterated the difficulties of water efficiency versus energy
An improvement in irrigation efficiency can often be achieved by adopting a form
of pressurised irrigation. The problems are that
the increased operating costs
may prejudice the viability of the farm business and that the manufacture and
operation of pressurised
systems is more energy intensive than surface
irrigation systems. The result may therefore be improved water use efficiency
but decreased
energy use efficiency and perhaps decreased profitability of the
enterprise.
NIC also noted the connection between water use efficiencies and energy, arguing
that governments have failed to take rising
power prices into account when
designing programs:
Water efficiency in irrigation is often achieved by piping irrigation networks
and pressurising delivery, ideally regulated using
smart, automated control
systems. Operating such systems, however, entails far higher energy usage that
flood and other gravity based
systems. State and federal governments have
invested billions in water efficiency programs without addressing the energy
concern was reiterated by Mr Steve Whan, NIC Chief Executive Officer, who
explained the severe impact energy prices can
have on irrigators:
... electricity prices are a real problem for many of our producers. I met an
almond farmer in the Riverland in South Australia a
few weeks ago whose
electricity bill had increased by $87,000 in a single year. It was $325,000
prior to that; $87,000 on top of
that. Fortunately for him at the moment, the
price of almonds is really good. So he is coping with that. But if you have a
where the market or the terms of trade have turned against you a bit, or
one where the margins are not so good—for instance
industry—then that is a real
Jacqueline Knowles from the NFF told the Committee that high energy prices have
led farmers to make regressive choices in
terms of how much water they use:
... what we've seen over recent years is that, with escalating power prices,
farmers are either reverting to not using the water
use efficiency technology,
which is power hungry, or they're leaving the grid and dusting off diesel
generators. That's not good
for anyone, but that's been the most cost-effective
way for them to continue to run their pumps and their irrigation
5.65 Growcom,
representing the Queensland horticulture industry, argued that high energy
prices put pressure on profitability and
reduced capacity of enterprises to
invest for the future:
Water itself is not a large cost input for most irrigators even though without
it most farms cease to operate. For intensive horticulture
production systems
energy to pump water is currently the main driver for the uptake of water use
efficiency and alternative energy
sources. As the cost of energy steadily
continues to increase over the next few years ... irrigators will find it more
to objectively irrigate. As market price takers this will place
increasing pressure on farm gate returns and further reduce the ability
horticulture industry to self
5.66 Likewise,
the Queensland Farmers’ Federation noted the surge in energy prices in
recent years, and pointed out its impact
on irrigators:
Assessment of electricity bills amongst irrigators has revealed price increases
of 300 per cent over the last NSW network determination
(2009–2014). Similar increases have been experienced in Queensland over
the same period. The electricity costs cannot
be offset as irrigators are price
takers in international commodity markets with no ability to dictate returns
achieved for their
... higher energy costs have become a major constraining factor for irrigators
to utilise their water efficient irrigation equipment
and have caused individual
irrigators to be exposed to electricity price volatility and continuous price
5.67 Submitters
had a number of suggestions to deal with the impact of energy costs on
irrigators. The NIC argued that although many
organisations are addressing power
prices, an agriculture-focused irrigation energy program is necessary to assist
irrigators:
We argue that a national irrigation energy productivity program funded by ARENA
(Australian Renewable Energy Agency) is needed to
develop and incentivise
adoption of irrigation systems that optimise both energy and water usage. In
addition to increasing energy
and broader agricultural productivity, the program
would help reduce pressure on national bulk water resources, and in so doing may
reduce water allocation conflict in the Murray Darling Basin and other
catchments.
Hutchinson from the NIC argued that a whole-of-government approach is needed, to
ensure that relevant technology is not
excluded from programs for
irrigators:
The point that I would make in terms of the energy-irrigation nexus is the real
need for a whole-of-government approach when funding
programs of such national
significance, like what we have seen with the Basin Plan. As part of the on-farm
program, solar, for example,
was specifically excluded as an eligible activity,
which led farmers to move towards diesel and other things for pumping ... it was
because of the government departments that were operating the funding buckets;
solar did not fall into the right
Levy Scheider from Netafim noted that new technologies designed to help
irrigators reduce their energy costs were under development,
and that other
technologies could be also be of assistance:
It is absolutely an issue that is a challenge for us ... What we are doing about
it is developing systems that are low flow and low
pressure to reduce the
pressure, as well as working with pump companies to develop systems that are
going to work on solar as well—any
other renewable energy, like wind or
solar, as well as the storage. At present, storage—and I am thinking about
battery storage—is
expensive, but it is coming down in big
Ricegrowers’ Association argued that factors like energy prices should be
included in future WUE programs:
... future on-farm efficiency programs should not be focused on a single
input/commodity such as water savings. Rather the program
should take a broader
view and encompass energy and other input savings to ensure that the overall
efficiency impact for the business
is positive. There are a number of examples
where participants have upgraded their infrastructure to achieve water
efficiencies however
the upgraded infrastructure is significantly more energy
5.71 During
site inspections around Australia, the Committee heard numerous times that
rising electricity prices are impacting the
capacity of farmers to implement
more efficient irrigation technologies. In addition, the up-front cost of
installing alternative
energy sources was considered prohibitively high and so
economically unviable – despite the resulting water efficiencies savings
from new technologies.
Meteorological
forecasting
5.72 A further issue brought to the Committee’s attention was the
reliance on accurate and timely meteorological information,
and the impacts on
water use efficiency where this information is not available.
5.73 The Bureau of Meteorology (BOM)’s submission noted that its:
climate and streamflow forecasting services provide foresight into future water
availability and are being used now by irrigation
companies and other water
managers to assist in planning water allocations and managing
5.74 Similarly,
Macquarie River Food and Fibre noted that ‘efficient agricultural industry
requires access to timely, relevant
and accurate [weather radar] information to
fully inform production
decisions’.
5.75 However, Macquarie River Food and Fibre also observed that there are
gaps in coverage:
Improved access to weather radar services is imperative for agricultural
producers in central and western NSW who currently operate
in a ‘black
spot’ with inadequate coverage from existing radar stations at Moree,
Gunnedah, Wagga Wagga and
also raised the additional concern that there is ‘confusion with real-time
information (provided by the NSW Department
of Primary Industries - Water), and
river predictions and flood warnings (provided by the Bureau of Meteorology)
made available from
Committee comment
5.77 Energy pricing was a concern consistently raised with the Committee
during this inquiry, and it was often cited as an impediment
to installing and
operating new water efficient technologies. The Committee recognises that this
issue has significant influence
on irrigators’ adoption of water
efficiency measures and considers that improvements to water use efficiency
cannot be fully
achieved without addressing energy pricing.
5.78 The Committee notes that energy pricing concerns relate to electricity
costs and also the installation cost of alternative energy
sources. While
addressing these issues is beyond the scope of this inquiry, the Committee
considers it essential that further work
is undertaken. There may be scope for
WUE programs to include within their funding scope the installation of
alternative energy sources
where these power efficient technologies. The
Committee recommends that the Government further investigate the impact of
energy pricing
on the implementation of water use efficient technologies, and
develop a range of mechanisms to address these impediments.
Recommendation 5
5.79 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government investigate
mechanisms to address factors such as the rising cost of
electricity and cost of
alternative energies which may act as impediments to the adoption of water use
efficiency technologies in
irrigated agriculture.
5.80 The Committee suggests that this research be conducted by the
Research, Development and Extension (RD&E) body set out in
Recommendation
5.81 Accurate and timely weather forecasting is vital for irrigators to
ensure the efficient use of water. The value of efficient
technologies and
investment in new infrastructure is severely depleted if there is not access to
coordinated weather radar forecasting
and event information across all areas.
5.82 The Committees notes that the expansion of BOM services will require
some supplementary Government expenditure, however this
expenditure will
maximise the value gained from investments currently made in WUE programs.
Further, the Committee recommends that
the BOM work with State government
agencies and service providers to ensure more coordinated event information is
available to farmers
and irrigators.
Recommendation 6
5.83 The Committee recommends that the Bureau of Meteorology make
additions to its weather radar services to ensure up to date forecasting
coordinated information is available in all required irrigated areas.
6. Sustaining communities and infrastructure
6.1 While Government water efficiency assistance is targeted to irrigators,
regional communities are heavily impacted by the funding
provided and the
consequent economic health of the agricultural sector and infrastructure
investment in their region.
6.2 The first part of this chapter examines how WUE funded projects impact
regional communities, and measures to assist long-term
transition and
sustainability issues for communities affected by changing water use practices.
6.3 The second part of the chapter considers, as an adjunct to ensuring
sustainable regional communities, how the investment in water
infrastructure impacts the long-term sustainability of communities.
Benefitting regional
communities
6.4 As outlined in chapter 3, some submitters have argued that investing in
efficient irrigation methods, compared to water buybacks,
has additional social
benefits to the surrounding community. However, others have argued that these
programs are an inefficient way
of achieving these regional social objectives,
and may in fact not provide such benefits.
6.5 This section examines key social and economic issues for regional
communities which are impacted by water use efficiency changes
investment.
6.6 In its submission, DAWR made the case for the broader social and economic
beneficial consequences of irrigation infrastructure
Australian Government investment in on-farm and off-farm programmes under the
Basin Plan is also having positive flow-on effects
into local towns and
communities. Increased farm opportunities and profitability is helping to secure
the economic base of communities,
allowing for more local jobs, businesses and
services. For example, investment by Murrumbidgee Irrigation through PIIOP
Irrigation Infrastructure Operators Program] Round One resulted in
increased business for local contractors and suppliers. This quantum
of work for
local businesses can be expected to have a localised multiplier effect as they
in turn spend a proportion of their increased
revenue on other local goods and
Further, employment of contractors in the region to undertake the infrastructure
upgrade works has also provided short-term economic
flow on effects for the
community and skill transfer
opportunities.
Northern Basin Review included social and economic effects as one of its key
considerations, and DAWR noted that the subsequent
Northern Basin Taskforce is
working to achieve water recovery ‘in ways that deliver socio-economic
benefits to
communities’.
6.8 The MDBA submission outlined the findings of the Northern Basin Review,
highlighting that buybacks can lead to significant change
in the broader
The socio-economic analysis found that communities in the Northern Basin had
been subject to a considerable period of structural
change prior to the
implementation of the Basin Plan. Consequently, environmental water recovery
from buybacks can introduce an additional
driver of change for northern
communities. The adjustment challenges can be particularly significant when
there are sudden changes
in irrigation activity associated with the government
purchase of large parcels of water entitlements in irrigation dependent
communities.
A more steady approach to buybacks can somewhat mitigate the social
and economic
NIC described the Northern Basin Review’s socio-economic impact assessment
as ‘a game changer for the design of
future schemes’ and argued that
the findings suggest that:
Removal of further productive water will result in a real loss of capacity for
Australia to produce the fresh food and natural fibre
we use domestically and
that generates export income, and that it will produce loss of jobs, loss of
income and flow on impacts right
through Basin
communities.
6.10 Smartrivers,
a group of irrigators from the Lower Balonne, also pointed to the broad social
and economic benefits of water infrastructure
spending, noting that:
From the point of view of the community, the program is money well spent.
Continued irrigated agriculture means jobs and a sustained
local economy whilst
maintaining a critical mass in the population base. Delivery of the on-farm
projects provides stimulus for local
small business suppliers and
contractors.
similar point was made by the Goulburn Broken Catchment Management Authority,
which compared the economic and broad social
impacts of WUE programs to buybacks
and explained that:
Buy back of water often leads to declined productivity on properties with
reduced water available leading to reduced production and
a greater chance that
irrigation ceases on the property. Whereas the water use efficiency programs
link the funding available to
make water use efficiency improvements leading to
productivity increases across the region. The water use efficiency projects and
productivity benefits provide an economic stimulus, increased employment and
population growth improvements across the region and
Box 6.1 Harvey Water Irrigation Area,
On 22 August 2017 the Committee conducted site inspections in Harvey,
Western Australia. Harvey, which lies approximately 150km south
of Perth, is the
centre of the Harvey Water Irrigation Area (HWIA). The HWIA services
approximately 30 000 hectares of irrigated
area devoted to dairy, beef grazing
and horticulture. Harvey Water manages three irrigation districts in the HWIA
– the Waroona
district in the north, the Harvey district, and the Collie
River Irrigation District in the south.
The Committee inspected Harvey Water’s gravity-fed piped irrigation
network, which serves the northern two thirds of its customers,
those in the
Waroona and Harvey irrigation districts. The Committee also heard about the
problems faced by irrigators in the southernmost
Collie River irrigation
district, such as saline water in the Wellington Dam. Harvey Water has applied
to the Australian Government
for funding to help it address this problem.
The visit highlighted how WUE programs can help to drive economic
development well beyond the direct recipients of Government funding.
redevelopment of the Collie River irrigation district will likely lead to
substantial and positive regional development outcomes,
which would not have
been possible without joint funding from State and Federal governments.
6.12 Against this case, Professor Lin Crase argued that the sheer expense of
WUE projects should not be underestimated:
... the quantum of public monies used in WUE projects is itself worrying from a
broader economic perspective. At a time when government
bemoans the status of
budgets and the demands on the public purse increase, it is difficult to
rationalise WUE projects. They are
costly, ineffective and leave serious
challenges for the communities they purportedly
6.13 Drawing
on his research in the area, Professor Quentin Grafton argued that, while some
positive social and economic impacts are
undoubtedly felt in regions as a result
of irrigation infrastructure spending programs, those benefits have not been
achieved in
an efficient way:
Another stated objective [of irrigation subsidies] was to help irrigation
communities. If you take money and spend money—someone
else's money;
because someone has to pay for it—I have no doubt that, if you spend money
in a location and do not spend it
someplace else, you will help the location
where you have done the expenditure. But does that mean that that has led to an
improvement in welfare? Indeed, we have a method to make that sort of
judgement. It is called cost-benefit analysis. If we did a
cost-benefit analysis
in the context of irrigation subsidies on farm and off farm, they would fail
that test. It is a public interest
6.14 Professors
Grafton and Williams also took issue with the argument that the broad social
impacts of WUE programs justify the expense
of them, arguing that:
If community benefit is a goal of irrigation subsidies, it is puzzling that the
communities themselves where irrigators reside have
not been allowed to
determine how to spend the money rather than have it decided for them in the
form of payments to increase irrigation
efficiency. It is further puzzling that
if a key goal is to help poor and vulnerable in Australian irrigation
communities that the
most poor and vulnerable in such locations do not receive
any direct payments or transfers. Indeed, the opposite is the case, as
wealthiest in these communities, the irrigators, who are the direct
beneficiaries of the
a solution to this concern, Professors Grafton and Williams suggested that
increased community consultation about where and
how money is spent should be a
Instead of providing subsidies to increase irrigation efficiency through more
capital-intensive technologies, there should be a transparent
and deliberative
process that includes all relevant Basin communities, stakeholders and
interested parties to spend the funds that
would otherwise have been allocated
for irrigation subsidies. This process should maximise participation to the poor
and vulnerable
within the MDB and explicitly consider the key bio-physical and
socio-economic risks to Basin
communities.
6.16 Speaking
broadly about the issue, Professor Crase noted that there is a fundamental
structural problem with policies that attempt
to achieve disparate and unrelated
goals. By seeking to solve environmental, social and economic problems,
Australia’s approach
to irrigation policy has not effectively addressed
any of those, Professor Crase argued:
You asked me about the social impacts. More generally one of the problems with
water policy in this country at the national level
is that we've tried to put
everything into one basket. Instead of having a separate set of social policies
that are trying to deal
with a social problem—a policy aimed at dealing
with the environment, reallocating water to the environment—and another
thing to do with economics, we've lumped it all in together and called it the
Basin Plan. Then we've asked a single authority to
come up with a magic
instrument that does all of those things. It's little wonder that we've ended up
with suboptimal outcomes on
just about every level.
If you're worried about people's state of mental health in Griffith, why on
earth would changing water policy be the most effective
way to do that? I would
have thought that, if you were worried about people's mental health in Griffith,
you might want to invest
some of that hard-earned taxpayers' money into suitable
programs that'd deal with that. The difficulty is that you're trying to achieve
multiple outcomes with a single
instrument.
the improved productivity and increased certainty brought about by irrigation
infrastructure spending may have positive
broad social achievements, research
from academics at the University of Adelaide into the stress levels of people in
the irrigation
industry found that ‘distress levels of MDB irrigators were
higher than Australian farmers in general, but they were also higher
population’.
6.18 Within that research, they noted that the main causes of day-to-day
stress amongst horticultural irrigators were commodity prices
(80.8 per cent)
and electricity prices (74.8 per
Notably, they found
[i]rrigators who recorded high levels of psychological distress were much more
likely to strongly agree that irrigation infrastructure
investment had been
wasteful, and should have been spent on rural health and/or education services
findings prompted the academics to suggest a range of approaches to respond to
the high level of stress amongst irrigators,
including the suggestion that
buyback options might prove more beneficial than infrastructure investment:
We suggest beneficial policies in the water space could include reforming
termination fees in irrigation districts, supporting exit
packages for small
irrigators, eliminating irrigation infrastructure subsidies and supporting the
buyback of water entitlements (because
of the lock-in and path dependent nature
of irrigation infrastructure and the flexible nature of the buyback of water
entitlements
that allows for farm exit), increasing water market information and
conducting further research on value-adding opportunities for
irrigated farming.
Further research on the drivers of irrigators’ mental health and their
links with key social and economic
infrastructure across the MDB is also clearly
Committee comment
6.20 While the focus of this report has been on the water use efficiencies
benefitting the irrigated agricultural sector and the environment,
communities are also heavily impacted by water policies and WUE programs. The
Committee notes the importance of considering
the social and economic strength
of communities when discussing changing irrigation practices.
6.21 There is strong evidence that in some areas water use efficiency and
infrastructure investments are demonstrating clear flow-on
benefits to
communities, and that a robust local economy can drive growth and
diversification. This leads to regional resilience
and will better equip
communities to manage through diverse seasons and rainfall patterns.
6.22 However the Committee also notes criticisms regarding attempting to gain
diffuse social benefits from WUE programs, and arguments
for more direct
investment in regional social services. It is clear that water policies and
controls have led to changed irrigation
practices, and in regional areas any
change affecting the local agricultural sector dramatically impacts all tiers of
the community.
Consequently, driving greater water use efficiency should not be
separated from assisting regional communities to also undertake
this transition
and to build resilience and independence.
6.23 Currently there is no consistent monitoring or response to the social
and economic impacts on regional communities, and in particular
communities beyond the Murray-Darling Basin. It is critical to understand how
funding in one area may positively or adversely
affect a neighbouring community
and, just as close monitoring and evaluation of surrounding water systems is
required, so governments
should be aware of the dynamic impacts of these funding
arrangements on regions.
6.24 The Committee considers that a coordinated and targeted approach to
supporting regional communities through the transition process
to water use
efficiencies is required. The Committee notes that the Department of
Infrastructure and Regional Development delivers
a series of regional and
community programs, including the Murray-Darling Basin Regional Economic
Diversification Program, which
are designed to improve regional economic
diversity, growth, and resilience.
6.25 The Committee considers that the Government response should not be
confined to the Murray-Darling Basis, and it is important
that all regions
impacted by water constraints and changing water practices are assisted through
this process.
Recommendation 7
6.26 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government establish an
integrated taskforce to assist Regional Development Authorities
develop targeted initiatives to assist regional communities which
are impacted by the local irrigated agriculture sector transitioning
use efficiencies, and
ensure ongoing monitoring of the social and economic health of
these communities.
Infrastructure for the
6.27 The Committee heard that irrigation infrastructure projects, while
achieving immediate water efficiency gains, may result in
future financial
burdens for communities. In particular, infrastructure installed now will
require upgrading and replacing in the
future. However, there is not always a
clear plan developed for how those works will be funded or who should be
responsible for them.
6.28 Professor Lin Crase explained that communities which are currently
receiving funding for capital infrastructure may possibly
inherit significant
financial legacy issues. Professor Crase noted that the two key drivers of the
price of water are its scarcity
value and irrigation capital infrastructure
(e.g. pipes, pumps and channels). Governments are effectively gifting
infrastructure
to irrigation providers, and those new infrastructure facilities
are not included in any water pricing structure:
Under the regulatory arrangements, if an asset is gifted to you, you aren't
required to include it in the regulatory asset base.
In other words, if you're a
water utility, you don't have to count it; you can just pretend it fell out of
the sky and it didn't
cost anything. That means that, when you start to
calculate the prices that you pay for the water, you are actually ignoring a big
chunk of the cost, because you've just assigned it a value of
6.29 Professor
Crase suggested that, without any cost recovery through appropriate pricing,
there is little capacity for infrastructure
assets to be maintained into the
So that raises the obvious legacy question: if we've got all this infrastructure
we've invested in, who's putting the money aside
to pay for the depreciation and
who's putting the money aside to replace it when it all falls over in 10 years'
6.30 Professor
Crase cited an example where the capital infrastructure investment was not
accounted for:
The work we did in Goulburn-Murray Water showed that they were already
underpricing water by two-thirds. They would have to increase
prices by about
300 per cent to fully cover the cost of capital. And now we are giving them more
capital that they do not have to
count, which makes the situation even
asked about the necessity for irrigation providers to account for capital
infrastructure assets and depreciate them over
time, Professor Crase suggested
that irrigation providers would simply ask the government of the day for more
funding. Professor
Crase also suggested that certain groups in the broader
farming community may be leveraging more money to fewer people for less
6.32 In response, DAWR argued that investments in water use efficiency are
not ‘setting up regional communities with unmanageable
costs’, since the new or modernised infrastructure ‘will result in
reduced operational and maintenance costs’
6.33 DAWR further noted that these projects entail no on-going financial
commitments from the Australian Government other than that
specified in the
original project:
We note that projects funded under Sustainable Rural Water Use and
Infrastructure Program are intended to improve the efficiency
and productivity
of water use and management. Program guidelines, for both on- and off-farm
sub-programs, inform participants of
eligible and ineligible funding conditions
and activities. Funding is not applicable to on-going maintenance costs
associated with
new or existing infrastructure. Participants are encouraged to
take these costs into consideration when drafting their applications.
Participation in all Commonwealth infrastructure programs is voluntary with
infrastructure upgrades initiated and owned by proponents
who have ownership and
responsibility for the infrastructure over time. Feedback from participants in
on-farm programs indicates
that government-funded works have helped to
accelerate the process of renewing old and outdated infrastructure, covering
would have otherwise been solely incurred by
irrigators.
Committee comment
6.34 The Committee notes the importance of infrastructure funding and the
vital contribution of these projects to ongoing water efficiencies
productivity. However it is essential that this infrastructure does not result
in legacy issues which become a funding burden
of communities or for the
Government. As has been noted throughout this report, the long-term goal must be
financial resilience and
independence for the irrigated agricultural sector and
for regional communities.
6.35 The Committee notes its concerns in regards to infrastructure funding
and ensuring this is a capital investment for the future
– not a capital
legacy requiring support. The Committee considers it would be irresponsible for
funding or assistance to be
provided which did not incorporate detailed plans
for future costs, such as maintenance, repair and eventual replacement. Further,
the Government must ensure that infrastructure funded delivers a defined public
good and represents value for money against defined
6.36 To this end, the Committee notes the September 2017 Productivity
Commission’s draft report and recommendation on water
infrastructure for
agriculture:
Productivity Commission Draft Recommendation 7.3
Governments should not provide grant funding for irrigation infrastructure, or
that part of infrastructure, that is for the private
benefit of irrigators.
Rather, Australian, State and Territory Governments should ensure
a. National Water Initiative-consistent water entitlements
and planning are in place before any new irrigation infrastructure is considered
(including infrastructure being financed under the Northern Australian
Infrastructure Facility)
b. government grant funding is limited to those projects, or parts of
projects, delivering a public good. Any grant funding should
be subject to an
independent analysis of the project being completed and available for public
comment before any government announcements
on new infrastructure are made. The
analyses should establish that the project will be:
- environmentally sustainable
- economically viable and deliver public benefits that are at least
commensurate with the grant funding being provided
c. government financing (such as loans) for infrastructure generating private
benefits should only be provided after:
- an independent assessment has confirmed the finance can be repaid on
commercial terms. The assessment should be released for public
comment before
any announcement on new infrastructure is made
- robust governance arrangements have been put in place to deliver merit
based decision making and the ongoing monitoring of (and
public reporting on)
the government’s investment
- sufficient water entitlements have been sold to reduce the project’s
risk profile and provide assurance the finance will be
Australian, State and Territory Governments should enhance the National Water
Initiative to align with recommendations 7.3 (a) to
Committee notes its support for this draft recommendation and urges the
Australian Government to consider the Productivity
Commission’s final
recommendation on water infrastructure funding when it is released.
6.38 Further the Committee recommends that, where funding is provided for
water infrastructure, application assessment should include
consideration of the defined public good outcomes, and also account for full
life cycle costing, including asset depreciation
and replacement.
Recommendation 8
6.39 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government require any
water efficiency infrastructure funding or assistance provided
the defined public good benefit,
detailed plans for the full lifecycle costings of the
infrastructure, including asset depreciation and replacement, and
a detailed intention of how these lifecycle costings will be
Mr Rick Wilson MP
7 December 2017
A. Submissions and Exhibits
Submissions
Namoi Water
Professors Quentin Grafton and John Williams
§ 2.1 Supplementary
Macquarie River Food & Fibre
Associate Professor David Paton AM
Bureau of Meteorology
Netafim Australia Pty Ltd
John Pettigrew
Goulburn Broken Catchment Management Authority
Queensland Farmers' Federation
Australian National Audit Office
Gwydir Valley Irrigators Association Inc.
Mr Barry Croke
§ 12.1 Supplementary
National Irrigators' Council
Australian Bureau of Statistics
Southern Rural Water
Inland Rivers Network
The Hon Sussan Ley MP
Department of Agriculture and Water Resources
§ 18.1 Supplementary
§ 18.2 Supplementary
Dr David Adamson, Dr Adam Loch, Assoc. Prof Sarah Wheeler and Prof
Jeff Conner
Australian Academy of Technological Sciences and Engineering
Ricegrowers' Association of Australia
Coleambally Irrigation Co-operative Limited
Smartrivers
Cotton Australia
§ 24.1 Supplementary
Professor Lin Crase
Border Rivers Food & Fibre
NSW Department of Primary Industries
Dr Guy Roth
Tasmanian Farmers & Graziers Association
Environment Victoria
Robert Caldwell
Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation
National Farmers' Federation
Murray Irrigation
Murray–Darling Basin Authority
§ 36.1 Supplementary
Murrumbidgee Irrigation
Government of South Australia
Greater Shepparton City Council
Northern Territory Government
Harvey Water
Peter Smith
Wyndham City Council
Australian Lot Feeders' Association
Harvey Giblett
Dr Chris Perry
The Hon Alannah MacTiernan MLC
Barossa Infrastructure Ltd
Dominic Wy Kanak
Drip Irrigation’s Contribution to Food Security and Climate
B. Public hearings
Thursday, 30 March
Canberra, ACT
Private capacity
§ Professor Quentin Grafton
§ Professor John Williams
Wednesday, 5 April
Toowoomba, Queensland
§ Mr Scott Wallace, Land and Water Manager
Border Rivers Food and
§ Mr Timothy Napier, Executive Officer
Cotton Australia
§ Mr Michael Murray, General Manager, Operations
Central Downs Irrigators
§ Mr Lindsay Krieg, Chairman
Thursday, 6 April
Namoi Water
§ Mr Steven Carolan, Vice Chairman
§ Mrs Jon-Maree Baker, Executive Officer
Private capacity
§ Dr Guy Roth
Gwydir Valley Irrigators
Association
§ Mrs Zara Lowien, Executive Officer
§ Ms Louise Gall, Project Officer
§ Mr Nick Gillingham, General Farm Manager, Sundown Pastoral Company
§ Dr Michael Robertson, Science Director
§ Dr Michael Bange, Senior Principal Research Scientist
NSW Department of Primary
§ Mr Rod Jackson, Leader, Northern Irrigated Cropping Systems
§ Dr David Mitchell, Technical Specialist, Hydrology Research
§ Ms Claire Norris, MERI and Communications Officer, Sustaining the
Basin: Irrigated Farm Modernisation Program
Thursday, 25 May
Canberra, ACT
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources
§ Mr David Parker, Deputy Secretary, Water Division
§ Mr Paul Morris, First Assistant Secretary, Water Division
§ Ms Mary Colreavy, Assistant Secretary, Water Acquisition and Markets
Branch, Water Division
§ Mr Tim Fisher, Assistant Secretary, Water Policy Branch, Water
§ Ms Amy Fox, Assistant Secretary, Water Infrastructure Northern Branch,
Water Division
§ Mr Richard McLoughlin, Assistant Secretary, Water Resources Branch,
Water Division
§ Mr John Robertson, Assistant Secretary, Water Infrastructure Southern
Branch, Water Division
Thursday, 1 June
Canberra, ACT
Murray–Darling Basin
§ Mr Phillip Glyde, Chief Executive
§ Mr Colin Mues, Chief Economist
§ Mr Russell James, Executive Director, Policy and Planning Division
Thursday, 22 June
Canberra, ACT
National Irrigators'
§ Mr Steve Whan, Chief Executive Officer
§ Ms Karen Hutchinson, Director
Thursday, 10 August
Canberra, ACT
National Farmers'
§ Ms Jacqueline Knowles, Manager, Natural Resource Management
Tuesday, 22 August
Harvey, Western Australia
Government of Western
§ Mr John Ruprecht, Executive Director, Irrigated Agriculture,
Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development
Harvey Water
§ Mr Kevin Warburton, Chairman, South West Irrigation Asset
Cooperative
§ Mr Bradd Hamersley, General Manager
§ Mr Ian Eckersley, Director
§ Mr Stephen Cook, Operations Manager
§ Mr Geoff Calder, Consultant
Southern Forests Irrigation
§ Mr Harvey Giblett, Chairman
§ Mr Mark Bending, Member
§ Mr Justin Omodei, Member
Collie Shire
§ Councillor Wayne Sanford, Shire President
§ Councillor Glyn Yates, Shire Deputy President
Wednesday, 23 August
Adelaide, South Australia
Private capacity
§ Professor Lin Crase
§ Associate Professor David Paton AM
§ Dr David Adamson
§ Dr Adam Loch
§ Associate Professor Sarah Wheeler
Thursday, 24 August
Melbourne, Victoria
Environment
§ Ms Juliet Le Feuvre, Healthy Rivers Campaign Manager
Southern Rural
§ Mr Clinton Rodda, Managing Director
Netafim Australia Pty
§ Mr Levy Schneider, Managing Director
Private capacity
§ Mr Barry Croke
Australian Academy of
Technology and Engineering
§ Professor Edward (Snow) Barlow, Deputy Chair, Agriculture Forum
§ Dr Matt Wenham, Executive Manager, Policy and Projects
Greater Shepparton City
§ Mr Johann Rajaratnam, Director, Sustainable Development
Goulburn Broken Catchment
Management Authority
§ Mr Christopher Norman, Chief Executive Officer
§ Ms Megan McFarlane, Manager, Farm Water Program Manager
Thursday, 7 September
Canberra, ACT
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources
§ Mr Malcolm Thompson, Deputy Secretary, Water Division
§ Ms Mary Colreavy, Assistant Secretary, Water Division
§ Mr Charles Edlington, Assistant Secretary, Water Division
§ Mr Tim Fisher, Assistant Secretary, Water Division
§ Mr John Robertson, Assistant Secretary, Water Division
§ Dr Andrea Wilson, Assistant Secretary, Water Division
Friday, 15 September
Griffith, NSW
Ricegrowers' Association of
§ Miss Rachel Kelly, Policy Manager
Murrumbidgee
§ Mr Jody Rudd, General Manager, Asset Delivery, and A/g Chief Executive
§ Mr Frank Sergi, Chair
Coleambally Irrigation
Co-operative Limited
§ Mr Austin Evans, General Manager Operations
Murray Irrigation
§ Mrs Janet Manzin, Customer Accounts Officer
§ Mr Michael Pisasale, Customer Accounts Manager
AgriFutures Australia
§ Dr David Alden, General Manager, Research and Innovation
§ Mr Michael Beer, Program Manager, Research and Innovation
Macquarie River Food &
§ Mr Michael Egan, Chairman
§ Dr Grant Tranter, Executive Officer
Professor Lin Crase,
Department of Agriculture and
Water Resources,
Submission 18
Murray-Darling Basin Authority,
Submission 36
Murray-Darling Basin Authority,
Submission 36
Department of Agriculture and
Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture and
Water Resources,
Submission 18
Dr David Adamson et al,
Submission 19
Professor Quentin Grafton and
Professor John Williams,
Submission 2
Gwydir Valley Irrigators
Association,
Submission 11
Peter Smith,
Productivity Commission,
National Water Reform
, Draft Report, Canberra, September 2017, p. 3.
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Intergovernmental agreement on National Water
http://www.agriculture.gov.au/SiteCollectionDocuments/water/Intergovernmental-Agreement-on-a-national-water-initiative.pdf
pp. 3-4, accessed 16 November 2017.
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Intergovernmental agreement on National Water
Initiative,
http://www.agriculture.gov.au/SiteCollectionDocuments/water/Intergovernmental-Agreement-on-a-national-water-initiative.pdf
p. 4, accessed 16 November 2017.
Productivity Commission,
National Water Reform
, Draft Report, Canberra, September 2017, p. 5.
Productivity Commission,
National Water Reform
, Draft Report, Canberra, September 2017, p. 5.
Productivity Commission,
National Water Reform
, Draft Report, Canberra, September 2017, p. 6.
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Sustainable Rural Water Use and Infrastructure
http://www.agriculture.gov.au/water/mdb/programs/basin-wide/srwuip
accessed 17 October 2017.
Mr John Robertson,
Committee Hansard
, 25 May 2017, p. 3.
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Irrigation Hotspots Assessment Program
http://www.agriculture.gov.au/water/mdb/programs/basin-wide/irrigation-hotspots-program
accessed 18 October 2017.
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Irrigation Hotspots Assessment Program
http://www.agriculture.gov.au/water/mdb/programs/basin-wide/irrigation-hotspots-program
accessed 18 October 2017.
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Irrigation Modernisation Planning Assistance
http://www.agriculture.gov.au/water/mdb/programs/basin-wide/irrigation-modernisation-planning
accessed 18 October 2017.
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18.2
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18.2
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18.2
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18.2
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
National Water Infrastructure Development Fund
http://www.agriculture.gov.au/water/national/national-water-infrastructure-development-fund
accessed 19 October 2017.
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18.2
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18.2
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18.2
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18.2
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18.2
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Government of South
Submission 39
New South Wales Department
of Primary Industries,
Submission 28
New South Wales Department
of Primary Industries,
Submission 28
Queensland Farmers
Federation,
Submission 9
National Irrigators’
Submission 13
Murray Irrigation,
Submission 35
Goulburn-Broken Catchment
Management Authority,
Submission 8
Goulburn-Broken Catchment
Management Authority,
Submission 8
Southern Rural Water,
Submission 15
Southern Rural Water,
Submission 15
SmartRivers,
Cotton Australia,
Submission 24
Ricegrowers’
Association of Australia,
Submission 21
Ricegrowers’
Association of Australia,
Submission 21
Ricegrowers’
Association of Australia,
Submission 21
Ricegrowers’
Association of Australia,
Submission 21
National Irrigators Council,
Submission 13
Murray-Darling Basin
Submission 36
Murray-Darling Basin
Submission 36
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Murray-Darling Basin
Submission 36.1
National Irrigators’
Submission 13
National Farmers’
Federation,
Submission 34
See, for example, Dr David
Adamson et al.,
Submission 19
, pp. 9-10; Professor Quentin Grafton and
Professor John Williams,
Submission 2
Inland Rivers Network,
Submission 16
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18.2
Professor Quentin Grafton
and Professor John Williams,
Submission 2
Professor Quentin Grafton
and Professor John Williams,
Submission 2
Professor Quentin Grafton
and Professor John Williams,
Submission 2
Professor Quentin Grafton
and Professor John Williams,
Submission 2
Professor Quentin Grafton
and Professor John Williams,
Submission 2
R. M. Argent,
state of the environment 2016: inland water, independent report to the
Australian Government Minister for the Environment
, Australian
Government Department of the Environment and Energy, Canberra, 2017, p. 56.
Australian Academy of
Technological Sciences and Engineering,
Submission 20
Australian Academy of
Technological Sciences and Engineering,
Submission 20
Australian Academy of
Technological Sciences and Engineering,
Submission 20
Australian Academy of
Technological Sciences and Engineering,
Submission 20
Dr David Adamson et al,
Submission 19
Dr David Adamson,
Committee Hansard
, 23 August 2017, p. 13.
Dr Adam Loch,
, 23 August 2017, p. 15.
Dr David Adamson,
Committee Hansard
, 23 August 2017, p. 22.
Dr Adam Loch,
Committee Hansard
, 23 August 2017, p. 22.
Professor Lin Crase,
Committee Hansard
, 23 August 2017, p. 1.
Professor Lin Crase,
Committee Hansard
, 23 August 2017, p. 1.
Professor Lin Crase,
Committee Hansard
, 23 August 2017, p. 2.
Professor Lin Crase,
Committee Hansard
, 23 August 2017, p. 2.
Irrigators’ Council,
Submission 13
, pp. 9-10.
Professor Lin Crase,
Committee Hansard
, 23 August 2017, p. 1.
Professor Quentin
Committee Hansard
, 30 March 2017, p. 1.
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18.2
Dr David Mitchell,
Committee Hansard
, 6 April 2017, p. 24.
Dr David Mitchell,
Committee Hansard
, 6 April 2017, p. 24.
National Irrigators
Submission 13
Goulburn-Broken Catchment
Management Authority,
Submission 8
Cotton Australia,
Submission 24
, pp. 10-11.
National Farmers’
Federation,
Submission 34
Mr Frank Sergi,
Committee Hansard,
15 September 2017, p. 8.
Environment Victoria,
Submission 31
Dr David Adamson et al,
Submission 19
Dr David Adamson et al,
Submission 19
Dr David Adamson,
Committee Hansard
, 23 August 2017, p. 13.
Dr David Adamson and Dr
Committee Hansard
, 23 August 2017, pp. 17 – 19.
Mr John Robertson,
Committee Hansard
, 7 September 2017, p. 8.
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18.2
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18.2
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18.2
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Government of South
Submission 39
Government of South
Submission 39
Government of South
Submission 39
New South Wales
Department of Primary Industries,
Submission 28
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Government of South
Submission 39
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
South Australian
Government,
Submission 39
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Ricegrowers’
Association of Australia,
Submission 21
South Australian
Government,
Submission 39
South Australian
Government,
Submission 39
South Australian
Government,
Submission 39
National Farmers’
Federation,
Submission 34
National Farmers’
Federation,
Submission 34
, pp. 15-16.
National Farmers’
Federation,
Submission 34
Ricegrowers’
Association of Australia,
Submission 21
Ricegrowers’
Association of Australia,
Submission 21
Murrumbidgee Irrigation,
Submission 37
Mr Lindsay Krieg,
Committee Hansard
, 5 April 2017, p. 23.
Mr Steven Carolan,
Committee Hansard
, 6 April 2017, p. 2.
Ricegrowers’
Association of Australia,
Submission 21
Barossa Infrastructure
Submission 49
Netafim Australia,
Submission 6
Goulburn-Broken Catchment
Management Authority,
Submission 8
Cotton Australia,
Submission 24
Irrigators’ Council,
Submission 13
Irrigators’ Council,
Submission 13
Ricegrowers’
Association of Australia,
Submission 21
Productivity Commission,
National Water Reform
, Draft Report, Canberra, September 2017, p. 37.
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18.2
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18.2
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18.2
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18.2
Murray-Darling Basin
The Northern Basin Review: Understanding the economic, social and
environmental outcomes from water recovery in the northern basin
2016, p. 2.
Murray-Darling Basin
The Northern Basin Review: Understanding the economic, social and
environmental outcomes from water recovery in the northern basin
2016, p. 4.
Murray-Darling Basin
The Northern Basin Review: Understanding the economic, social and
environmental outcomes from water recovery in the northern basin
2016, p. 52.
Irrigators’ Council,
Submission 13
Cotton Australia,
Submission 24
Cotton Australia,
Submission 24
Cotton Australia,
Submission 24
National Farmers’
Federation,
Submission 34
National Farmers’
Federation,
Submission 34
National Farmers’
Federation,
Submission 34
Ms Jacqueline Knowles,
Committee Hansard
, 10 August 2017, p. 2.
National Farmers’
Federation,
Submission 34
National Farmers’
Federation,
Submission 34
Smartrivers,
Submission 23
Dr David Adamson,
Committee Hansard
, 23 August 2017, pp. 15-16.
Productivity Commission
National Water Reform,
Draft Report, Canberra, p. 26.
Productivity Commission
National Water Reform,
Draft Report, Canberra, p. 28.
Murray-Darling Basin
CSIRO Complementary Measures assessment method
https://www.mdba.gov.au/publications/independent-reports/csiro-complementary-measures-assessment-method
accessed 28 November 2017.
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Ms Mary Colreavy,
Committee Hansard
, 7 September 2017, p. 10.
Mr Malcolm Thompson,
Committee Hansard,
7 September 2017, p. 10.
Mr Malcolm Thompson,
Committee Hansard,
10 August 2017, p. 10.
Mr Phillip Glyde,
Committee Hansard
, 1 June 2017, p. 5.
Ms Jacqueline Knowles,
Committee Hansard
, 10 August 2017, p. 4.
National Farmers’
Federation,
Submission 34
Irrigators’ Council,
Submission 13
Ms Rachel Kelly,
Committee Hansard
, 15 September 2017, p. 1.
Cotton Australia,
Submission 24
Gwydir Valley Irrigators
Association,
Submission 11
, pp. 8-10.
Professor Snow Barlow,
Committee Hansard
, 24 August 2017, p. 27.
Professor Lin Crase,
Committee Hansard,
23 August 2017, pp. 1-2.
Professor Snow Barlow,
Committee Hansard
, 24 August 2017, pp. 27-8.
Professor Guy Roth,
Committee Hansard
, 6 April 2017, p. 12.
Professor Guy Roth,
Committee Hansard
, 6 April 2017, p. 11.
Professor Snow Barlow,
Committee Hansard,
24 August 2017, p. 31.
Professor Guy Roth,
Committee Hansard
, 6 April 2017, p. 10.
Gwydir Valley Irrigators
Association,
Submission 11
Professor Guy Roth,
Submission 29
Cotton Australia,
Submission 24
Mr Peter Smith,
Submission 43
Irrigators’ Council,
Submission 13
Mr Steve Whan,
Committee Hansard
, 22 June 2017, p. 4.
Ms Jacqueline Knowles,
Committee Hansard
, 10 August 2017, p. 3.
Queensland Farmers’
Federation,
Submission 9
Irrigators’ Council,
Submission 13
Ms Karen Hutchinson,
Committee Hansard
, 22 June 2017, p. 4.
Mr Levy Schneider,
Committee Hansard
, 24 August 2017, p. 15.
Ricegrowers’
Association of Australia,
Submission 21
Bureau of Meteorology,
Submission 5
Macquarie River Food and
Submission 3
Macquarie River Food and
Submission 3
Macquarie River Food and
Submission 3
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18,
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18
Murray-Darling Basin
Submission 36
Irrigators’ Council,
Submission 13
, pp.16-17.
Smartrivers,
Submission 23
Goulburn Broken Catchment
Management Authority,
Submission 8
Professor Lin Crase,
Submission 26
Professor Quentin
Committee Hansard
, 30 March 2017, p. 4.
Professor Quentin Grafton
and Professor John Williams,
Submission 2
Professor Quentin Grafton
and Professor John Williams,
Submission 2
Professor Lin Crase,
Committee Hansard
, 23 August 2017, p. 5.
Dr David Adamson et al,
Submission 19
, pp. 10-11.
Dr David Adamson et al,
Submission 19
Dr David Adamson et al,
Submission 19
Dr David Adamson et al,
Submission 19
Professor Lin Crase,
Committee Hansard
, 23 August 2017, p. 2.
Professor Lin Crase,
Committee Hansard
, 23 August 2017, pp. 2-3.
Professor Lin Crase,
Committee Hansard
, 23 August 2017, p. 3.
Professor Lin Crase,
Committee Hansard
, 23 August 2017, p. 3.
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18.2
Department of Agriculture
and Water Resources,
Submission 18.2
Productivity Commission
National Water Reform
, Draft Report, Canberra, p. 35.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (573 KB)
PDF format (430 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter