URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJStaCPW/2019/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:09:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Parliamentary Joint Standing Committee on Public Works (46th Parliament) --- "Australian High Commission Property Replacement Project, Tarawa, Kiribati - PP 528/2019" [2019] AUPJStaCPW 11 (2 December 2019)
Conduct of the inquiry
Need for the works
Options considered
Scope of the works
Community consultation
Cost of the works
Committee comment
3. Australian High Commission Property Replacement
Project, Tarawa, Kiribati
3.1 The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) seeks approval from
the Committee to proceed with the proposed Australian High
Commission (AHC)
Property Replacement Project, Tarawa, Kiribati.
3.2 The purpose of the project is to provide new fit for purpose office
accommodation and residential housing for the AHC Mission
3.3 The estimated cost of the project is $19.6 million (excluding GST).
3.4 The project was referred to the Committee on 18 September 2019.
Conduct of the
3.5 Following referral, the inquiry was publicised on the Committee’s
website and via media release.
3.6 The Committee received one submission and one confidential submission. A
list of submissions can be found at Appendix A.
3.7 On 15 November 2019, the Committee conducted a public and in-camera
hearing. A transcript of the public hearing is available on
Committee’s website.
Need for the works
3.8 The project proposes to replace the existing Chancery, Chancery Annex and
staff residences at Tarawa
...with purpose built, prefabricated, low maintenance and highly sustainable
location appropriate facilities. The proposed investment
will address the
rapidly deteriorating condition and high maintenance cost of the existing
facilities, which are approaching the
end of their useful economic
3.9 DFAT notes
that the current facilities ‘do not meet the requirement to provide
reasonable quality and functional working
accommodation for all staff and
appropriate living quarters’, and the ‘poor condition’ of the
properties ‘does
not reflect favourably on Australia’s role as a
lead partner in the Pacific
Australia’s
step‐up in engagement with the Pacific was ‘one of the highest
priorities of the 2017 Foreign Policy
White Paper, launched on 23 November
3.10 As DFAT noted at the public hearing, Kiribati has also recently shifted
its diplomatic recognition:
...they previously recognised Taiwan, until just recently, in September, they
made the decision to recognise China instead. China
does not yet have an embassy
actually based in Tarawa ... So there are just the New Zealand and the
Australian high commissions represented
3.11 DFAT has
difficulty in attracting and retaining Australia based staff (A-based staff) for
postings across the Pacific.
is classified as a Category E hardship post based on its remote location and
limited access to amenities and services. As
the Department further
...attracting, retaining and supporting staff, through the provision of a
high-quality work and living environment, is essential
to the government’s
broader strategy of building a Pacific region that is securely strategically,
stable economically and sovereign
politically.
to the role of the five A-based and 20 locally engaged staff at the AHC at
Tarawa, DFAT noted that the development program
with Kiribati formed an
important part of that role, as well as promoting Australia’s bilateral
relationship with Kiribati
through ‘various security initiatives under the
Pacific step-up, the Australia Pacific Security College and the Pacific Fusion
Staff are also
assisting Kiribati in preparations to host the Pacific Islands Forum in
3.13 Overall, DFAT observed that the key issues with the working and
residential accommodation were:
▪ Office Accommodation (Chancery). The Chancery is not large enough for
existing accommodation requirements and has no room
for growth with the current
arrangement impractical and not functional; and
▪ Residential Accommodation. There are only three houses available for
Mission employees against the requirement for five houses
and the current state
of the building are not considered fit for purpose. A fourth house, which has
been temporarily repaired after
extensive termite damage, is currently being
used as a Chancery Annex but is located approximately 300 metres from the
3.14 DFAT also provided details on the objectives for the project, as
▪ Fit for purpose
▪ Staff retention
▪ Improved whole of life costs
▪ Sustainability
▪ Local labour
▪ Outlay cost
▪ Ease of delivery
Options considered
3.15 DFAT considered three options for the project:
▪ Option 1—Do nothing
▪ Option 2—Refurbish and extend
▪ Option 3—Demolish and construct
3.16 DFAT considered option 3, demolish and construct new, as representing
the best value for money, for the following reasons:
▪ Option 3 achieves the project objectives and provides greater
functionality, amenity and operational efficiency than Option
▪ The higher cost of Option 3 is accounted for by the larger building
area of the houses, which need to be bigger than the existing
houses to achieve
the functional objectives, particularly in relation to helping improve staff
retention and attraction; and
▪ The Chancery under Option 3 is smaller and more efficient than can be
achieved through Option 2.
Scope of the works
3.17 The scope of the project is to deliver the replacement of the following
AHC facilities at Tarawa:
▪ Head of Mission (HOM) Residence—4 bedrooms
▪ Deputy Head of Mission (DHOM) Residence—3 bedrooms
▪ Senior Administration Officer (SAO) Residence—3 bedrooms
▪ Second Secretary 1 Residence—3 bedrooms
▪ Second Secretary 2 Residence—3 bedrooms
▪ Chancery (office working accommodation for maximum 31 staff)
▪ All associated demolition, civil and landscaping
3.18 DFAT noted that the challenges of constructing and maintaining
properties in Kiribati and the Pacific are significant, with lack
of contractor
and construction material availability, high shipping costs and challenging
environmental factors contributing to these
difficulties.
3.19 Accordingly, the Department explained that it had adopted innovative
planning and design concepts for the AHC facilities at Tarawa:
As part of the Project, Reeves International have partnered with the design
team, Unitised Building (UB) to develop a flexible façade
and structural
system that is adaptable to the buildings that will be constructed in this
The UB panel system is a unique system of precision manufactured prefabricated
floor, wall and façade panels. Each panel consists
of lightweight steel
elements encased in a cementitious infill. The panels are designed to lock
rapidly together with minimal backpropping
to create a building’s
superstructure and interface with a building’s chosen façade
specifications and bathroom
The UB design solutions include prefabricated bathroom ‘pods’, which
will be shipped complete as these elements comprise
the most critical
construction challenges for finishing trades, waterproofing and
key features of the UB panel system for the project include: minimal site works;
corrosion resistance; termite proofing;
maximum floor area space; safe, rapid
installation; and maximum design
flexibility.
DFAT further noted
that, with the prefabricated building system at Tarawa, it was seeking to
develop a ‘repeatable best-practice
design and construction model to
fast-track further building programs at other Australian missions throughout the
Asia-Pacific region’.
3.21 There was interest at the public hearing in further exploring the extent
of deterioration of the existing buildings at Tarawa.
DFAT observed that the
original buildings were not fit for purpose—from the outset, the buildings
‘were always going
to be challenged by the environment and always going to
require high levels of
maintenance’.
buildings had not been constructed by the Australian Government:
They were purchased in the mid-eighties ... The annex was actually formerly the
British high commission residence. They are a traditional
build ... termites are
particularly virulent in the Pacific ... which is specifically why we’ve
investigated alternative construction
to whether the staged build would effect AHC activities, DFAT confirmed that all
activities will be maintained—‘we’re
able to build the new
chancery behind the existing chancery’ and ‘because of the nature of
the phasing we’re able
to accommodate
3.23 Asked whether there might be a need to increase the office or
residential accommodation on Tarawa in the future, DFAT responded
current forecasts, it did not see that as an immediate
requirement—however, given its 25-year outlook in undertaking
the project,
it is ‘remaining sensitive and flexible to the necessity that may arise at
a future point’.
3.24 As part of the project, asbestos cement sheeting will need to be taken
off the island for disposal. DFAT confirmed that the contractor
will include the
‘Pacific-experienced services of an environmental remediation contractor
to undertake assessment and International
Asbestos Removals for safe
The contractor
has identified facilities in Victoria to receive the asbestos cement sheeting
upon receipt of the permit.
consultation
3.25 DFAT noted that it had undertaken numerous local stakeholder
consultation activities as part of the development of the
This included meeting
with the local government of Kiribati and the Ministry of Infrastructure and
Sustainable Energy to discuss
the project and brief them on the proposed
demolition and construction activities and the necessary approval
The project had been
‘well received with no major issues or concerns raised by local
stakeholders’.
3.26 In terms of local community benefits, DFAT explained that the project
seeks to ‘build local capacity through collaboration
with the DFAT funded
Kiribati Institute of
Technology’.
For example,
local craftsmen will be employed to construct the maneabas throughout the
properties, ‘fostering traditional skills
Cost of the works
3.27 The project has an estimated cost of $19.6 million (excluding GST).
3.28 DFAT provided further details on project costings in its confidential
submission and during an in-camera hearing.
3.29 In terms of public value, the project will be delivered in two stages to
provide maximum flexibility in the construction methodology
and opportunity for
innovation to be passed onto the
Commonwealth.
3.30 At the public hearing, DFAT emphasised that using prefabricated
structures is the most efficient and cost-effective method for
staging and
sequencing the works:
Improved quality control and significantly reducing waste, transport energy and
packaging, as well as time reduced on site, are additional
benefits of this
approach. The passive design principles adopted and materials selected will
promote sustainability and enhance the
environmental performance of the
developing the proposal, DFAT further explained that they had ‘worked
closely with industry to promote Australian content,
expertise, innovation and
excellence’, including Australian companies—Reeves International
construction group, James
Cubitt Architects and Unitised
3.32 DFAT pointed to the high maintenance cost of the existing facilities as
being of particular concern, noting that one of the objectives
of the project
was ‘reduced operating and maintenance costs over an extended building
life span (nominally 25
The Department
stated that it was currently spending ‘in the order of about $544,000 in
repairs, maintenance and other operating
expenses’, to maintain the DFAT
owned Tarawa buildings.
projected ‘a whole-of-life costings reduction from $544,000 to around
$233,000 going forward’,
with energy costs also being reduced ‘in the order of about $77,000 per
3.33 The Committee is satisfied that the costings for the project provided to
it have been adequately assessed by the proponent entity.
Committee comment
3.34 The Committee did not identify any issues of concern with the proposal
and is satisfied that the project has merit in terms of
need, scope and
3.35 Having regard to its role and responsibilities contained in the
Public Works Committee Act 1969
, the Committee is of the view that this
project signifies value for money for the Commonwealth and constitutes a project
fit for purpose, having regard to the established need.
Recommendation 3
3.36 The Committee recommends that the House of Representatives resolve,
pursuant to
Section 18(7)
Public Works Committee Act 1969
is expedient to carry out the following proposed works: Australian High
Commission Property Replacement Project, Tarawa,
3.37 Proponent entities must notify the Committee of any changes to the
project scope, time, cost, function or design. The Committee
also requires that
a post-implementation report be provided within three months of project
completion. A report template can be found
on the Committee’s website.
Submission 1
Submission 1
Submission 1
Ms Fleur Davies, Assistant
Secretary, New Zealand, Polynesia and Micronesia Branch, DFAT,
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, p. 2.
Submission 1
Mr Kevin Nixon, Executive
Director, Overseas Property Office, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
15 November 2019, p. 1.
Ms Davies, DFAT,
of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 2.
Ms Davies, DFAT,
of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 2.
Submission 1
Submission 1
Submission 1
Submission 1
Submission 1
Submission 1
Submission 1
Submission 1
Mr Nixon, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 1.
Mr Nixon, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 1.
Ms Annette de la Rue,
Director, Pacific Property Program, Overseas Property Office, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 3.
Ms de la Rue, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 3.
Mr Nixon, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 3.
Submission 1
Submission 1
p. 30. See also on this point, Mr Nixon, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
15 November 2019, p. 2.
Submission 1
Submission 1
Submission 1
Mr Nixon, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 1.
Mr Nixon, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 1.
Submission 1
Mr Nixon, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 1.
Mr Nixon, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 1.
Submission 1
p. 5, p. 6.
Mr Nixon, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 1.
Ms de la Rue, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 2.
Mr Nixon, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 2.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (165 KB)
PDF format (559 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter