URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBSD/2025/63.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:14:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Report Snapshot [2025] AUSStaCSBSD 63 (29 October 2025)
Report snapshot1
Chapter 1: Initial scrutiny
Bills introduced 1 September to 9 October 2025
Bills previously deferred
Bills commented on in report
Bills that establish or amend standing appropriations or establish, amend
or continue in existence special accounts
Private members or senators’ bills that may raise scrutiny concerns
Commentary on amendments
Chapter 2: Commentary on ministerial responses
Bills which the committee has sought further information on or concluded
its examination of following receipt of ministerial response
Administrative Review Tribunal and Other Legislation Amendment Bill
Seeking further information
The bill amends the
Administrative Review Tribunal Act 2024
Act) to provide a general discretion for the Administrative Review Tribunal
(ART) to dispense with an oral hearing in proceedings;
Migration Act
(Migration Act) to provide for certain migration decisions to be made
without an oral hearing as usual practice.
Scrutiny principle (iii) – Procedural fairness
Scrutiny principle (iii) – Adequacy of review rights
Schedule 1, item 3, proposed subsection 106(6) provides the ART with a
general discretion to dispense with the hearing of a proceeding
orally where it
reasonably believes the issues can be adequately determined without the parties
and it is reasonable in the circumstances
to decide. Although procedural
fairness will not always require an oral hearing, the committee notes that the
conduct of oral hearings
enhance public confidence, transparency, efficiency and
the accessibility of proceedings and may, in some cases, be required for
procedural fairness. The committee is seeking further information from the
minister underpinning the rationale for this discretion
and whether its drafting
could require specific regard to procedural fairness. The committee also queries
whether the operation of
the discretion could be subject to a statutory review
to be tabled in Parliament.
Scrutiny principle (iii) – Procedural fairness
Schedule 1, item 16, proposed Division 4A of the Migration Act would
require the ART to review student visa refusal decisions, and
other temporary
visa decisions prescribed in regulations, ‘on the papers’. The
committee notes that proposed section
367E would displace the common law right
to natural justice in relation to decisions reviewed on the papers with natural
requirements to be set out by the provisions in Division 4A. The
committee is seeking detailed information about why it is appropriate
student visa refusal decisions to be determined on the papers and whether the
bill could be amended to require the ART to act
in a fair and just manner when
applying proposed Division 4A and otherwise leaves to the Senate the
appropriateness of the proposed
Scrutiny principle (iv) – Delegated legislation modified or
exempting primary legislation (Henry VIII)
Schedule 1, item 16, proposed paragraph 367D(h) of the Migration Act
provides for regulations to prescribe other provisions of the
ART Act that would
not apply to applications being reviewed on the papers. This would allow for
regulations to disapply provisions
of the ART Act with respect to applications
to be reviewed on the papers. The committee is seeking information from the
adequate legislative safeguards are provided to ensure its appropriate
Scrutiny principle (iv) – Significant matters in delegated
legislation
Scrutiny principle (i) – Retrospective application
Schedule 1, item 16, proposed paragraph 367C(2)(b) of the Migration Act
would allow regulations to prescribe categories of reviewable
temporary visa
decisions that the ART would review on the papers. The committee notes that the
regulations could retrospectively
prescribe categories of visa applications,
including those initiated before the bill commences, as decisions to be reviewed
papers without the ART’s consideration of the individual
circumstances of each application. The committee is requesting further
from the minister about the provision’s appropriateness and whether anyone
is likely to be adversely affected by it.
Australia Day Bill 2025
No comment.
Australian Centre for Disease Control (Consequential Amendments and
Transitional Provisions) Bill 2025
Advice to Parliament
This bill proposes consequential amendments to support the establishment of
the Australian Centre for Disease Control, as well as
the office of the
Director-General and the Advisory Council of the Australian Centre for Disease
Scrutiny principle (ii) – Broad delegation of administrative
The bill seeks to repeal and replace
section 544A
Biosecurity Act
to permit the Director of Human Biosecurity to delegate any and all of
their functions or powers under that legislation (subject
to three exceptions).
While the delegation of the Director’s powers is confined to SES employees
who are human biosecurity
officers, the explanatory memorandum provides limited
information justifying the broad scope of powers that may be delegated. The
committee draws its concerns to the attention of Senators.
Australian Centre for Disease Control Bill 2025
Seeking further information
This bill establishes the Australian Centre for Disease Control (CDC) as an
independent, non-corporate Commonwealth entity and establishes
the role, powers,
functions and duties of the agency and its Director-General.
Scrutiny principle (i) – Privacy
Scrutiny principle (iii) – Availability of merits review
Clauses 44 and 46 of the bill provide that requests or directions to
provide information issued by the CDC Director-General have effect
despite any
other written or unwritten law of the Commonwealth or a State or Territory
(except designated secrecy laws). The committee
requests that an addendum to the
explanatory memorandum is tabled in the Parliament to clarify the scope and
intended operation of
this override.
Scrutiny principle (i) – Privacy
Subclauses 51(2) and 52(2) authorise disclosures of information in the
performance of functions or exercise of powers in connection
with the bill and
other health and biosecurity legislation. The committee is concerned that the
explanatory memorandum does not provide
adequate justification for excluding
entrusted persons from the operation of certain threshold tests that consider
the necessity
of disclosures and minimising information disclosed. The committee
therefore requests that an addendum to the explanatory memorandum
is tabled with
additional information.
Scrutiny principle (i) – Privacy
Clause 53 of the bill authorise the Director-General to disclose
‘relevant information’ (which can include personal information)
where they certify that disclosing the information is in the public interest.
While the explanatory memorandum indicates that this
provision would enable
disclosures otherwise than as envisaged by the authorisations proposed in bill,
this provision does not appear
to be limited in this manner. The committee is
seeking further information about why this clause is required and appropriate,
how the Director-General would be required to consider that all other
avenues for lawful disclosure have been considered.
Scrutiny principle (i) – Reversal of the evidential burden of
Clause 71 establishes various offences for the improper use or disclosure
of protected information by ‘entrusted persons’
and persons engaged
in health entities outside of the Commonwealth. These offences provide
offence-specific defences for which a
defendant would bear an evidential burden
of proof. The committee requests the minister's advice about the appropriateness
Scrutiny principle (iii) – No-invalidity clause
Subclause 12(1) declares Parliament's intention that the Director-General
must have regard to certain objectives when performing their
Subclause 12(3) provides that a failure to comply does not affect the validity
of anything done in the performance of
the Director-General’s functions,
and is not a ground for the review or challenge of any decision. While it is
unclear why
this subclause is required with respect to high-level considerations
and objectives, the committee leaves to the Senate as a whole
appropriateness of including this no-invalidity clause.
Scrutiny principle (iv) – Exemption from disallowance
Clause 67 seeks to authorise the Director-General to make a ‘data
sharing declaration’ where they are satisfied doing
so is necessary to
respond to the existence of a severe and immediate, or severe and unforeseen
threat to public health. Data sharing
declarations are not subject to
disallowance, which limits appropriate parliamentary scrutiny of their
operation. The committee is
seeking the minister's detailed advice about the
exceptional circumstances that justify this exemption and whether the bill could
be amended to provide for disallowance.
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1)
Advice to Parliament
Scrutiny principle (i) – Undue trespass on personal rights and
Scrutiny principle (i) – Coercive powers
Scrutiny principle (v) – Deferral and removal of
The bill, now Act, amended section 34JF of the
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
(ASIO Act) to extend the sunsetting date
applying to Division 3 of Part III of that Act for 18 months (from 7 September
7 March 2027). In
Scrutiny Digest 4 of 2025
, the committee
outlined its longstanding concerns about the broad and extraordinary nature of
the coercive questioning powers available
to the Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation under this framework and associated scrutiny concerns
raised by the committee
since its introduction in 2003. In light of those
concerns, the committee sought the minister’s advice as to why it was
and appropriate to defer the relevant sunsetting period by 18 months.
Having considered the minister’s response, the committee
reiterates its
significant scrutiny concerns in relation deferring the sunsetting of the
compulsory questioning powers framework,
but as the bill has now passed, it
makes no further comment.
Commission of Inquiry into Antisemitism at Australian Universities Bill
2024 (No. 2)
The committee notes that this non-government bill may raise scrutiny
concerns under Senate standing order 24. Should this bill proceed
stages of debate, the committee may request further information from the
legislation proponent.
Commonwealth Parole Board (Consequential and Transitional Provisions)
No comment.
Commonwealth Parole Board Bill 2025
Advice to Parliament
The bill establishes the Commonwealth Parole Board as an independent
statutory agency to make effective and risk-informed decisions
conditional release and management of federal offenders and other detained
Scrutiny principle (i) – Immunity from civil liability
Clause 16 of the bill provides limited immunities from civil proceedings
for a member of the Commonwealth Parole Board, staff assisting
the Board, and
any person who is providing information as requested or required by an
authorised officer. The bill and explanatory
memorandum are silent as to whether
the immunity would extend to the Commonwealth as a whole. The committee is
seeking information
from the minister as to whether the immunities from civil
liability in the bill are intended will extend to the Commonwealth as a
and, if so, why. Information is also sought about any recourse available to
affected individuals where their ability to bring
a claim is removed as a result
of these immunities.
Scrutiny principle (ii) – Broad discretionary powers
The bill provides in clause 17 that the procedures of the Board are as
determined by the Chair, who may also issue procedural guidelines
relating to
the procedures of the Board under clause 13. Subclause 18(4) further provides
that the Board may regulate proceedings
at its meetings as it considers
appropriate, subject to the provisions of that Division of the bill and any
guidelines issued by
the Chair. In light of the importance of procedure to
offenders seeking parole or conditional liberty, the committee is seeking
information about whether the Chair is required to issue procedural
guidelines, whether these would be published and what legal or
consequences may follow where the Board chooses not to comply with such
procedures.
Competition and Consumer Amendment (Divestiture Powers) Bill
No comment.
Competition and Consumer Amendment (Make Price Gouging Illegal) Bill
No comment.
Corporations (Review Fees) Amendment (Technical Amendments) Bill
No comment.
Criminal Code Amendment (State Sponsors of Terrorism) Bill
Advice to Parliament
This bill amends the
Criminal Code Act 1995
to enable the
Commonwealth to list foreign state entities as state sponsors of terrorism;
introduces new criminal offences relating
to state sponsors of terrorism; and
makes consequential amendments to various Acts in relation to state terrorist
acts, including
extending the application of Part 5.3 of the Criminal Code to
the new offences.
Scrutiny principle (i) – Undue trespass on personal rights and
Scrutiny principle (i) – Coercive powers
Scrutiny principle (ii) – Broad discretionary powers
Schedule 2 of the bill would amend Part 5.3 of the Criminal Code to provide
that various measures, including control orders, preventative
detention orders
and post sentence orders may be applied in relation to state sponsors of
terrorism and state terrorist acts. The
committee notes its previous commentary
with respect to a number of such measures, which involve broad discretionary
powers of a
coercive nature that trespass significantly on personal rights and
liberties, including the presumption of innocence. The committee
draws these
matters to the attention of senators and leaves to the Senate as a whole the
appropriateness of extending their application
to acts of state sponsored
Scrutiny principle (i) – Undue trespass on personal rights and
Scrutiny principle (i) – Freedom of expression
This bill expands the definition of ‘prohibited terrorist
organisation symbols’ in subsection 80.2E(3) of the Criminal
capture symbols used by state sponsors of terrorism or their members; including
for the criminal offences of causing a prohibited
symbol to be displayed in
public or trading in goods that depict or contain a prohibited symbol. The
committee notes that the definitional
uncertainty, breadth and consequences of
these offences, which also attract mandatory minimum sentences, may unduly
trespass on personal
rights and liberties, including freedom of expression. The
committee draws these concerns to the attention of senators.
Scrutiny principle (i) – Reversal of the evidential burden of
Schedule 1, item 1 of the bill establishes various offences that contain
offence-specific defences in relation to which the defendant
would bear an
evidential burden of proof. The committee requests that an addendum to the
explanatory memorandum be tabled in the
Parliament as soon as practicable
concerning the appropriateness of these defences. The committee otherwise draws
its scrutiny concerns
the use of offence-specific defences in the bill to the
attention of senators.
Scrutiny principle (i) – Reversal of the legal burden of
Schedule 1, item 1, proposed sections 112.2 and 112.5 create offences
containing offence-specific defences that reverse the
legal burden
proof in relation to each offence. Reversing the legal burden of proof places
the onus a defendant (rather than the prosecution)
to prove certain elements of
the offence on the balance of probabilities. In this instance, the explanatory
memorandum inaccurately
states that both offences reverse the evidential burden
of proof. that an addendum to the explanatory memorandum be tabled in the
Parliament as soon as practicable concerning the appropriateness of reversing
the legal burden of proof in these offences.
Scrutiny principle (iv) – Delegated legislation modifying or
exempting primary legislation
Schedule 1, item 1, proposed section 110.9 provides that regulations may
modify the operation of proposed Part 5.3A to disapply provisions
of that part
in certain circumstances, including in relation to specified persons, bodies, or
circumstances. The explanatory memorandum
does not, in the committee’s
opinion, provide sufficient information justifying this Henry VIII-like
provision. The committee’s
concerns are heightened insofar as such
regulations may be capable of disapplying protections against a person being
tried or punished
twice in respect of equivalent offences under both
Commonwealth and State and Territory Laws. The committee requests that an
to the explanatory memorandum addressing the appropriateness of making
provision for delegated legislation to modify the operation
of proposed part
5.3A of the primary legislation and any applicable legislative safeguards be
tabled in the Parliament as soon as
practicable.
Customs Tariff Amendment (Draught Beer) Bill 2025
No comment.
Defence Amendment (Parliamentary Joint Committee on Defence) Bill
Seeking further information
The bill would amend the
Defence Act 1903
to establish the
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Defence (PJCD) to provide parliamentary
oversight of Australian defence agencies.
Scrutiny principle (i) – Significant penalties
Schedule 1, Division 4 of
in the bill contains offences that would
apply in relation to the proposed PJCD. Proposed subsection 110ADG(1) create an
for current or former committee members and staff to record, disclose or
communicate information or documents relating to their office
or employment
other than to enable the committee to perform its functions. The maximum penalty
is 5 years imprisonment or 330 penalty
units. The committee reiterates its
concern that provisions seeking to impose significant penalties must be
appropriately justified,
with reference to the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth
, and so requests further information.
Scrutiny principle (v) – Insufficient parliamentary
Schedule 1, item 2, proposed
Part VIIIAB
in the bill set out procedures
that would apply to the PJCD. These include procedures restricting how the PJCD
may consider ‘protected
information’, such as operationally
sensitive and national security sensitive information, based on executive
discretion and
that would apply in addition to existing public interest immunity
processes usually applied by parliamentary committees. The committee
concerns about these provisions to the attention of senators.
Digital ID Repeal Bill 2024
No comment.
Education Legislation Amendment (Integrity and Other Measures) Bill
Seeking further information
Scrutiny principle (iv) – Exemption from disallowance
Scrutiny principle (v) – Incorporation of external materials as
existing from time to time
Schedule 1, item 32, proposed section 14C provides the minister may make a
legislative instrument to pause the processing of registration
applications that
are received by agencies administering the
Education Services for Overseas
Students Act 2000
(ESOS Act). The bill also provides, at proposed sections
14D, 14E and 14F, for similar instruments to be made for applications relating
to adding provider locations or courses.
Proposed subsection 14C(8) provides that instruments made by the minister
are not subject to disallowance under
Legislation Act
. Similar provisions are included for the other instruments.
The committee raises concern that the explanatory memorandum insufficiently
justifies these instruments. The committee reiterates
that where material is
incorporated by reference into the law, as is provided for in proposed sections
14C, 14D, 14E and 14F, such
material should be freely and readily available to
all those who may be interested in the law.
The committee recommends the bill be amended to provide for disallowance so
there is appropriate parliamentary oversight of any instruments
made and is
seeking information about the exceptional circumstances that may justify an
exemption from disallowance. The committee
leaves to the Senate the
appropriateness of the provisions.
Scrutiny principle (iii) – No-invalidity clause
Schedule 1, item 32, proposed section 14G would require the minister to
consult with specified entities before making a legislative
instrument under
proposed sections 14C, 14D, 14E and 14F. However, proposed subsection 14G(2)
provides that a failure to undertake
such consultation would not affect the
validity of any instrument made.
The committee considers the explanatory memorandum provides limited
information justifying the proposed section (being to provide
business certainty to providers) and does not adequately address the need for
proposed subsection 14G(2). The committee
leaves to the Senate the
appropriateness of the provision.
Excise Tariff Amendment (Draught Beer) Bill 2025
No comment.
Fair Work Amendment (Baby Priya's) Bill 2025
No comment.
Freedom of Information Amendment Bill 2025
Seeking further information
This bill seeks to amend the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
modernise the operation of the Freedom of Information (FOI) framework with the
aim of reducing inefficiencies, clarifying provisions
and exemptions, and
addressing abuses of process.
Scrutiny principle (i) – Undue trespass on personal rights and
Scrutiny principle (iii) – Adequacy of review rights
Various provisions in the bill, including amendments to the objects clause
and conditional exemption relating to deliberative processes
of government, may
operate to limit how individuals may access government information. To the
extent these changes may unduly trespass
on personal rights and liberties or
affect adequacy of review rights that rely on access to government information,
the committee
is concerned about the justification provided in the explanatory
memorandum. It therefore seeks further detailed information from
the minister
Scrutiny principle (iii) – Procedural fairness
Schedule 2, item 41, proposed section 15AD permits agencies or ministers to
refuse to deal with frivolous, vexatious or harassing
or intimidating FOI
requests. An affected applicant must be notified where a decision is made not to
deal with their request on such
grounds. However, the bill would not require
them to be notified of the reasons for a refusal decision (including
information, evidence
or findings on which it was based). The committee is
concerned that this may limit applicants’ practical ability to seek
external review of refusal decisions. It is therefore seeking further
information from the minister about whether a refusal notice
could include
findings of fact and reasons for refusing to deal with applications in these
circumstances.
Scrutiny principle (ii) – Broad delegation of administrative
Schedule 5, item 22 amends the delegation power in
Australian Information Commissioner Act 2010
to enable the Information
Commissioner to delegate their discretion to refuse to investigate FOI
complaints to any member of their
staff. The committee is seeking information
the training,
qualifications and experience of delegates and provide further
safeguards to delegates below the SES level who exercise this function.
Scrutiny principle (iii) – Availability of merits review
Scrutiny principles (iv) – Charges and fees in delegated
legislation
Schedule 6, item 6, proposed section 93C of the bill allows regulations to
set out application fees to make FOI applications. The
committee is concerned
that the bill and the explanatory memorandum provide limited guidance about how
such fees may be calculated
and the review rights that may be available with
respect to decisions to waive these fees. The committee requests advice from the
minister about whether the bill or explanatory materials could be amended to
clarify these matters.
Health Legislation Amendment (Improved Medicare Integrity and Other
Measures) Bill 2025
Advice to Parliament
Scrutiny principle (i) – Abrogation of privilege against
self-incrimination
Schedule 9, item 1 amends existing
section 106ZPQ
Insurance Act 1973
, which abrogates the privilege against
self-incrimination, to expand exceptions to certain use immunities would
otherwise apply to
documents provided under the section. In
Scrutiny Digest 4
, the committee requested advice about the necessity and
appropriateness of these exceptions, and whether consultation occurred with
Attorney-General's Department. Having considered the minister’s response
and as the bill has now passed, the committee
makes no further comment.
Scrutiny principle (i) – Strict liability offences
Schedule, 2 Item 78, proposed subsection 32CP(3) into the
Therapeutic
Goods Act 1989
to provide a strict liability offence carrying a maximum
penalty of 100 penalty units. In
Scrutiny Digest 4 of 2025
, the committee
drew its scrutiny concerns to the attention of senators, noting the penalty
exceeds the maximum envisaged in the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth
. The committee thanks the minister for providing additional advice
and as the bill has now passed, makes no further comment.
Scrutiny principle (ii) – Broad delegation of administrative
Schedule 2, item 51,
subsection 57(1A)
expands the Secretary’s power
to delegate specified functions, and powers under the
Therapeutic Goods Act
to state and territory officers. In
Scrutiny Digest 4 of 2025
the committee requested the minister’s advice about whether the bill could
be amended to limit these delegations to heads
of relevant departments or
agencies, or subdelegates with appropriate skills, qualification or experience.
Having considered the
minister’s response and as the bill has now passed,
the committee makes no further comment.
Health Legislation Amendment (Miscellaneous Measures No. 1) Bill
Seeking further information
This bill seeks to amend various acts relating to the Health portfolio.
Scrutiny principle (ii) – Broad discretionary powers
Scrutiny principle (iv) – Significant matters in delegated
legislation
Scrutiny principle (v) – Incorporation of external material from
time to time
Schedule 1, item 2 amends the
Health Insurance Act 1973
to automate
the allocation, revocation and suspension of Medicare provider numbers. In doing
so, proposed subsections 22J(3) and
22K(3) would grant the Chief Executive
Medicare a broad discretion to revoke or suspend the allocation of a provider
number where
they consider it appropriate to do so in all the circumstances.
Further, proposed subsections 22J(5) and 22K(6) provide that Medicare
numbers may be revoked or allocations suspended in circumstances prescribed by a
legislative instrument. Proposed section
22V provides for the incorporation of
external material as amended from time to time. The committee is seeking
information about
the necessity and appropriateness of these provisions and
whether there could be any limits or constraints imposed on the broad
discretions.
No comment.
Housing Australia Amendment (Accountability) Bill 2025
No comment.
Human Rights (Parliamentary Scrutiny) Amendment (Consideration of
UNDRIP) Bill 2023
No comment.
Private Health Insurance (National Joint Replacement Register Levy)
Amendment Bill 2025
No comment.
Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Amendment (Ban
Unethical Contractors) Bill 2025
The committee notes that this non-government bill may raise scrutiny
concerns under Senate standing order 24. Should this bill proceed
stages of debate, the committee may request further information from the
legislation proponent.
Regulatory Reform Omnibus Bill 2025
Seeking further information
This omnibus bill seeks to amend a wide range of legislation across
multiple portfolios with the aim of supporting a single disclosure
within government service delivery, improving and maintaining access to
government services, reducing regulatory burden
and improving government
efficiency and productivity.
Scrutiny principle (i) – Privacy
Schedule 2, item 153 in the bill seeks to repeal existing
section 135AA
National Health Act 1953
, which requires the Information Commissioner
to make Privacy Rules about the handing of personal information obtained in
to payment claims under Medicare or pharmaceutical benefits schemes. In
place of this, the bill inserts proposed sections 135ABA,
135ABB and 135ABC to
authorise the collection, use and disclosure of information for a wide range of
purposes, including to protect
the integrity and sustainability of the Medicare
program. The committee notes that the explanatory memorandum does not clearly
the privacy safeguards that would protect personal health information
handled under these authorisations in the absence of privacy
rules made by the
Commissioner. The committee is requesting information about applicable
safeguards and whether the bill would enhance
or reduce the protection of
personal health information.
Scrutiny principle (i) – Reversal of the evidential burden of
The bill redrafts existing section 135A to clarify that a person commits an
offence if they use or disclose information about another
person obtained while
performing duties or exercising powers under the
National Health Act
. The offence carries a maximum penalty of 2 years imprisonment or 50
penalty units, or both. This offence contains an offence-specific
defence for
which a defendant would bear an evidential burden of proof. The committee
requests the minister's advice about the appropriateness
Repeal Net Zero Bill 2025
No comment.
Road Vehicle Standards Amendment (Safer E-Bikes) Bill 2025
No comment.
Social Security and Other Legislation Amendment (Technical Changes No.
2) Bill 2025
This bill includes a standing appropriation. Standing appropriations enable
entities to spend money from the Consolidated Revenue
Fund on an ongoing basis.
By allowing the executive government to spend unspecified amounts of money for
an indefinite time into
the future, provisions which establish standing
appropriations may, depending on the circumstances of the legislation, infringe
the committee’s terms of reference relating to the delegation and
exercise of legislative power.
Therefore, the committee has determined that, as part of its standard
procedures for reporting on bills, it should draw senators’
attention to
bills that establish or amend standing appropriations or establish, amend or
continue in existence special accounts.
Social Security and Other Legislation Amendment (Technical Changes No.
2) Bill 2025
Seeking further information
Scrutiny principle (i) – Retrospective validation
Schedule 1, item 2, proposed sections 1117, 1117A and 1117B retrospectively
validate any actions and effects of historical income
apportionment methods that
were used to determine income for the purpose of means-tested social security
payments between 1 July
1991 and 6 December 2020. The bill seeks to preserve a
person’s right to commence proceedings in reliance on any ‘accrued
general law rights’ they have previously accrued with respect to the use
of income apportionment. The committee is requesting
further information
regarding the specific kinds of accrued general law rights that would be
preserved notwithstanding the retrospective
validation provided by the bill.
Information is also sought about the extent to which provision for compensation
is expected to offset
any adverse impacts arising from the application of
retrospectivity in this instance.
Scrutiny principle (iii) – Significant matters in delegated
legislation
Scrutiny principle (iv) – Availability of merits review
Schedule 3 seeks to establish a resolution scheme under which a person who
owes a social security debt to the Commonwealth as a consequence
validated income apportionment methods may be compensated by the Commonwealth.
The bill provides for various significant elements
of the resolution scheme to
be determined by legislative instrument, including processes for review. The
committee therefore queries
whether review processes provided under the
instrument would conform with similar existing merits review processes under
social security
laws and whether the bill could be amended to provide high-level
guidance about certain aspects of the scheme.
Scrutiny principle (v) – Standing appropriations
Schedule 4, item 1 authorises amounts to be appropriated from the
Consolidated Revenue Fund for the purposes of making payments under
Resolution Scheme. The committee notes that standing appropriations afford
limited parliamentary oversight of government expenditure.
The committee is
seeking further information about the appropriateness of providing for a
standing appropriation, relevant mechanisms
to report to Parliament on its use
and any consideration of the bill providing guidance about the amount of funds
that may be appropriated.
Strengthening Oversight of the National Intelligence Community Bill
Advice to Parliament
Scrutiny principle (iv) – Significant matters in delegated
legislation
Schedule 1, Item 6, proposed section 3A of the Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security Act 1986
(IGIS Act) seeks to define the
intelligence functions of the Department of Home Affairs in accordance with the
meaning given by the
regulations. The committee raised concerns about these
important matters that inform the scope of oversight being defined in delegated
legislation in
Scrutiny Digest 5 of 2025
and requested information as to
the necessity and appropriateness of doing so. The committee also queried
whether further high-level
guidance could be set out in the bill. Having
considered the minister’s response, the committee draws its concerns to
the attention
of senators and the Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of
Delegated Legislation.
Scrutiny principle (i) – Reversal of the evidential burden of
The bill seeks to establish several offence-specific defences, in the
context of existing information disclosure offences, for which
a defendant would
bear the evidential burden of proof. The explanatory memorandum states that
these amendments are intended to clarify
that the relevant information can be
provided to IGIS without limitation. In
Scrutiny Digest 5 of 2025
committee requested the minister’s advice about the appropriateness of
these defences. Having considered the minister’s
response, the committee
draws its concerns to the attention of senators.
Scrutiny principle (i) – Immunity from civil and criminal
Schedule 3, item 4 of Schedule 3, proposed section 476.7 of the
Code Act 1995
would exempt certain defence officials from civil and criminal
liability for certain ‘computer related conduct’ that
is engaged in
in the proper performance of authorised Australian Defence Force activities. In
Scrutiny Digest 5 of 2025
, the committee requested the minister’s
advice about the necessity and appropriateness of these immunities and
particular aspects
of their proposed operation. Having considered the
minister’s response, the committee draws its concerns to the attention of
Superannuation Guarantee Charge Amendment Bill 2025
No comment.
Superannuation Legislation Amendment (Tackling the Gender Super Gap)
No comment.
Telecommunications Amendment (Enhancing Consumer Safeguards) Bill
Advice to Parliament
The bill amends the
Telecommunications Act 1997
to establish a
carriage service provider registration scheme; make industry codes directly
enforceable by the Australian Communications
and Media Authority (ACMA); and
amend existing arrangements relating to the application of penalty amounts for
infringement notices
and civil penalties.
Scrutiny principle (i) - Retrospective application
Schedule 2, item 5, proposed
section 121
seeks to provide that industry
participants who do not comply with a registered industry code may be liable to
a civil penalty for
non-compliance in circumstances where they have not received
a prior direction from the ACMA. Schedule 2, subitem 9(1) applies the
section to conduct engaged in before commencement of the bill. The committee
raised concerns about the provision’s
retrospective application in
Scrutiny Digest 5 of 2025
, and requested further information, including
as to whether individuals are likely to be affected. Having considered the
response, the committee draws its concerns to the attention of
Telecommunications Legislation Amendment (Triple Zero Custodian and
Emergency Calling Powers) Bill 2025
Advice to Parliament
This bill seeks to implement recommendations of the 2023 Bean Review,
including to establish a Triple Zero Custodian to coordinate
management and
oversight of the Triple Zero emergency call ecosystem.
Scrutiny principle (v) – Tabling of documents in
Schedule 1, item 7, proposed section 151R provides that the Minister may
cause a review to be conducted into the effectiveness of
proposed Divisions 3, 4
and 5 after two years from the commencement of the proposed section. The
committee reiterates that the tabling
of documents provides opportunities for
debate that are not available where documents are not made public or are only
published online.
As the bill has now passed both Houses of Parliament, the
committee reiterates this scrutiny concern but makes no further comment.
committee recommends amending the bill to provide that any report from the
statutory review be tabled in both Houses of the Parliament
and leaves to the
Senate the appropriateness of proposed section 151R.
Scrutiny principle (v) – Parliamentary scrutiny
The committee notes that the bill was introduced in the House of
Representatives on 7 October 2025 and passed both Houses of Parliament
October 2025 within five sitting days of its introduction. The committee notes
with concern the speed at which this bill has
passed the Parliament and
reiterates its consistent view that legislation should be subject to thorough
parliamentary scrutiny.
Treasury Laws Amendment (Payday Superannuation) Bill 2025
Advice to Parliament
The bill amends the
Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act
(SGA Act) and other legislation to incentivise employers to make
superannuation contributions for their employees when they pay the
employee’s qualifying earnings rather than on a quarterly
Scrutiny principle (i) - Retrospective application
Schedule 1, item 61, proposed section 69 of the SG Act provides that the
Commissioner of Taxation may recover excess amounts paid
under Part 8 of the Act
as a debt due to the Commonwealth under certain conditions, where they have
given at least 28 days’
written notice to the debtor. Schedule 1, item 188
would apply the amendments in proposed section 69 to payments made by the
Commissioner
before, on or after 1 July 2026. The committee raises concern that
the explanatory memorandum does not sufficiently address the exceptional
circumstances required to justify the retrospective application of these
amendments. It therefore requests that an addendum explanatory
memorandum is
tabled in the Parliament as soon as practicable containing information about the
appropriateness of the proposed provisions
and any likely adverse effects on
individuals. The committee otherwise leaves to the Senate as a whole the
appropriateness of these
amendments applying retrospectively.
Treasury Laws Amendment (Strengthening Financial Systems and Other
Measures) Bill 2025
Seeking further information
This omnibus bill proposes to amend various Acts administered by the
Scrutiny principle (i) – Significant penalties
Various provisions in Schedule 1 of the bill would amend Chapter 6C of the
Corporations Act 2001
to renumber and remake (with increased penalties)
certain existing fault-based and strict liability offences governing failures to
disclose required information about substantial holdings and securities in
companies. Schedule 1, item 63, for example, would double
a custodial penalty
from 2 years imprisonment to 4 years imprisonment for a fault-based offence. The
committee reiterates that the
rationale for the imposition of significant
penalties should be fully outlined in the explanatory memorandum, with
references to
similar penalties in Commonwealth legislation. The committee seeks
the minister's advice as to the appropriateness of the custodial
proposed by the bill.
Scrutiny principle (iii) – Availability of judicial review
Scrutiny principle (iii) – Procedural fairness
Schedule 2, item 1, proposed
sections 150
Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commissions Act 2012
authorise disclosures of certain protected information regarding
‘recognised assessment activities’ of registered entities
ACNC Commissioner or the Commissioner of Taxation. The proposed amendments would
require that the ACNC Commissioner must notify
a registered entity and consider
any submissions made before making some disclosures, but not other disclosures.
The committee raises
concern that the proposed approach may undermine procedural
fairness, particularly the right to a fair hearing, where a registered
cannot object or make submissions before the Commissioner decides to disclose
certain information. The committee leaves to
the Senate as a whole the
appropriateness of these provisions.
Scrutiny principle (v) - Deferral of sunsetting
Schedule 6 of the bill would amend the
Competition and Consumer Act
to extend the sunsetting date of
from 1 January 2026 to 1
January 2031. That part provides a framework for the Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission (ACCC)
(or the Treasurer) to respond to corporations that
engage in prohibited conduct in the energy market. The committee considers the
explanatory memorandum provides limited guidance as to the particular
circumstances that justify extending the sunsetting date. The
committee requests
the minister’s advice as to the appropriateness of the extension.
This entry can be cited as:
Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills, Report snapshot,
Scrutiny Digest 6 of 2025
; [2025] AUSStaCSBSD 63.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (638 KB)
PDF format (145 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter