URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJStaCPW/2019/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:09:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Parliamentary Joint Standing Committee on Public Works (46th Parliament) --- "Report 02/2019 - Referrals made 31 July 2019 - PP 246/2019" [2019] AUPJStaCPW 4 (9 September 2019)
Membership of the 45th Parliament
Membership of the 46th Parliament
Committee Secretariat
Structure of the Report
Conduct of the inquiry
Need for the works
Options considered
Scope of the works
Community consultation
Cost of the works
Committee comment
Conduct of the inquiry
Need for the works
Scope of the works
Cost of the works
Consultation
Committee comment
Point Wilson Waterside Infrastructure Remediation Project
Australian Taxation Office Fit-out of Leased Premises in Moonee Ponds, Victoria
Point Wilson Waterside Infrastructure Remediation Project
Friday, 24 August 2018 – Lara, Victoria
Department of Defence
Aurecon Group
CPB Contractors
Australian Taxation Office Fit-out of Leased Premises in Moonee Ponds, Victoria
Friday, 7 December 2018 – Canberra, ACT
Australian Taxation Office
Cushman & Wakefield
PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Report 2/2019
Referrals made July 2019
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works
© Commonwealth of Australia
ISBN 978-1-76092-017-3 (Printed Version)
ISBN 978-1-76092-018-0 (HTML Version)
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 3.0 Australia License.
The details of this licence are available on the Creative Commons website:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/au/
List of Recommendations
1 Introduction
2 Introduction - Structure of the
Structure of the Report
3 Point Wilson Waterside Infrastructure
Remediation Project
Conduct of the inquiry
Need for the works
Options considered
Scope of the works
Community consultation
Cost of the works
Committee comment
4 Australian Taxation Office Fit-out of
Leased Premises in Moonee Ponds, Victoria
Conduct of the inquiry
Need for the works
Scope of the works
Cost of the works
Consultation
Committee comment
Appendix A. List of
submissions
Appendix B. List of witnesses and public
Membership of the
The Hon Scott Buchholz MP
(until 28 August
The Hon Dr John McVeigh MP
(from 13 September 2018)
Deputy Chair
Mr Tony Zappia MP
Senator Alex Gallacher
Mr Ian Goodenough MP
Mr Julian Hill MP
(until 10 September 2018)
Ms Justine Keay MP
(from 10 September 2018)
Ms Joanne Ryan MP
Senator Amanda Stoker
Mr Andrew Wallace MP
Senator John Williams
Membership of the
The Hon Dr John McVeigh MP
Deputy Chair
Mr Tony Zappia MP
Ms Lisa Chesters MP
Senator Alex Gallacher
Senator Hollie Hughes
Hon Barnaby Joyce MP
Senator Susan McDonald
Mr David Smith MP
Mr Rick Wilson MP
Committee Secretariat
Committee Secretary
Pauline Cullen
Inquiry Secretary
James Bunce
Office Manager
Tanya Pratt
List of Recommendations
Recommendation 1
3.46 The Committee recommends that the House of Representatives resolve,
pursuant to
Section 18(7)
Public Works Committee Act 1969
is expedient to carry out the following proposed works: Point Wilson Waterside
Infrastructure Remediation project.
Recommendation 2
3.48 The Committee requests that the Department of Defence provide the
Committee with an annual progress report for the Point Wilson
Infrastructure Remediation project as well as detailed reports which provide the
final costs of each element once completed.
Defence should also provide the
detail of any commercial sharing opportunities or use that it has been able to
Recommendation 3
4.32 The Committee recommends that the House of Representatives resolve,
pursuant to
Section 18(7)
Public Works Committee Act 1969
is expedient to carry out the following proposed works: proposed fit out of
leased premises for the Australian Taxation
Office in Moonee Ponds,
1. Introduction
1.1 The following projects were referred to the Public Works Committee (PWC)
Parliament in the second half of 2018:
§ Point Wilson Waterside Infrastructure Remediation, Point Wilson,
Victoria – 18 June 2018
§ Australian Taxation Office Proposed fit-out of Leased Premises in
Moonee Ponds, Victoria – 25 October 2018.
1.2 The Committee had completed the inquiry processes and adopted the report
but did not table a report prior to the dissolution of
the Parliament. The
referrals therefore lapsed.
1.3 The Point Wilson and ATO Moonee Ponds projects were referred to the PWC
Parliament on 31 July 2019. The Committee decided not to
repeat the inquiry process as it was advised by both proponent entities
there had been no significant changes to the work since the original referral.
Evidence taken on both these inquiries is available
on the Committee’s
1.4 The Committee has resolved to adopt the report as adopted by the PWC of
Parliament without amendment. The following chapters are the
report as adopted by the PWC of the 45
Parliament. Therefore any
references to ‘the Committee’ in Chapters 2 to 4 refer to the PWC of
Parliament.
1.5 The Committee thanks the members of the PWC of the 45
Parliament for their time and expertise in conducting the inquiry.
2. Introduction - Structure of the report
2.1 Under the
Public Works Committee Act 1969
(the Act), the
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works is required to inquire into and
report on public works referred to
it through either house of Parliament.
Referrals are made pursuant to
of the Act, and by practice are made
by the Minister for Finance or their delegate in the House of
Representatives.
2.2 All public works that have an estimated cost exceeding $15 million must
be referred to the Committee and cannot be commenced until
the Committee has
made its report to Parliament and the House of Representatives receives that
report and resolves that it is expedient
to carry out the
2.3 Under the Act, a public work is a work proposed to be undertaken by the
Commonwealth, or on behalf of the Commonwealth concerning:
§ the construction, alteration, repair, refurbishment or fitting-out of
buildings and other structures;
§ the installation, alteration or repair of plant and equipment designed
to be used in, or in relation to, the provision of services
for buildings and
other structures;
§ the undertaking, construction, alteration or repair of landscaping and
earthworks (whether or not in relation to buildings
and other structures);
§ the demolition, destruction, dismantling or removal of buildings,
plant and equipment, earthworks, and other structures;
§ the clearing of land and the development of land for use as urban land
or otherwise; and
§ any other matter declared by the regulations to be a
2.4 The Act requires that the Committee consider and report on:
§ the purpose of the work and its suitability for that purpose;
§ the need for, or the advisability of, carrying out the work;
§ whether the money to be expended on the work is being spent in the
most cost effective manner;
§ the amount of revenue the work will generate for the Commonwealth, if
that is its purpose; and
§ the present and prospective public value of the
2.5 The Committee pays attention to these and any other relevant factors when
considering the proposed work.
Structure of the
2.6 The then Assistant Minister for Finance, the Hon David Coleman MP,
referred the following proposed project to the Committee in
§ Point Wilson Waterside Infrastructure Remediation project.
2.7 The then Special Minister of State, the Hon Alex Hawke MP, referred the
following proposed project to the Committee on 25 October
§ Australian Tax Office Fit-out of Leased premises in Moonee Ponds,
2.8 In considering the works, the Committee analysed the evidence presented
by the proponent agencies, submissions and evidence received
at public and
in-camera hearings.
2.9 In consideration of the need to report expeditiously as required by
Section 17(1) of the Act, the Committee has only reported
on significant issues
of interest or concern.
2.10 Chapter 3 addresses the proposed Point Wilson Waterside Infrastructure
Remediation project. The estimated cost of this project
is $218.9 million
(excluding GST).
2.11 Chapter 4 addresses the proposed Australian Tax Office Fit-out of Leased
premises in Moonee Ponds, Victoria. The estimated cost
of this project is $35.5
million (excluding GST).
2.12 Submissions are listed at Appendix A, and hearings and witnesses are
listed at Appendix B.
3. Point Wilson Waterside Infrastructure Remediation
3.1 The Department of Defence (Defence) seeks approval from the Committee to
proceed with the proposed Point Wilson Waterside Infrastructure
Remediation
project, at Point Wilson, Victoria.
3.2 Point Wilson Explosives Area (PWEA) is located on the north shore of
Corio Bay, approximately 50 kilometres west of Melbourne.
According to
The PWEA is the sole Defence-owned importation facility capable of bulk movement
of explosive ordnance (EO). It is a significant
maritime asset, currently
consisting of a 2.4 kilometre long jetty and 168 metre long wharf capable of
accommodating EO container
3.3 Defence
states that PWEA has been closed since 2008 due to ‘unsafe
structural’ conditions, details of which can be
found under the
‘Need for the works’ section of this
The purpose of this
proposal is to ‘remediate the PWEA waterside infrastructure in order to
enable to recommencement’
of EO importation at the
3.4 The estimated cost of the project is $218.9 million (excluding GST).
3.5 The project was referred to the Committee on 28 June 2018.
Conduct of the
3.6 Following referral, the inquiry was publicised on the Committee’s
website and via media release.
3.7 The Committee received two submissions and two confidential submissions.
A list of submissions can be found at Appendix A.
3.8 On 24 August 2018, the Committee conducted a site inspection at Point
Wilson Explosives Area. On the same day, the Committee
also conducted a public
and in camera hearing. A transcript of the public hearing is available on the
Committee’s website.
Need for the works
3.9 In its submission, Defence notes that the jetty and wharf at PWEA
‘were constructed between 1958 and 1961, and the facility
was officially
opened in 1961’.
according to Defence:
PWEA has exceeded its anticipated design life. In 2008, a structural report
assessed that the wharf and jetty structure had deteriorated
to the point that
it is unsafe and inoperable until remediation work is completed. As a result,
the waterside facility was deemed
non-operational for bulk EO operations. In
2016, further safety shortcomings were identified, which led to a decision to
all access to the jetty and wharf, with access by exception to address
critical safety issues
3.10 Defence
outlined the safety issues identified:
Concrete deck deterioration.
The deterioration of the concrete
deck, due to chloride ingress into the concrete, has led to spalling of the
concrete soffit and
corrosion of the steel reinforcement resulting in loss of
structural capacity.
Steel crosshead corrosion.
The breakdown of the coating and
subsequent corrosion of the steel crosshead has led to a reduction in the
structural capacity of
the members.
Steel stringer beam halving joints corrosion
. The stiffeners
and connection plates on the half joints on the stringers have corroded to such
an extent that the structural capacity
has been significantly impacted.
Steel piles corrosion.
The protective coating that was
installed to protect the steel piles has deteriorated over time. This, in
conjunction with higher
rates of corrosion in the splash zone, has resulted in
the steel piles undergoing various rates of corrosion. The jetty piles have
been assessed as being in reasonable condition (generally due to their
protection by the existing cathodic protection system). The
wharf and link span
piles are not protected by cathodic protection and are in significantly worse
condition than the jetty piles.
Dilapidated timber fender piles.
Necking of the timber piles
below the waterline and marine borers within the timber have significantly
reduced the berthing load
capacity of the timber fender piles. In 2017, this
degradation reached a point where the risk of failure and subsequent collapse
into the sea was considered a potential public safety risk to mariners and the
environment. Due to this risk, all timber fender
piles have recently been
3.11 As a result of these issues, Defence has been importing EO through Port
Alma, a privately owned port 60 kilometres south of Rockhampton,
Queensland.
3.12 According to Defence, reliance on Port Alma as the sole point of
importation represents the following risks:
§ Port Alma is a commercial port, and its availability is constrained
due to continual competition for berthing slots with resource
companies. Access is not guaranteed and quite often time pressures and
difficult during high port congestion.
§ Port Alma does not have any onsite EO storage facilities and requires
transfer to the Queensland storage reserve of Bajool,
some 30 kilometres from
Port Alma. Bajool has limited EO storage capacity, requiring further overflow
storage in a disused quarry
at the remote Shoalwater Bay Training Area,
approximately 130 kilometres north of Port Alma. This leads to additional
security and handling risks, and costs due to limited infrastructure
at Shoalwater Bay. This overflow storage access will be limited
in the future
with Shoalwater Bay experiencing increased training usage by the Australian
Defence Force and foreign forces.
§ The port can only handle shipping containers rather than pallets,
limiting its utility. It has ageing and limited facilities
(some of which are
50 years old), there is potential that it may close for refurbishment or upgrade
in the near to medium future.
There is also no guarantee on the future use of
Port Alma as Defence is not seen as a priority for a commercial port.
§ Port Alma is vulnerable to inclement weather; being closed due to king
tides and weather events on a number of occasions.
The roads to Bajool are poor
and subject to risks and constraints as they are single lane width and have
closed shoulders.
§ Increased workarounds and inefficiencies incur an extra cost of
approximately $1 to $1.5 million per shipment in additional
transport, handling,
security, and port fees, all of which leads to increased inefficiencies and
operational stress on the EO supply
chain. There are considerable distances to
the main EO depot sites in New South Wales and Victoria, and it can take months
all EO is finally distributed around the EO network.
§ It creates complexity in quarantine management with a number of local
agreements in place regarding the transport of contaminated
containers at
Bajool, which could be cancelled at any stage. Defence has on occasion been
instructed to unload within 24 hours,
making it difficult to organise
biosecurity officers to support
3.13 At the public hearing, Defence gave the Committee further detail on how
the contaminated container issue added additional risks
to Defence’s
handling of EO through Port Alma:
The biosecurity aspects at Port Alma are very limited, and they can’t hold
explosive containers on the site for any length
of time. So those containers,
if they come through with any sort of biocontaminant... are currently plastic
wrapped and then trucked
the 40 kilometres to Bajool, where there is a treatment
3.14 Defence
told the Committee that ‘returning PWEA to operational status is therefore
critical to the sustainment and surety
of the Defence EO supply chain, and will
contribute to a broad range of Defence
capabilities’.
3.15 At the public hearing, Defence further stated that:
Point Wilson provides us with the additional strategic capacity to import our
explosives. It is a dedicated, Defence-owned and controlled
refurbished, it provides a guaranteed secure and reliable importation capacity,
mitigates our quarantine risks that we
currently have and minimises the amount
of road transport that [Defence subjects its] munitions
3.16 The PWEA
acting as the single point of entry for bulk EO importation is important for the
realisation of the objectives of the
Explosives Ordnance Logistics Reform
Program (EOLRP), examined by the Committee in
3.17 Furthermore, according to Defence:
If the project does not proceed, the entire dilapidated wharf and jetty would
need to be demolished for public safety at an estimated
cost of $60-100
Committee is satisfied that the need for the works exists.
Options considered
3.19 Defence considered a range of options in developing this proposal.
Firstly, Defence stated that it considered the suitability
of other bulk EO
importation sites, such as Twofold Bay in New South Wales and Wyndham Port in
Western Australia.
3.20 According to Defence:
Twofold Bay was considered not suitable due to an insufficient EO licence, a
lack of onsite EO storage, no ability to manage or accommodate
importation
levels of EO containers, no direct access to major roads and rail networks,
close proximity to private and commercial
businesses and public beaches. The
Wyndham Port was found to be extremely remote with no major roads and rail
infrastructure access,
limited access through the wet season, increased
operating costs due to remote location and ship limitations due to tidal ranges
other potential, existing sites were ruled out, Defence told the Committee that
it considered a ‘broad range of options’
to ‘meet the
requirements of EO bulk’ importation at PWEA:
In the initial development phase, options ranged from minimal refurbishment to
complete replacement and it was determined that major
refurbishment was the
preferred option as it best meets the capability requirements and is best value
result of this, Defence considered two options in further detail:
Option One – Remediate wharf with 2.4 kilometre single lane
The remediation of the 2.4 kilometre jetty consists of a 2,255 metre
single lane jetty and 125 metre link span connecting to the new
wharf, with
associated supporting infrastructure. This was considered a low risk option,
which operationally represents the status
quo. This option was considered to
have significant benefits despite the larger capital cost as it decreases the
risk of inoperability
or a serious incident.
Option Two – Use of a floating deck to reduce jetty length.
A floating deck is a large steel, subdivided pontoon which is capable of
carrying EO via transhipment between the commercial EO ship,
at anchor, and an
unloading wharf. A floating deck can be considered to provide the same
capability as a standard wharf (albeit
significantly larger as EO containers are
temporarily stored on the floating deck) and would be equipped with a range of
fittings, services and buildings to that of a traditional wharf.
Several floating deck sub-options were considered and a medium
sized floating
deck, and an 880 metre single lane jetty including passing bays to allow two way
traffic was found to be the most
3.23 Defence informed the Committee that Option One was selected, despite
requiring higher capital expenditure. This is because Option
Two required the
introduction of a new platform, technology, and operating model, which in turn
would bring increased complexity,
and safety and other
Scope of the works
3.24 Defence split the proposed works into five project elements:
§ Project Element One: Jetty. Refurbish the 2,255 metre single lane
(two-way) jetty with passing bays, consisting of a new jetty
deck and stringer
beams with strengthened existing piles, and crossheads where required.
§ Project Element Two: Wharf. Construct a new 135 metre wharf and 125
metre link span consisting of a new deck with new piles,
crossheads and stringer
beams, comprising of:
- Demolition of the existing wharf.
- Construct new steel piles, concrete beams, and deck in an enhanced
configuration that is 30 metres shorter and six metres wider
for improved safety
and operational capability. This will accommodate EO ships up to 136 metres in
length, 18,000 tonnage displacement
and laden draft of 8.5 metres.
- Install new mooring dolphins.
- Construct a single boat landing abutting the end of the Amenities building
for use by line boats and/or security vessels.
§ Project Element Three: Waterside amenities. A new single-storey
waterside amenities building to provide working accommodation
and amenities for
the stevedores, line crew and operators.
§ Project Element Four: Landside infrastructure. Landside
infrastructure upgrades comprising:
- Demolition of existing buildings.
- A new single-storey concrete facility to house the pump sets supporting the
waterside fire and potable water infrastructure.
- Remediation of the causeway and approach road, including associated
landscaping.
§ Project Element Five: Engineering Services. Services upgrades,
comprising:
- The waterside infrastructure is planned to be powered from an extended 22
kilovolts cable supply that is reticulated along the wharf
to the substation
located within the Amenities building.
- The site’s combined water and fire main shall be upgraded and
reticulated to the Pump House and Tanks. A new potable water
main shall service
the Amenities Building and wharf wash-down facility. The fire main shall be
reticulated along the wharf to the
fire hydrants, hose reals and monitors on the
- A new septic holding tank will be replaced below the Amenities
- New communications cabling shall be reticulated to the Fire Pump House and
Amenities building for the emergency phones and fire
control cabling.
- The installation of an electrical cathodic protection system on the marine
infrastructure to protect against
3.25 Subject to Parliamentary approval, construction is expected to commence
late 2018 and be completed in
3.26 The Committee finds that the proposed scope of works is suitable for the
works to meet its purpose.
consultation
3.27 As it does for all projects examined by the Committee, Defence provided
a report on its community consultation process for this
3.28 According to this submission, Defence placed advertisements in the
Geelong Advertiser and Herald Sun newspapers, regarding two
information sessions which were held at Corio Central Shopping Centre and
Cobradah House, Bell Post Hill, both on 11 June
3.29 Additionally, Defence wrote letters offering formal briefings to a range
of potential stakeholders, including state and federal
Members of Parliament,
local government representatives, relevant Victorian Government departments and
authorities, business and
commercial groups, and a range of community groups and
local businesses and
organisations.
3.30 At the public hearing, Defence was questioned about the extent of its
community consultation, and specifically whether Melbourne
Water – Point
Wilson’s nearest neighbour – had been contacted directly.
3.31 Defence responded that while Melbourne Water had not been directly
‘the normal
community consultation’ with details of the project being available
‘on a website and
advertised’.
3.32 Furthermore, the Committee questioned whether Defence had undertaken
consultations in the areas through which EO received at
Point Wilson would
transit on its way to EO storage and distribution facilities. Defence responded
The specific roads taken become highly sensitive in terms of not wanting to tell
the public, but more so from a security point of
view. Broadcasting widely
where the EO is moving around potentially opens up some form of threat from
people who may have nefarious
ideas in their heads about how to use
Cost of the works
3.33 The project has a budget of $218.9 million, exclusive of GST. It
includes the cost of construction, management and design fees,
contingencies and
an escalation allowance.
3.34 Defence provided further detail on project costings in its confidential
submission and during an in-camera hearing.
3.35 The Committee is satisfied that the costings for the project provided to
it have been adequately assessed by the proponent entity.
Committee comment
3.36 The Committee is aware that the need for this project is to support one
to three bulk importations of EO per
The cost of the project is
$218.9 million and Defence has indicated efficiencies that could be achieved
through this project, as
opposed to continuing to rely on Port Alma as the
primary site of EO bulk importation to Australia.
3.37 The Committee was informed that the jetty and wharf at PWEA were
assessed as being non-operational in 2008 for bulk EO importation
and Defence
was required to use a commercial port, Port Alma, for importation of bulk EO.
The Committee was informed that there were
significant risks in using Port Alma
as it is a commercial port and also subject to transport and biosecurity
3.38 The Committee notes that the conduct of these works is important to
achieving efficiencies in both the EO network and Defence
expenditure on
maintaining and using this network. The Committee is also aware that the EO
network efficiencies that will be achieved
under the EOLRP can only be fully
realised if Point Wilson is refurbished and again acts as the primary point for
bulk EO importation.
3.39 The Committee’s function, however, is not to ensure efficiencies
for Defence but to ensure that the most effective use
is made of the moneys to
be expended on the work.
3.40 The Committee did not feel that the necessity for carrying out the
works, presented by Defence, was entirely compelling in relation
redevelopment of Point Wilson purely on the basis of the two or three
importations a year, given that it has already been
using Port Alma since the
decommissioning of the wharf and jetty at PWEA.
3.41 The Committee therefore requests that Defence keeps it updated on
progress and costings in relation to each of the project elements
by providing
an annual progress report as well as detailed reports which provide the final
costs of each element once completed.
Defence should also provide detail of any
commercial sharing opportunities or use that it has been able to pursue.
3.42 On community consultation, the Committee notes that in its consultations
for this project, Defence omitted Point Wilson’s
nearest neighbour from
being directly contacted. The Committee encourages Defence to continue to
consult widely on this project,
as it generally does for all its projects.
3.43 Furthermore, the Committee is aware that the Victorian Government has
confirmed that these proposed works are unlikely to impact
current or future
port projects in Victoria. This was a key issue for the Committee, especially
in light of the fact that the Victorian
Government is considering future options
for the development of a second container port in the Bay West area. The
Committee encourages
Defence to continue to consult with the relevant state
government ministers in relation to this project, particularly as the option
a Bay West second container port is finalised.
3.44 Additionally, the Committee is not convinced by the argument put by
Defence that consulting with communities along the EO transportation
not desirable. In the Committee’s view, it is entirely possible for
Defence to consult with local and state members
between Point Wilson and key EO
storage and distribution sites like Myambat and Mangalore.
3.45 As such, the Committee encourages Defence to further widen its
consultation in regard to EO importation and distribution routes,
ensure that local communities know that dangerous goods are being transported
through their general area. This can be done
without disclosing the specific
routes that will be taken, thereby incurring additional security risks, and will
act to ensure that
local residents in these areas have a forum to raise concerns
and have these concerns addressed.
Recommendation 1
3.46 The Committee recommends that the House of Representatives resolve,
pursuant to
Section 18(7)
Public Works Committee Act 1969
is expedient to carry out the following proposed works: Point Wilson Waterside
Infrastructure Remediation project.
3.47 Proponent entities must notify the Committee of any changes to the
project scope, time, cost, function or design. The Committee
also requires that
a post-implementation report be provided within three months of a project
completion. A report template can be
found on the Committee’s website.
Recommendation 2
3.48 The Committee requests that the Department of Defence provide the
Committee with an annual progress report for the Point Wilson
Infrastructure Remediation project as well as detailed reports which provide the
final costs of each element once completed.
Defence should also provide the
detail of any commercial sharing opportunities or use that it has been able to
4. Australian Taxation Office Fit-out of Leased
Premises in Moonee Ponds, Victoria
4.1 The Australian Taxation Office (ATO) seeks approval from the Committee to
proceed with the Fit-out of leased premises in Moonee
Ponds, Victoria.
4.2 The estimated cost of the project is $35.5 million (excluding GST).
4.3 The project was referred to the Committee on 25 October 2018.
4.4 Subject to Parliamentary approval, it is anticipated that construction
will commence March 2019 and be completed by February 2020.
Conduct of the
4.5 Following referral, the inquiry was publicised on the Committee’s
website and via media release.
4.6 The Committee received two submissions and one confidential submission. A
list of submissions can be found at Appendix A.
4.7 On 7 December 2018, the Committee received a site inspection by
presentation. On the same day, the Committee also conducted a
public and in
camera hearing. A transcript of the public hearing is available on the
Committee’s website.
Need for the works
4.8 According to the ATO it has ‘an ongoing requirement for a presence
in the North West Melbourne
current leased premises in Moonee Ponds is due to expire on 5 February
4.9 In its submission, the ATO stated that it followed Commonwealth Property
Management Framework and Resource Management Guide No.
500 in seeking surplus
space suitable for its requirements. The Department of Finance identified no
surplus space suitable for these
requirements.
4.10 Following an approach to market the ATO has secured 14,000 square metres
located over four floors at 6-20 Gladstone Street in
Moonee Ponds. According to
the ATO it proposes to:
...remain in the current Moonee Ponds site with a reduction in Nett Lettable
Area (NLA) of approximately 7,200 square metres. The
new agreement for lease is
for 14,000 square metres located over four floors from ground to level 3
inclusive. The fit-out works
of the floors will coincide with a proposed upgrade
of the base building services as they approach the end of their acceptable life
ATO advised that the building was 27 years old, the current fit-out was
completed in 2005, and the most recent update to
its breakout areas and meeting
rooms was completed in 2012 with fit-out and finishes having reached end of
4.12 The ATO elaborated on the deficiencies in the existing Moonee Ponds
The current fit-out does not provide the ATO with the ability to meet the
industry standards or government density benchmarks. The
workstations are
designed for cathode-ray tube monitors, including the no longer necessary
volumes of storage based on older, paper
based work processes that are
inefficient in their design. They are also designed for single focus work. They
do not reflect well
the current ATO aims set out in our 2024 plan, including
increased collaboration, innovation and providing a more purpose-built
environment
to support business needs and the professional requirements of
Scope of the works
4.13 The ATO stated that the ‘fit-out will include new work points,
upgraded security systems to cater for multi-tenancy occupancy,
meeting rooms
and general collaboration areas for
4.14 The ATO submission provided further detail on the proposed scope of
The fit-out design is a contemporary open-plan office space
§ Modular work points that can be easily and quickly
reconfigured
§ Collaboration, offices and meeting areas that are flexible and
designed for future reconfiguration
§ A robust security system that protects ATO information, people, other
assets and operations
§ Enhanced conference, training and video conference facilities to
support contemporary work practices
§ New computer room designed to current specifications
§ First aid room and amenities
4.15 The ATO stated that the proposed works included an increase in the
number of bike racks from 80 to 120 and provision of staff
lockers used by
cyclists and staff undertaking physical exercise (including at local gyms).
4.16 According to the ATO, the landlord for the leased premises in Moonee
Ponds will undertake a number of works at their own cost
...the refurbishment of the base building services, including but not limited to
upgrades to air conditioning systems; lifts; environmental
performance of the
building; staff amenities, including toilets, showers and change rooms; paint;
lighting; blinds; and other
protections.
ATO noted that the occupational density of the new lease is expected to reduce
space by approximately 34 per cent aligning:
...with the changes to [the ATOs] business model over time and also supports the
ATO to meet our Commonwealth targets, particularly
around occupational
Committee finds that the proposed scope of works is suitable for the works to
meet its purpose.
Cost of the works
4.19 The project has a budget of $35.5 million, excluding GST. The cost
estimate includes provision for the office fit-out, cost escalation,
contingencies, associated professional fees and the ATO’s internal
4.20 The ATO provided further detail on project costings in its confidential
submissions and during one in-camera hearing.
Consultation
4.21 The ATO submission states that it conducted, or intended to conduct,
consultations with a number of internal and external stakeholders
§ Department of Finance
§ Cushman & Wakefield Pty Ltd (Property Leasing, Project Management
and Facilities Management)
§ Peckvonhartel PVH (Interior Designer)
§ Umow Lai (Services Engineers)
§ Aquenta (Quantity Surveyors)
§ McKenzie Group (Building Surveyor)
§ ATO Executive
§ ATO business lines
§ ATO Work Health & Safety
§ Unions (Community and Public Sector Union and Australian Services
Union [ASU])
§ ATO Workforce
4.22 The ASU Taxation Officers’ Branch made a submission on the
proposed works stating that ATO staff at Moonee Ponds had not
seen the latest
concept drawings for the proposed works or the ATO’s submission to the
4.23 When asked on whether the ATO had engaged with the ASU, the ATO advised
that there had been discussions around the proposed works
and that the
consultation was ongoing.
4.24 The ATO agreed that further consultation would be part of its next
Absolutely. I would just say 'further consultation'. There's been some; there
hasn't been none. We've certainly been out and engaged
with people about how
they work at the moment and what work they're doing. We've done some discussion
other fit-outs. Certainly members of the committee
that's already been formed, including the ASU member and the CPSU members, have
been invited and indeed have come in and spent time in Docklands to see that
environment and see how that is working for
ATO added that they were confident that they would address all concerns raised
by the ASU.
Committee comment
4.26 The Committee understands that the ATO has a long term operational
requirement in North West Melbourne. The Committee also accepts
that the current
facilities are ageing and in need of an upgrade to increase collaboration and
innovation and provide staff a purpose-built
environment to support business
needs and professional requirements.
4.27 The Committee recognises the concerns raised in the ASU submission from
staff who will be impacted by the proposed newly designed
office fit-out. The
impact of proposed public works is always an important facet of the
Committee’s scrutiny.
4.28 In any change, especially ones that affect employees, it is vitally
important to communicate with staff early and engage with
them through the
change process. The Committee has observed in other projects that involving
staff early in the consultation process
enables staff to understand and accept
the need for change and alleviate concerns which, in most cases, results in a
positive response
to the change process.
4.29 The Committee encourages the ATO to continue consulting with staff and
stakeholders about changes to their work environment.
4.30 The Committee did not identify any issues of concern with the proposal
and is satisfied that the project has merit in terms of
need, scope and
4.31 Having regard to its role and responsibilities contained in the
Public Works Committee Act 1969
, the Committee is of the view that this
project signifies value for money for the Commonwealth and constitutes a project
fit for purpose, having regard to the established need.
Recommendation 3
4.32 The Committee recommends that the House of Representatives resolve,
pursuant to
Section 18(7)
Public Works Committee Act 1969
is expedient to carry out the following proposed works: proposed fit out of
leased premises for the Australian Taxation
Office in Moonee Ponds,
4.33 Proponent entities must notify the Committee of any changes to the
project scope, time, cost, function or design. The Committee
also requires that
a post-implementation report be provided within three months of project
completion. A report template can be found
on the Committee’s website.
Hon Dr John McVeigh MP
A. List of submissions
Point Wilson Waterside
Infrastructure Remediation Project
Department of Defence
§ 1.1 Confidential
§ 1.2 Supplementary to submission 1
Australian Taxation Office
Fit-out of Leased Premises in Moonee Ponds, Victoria
Australian Taxation Office
§ 1.1 Confidential
§ 1.2 Supplementary to submission 1
Australian Services Union
§ 2.1 Supplementary to submission 2
§ 2.2 Supplementary to submission 2
§ 2.3 Supplementary to submission 2
§ 2.4 Supplementary to submission 2
§ 2.5 Supplementary to submission 2
§ 2.6 Supplementary to submission 2
§ 2.7 Supplementary to submission 2
§ 2.8 Supplementary to submission 2
§ 2.9 Supplementary to submission 2
§ 2.10 Supplementary to submission 2
§ 2.11 Supplementary to submission 2
§ 2.12 Supplementary to submission 2
§ 2.13 Supplementary to submission 2
B. List of witnesses and public hearings
Point Wilson Waterside
Infrastructure Remediation Project
Friday, 24 August 2018
– Lara, Victoria
Department of
Brigadier Matt Galton, Director General, Capital Facilities and
Infrastructure
Air Commodore Wade Evans, Director General, Explosive Ordnance
Mr Timothy McKay, Assistant Director, Environmental Protection and
Ms Sara Clout, Project Director, Victoria and Tasmania
Aurecon Group
Mr Tim Hales, Project Manager and Contract Administrator
CPB Contractors
Mr Sebastian Ward, Project Manager
Australian Taxation Office
Fit-out of Leased Premises in Moonee Ponds, Victoria
Friday, 7 December 2018
– Canberra, ACT
Australian Taxation
Mr Andrew Closey, Assistant Commissioner, ATO Property
Ms Lillian Cheong, Associate Director
Mr Christopher Hanley, National Director
Ms Alex Laughlan, Senior Interior Designer
Mr Colin Bainbridge, Senior Quantity Surveyor
peckvonhartel
Mr Timothy Giles, Lead Interior Designer
Australian Services Union –Branch Secretary Taxation Officers
Mr Jeffrey Lapidos
All public works that have an
estimated cost exceeding $15 million must be referred to the Committee and
cannot be commenced until
the Committee has made its report to Parliament and
the House of Representatives receives that report and resolves that it is
to carry out the work.
The Act, Section 5.
The Act, Section 17.
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Air Commodore Evans,
Department of Defence,
Transcript of evidence
, 24 August 2018, p. 5.
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Air Commodore Evans,
Department of Defence,
Transcript of evidence
, 24 August 2018, p. 5.
Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Public Works,
Report 7/2017
, Chapter 5.
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
, pp. 14-15.
Department of Defence,
Submission No. 1
Department of Defence,
Supplementary Submission 1.1
Department of Defence,
Supplementary Submission 1.1,
Department of Defence,
Supplementary Submission 1.1,
p. 1 and pp. B1-B7.
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of evidence
, 24 August 2018, p. 7.
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of evidence
, 24 August 2018, p. 7.
Department of Defence,
Submission No. 1
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of evidence
, 24 August 2018, p. 1.
Public Works Committee Act
Australian Taxation Office,
Submission 1
Australian Taxation Office,
Submission 1
Australian Taxation Office,
Submission 1
Australian Taxation Office,
Submission 1
Mr Andrew Closey, Australian
Taxation Office,
Transcript of evidence
, 7 December 2018, p. 3.
Mr Andrew Closey, Australian
Taxation Office,
Transcript of evidence
, 7 December 2018, p. 3.
Mr Andrew Closey, Australian
Taxation Office,
Transcript of evidence
, 7 December 2018, p. 3.
Australian Taxation Office,
Submission 1
Mr Andrew Closey, Australian
Taxation Office,
Transcript of evidence
, 7 December 2018, p. 3.
Mr Andrew Closey, Australian
Taxation Office,
Transcript of evidence
, 7 December 2018, p. 3.
Australian Taxation
, Submission 1
Australian Services Union
Taxation Officers’ Branch,
Submission 2
Mr Andrew Closey, Australian
Taxation Office,
Transcript of evidence
, 7 December 2018, p. 10.
Mr Andrew Closey, Australian
Taxation Office,
Transcript of evidence
, 7 December 2018, p. 10.
Mr Andrew Closey, Australian
Taxation Office,
Transcript of evidence
, 7 December 2018, p. 10.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (193 KB)
PDF format (502 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter