URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBSD/2025/66.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:14:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Australian Centre for Disease Control Bill 2025 - Initial Scrutiny [2025] AUSStaCSBSD 66 (29 October 2025)
Australian Centre for Disease Control Bill 202543
Availability of merits review
Reversal of the evidential burden of proof64
No-invalidity clause69
Exemption from disallowance74
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025
This bill establishes the Australian Centre for Disease Control as an
independent, non-corporate Commonwealth entity and establishes
the role, powers,
functions and duties of the agency and its Director-General.
Health, Disability and Ageing
House of Representatives on 3 September 2025
Bill status
Before the Senate
Availability of merits
1.49 Part 4 of the bill seeks to provide for the collection, sharing, use and
disclosure of information, including personal information
Director-General of the Australian Centre for Disease Control (CDC) and others.
In particular, Division 2 sets out information-gathering
powers, which would
authorise the Director-General to request or direct that certain information be
provided to them or a designated
data service provider (such as the Australian
Bureau of Statistics or the Australian Institute of Health and
1.50 Under these powers, the Director-General would be authorised to request
in writing, or enter written agreements with, Australian
government entities,
corporations, international organisations, individuals and other entities to
give information to the Director-General
or a designated data service
These requests or
agreements may relate to specified information or categories of information,
either on an ad hoc basis or from
1.51 The Director-General may request or direct that information be provided
only where they are satisfied that the information is
reasonably necessary for
the performance of their functions or duties under the bill – or, for a
request only, certain other
The Director-General must additionally consider that it is reasonable in the
circumstances to direct that information be provided
and must have consulted the
Advisory Council for the CDC about the proposed
A direction cannot be
issued to an Australian government entity (including State and Territory
entities), an international organisation,
or any person employed or engaged by
such bodies.
1.52 Subclauses 44(3) and 46(3) provide that requests and directions to
provide information respectively have effect despite any other
written law of
the Commonwealth or a State or Territory, and any unwritten law of the
Commonwealth or a State or Territory (subject
only to designated secrecy laws).
Additionally, the provisions in Division 3 of Part 4 authorising the collection,
use, or disclosure
of information in accordance with a data sharing declaration
would operate on the same basis – prevailing over any other written
unwritten law of the Commonwealth or a State or Territory, subject only to
designated secrecy laws.
1.53 Bills which enable the collection, use or disclosure of personal
information may trespass on an individual’s right to privacy.
Where a bill
contains provisions for the collection, use, or disclosure of personal
information, the committee expects the explanatory
memorandum to the bill to
address why it is appropriate for the bill to provide for the collection of
personal information; and what
safeguards are in place to protect the personal
information, and whether these are set out in law or in policy (including
1.54 In relation to subclause 44(3), the explanatory memorandum states:
Paragraphs 44(3)(a) and 44(3)(b) allow for compliance with the request or
agreement despite any other written law of the Commonwealth
or a State or
Territory, whether enacted before or after the commencement of the Bill; and any
unwritten law (common law) of the
Commonwealth or a State or
1.55 The explanatory memorandum provides a similar justification for
subclause 46(3).
1.56 The committee acknowledges that confidentiality and secrecy offences as
well as privacy legislation may foreseeably prevent or
inhibit an entity in
complying with a request or direction. The committee understands that
‘unwritten law’ refers to
the common law, however, it is not equally
clear to the committee that common law principles or immunities at Commonwealth
and Territory level would hinder the provision of information to the
Director-General.
1.57 For example, the common law privilege against self-incrimination would
not appear to prevent the voluntary provision of specified
information in
response to a request under clause 43. Further, because subclause 46(3) of the
bill does not abrogate this common
law privilege by express words, it is not
clear to the committee which unwritten laws (if any) could prevent compliance
with a direction
such as would justify their being overridden. In a similar
vein, it is also noted that clause 79 of the bill also confirms that the
would not affect the law relating to legal professional privilege.
1.58 In this respect, the committee considers that the explanatory memorandum
does not sufficiently clarify which written or unwritten
laws would be displaced
by the exercise of the Director-General’s powers. As doing so may unduly
trespass on personal rights
and obligations, such as privacy, the committee
queries whether an addendum to the explanatory memorandum could be provided by
of clarification.
1.59 The committee notes, however, that the exercise of the
Director-General’s powers to request or compel information is conditioned
on their satisfaction of the criteria set out in subclauses 43(3) and 45(4) as
discussed above. The power of the Director-General
to compel information is also
subject to external merits review by the Administrative Review Tribunal
however decisions to use
or disclose information in accordance with the broader range of authorisations
under Division 3 of
in the bill are not.
1.60 The committee considers that, generally, administrative decisions that
will, or are likely to, affect the interests of a person
should be subject to
independent merits review unless a sound justification is provided by reference
to the Administrative Review
Council's guidance document,
What decisions
should be subject to merits review?
It appears that decisions to use or
disclose information authorised for various purposes under Division 3 of
of the bill would, or are at least likely to, affect individual interests,
primarily personal privacy. In this instance, the explanatory
memorandum does
not address whether any consideration has been given to whether it would be
appropriate that decisions to use or
disclose information in accordance with the
authorisations under Division 3 of
of the bill be subject to merits
review by the ART. The committee’s examination of the bill would
accordingly benefit from
further information on this matter.
1.61 The committee requests that an addendum to the explanatory memorandum
containing additional justification for why it is necessary
to override any
written and unwritten law of the Commonwealth or a State or Territory with
respect to the operation of information-gathering
powers and authorisations in
Clauses 43 to 47 and of the bill be tabled in Parliament as soon as practicable,
noting the importance
of these explanatory materials as a point of access to
understanding the law and, if needed, as extrinsic material to assist with
interpretation.
1.62 The committee otherwise draws its scrutiny concerns to the attention
of senators and leaves to the Senate as a whole the appropriateness
overriding any written and unwritten law of the Commonwealth or a State or
Territory with respect to the operation of information-gathering
authorisations under
of the bill.
1.63 The committee requests the minister’s
advice as to the characteristics of decisions to use or disclose information on
basis of any authorisations in Division 3 of
of the bill which
justify the omission of merits review, by reference to the Administrative Review
Council’s guide
What decisions should be subject to merit
1.64 Subclauses 51(2) and 52(2) authorise a person to disclose
‘relevant information’ to an ‘entrusted person’
course of, or for the purpose of, performing a function or duty or exercising a
power in connection with the bill or other
legislation
or assisting another
person to do so, or the
Biosecurity Act 2015
(Biosecurity Act)
respectively. Relevant information is defined in clause 5 of the bill and
includes protected information which encompasses
personal information. Clause 5
also defines ‘entrusted persons’, which include the Minister, the
Director-General, Advisory
Council members, APS employees of the CDC or relevant
department (and persons supporting these bodies).
1.65 Disclosures of protected information to persons who do not satisfy the
definition of ‘entrusted person’ are subject
to additional
requirements, including that the discloser be satisfied that disclosing the
information is necessary for their function,
duty or exercise of a power; that
only the minimum amount of protected information necessary for that purpose is
disclosed, and that
the disclosure is only made to those recipients as are
necessary for that purpose.
1.66 Although the explanatory memorandum acknowledges in several places that
a greater degree of consideration is required for disclosures
to people other
than entrusted persons, it states only, in the context of the authorisation to
disclose information for the purposes
of the Biosecurity Act, that:
Limitations on disclosure of protected information are established under
subclauses 52(2) and 52(3). Where a disclosure is made to
an entrusted person
(excluding persons employed or engaged by designated data service providers), an
APS employee of the Agriculture
Department, or a person employed or engaged by
the Commonwealth to provide services to the Commonwealth in connection with the
Agriculture
Department, no limitations on disclosure of protected information
are imposed. The intent is to streamline sharing of information
between persons
with duties related to administration of the Biosecurity Act in support of the
Australian CDC’s One Health
objectives.
1.67 In this respect, the committee does not consider that the explanatory
memorandum provides adequate information to justify the
lesser level of privacy
safeguards applicable to disclosures to entrusted persons. In particular, it is
not clear to the committee
why it would be inappropriate for the bill to require
that entrusted persons (and others who may be prescribed by ministerial rules)
must also consider the necessity of the disclosure, the minimisation of any
information provided, and essential recipients as set
out in subclauses 52(2)
1.68 The committee requests that an addendum to the explanatory memorandum
containing a justification for excluding disclosures to
entrusted persons from
the additional requirements in subclauses 52(2) and 52(3) be tabled in
Parliament as soon as practicable,
noting the importance of these explanatory
materials as a point of access to understanding the law and, if needed, as
extrinsic material
to assist with
interpretation.
1.69 The committee otherwise draws its scrutiny concerns to the attention
of senators and leaves to the Senate as a whole the appropriateness
of excluding
disclosures to entrusted persons from the additional requirements in subclauses
52(2) and 52(3).
1.70 Clause 53 of the bill would authorise the CDC Director-General to
disclose ‘relevant information’, defined in clause
5 of the bill. To
the extent this category includes protected information (including personal
information), subclause 53(2) would
only authorise the Director-General to
disclose it where they certify that it is in the public interest to do so and
the purpose
of the disclosure could not be achieved without disclosing the
protected information. Ministerial rules may set out guidelines governing
exercise of the Director-General’s discretion to issue certificates for
the purposes of this authorisation to disclose
information.
1.71 The explanatory memorandum states that:
This authorisation provides a basis for disclosing protected information in a
manner that is lawful and not arbitrary, and where it
is reasonable, necessary
and proportionate to achieve a legitimate objective. The requirement to certify
that the public interest
disclosure purpose could not otherwise be achieved
establishes a high threshold for the Director-General’s discretion to use
this authorisation as it necessitates that all other avenues for lawful
disclosure are considered prior to exercising this authorisation.
The intent of this authorisation is to enable disclosure of information in
circumstances not otherwise envisaged by the authorisation
framework in the Bill
and other laws under which the Australian CDC has statutory roles to enable
information held by the Australian
CDC to be disclosed as necessary to mitigate
or contain a threat to public health. It is not generally intended that this
authorisation
be used in a manner that would directly identify an individual or
other type of entity. Rather, this authorisation allows for disclosures
instances where attribute disclosure may be unavoidable, such as in cases of
disease incursions affecting a small number of individuals
or disease clusters
in small geographic areas.
1.72 The committee notes that the explanatory materials characterise this
provision as enabling disclosure of information in circumstances
that are not
otherwise envisaged by the authorisation framework in Division 3 of Part 4 of
the bill and other related laws under
which the CDC would have functions. It
does not appear, however, that such a constraint is present on the face of the
bill. While
the committee acknowledges the intention stated in the explanatory
memorandum that this authorisation would not generally be used
in a manner that
directly identifies an individual or other type of entity, such disclosures may
still infringe individual privacy
1.73 Given the presence of more tailored safeguards in other authorisations
– which, for example, require the discloser to be
satisfied that the
disclosure is necessary, proportionate, and directed only to essential
recipients – the committee is concerned
that this proposed authorisation
may be favoured over those more appropriate mechanisms. This concern would be
heightened should
the minister not make any guidelines in relation to the
issuing of public certificates.
1.74 In light of the above, the committee requests the minister’s
advice as to:
why it is necessary and appropriate that the bill include a
residual authorisation for the Director-General to disclose information
public interest; and
whether and how the Director-General would be required under
clause 53 to be satisfied that all other avenues for lawful disclosure,
including under other authorisations set out in the bill, have been considered
prior to authorising disclosure.
Reversal of the evidential burden of
1.75 Subclauses 71(1) to 71(3) establish offences for the improper use or
disclosure of protected information by ‘entrusted
persons’ (e.g. the
Minister, Director-General, an APS employee in the Department of Health,
designated data service provider
staff etc.), where that information has been
obtained or generated in the course of performing their functions or through
disclosures
made under the bill. These offences carry maximum penalties of
imprisonment for 2 years or 120 penalty units or both.
1.76 Subclause 71(4) applies an equivalent offence to individuals engaged by
prescribed public health entities outside the Commonwealth,
who are not
entrusted persons. This offence carries a lesser maximum penalty of imprisonment
for 1 year or 60 penalty units or both.
1.77 Subclauses 71(5) and 71(6) set out offence-specific defences, stating
that the offences do not apply where:
• the person used or disclosed the information in good faith in the
purported performance of functions or exercise of powers
under specified
legislation, or while assisting another person in doing
• the use or disclosure is required or authorised by the bill, another
Commonwealth law, or a prescribed State or Territory
1.78 A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to both
1.79 At common law, it is ordinarily the duty of
the prosecution to prove all elements of an offence. This is an important aspect
of the right to be presumed innocent until proven guilty. Provisions that
reverse the burden of proof and require a defendant to
disprove, or raise
evidence to disprove, one or more elements of an offence, interferes with this
common law right.
1.80 While in this instance the defendant bears an evidential burden
(requiring the defendant to raise evidence about the matter),
rather than a
legal burden (requiring the defendant to positively prove the matter), the
committee expects any such reversal of the
evidential burden of proof to be
justified. While acknowledged, the reversals of the evidential burden of proof
in clause 71 have
not been justified in the explanatory materials.
1.81 In this case, it is not apparent that all of the matters are matters
within the defendant's knowledge, or that it would be
significantly more difficult or costly for the prosecution to establish the
matters than for the defendant to establish them. These may be matters more
appropriate to be included as an element of the offence.
1.82 As the explanatory materials do not address this issue, the committee
requests the minister's advice as to why it is proposed
to use offence-specific
defences (which reverse the evidential burden of proof) in this instance. The
committee's consideration of
the appropriateness of a provision which reverses
the burden of proof is assisted if it explicitly addresses relevant principles
as set out in the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth
No-invalidity
1.83 Subclause 12(1) of the bill expressly declares Parliament’s
intention that the CDC Director-General must have regard to
certain objectives
in the performance of their functions. These objectives are:
• the need to base public health advice on data and other forms of
• the need for public trust in public health advice;
• the need for transparency in the performance of these functions;
• the impacts of risks to public health; and
• the impacts of responses to risks to public health, on particular
communities and population
1.84 Subclause 12(2) provides that this obligation does not create rights or
duties that are enforceable by proceedings in a court
or tribunal. Subclause
12(3) provides that a failure to comply with the obligation in subsection (1)
does not affect the validity
of anything done in the performance of the
Director-General’s functions and is not a ground for the review of any
1.85 A legislative provision that indicates that an act done or a decision
made in breach of a particular statutory requirement or
other administrative law
norm does not result in the invalidity of that act or decision, may be described
as a 'no-invalidity' clause.
There are significant scrutiny concerns with
no-invalidity clauses, as these clauses may limit the practical efficacy of
review to provide a remedy for legal errors. For example, as the
conclusion that a decision is not invalid means that the decision-maker
power (i.e. jurisdiction) to make it, review of the decision on the grounds of
The result is that some of the
standard remedies for judicial review will not be available. Consequently, the
committee expects a
sound justification for the use of a no-invalidity clause to
be provided in the explanatory memorandum.
1.86 In relation to this no-invalidity clause, the explanatory memorandum
Subclause 12(3) uses a no-invalidity clause to limit judicial review on the
basis of the objectives. It makes it clear that a failure
to comply with the
listed objectives does not affect the validity of anything done in the
performance of the Director-General’s
functions and is not a ground for
the review or challenge of any decision. This subclause provides a limitation on
judicial review,
as it only prevents review being sought in relation to the
exercise of a function, on the basis that it was inconsistent with the
Director-General’s objectives. This is necessary because the objectives
are intended to be high-level guiding considerations,
which the Director General
must have regard to in the exercise of their functions. They are not intended to
be enforceable. The limitation
to judicial reviews is necessary and appropriate
to achieve this purpose.
1.87 It is not clear to the committee why the inclusion of the non-invalidity
clause in subclause 12(3) is considered necessary. The
committee notes, in
particular, the statement in the explanatory memorandum that the intention of
the objectives in subclause 12(1)
is to set high-level guidance, key priorities
and considerations for the CDC,
rather than enforceable rights or duties as is made explicit by subclause
The objectives set out in
paragraphs 12(1)(a) through (d) would therefore appear to function as general
matters to be considered;
with the Director-General to determine, in the
exercise of any function, what weight (if any) to afford to these matters in
with ordinary principles of administrative law.
1.88 As a court may not consider these high-level considerations sufficiently
material as to invalidate the Director-General’s
exercise of a function,
duty or power, it is not clear that the proposed non-invalidity clause provides
any necessary protection.
However, according to orthodox judicial review
principles, the nature of the obligation to consider these guiding
considerations
means that the court would not have any role in enforcing the
substance of those considerations. Rather, the scope of any court’s
examination would be merely concerned with whether or not the Director-General
considered those objectives, with questions of how
much weight should be placed
on each objective being left entirely to the discretion of the Director-General.
For this reason, the
no-invalidity clause appears to respond to a risk of review
that does not exist as a matter of law and, in doing so, does not fully
recognise the nature of an obligation to consider high-level guiding
objectives.
1.89 The committee draws its scrutiny concerns to the attention of
senators and leaves to the Senate as a whole the appropriateness
of providing
for a no-invalidity clause in subclause 12(3) of the bill.
Exemption from
disallowance
1.90 Clause 67 of the bill seeks to authorise the Director-General to make a
‘data sharing declaration’ in circumstances
where they are satisfied
that the making of a declaration is necessary to respond to the existence of a
severe and immediate, or
severe and unforeseen threat to public
1.91 A data sharing declaration must address certain matters relevant to the
exchange of information, including the kinds of information
to which it applies,
the entities that may collect, use, disclose and receive information and the
purposes for which that information
may be collected, used or disclosed. A
declaration made under subclause 67(1) may continue in force for up to 12 months
disallowance.
1.92 Disallowance is the primary means by which
the Parliament exercises control over the legislative power that it has
to the executive. Exempting an instrument from disallowance therefore
has significant implications for parliamentary scrutiny. In
June 2021, the
Senate acknowledged these implications and resolved that delegated legislation
should be subject to disallowance unless
exceptional circumstances can be shown
which would justify an exemption. In addition, the Senate resolved that any
claim that circumstances
justify such an exemption will be subject to rigorous
scrutiny, with the expectation that the claim will only be justified in rare
1.93 The Senate's resolution is consistent with concerns about the
inappropriate exemption of delegated legislation from disallowance
expressed by
this committee in its recent review of the Biosecurity
and by the Senate Standing
Committee for the Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation in its inquiry into the
exemption of delegated legislation
from parliamentary
1.94 In light of these comments and the resolution of the Senate, the
committee expects that any exemption of delegated legislation
from the usual
disallowance process should be fully justified in the explanatory memorandum.
This justification should include an
explanation of the exceptional
circumstances that are said to justify the exemption and how they apply to the
circumstances of the
provision in question.
1.95 In this instance the explanatory memorandum states that:
Subjecting declarations to disallowance could undermine the technical and
scientifically based advice of the Director-General and
impede timely public
health mitigation and containment activities. The declaration power is required
for timely data sharing to respond
to severe public health threats, which is of
essential national interest. The risk of disallowance may prevent the timely
of information and swift response to the threat due to the commercial
and legal uncertainty caused by disallowance, which may result
in exposing
entities to the risk that the declaration may later be disallowed and the use of
the information be unauthorised. Additionally,
disallowance could delay or
preclude the Australian CDC’s receipt of information required to provide
timely advice in a response
to a public health threat, and could therefore delay
or preclude necessary mitigation and response activities. As such, disallowance
of a data sharing declaration could lead to inadequate management of public
health threats and risks posed to human health, resulting
in material impacts on
the health and wellbeing of Australians.
Examples of other instruments not subject to disallowance include National
Emergency Declarations made under the
National Emergency Declaration Act
in response to emergencies that could cause nationally significant harm
in Australia. The declaration power at clause 67 is intended
to be used in
comparable circumstances to mitigate or contain a genuine threat to human
1.96 The committee acknowledges the three interrelated justifications
provided in the explanatory memorandum. Broadly, these are that
the risk of
disallowance could:
• cause commercial and legal uncertainty for entities about their
authorisation to collect, use or share information contemplated
declaration;
• compromise the effective management of public health threats by
frustrating the timely exchange of information required to
inform mitigation and
containment measures; and
• as a result, undermine the technical and scientifically based advice
of the CDC Director-General and management of public
health threats.
1.97 In relation to these justifications, the committee reiterates its view
that the significance of threats to public health or their
emergency nature is
not a sufficient justification for exempting an instrument from disallowance as
a matter of course. Should disallowance
of a particular instrument be likely to
lead to or elevate a particular threat or harm to Australian interests, this is
that the Parliament could take into account in its deliberations. This
is particularly likely given that parliamentarians are directly
accountable to
their electors in relation to how they exercise their law-making functions.
1.98 Further, as a general principle, the committee considers that
Parliament's oversight of Commonwealth law should be greater, not
lesser, when
the consequences of that law are significant. This is particularly so when the
law will impact on individual rights
or liberties as is the case in relation to
authorising the handling of information during public health emergencies that
may include
sensitive personal health information and data. The committee notes
that emergency-related instruments such as these are more likely
to impact upon
individual rights and liberties than instruments dealing with more 'routine'
regulatory matters.
1.99 In relation to the effect of the disallowance process on the timely
exchange of information, the committee reiterates its comments
disallowable status of an instrument does not prevent urgent action being taken.
In particular, the committee notes that
legislative instruments can commence
immediately after they are registered, and that the disallowance of an
instrument does not invalidate
actions that were taken prior to the time of
disallowance.
1.100 Finally, the committee also reiterates its comments that the mere fact
that a decision may be based on scientific and technical
considerations is not,
of itself, a sufficient justification for an exemption from the usual
disallowance process as a matter of
1.101 In light of the above, the committee
requests the minister's detailed advice as to:
why it is considered necessary and appropriate to provide that
data sharing declarations made under clause 67 are not subject to disallowance;
whether the bill could be amended to provide that data sharing
declarations are subject to disallowance to ensure that they are subject
appropriate parliamentary oversight.
This entry can be cited as:
Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills, Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025,
Scrutiny Digest 6 of 2025
; [2025] AUSStaCSBSD
Clauses 44–46. The
committee draws senators’ attention to these provisions pursuant to Senate
standing orders 24(1)(a)(i)
and 24(1)(a)(iii).
Clauses 43–49.
Subclause 43(1).
Paragraph 43(2)(b).
These are the
Biosecurity
National Health Security Act 2007
Occupational Respiratory Disease Registry Act 2023
Subclause 45(4).
Subclause 45(5).
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Administrative Review
decisions should be subject to merit review?
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Clause 71. The committee
draws senators’ attention to these provisions pursuant to Senate standing
order 24(1)(a)(i).
These are the
Health Security Act 2007
National Occupational Respiratory
Disease Registry Act 2023
. Clause 52 applies with respect to disclosures for
Biosecurity Act 2015
Explanatory memorandum, p.
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Clause 53. The committee
draws senators’ attention to this provision pursuant to Senate standing
order 24(1)(a)(i).
Subclause 53(5).
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Clause 71. The committee
draws senators’ attention to these provisions pursuant to Senate standing
order 24(1)(a)(i).
Subclause 71(5).
Subclause 71(6).
Subsection 13.3(3) of the
Criminal Code
provides that a defendant who wishes to rely on any
exception, exemption, excuse, qualification or justification bears an evidential
burden in relation to that matter.
Attorney-General's
Department,
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences, Infringement Notices and Enforcement
, September 2011, pp 50–52.
Subclause 12(3). The
committee draws senators’ attention to this provision pursuant to Senate
standing order 24(1)(a)(iii).
Subclause 12(1).
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Subclause 12(2).
Subclauses 67(1)–(2);
67(6). The committee draws senators’ attention to this provision pursuant
to Senate standing order
24(1)(a)(iv).
Subclause 67(1).
Subclause 67(6) and clause
Senate resolution 53B. See
Journals of the Senate
, No. 101, 16 June 2021, pp. 3581–3582.
See Chapter 4 of Senate
Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills,
of exemption from disallowance provisions in the Biosecurity Act 2015: Scrutiny
Digest 7 of 2021
(12 May 2021), pp. 33–44; and
Digest 1 of 2022
(4 February 2022), pp. 76–86.
Senate Standing Committee
for the Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation,
into the exemption of delegated legislation from parliamentary oversight:
Interim report
(December 2020); and
into the exemption of delegated legislation from parliamentary oversight: Final
(March 2021).
Explanatory memorandum, pp.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (181 KB)
PDF format (159 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter