URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBSD/2025/68.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:14:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Criminal Code Amendment (State Sponsors of Terrorism) Bill 2025 - Initial Scrutiny [2025] AUSStaCSBSD 68 (29 October 2025)
Criminal Code Amendment (State Sponsors of Terrorism) Bill 202589
Undue trespass on personal rights and liberties
Coercive powers
Broad discretionary powers90
Freedom of expression
Undue trespass on personal rights and liberties114
Reversal of the evidential burden of proof122
Reversal of the legal burden of proof127
Delegated legislation modifying or exempting primary legislation131
Criminal Code Amendment
(State Sponsors of Terrorism) Bill
This bill seeks to amend the
Criminal Code Act 1995
to enable the
Commonwealth to list foreign state entities as state sponsors of terrorism;
introduces new criminal offences relating
to state sponsors of terrorism; and
makes consequential amendments to various Acts in relation to state terrorist
acts, including
extending the application of Part 5.3 of the Criminal Code to
the new offences.
Attorney-General
House of Representatives on 8 October 2025
Bill status
Before the House of Representatives
Undue trespass on personal rights and liberties
Broad discretionary
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Criminal Code)
presently allow for the listing of foreign states, or state entities, as
terrorist organisations.
1 of the bill seeks to insert proposed Part 5.3A in the Criminal Code in
relation to state sponsors of terrorism. The bill
would authorise the
Governor-General to list, by regulation, a ‘foreign state entity’
(including a foreign national or
subnational government or authority) as a
‘state sponsor of terrorism’.
1.117 As a precondition to the making of such regulations, the Australian
Federal Police (AFP) minister must be satisfied on reasonable
grounds that the
foreign state entity, or a member of that entity, has directly or indirectly
engaged in, prepared, planned, assisted
or fostered the doing of a terrorist act
that was targeted at Australia, or has advocated the doing of a terrorist act
that was targeted
at Australia (whether or not the terrorist act
The AFP minister must
also have obtained the Foreign Affairs minister’s written agreement to the
entity being specified as
a state sponsor of terrorism and have arranged for the
Leader of the Opposition in the House of Representatives to be briefed in
relation to the proposed
regulation.
1.118 The bill also seeks to introduce new offences applicable to
‘state terrorist acts’
and persons who would seek to assist or support such
Further, Schedule 2 of the
bill would amend Part 5.3 of the Criminal Code to provide that various measures,
including control orders,
preventative detention orders and post sentence
orders, may be applied to state sponsors of terrorism and state terrorist acts.
Extension of broad coercive powers to ‘state terrorist
1.119 Items 1 to 6 of Schedule 2 of the bill would incorporate references to
‘state terrorist acts’ in Part 5.3 of the
Criminal Code, which would
authorise the application of the following measures to acts involving a state
sponsor of terrorism:
• the control order regime, which allows courts to impose conditions on
a person without charge, restricting their movement,
associations or activities
in the community for up to 12
• the preventative detention order regime, which authorises the
detention of a person in custody for up to 48 hours if it is
suspected, on
reasonable grounds, that they are preparing to engage in a terrorist
• post-sentence orders (being continuing detention orders and extended
supervision orders), which allow a terrorist offender
who poses an unacceptable
risk of committing terrorist offences to continue to be held in detention after
the conclusion of their
sentence or released subject to supervision
conditions.
1.120 The committee's terms of reference require it to consider whether
provisions of a bill trespass unduly on personal rights and
Consistent with this
mandate, the committee has previously raised scrutiny concerns regarding these
broad coercive powers, which
the committee has repeatedly recognised are
extraordinary in nature. The committee has identified multiple scrutiny concerns
in relation
to control orders
and preventative detention
along with various
other aspects of the measures proposed now to be applied to state sponsored
1.121 That this bill proposes to broaden the application of these measures
therefore raises the same underlying scrutiny concerns,
which have not been
revisited in the explanatory materials. These concerns are heightened to the
extent they were initially, in part,
justified as temporary measures. In light
of the committee’s longstanding view that such regimes constitute
extraordinary powers,
the committee considers any extension of the scope of
conduct and offences to which they may apply requires close scrutiny.
1.122 In relation to the current bill, the explanatory memorandum indicates
that it is essential to extend these measures to state
terrorist acts to enable
equivalent powers for law enforcement to respond to and prevent state terrorist
acts and terrorist acts
This is a preventative mechanism available to law enforcement to protect the
community from terrorist acts.
In recognition of the fact that the harm that could eventuate from a state
terrorist act is equivalent to a terrorist act, it is essential
enforcement have equivalent powers at their disposal to respond to and prevent a
state terrorist act in the same manner
as a terrorist
1.123 While acknowledging the commensurate risk of significant harm posed by
state sponsored terrorism and equal need for effective
counter-terrorism
responses in this context, the committee reiterates that aspects of these
measures substantially depart from traditional
approaches to the criminal law
and the presumption of innocence, particularly in giving coercive powers to
detain and restrain persons
who may not have been convicted of, or even charged
with, a criminal offence.
Consequential amendments
1.124 Schedule 3 of the bill proposes consequential amendments to various
legislation to apply powers under these Acts to the new
offences in Part 5.3A.
Specifically, the bill seeks to amend:
Australian Citizenship Act 2007
to permit a court to
revoke the Australian citizenship of a person who is convicted of a new
offence (which would be captured in the amended definition of
‘serious offence’ for the purposes of citizenship cessation
• the definition of ‘politically motivated violence’ in the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
, which would serve
to extend the compulsory questioning powers to the new
Counter-Terrorism (Temporary Exclusion Orders) Act 2019
apply the temporary exclusion order scheme to state terrorist acts and state
sponsors of terrorism;
Crimes Act 1914
to include ‘a state terrorist
act’ within the definition of a terrorist
The presumption against
bail under that Act would consequently apply to the proposed
• existing offences in the Criminal Code, including offences of
advocating the doing of a terrorist act; publicly displaying
a prohibited
symbol; abhorrent violent conduct and violent extremist material, to apply them
to a state terrorist act or a state
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
to permit law enforcement
officers to apply to a court for emergency authorisations for the use of a
surveillance device when investigating
the proposed
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
capture the proposed offences within the definition of ‘serious
offence’, which enable agencies to apply to a court
for warrants
authorising interception of telecommunications and/or access to stored
communications for the investigation of
offences in respect of control
orders and supervision orders (both interim and
1.125 The committee has also previously raised scrutiny concerns, including
the potential for undue trespass on personal rights and
liberties, in relation
to several of these measures (or the broader frameworks that underpin their
operation).
1.126 As this bill expands the operation of measures, about which the
committee has expressed serious concerns, the committee draws
these concerns to
the attention of senators and leaves to the Senate as a whole the
appropriateness of doing so.
Undue trespass on personal rights
and liberties
1.127 This bill seeks to expand the definition of prohibited terrorist
organisation symbols in subsection 80.2E(3) of the Criminal
Code to capture
symbols used by a state sponsor of terrorism, or members of a state sponsor of
terrorism, to identify the state sponsor
of terrorism or any of its
This would, in turn,
expand the scope of conduct which would be considered an offence under sections
80.2HA and 80.2JA of the Criminal
Code; that is, causing a prohibited symbol to
be displayed in a public place or trading in goods that depict or contain a
symbol respectively. The maximum penalty for an offence under section
80.2HA is 5 years imprisonment, while the maximum penalty under
80.2JA is 12 months imprisonment.
1.128 The committee notes at the outset, as it did during its earlier
examination of these offences in
Scrutiny Digest 9 of 2023
offences seek to restrict forms of expression and, as such, may unduly trespass
on freedom of expression. In particular,
the committee previously expressed
scrutiny concerns regarding these offences with respect to a lack of clarity as
to exactly which
symbols may be prohibited in practice given these provisions do
not define or specify prohibited
The committee has
previously noted that such ambiguity may cause difficulties for law enforcement
bodies that are empowered to enforce
the offences or otherwise issue directions
under other parts of the Criminal
1.129 The explanatory materials relevantly provide:
362. Paragraph 80.2E(3)(c) is intended to capture symbols that a state
sponsor of terrorism, or its members, use to identify the state
terrorism, or a part of it. It is intended to capture symbols that are
inextricably linked with a state sponsor of terrorism,
being an entity that has
engaged in, supported or advocated, terrorist acts targeted at Australia.
363. Depending on the structure of the state sponsor of terrorism, specific
symbols may be used to identify discrete parts of the
entity, such as a military
wing, which differ from the symbol(s) used to identify the organisation as a
whole. The definition ensure
that symbols used to identify the foreign state
entity as a whole, or a part of the foreign state entity, are captured by the
definition.
364. The symbol may be used to identify a state sponsor of terrorism by the
state sponsor itself or by its members, in a range of
media, contexts and
formats including but not limited to promotional or recruitment material,
telecommunication exchanges between
members, public statements or propaganda. It
is intended that the term ‘symbol’ be interpreted as a visual
representation,
for example, an image, emblem or icon.
365. The legislation does not specify particular symbols of state sponsors of
terrorism for the purpose of the definition in subsection
80.2E(3). This is to
ensure that the offences cannot be easily circumvented by the state sponsor of
terrorism changing their symbol
to avoid criminality.
366. Paragraph 80.2E(3)(d) is intended to recognise that there may be some
variations in the ways in which state sponsor of terrorism
symbols are depicted.
The legislation is not intended to be so prescriptive in defining these symbols
as to exclude variations from
being captured by the provisions, where they would
be recognised by the public as being symbols used by a state sponsor of
This could include any figure, drawing, symbol, pattern or design
substantially similar to a state sponsor of terrorism symbol and
being reasonably recognised as a modified version of one of those symbols. This
includes circumstances in which an individual
could seek to avoid criminal
liability under subdivision CA of Division 80 by slightly altering a prohibited
terrorist organisation
symbol before engaging in conduct that would be otherwise
prohibited.
1.130 The explanatory memorandum indicates that prescribing particular
symbols associated with state sponsors of terrorism is not
appropriate as doing so would enable such entities to evade criminal liability
by changing their symbol. Although the
committee acknowledges this explanation,
it considers that the lack of clear guidance as to which symbols are prohibited
it difficult for a person to understand whether certain conduct would
constitute an offence and hamper enforcement. For example,
a person may employ
commonly used symbols that carry obscure or coded meanings in reference to a
state sponsor of terrorism. In such
circumstances, where the relevant symbol
carries multiple or layered meanings, and the offence provisions do not clearly
the symbols that may attract criminal liability, it is unclear to the
committee how essential elements of this offence as set out
in subsections
80.2HA(3), (4), or (7) could be established objectively. Broadly, these are that
the public display of the symbol
would be reasonably regarded as advocating or
inciting hatred against a racial, religious or cultural
1.131 Accordingly, the uncertainty, breadth and consequences of these
offences may impact on the predictability and guidance provided
by the law,
undermining fundamental rule of law principles. The committee’s concerns
are further heightened where, as is the
case here, the offences in subsections
80.2H and 80.2HA of the Criminal Code are subject to mandatory minimum terms of
imprisonment
as set out in items 1A and 1B in the table at
section 16AAA
Crimes Act 1914
. Given the substantial penalties that would apply to the
expanded offences, the committee notes that the matters outlined ought to
been set out with greater specificity.
1.132 The committee reiterates its concern regarding mandatory minimum
sentences as previously discussed in the context of these
that such minimums
fetter judicial discretion and may result in the imposition of sentences of
imprisonment that are disproportionate
to the offence in the circumstances.
Typically, offences will carry maximum penalties determined by Parliament,
leaving to the courts
the discretion to impose a sentence up to that maximum.
Courts must consider whether a particular case meets the threshold for imposing
a term of incarceration and what the appropriate term is by taking into account
and balancing the purposes and principles of sentencing
and how they apply to
the circumstances of the offending and the accused.
1.133 Mandatory minimum sentences constrain the exercise of judicial
discretion and deprive a court of the ability to adequately consider
culpability of a particular defendant. At common law, it is understood that the
purpose of a criminal sentence is that it reflects
the objective seriousness of
the offence committed and that there must be a reasonable proportionality to the
circumstances of the
As mandatory sentences fail to account for individual circumstances, this could
lead to detention that is disproportionate and arbitrary.
1.134 The committee draws its scrutiny concerns to the attention of
senators and leaves to the Senate as a whole the appropriateness
expansion of the offences with regard to the public display and trading of
prohibited terrorist organisation symbols to state
sponsors of
Reversal of the evidential burden of
1.135 A number of offences proposed in Schedule 1, item 1 of the bill contain
offence-specific defences in relation to which the defendant
would bear an
evidential burden of proof. These include:
• proposed section 111.4 – an offence of possessing things
connected with state terrorist acts with a maximum penalty
of 15 years
imprisonment for doing so knowingly and 10 years imprisonment where
• proposed section 111.5 – an offence of collecting or making
documents likely to facilitate state terrorist acts with
a maximum penalty of 15
years imprisonment for doing so knowingly and 10 years imprisonment where
• proposed section 111.8 – an offence of possessing things
connected with terrorist acts with a maximum penalty of 15
years imprisonment
for doing so knowingly and 10 years imprisonment where reckless; and
• proposed section 111.9 – an offence of collecting or making
documents likely to facilitate terrorist acts with a maximum
penalty of 15 years
imprisonment for doing so knowingly and 10 years imprisonment where
1.136 Each of these offences provide exceptions (offence-specific defences)
to the relevant offence, stating that the offence does
not apply where the
relevant action was not intended to facilitate preparation for, the engagement
of an entity in, or assistance
in a state terrorist
1.137 Proposed sections 112.4 and 112.7 also seek to reverse the evidential
burden of proof in relation to the following offences:
• proposed section 112.4 – an offence of providing, receiving or
participating in training involving a state sponsor of
terrorism with a maximum
penalty of 25 years imprisonment; and
• proposed section 112.7 – an offence of associating with state
sponsors of terrorism with a maximum penalty of 3 years
imprisonment.
1.138 Proposed subsections 112.4(4) and 112.7(4) provide offence-specific
defences stating that these offences do not apply unless
the person is reckless
as to the fact that the entity they engaged with is a state sponsor of
terrorism. Proposed subsection 112.7(5)
also provides, in relation to the
offence of associating with a state sponsor of terrorism, a number of exceptions
outlining acceptable
relationships or circumstances in which a person may
associate with a person who is a member of, or who promotes the activities of,
state sponsor of terrorism.
Further, proposed subsection 112.7(6) also provides that the offence does not
apply to the extent that it infringes on any constitutional
doctrine of implied
freedom of political communication.
1.139 A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to these
1.140 At common law, it is ordinarily the duty of the prosecution to prove
all elements of an offence. This is an important aspect
of the right to be
presumed innocent until proven guilty. Provisions that reverse the burden of
proof and require a defendant to
disprove, or raise evidence to disprove, one or
more elements of an offence, interferes with this common law right.
1.141 While, in these instances, the defendant bears an evidential burden
(requiring the defendant to raise evidence about the matter),
rather than a
legal burden (requiring the defendant to positively prove the matter), the
committee expects any such reversal of the
evidential burden of proof to be
justified. The reversals of the evidential burden of proof in proposed
subsections 111.4(5), 111.5(5),
111.8(5), 111.9(5), 112.4(4), 112.7(4), and
112.7(6) have not been addressed in the explanatory materials.
1.142 The explanatory memorandum does contain an explanation in relation to
proposed subsection
201. The defendant would bear the evidentiary burden in relation to these
defences. The Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences sets
out circumstances in
which an offence- specific defence is appropriate. These include where it would
be significantly more difficult
and costly for the prosecution to disprove than
for the defendant to establish the matter. The Guide also provides such defences
may be appropriate where the matter is peculiarly within the knowledge of the
202. In relation to paragraph 112.7(5)(a), the fact that a person is a close
family member, and the nature of the engagement related
to a matter of family or
domestic concern would be significantly more difficult and costly for the
prosecution to disprove than for
the defendant to establish the matter. This is
particularly so when the person’s cultural background is taken into
203. In relation to paragraph 112.7(5)(b), the nature of, and any
interactions that occur as part of, religious worship are private
matters that
are not readily accessible to the public. Therefore, it would be far easier and
less costly for the defendant to establish
these matters as it is peculiarly
within their knowledge.
204. In relation to paragraph 112.7(5)(c), the purpose of the provision of
the aid is peculiarly within the knowledge of the defendant,
and significantly
more costly and difficult for the prosecution to disprove.
205. In relation to paragraph 112.7(5)(d), due to protections associated with
legal professional privilege, the defendant is more
appropriately placed to
discharge the evidential burden in relation to the fact of, and nature of, their
engagement with their client.
1.143 The committee acknowledges that the explanatory memorandum provides
some explanation in respect of the defences in proposed
subsection 112.7(5) and
the need for the reversal of the burden. However, as the justification provided
is high level and general
in nature, it is not apparent that such matters are
peculiarly within the defendant's knowledge, or that it would be significantly
more difficult or costly for the prosecution to establish the matters than for
the defendant to establish them.
1.144 As the explanatory materials do not adequately address this issue,
the committee requests that an addendum to the explanatory
memorandum containing
a more detailed justification as to why it is proposed to use the
offence-specific defences (which reverse
the evidential burden of proof)in
proposed subsections 111.4(5), 111.5(5), 111.8(5), 111.9(5), 112.4(4), and
112.7(4) to 112.7(6)
be tabled in Parliament as soon as practicable, noting the
importance of these explanatory materials as a point of access to understanding
the law and, if needed, as extrinsic material to assist with
interpretation.
1.145 The committee otherwise draws its scrutiny concerns to the attention
of senators and leaves to the Senate as a whole the appropriateness
of offence-specific defences reversing the evidential burden of proof in the
proposed provisions.
Reversal of the legal burden of
1.146 Schedule 1, item 1, proposed section 112.2 would establish an offence
of intentionally and knowingly being a member of a foreign
state entity that is
a state sponsor of terrorism, which carries a maximum penalty of 10 years
imprisonment. Proposed subsection
112.2(2) proposes introducing a defence to
this offence, to provide that the offence of intentionally being a member of a
state entity that the person knows to be a state sponsor of terrorism
does not apply where the person proves that they took all reasonable
cease to be a member of the entity as soon as practicable after they knew the
entity was a state sponsor of terrorism.
1.147 Further, schedule 1, item 1, proposed section 112.5(1) and (2) would
create offences of intentionally receiving, collecting
or making available funds
from, for, or to a state sponsor of terrorism – knowingly or recklessly
– which carry a maximum
penalty of 25 imprisonment and 15 years
imprisonment respectively. Proposed section 112.5(4) proposes introducing a
defence to provide
that neither offence applies in relation to the
person’s receipt of funds from the foreign state entity where the person
that they received the funds solely for the purpose of providing:
• legal representation for a person in proceedings relating to the
Division containing the offence; or
• legal advice or legal representation in connection with the question
of whether the entity is a state sponsor of terrorism;
• assistance to the entity for it to comply with a law of the
Commonwealth or a State or Territory.
1.148 For each offence, a legal burden of proof is proposed to be placed on
the defendant, ensuring that the defendant would need
to prove, on the balance
of probabilities, that they took all reasonable steps to cease being a member or
that they received funds
from the foreign state entity for the purposes
specified above.
1.149 At common law, it is ordinarily the duty of the prosecution to prove
all elements of an offence. This is an important aspect
of the right to be
presumed innocent until proven guilty. Provisions that reverse the burden of
proof and require a defendant to
disprove one or more elements of an offence,
interfere with this common law right. As the reversal of the burden of proof
the right to be presumed innocent until proven guilty, the committee
expects there to be a full justification each time the burden
is reversed, with
the rights of people affected being the paramount consideration.
1.150 With respect to proposed section 112.2(2), the explanatory memorandum
for the bill relevantly states:
Subsection 112.2(2) provides that the offence does not apply if the person
proves that, as soon as practicable after learning the
entity was a state
sponsor of terrorism, they took all reasonable steps to cease to be a member of
the entity. The defendant would
bear the evidentiary burden in relation to this
exception. This is appropriate as when the person learnt of the status of the
state entity and the subsequent steps taken by the individual would be
peculiarly within the knowledge of the defendant and significantly
more costly
and difficult for the prosecution to
1.151 The explanatory memorandum states in relation to proposed section 112.5
The defendant would bear the evidentiary burden in respect of these
1.152 The committee notes that the explanatory memorandum appears to
incorrectly suggest that these provisions impose an evidential
burden on the
defendant, which does not accurately state the effect of the bill or reflect the
explanatory note following each subsection.
Although the explanatory memorandum
presents a justification for reversing the evidential burden of proof in the
context of proposed
section 112.2, the committee does not consider that this
justification adequately establishes why it is necessary to reverse the
burden of proof, noting the impact of doing so on the presumption of innocence.
In the absence of such justification, the committee
is concerned that the
proposed reversal of the legal burden is likely to unduly infringe on the
personal rights and liberties of
individuals.
1.153 The committee requests that an addendum to the explanatory
memorandum containing a justification for the reversal of the legal
proof in proposed subsections 112.2(2) and 112.5(4) be tabled in Parliament as
soon as practicable, noting the importance
of these explanatory materials as a
point of access to understanding the law and, if needed, as extrinsic material
to assist with
interpretation.
Delegated legislation modifying or exempting primary
legislation
1.154 Item 1 of Schedule 1, proposed section 110.9 seeks to provide that
regulations may modify the operation of proposed
such that provisions
of the Part would not apply to a matter that is dealt with by a law of a State
or Territory as specified in
those regulations, or to ensure no inconsistency
arises with a specified State or Territory Law. The regulations could also
the application of the Part to specified persons, bodies, or
circumstances.
1.155 Provisions enabling delegated legislation to modify the operation of
primary legislation are akin to Henry VIII clauses, which
authorise delegated
legislation to make substantive amendments to primary legislation (generally the
relevant parent statute). The
committee has significant scrutiny concerns with
Henry VIII-type clauses, as such clauses impact on the level of parliamentary
and may subvert the appropriate relationship between the Parliament and
the Executive. Consequently, the committee expects a sound
justification to be
included in the explanatory memorandum for the use of any clauses that allow
delegated legislation to modify
the operation of primary legislation.
1.156 The committee notes that the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC),
Review of the Legislative Framework for Corporations and Financial
Services Regulation
out some helpful guidance as to when delegated legislation should be permitted
to override or modify the operation of an Act.
It states that it should only be
done in exceptional circumstances where there is a strong need or benefit in
doing so, the empowering
provision is as circumscribed as possible, and there
are sufficient safeguards in place to reflect the significance of the power.
ALRC also set out some criteria in relation to when it may be appropriate to
delegate a power of exclusion or
1.157 The committee will also have concerns about provisions that enable
delegated legislation to exempt persons or entities from
the operation of
primary legislation. These provisions have the effect of limiting, or in some
cases removing, parliamentary scrutiny.
Consequently, the committee will be
concerned about provisions of this kind—particularly where they permit
exemptions or modifications
that apply to a broad range of entities or
legislative provisions—and expects a justification for the use of such
to be included in the explanatory memorandum.
1.158 The committee considers that the explanatory memorandum does not
include an explanation of why it is appropriate in this instance
that delegated
legislation be allowed to modify the operation of the proposed Part 5.3A. It is
also noted that the explanatory memorandum
does not identify any legislative
safeguard to ensure that proposed section 110.9 is used
appropriately.
The committee is
accordingly concerned that regulations made pursuant to proposed section
110.9(1)(a) would be capable of disapplying
proposed section 110.8, which
provides protection against a person being tried or punished twice in respect of
equivalent offences
under both Commonwealth and State and Territory Laws without
disapplying the remainder of the provisions of proposed Part 5.3A.
The committee requests that an addendum to the explanatory memorandum
containing a justification addressing the following matters
be tabled in
Parliament as soon as practicable, noting the importance of these explanatory
materials as a point of access to understanding
the law and, if needed, as
extrinsic material to assist with
interpretation:
why it is appropriate to allow delegated legislation to modify the
operation of proposed Part 5.3A of
Criminal Code Act 1995
whether there are legislative safeguards in place to ensure that
such provisions are used appropriately.
This entry can be cited as:
Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills, Criminal Code Amendment
(State Sponsors of Terrorism)
Scrutiny Digest 6 of 2025
[2025] AUSStaCSBSD 68.
Schedule 2, items 1-6. The
committee draws senators’ attention to these provisions pursuant to Senate
standing order 24(1)(a)(i)
Division 102,
Schedule 1, item 1, proposed
section 110.3(3).
Schedule 1, item 1, proposed
subsection 110.3(4).
‘State terrorist
act’ would be defined as ‘a terrorist act engaged in by a state
sponsor of terrorism or a member
of a state sponsor of terrorism.’
Schedule 1, item 1, proposed
Divisions 111 and 112.
Criminal Code Act
, Part 3, Division 104.
Criminal Code Act
, Part 3, Division 105.
Criminal Code Act
, Part 3, Division 105A.
See, for example, Senate
Standing Committee on the Scrutiny of Bills,
Digest 10 of 2023
(6 September 2023), pp. 1–6; Senate Standing
Committee on the Scrutiny of Bills,
Digest 12 of 2023
(18 October 2023), pp. 62–65; and Senate
Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Digest 5 of 2022
(28 September 2022), pp. 4–6.
Senate Standing Committee
for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Digest 10 of 2023
(6 September 2023) p. 2; Senate Standing Committee
for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Digest 5 of 2022
(28 September 2022), pp. 4–6; Senate Standing
Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Digest 12 of 2021
(11 August 2021), pp. 1–4; Senate Standing Committee
for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Digest 6 of 2018
(20 June 2018), pp. 13–16.
Senate Standing Committee
for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Digest No. 7 of 2016
(12 October 2016) p. 20; Senate Standing
Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Report of 2016
(9 November 2016), pp. 468–487.
Senate Standing Committee
for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Report of 2016
(9 November 2016) pp. 468–487.
Explanatory memorandum,
Explanatory memorandum,
Schedule 3, items 3 and
Schedule 3, item 8. The
definition of ‘adult questioning matter’ and ‘minor
questioning matter’ in
section 34A
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
includes ‘politically motivated
Section 34B
provides that a compulsory questioning warrant may
be requested in relation to an adult questioning matter and a minor questioning
Schedule 3, items
Schedule 3 items 16 and
Crimes Act 1914
section 15AA
Schedule 3, items
26–43. Schedule 4, items 5 and 6 also amend the
Criminal Code Act 1995
in relation to offences prohibiting the public display of prohibited
Schedule 3, items 68 and
Schedule 3, items 70 and
See for example Senate
Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Digest 3 of 2024
(28 February 2024), pp. 64–66;
Digest 16 of 2023
(7 December 2023), p. 4
Senate Standing
Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Digest 14 of 2020
(16 October 2020), pp. 18–20; Senate Standing
Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Digest 7 of 2019
(17 October 2019) pp. 5–15.
Schedule 2, item 29,
subsection 80.2E(3). The committee draws senators’ attention to this
provision pursuant to Senate standing
order 24(1)(a)(i).
Schedule 2, item 29,
subsection 80.2E(3).
Senate Standing Committee
on the Scrutiny of Bills,
Digest 9 of 2023
(9 August 2023), pp. 2-3.
For example, a direction
made by police officers to cease displaying a prohibited symbol under section
80.2M of the
Criminal Code Act 1995
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Criminal Code Act
, subsections 80.2HA(3), (4) and (7).
See the committee’s
comments on the Criminal Code Amendment (Hate Crimes) Bill 2024
Standing Committee on the Scrutiny of Bills,
Digest 2 of 2025
(9 August 2023), pp. 22–24. See also the
committee’s previous comments regarding mandatory minimums in the
Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Digest 13 of 2001
(20 September 2001), p 8;
Digest 3 of 2010
(10 March 2010), p. 2;
Digest 10 of 2014
(27 August 2014), p. 10;
Digest 4 of 2015
(25 March 2015), p. 11;
Digest 13 of 2017
(15 November 2017), pp. 76–79;
Digest 6 of 2019
(18 September 2019), pp. 3–4;
Digest 2 of 2022
(18 March 2022) p. 33; and
Digest 15 of 2023
(29 November 2023), p. 14.
Veen v The Queen
(No 2) (1988) 164 CLR 465 at p. 477.
Schedule 1, item 1. The
committee draws senators’ attention to these provisions pursuant to Senate
standing order 24(1)(a)(i).
Schedule 1, item 1,
proposed subsections 111.4(5), 111.5(5), 111.8(5), and 111.9(5).
Schedule 1, item 1,
proposed subsection 112.7(5).
Explanatory memorandum, p.
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Schedule 1, item 1. The
committee draws senators’ attention to these provisions pursuant to Senate
standing order 24(1)(a)(i).
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Schedule 1, item 1,
proposed section 110.9. The committee draws senators’ attention to this
provision pursuant to Senate standing
order 24(1)(a)(iv).
Australian Law Reform
Commission, Report 141,
Confronting
Complexity: Reforming Corporations and Financial Services Legislation
(November 2023)
Australian Law Reform
Commission, Report 141,
Confronting
Complexity: Reforming Corporations and Financial Services Legislation
(November 2023), Appendix D, pp. 298–301. See also Andrew Edgar,
Regulation-Making in the United Kingdom and Australia: Democratic Legitimacy,
Safeguards and Executive Aggrandisement
, Hart (2023), pp. 162–165.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (202 KB)
PDF format (169 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter