URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJCHR/2025/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:08:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Aged Care and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2025 - New and Ongoing Matters [2025] AUPJCHR 25 (27 August 2025)
Chapter 1 :
New and ongoing matters
Aged Care and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 202511
Expanding the definition of ‘guardian’
Preliminary international human rights legal advice
Rights of persons with disability to equal recognition before the law
Committee view
New and ongoing matters
1.1 The committee comments on the following bills and legislative instrument,
and in some instances, seeks a response or further information
from the relevant
Aged Care and Other
Legislation Amendment Bill
The bill seeks to support the commencement of the
Aged Care Act
by making various technical, transitional and consequential changes to
numerous other Acts, such as by:
• allowing different subsidy calculators to be set out in the rules
for cohorts of people already receiving funding and implementing
worse off’ principle;
• enabling unspent funds accrued on behalf of older persons to remain
available to them under the new system;
• mandating a review of the Aged Care Quality Standards every five
• providing for transitional information collection, use and
disclosure arrangements of protected and personal information;
• introducing a rule making power which empowers the minister during
the first two years of operation of the
Aged Care Act 2024
to make rules
modifying the operation of primary legislation; and
• amending the
Healthcare Identifiers Act 2010
to expand the
entities which have a healthcare identifier and which is to be used in relation
to the delivery of health and aged
care and other support services.
Health, Disability and Ageing
House of Representatives, 24 July 2025
Rights of persons with disability; privacy
Expanding the definition of
Aged Care Act 2024
(Aged Care Act) provides for
‘guardians’, who are persons authorised to do a thing on behalf of
an individual that may
or must be done by the individual under, or for the
purposes of, the Aged Care Act.
guardian is someone who has guardianship of the individual under a law of the
Commonwealth, a state or a territory; is appointed
by a court, tribunal, board
or panel (however described) under a law of the Commonwealth, a state or a
territory, and has power to
make decisions for the individual; or holds an
enduring power of attorney or like power granted by the
individual.
1.3 A person who is considered a guardian for the purposes of the Aged Care
Act must also be registered by the System Governor (the
secretary of the
department) as a ‘supporter’ if they request to be registered as a
supporter and the System Governor
is satisfied that the person is able to comply
with the duties of supporters (as set out under subsection 30(1) of the Aged
Act). A supporter is someone who can do the following actions under the
Aged Care Act with the consent of the
individual:
request, access or
receive information or documents; communicate information, including the will,
preferences and decisions of the
individual; and a thing, other than making a
decision on behalf of the individual, prescribed by the
1.4 The committee previously commented on the guardian and supporter
framework by which a person may be registered as a supporter
of an individual in
1.5 This bill seeks to expand the definition of a guardian by providing that
a guardian also includes a class of persons prescribed
Preliminary international human rights legal
Rights of persons with disability to equal
recognition before the law
1.6 By allowing rules to prescribe a class of persons who may be considered a
guardian, this measure expands the types of persons
who have decision-making
authority on behalf of an individual and also the types of persons who can
request to be registered as a
supporter for the purposes of the Aged Care Act.
This engages the rights of persons with disabilities to equal recognition before
1.7 The right to equal recognition before the law includes the right to enjoy
legal capacity on an equal basis with others in all
aspects of life and, in all
measures that relate to the exercise of legal capacity, there should be
appropriate and effective safeguards
The UN Committee on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities has confirmed that there can be no
derogation from these requirements
under article 12 of the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which describe the content of the general
equality before the law under the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights.
words, 'there are no permissible circumstances under international human rights
law in which this right may be
The UN Committee on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities has made clear that practices that deny
the right of people with disabilities
to legal capacity in a discriminatory
manner, such as substitute decision-making regimes, are contrary to article 12
and must be
'abolished in order to ensure that full legal capacity is restored
to persons with disabilities on an equal basis with
Thus the key questions
are whether the measure would have the effect of denying an individual’s
legal capacity on the basis
of their disability and whether the measure, in
expanding who can make decisions on behalf of an individual, would facilitate a
of substitute decision-making.
1.8 The UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities has stated
that substitute decision-making should be replaced by supported
decision-making,
whereby individuals are supported to exercise their legal
Supports may include
peer support, advocacy, assistance with communication or advance planning,
whereby a person can state their
will and preferences in advance should they be
unable to do so at a later point in time. The UN Committee on the Rights of
with Disabilities has noted that 'where, after significant efforts have
been made, it is not practicable to determine the will and
preferences of an
individual, the "best interpretation of will and preferences" must replace the
"best interests"
determinations'.
States are also
required to create appropriate and effective safeguards for the exercise of
legal capacity to protect persons with
disabilities from
Such safeguards must
ensure that measures relating to the exercise of legal capacity respect the
rights, will and preferences of
the person; are free of conflict of interest and
undue influence; are proportional and tailored to the person's circumstances;
for the shortest time possible; and are subject to regular review by an
independent and impartial
1.9 The Aged Care Act contains a framework for the registration of
supporters.
As noted above,
where a guardian requests to be a supporter, they must be registered as one if
the System Governor is satisfied they
can comply with the supporter duties. This
framework includes several elements of supported decision-making and some
important safeguards
to protect individuals from abuse, including:
• providing for duties of supporters, including to:
(a) act in a manner that promotes the will, preferences and personal,
cultural and social wellbeing of the individual;
(b) act honestly, diligently and in good faith; and
(c) support the individual only to the extent necessary for the individual to
do the thing, applying the supporter’s best endeavours
to maintain the
ability of the individual to make the individual’s own
• making it an offence for a supporter to do various things with the
intention of dishonestly obtaining a benefit or causing
• requiring supporters to inform the System Governor of events or
circumstances that may affect their ability or capacity to
1.10 The Aged Care Act contains key features of a supported decision-making
regime, which is to be welcomed from the perspective of
international human
rights law. However, the effectiveness of these requirements will depend on how
much training and guidance is
provided to
supporters.
In this regard, when
considering these provisions when they were first introduced, the committee
recommended that consideration be
given to ensuring the provision of training
and guidance to supporters in order that they can support the individual to
legal capacity in a way that respects their rights, will and
preferences and does not amount to substitute
decision-making.
, the former minister advised that they accepted the
committee’s
recommendation.
It is unclear,
however whether this training and guidance has been developed or implemented. As
such, expanding the category of people
who may be a guardian, and also
registered as a supporter, risks expanding the circumstances where a
person’s legal capacity
may be denied if that individual is not supported
appropriately.
1.11 Further, while a supporter does not explicitly have decision-making
authority under the Aged Care Act, it appears that a guardian
may still exercise
decision-making authority on behalf of an
individual.
The explanatory
memorandum states that the purpose of the measure ‘is to provide a
mechanism to prescribe that other classes
of persons with decision-making
authority for an individual can be prescribed by the
It is unclear who
is contemplated to be included in a class of persons that can be prescribed by
the rules. The explanatory memorandum
does not explain why this measure is
considered necessary or who is envisaged to be captured by this amendment to the
definition.
The statement of compatibility does not identify that the right of
people with disability to equal recognition before the law is
engaged by this
measure and so provides no assessment as to the compatibility of the measure
with this right. Without this information
and noting that the rules have not yet
been made, it is difficult to assess the extent to which the measure may be
incompatible this
right and potentially engage and limit other human rights.
1.12 If the measure had the practical effect of denying people legal capacity
on the basis of disability, it risks being incompatible
with the right to equal
recognition before the law. The Aged Care Act contains several key elements of a
supported decision-making
regime and important safeguards to protect individuals
against abuse. However, if not supported appropriately, and where
decision-making
authority may be exercised by a broad class of individuals,
there is a risk that the measure could still constitute a form of substitute
decision-making under international human rights law and consequently be
incompatible with the right to equal recognition before
Committee view
1.13 The committee notes that providing that a ‘guardian’ also
includes a class of persons prescribed by the rules has
the effect of expanding
who has decision-making authority for an individual, and who may be registered
as a supporter, under the
Aged Care Act 2024
. The committee notes this
engages the rights of persons with disability to equal recognition before the
1.14 The committee previously raised concerns with substitute decision-making
and the rights of persons with disability to equal recognition
before the law in
relation to provisions in the
Aged Care Bill 2024
. The committee was
particularly concerned with proposed provisions that authorised supporters to
exercise decision-making
However, subsequent
to the tabling of the committee’s comments in
, amendments were agreed to which removed these provisions from
the bill that finally passed both Houses. The committee welcomes this
given the human rights concerns it previously raised.
1.15 In relation to the current measure, the committee considers further
information is required to assess its compatibility with
the rights of persons
with disability to equal recognition before the law, and as such seeks the
minister's advice in relation to:
(a) why is it considered necessary to provide that a ‘guardian’
is also a person who is included in a class of persons
to be prescribed by
(b) what class of persons is likely to be prescribed in the rules;
(c) what decisions a guardian can make on behalf of an individual under the
Aged Care Act
(d) what, if any, training and guidance has been developed and implemented
for supporters to support an individual to exercise legal
capacity in a way that
respects their rights, will and preferences and does not amount to substitute
decision-making.
This entry can be cited as:
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights,
Aged Care and Other Legislation
Amendment Bill 2025
Report 4 of 2025
[2025] AUPJCHR 25.
Aged Care Act 2024
subsection 28(1).
Aged Care Act 2024
subsection 28(2).
Schedule 1, item 25, proposed
seeks to substitute ‘with the consent of the individual’
with ‘in line with the individual’s will and preferences’.
Aged Care Act 2024
section 27.
Parliamentary Joint Committee
on Human Rights,
(10 October 2024) pp. 45-54 and
(20 November 2024) pp. 61-64.
Schedule 1, item 26, proposed
paragraph 28(2)(d).
Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities, article 12.
Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities, article 12.
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1: Article 12, Equal
recognition before the law
(2014) [1], [5].
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1: Article 12, Equal
recognition before the law
(2014) [5].
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1: Article 12, Equal
recognition before the law
(2014) [7]. For a discussion of the academic
debate regarding the interpretation and application of article 12, particularly
in relation
to substitute decision-making, see, for example, Bernadette McSherry
and Lisa Waddington, 'Treat with care: the right to informed
consent for medical
treatment of persons with mental impairments in Australia',
Journal of Human Rights
, vol. 23, issue no. 1, pp. 109–129.
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1: Article 12, Equal
recognition before the law
(2014) [15]–[16], [21]. The features of a
supported decision-making regime are detailed in paragraph [29].
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1: Article 12, Equal
recognition before the law
(2014) [21].
Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities, article 12; Committee on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1: Article 12, Equal recognition before the
(2014) [20]; Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,
article 12(4).
Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities, article 12(4). See also article 17.
Aged Care Act 2024
Aged Care Act 2024
subsection 30(2).
Aged Care Act 2024
section 36.
Aged Care Act 2024
section 31.
See Committee on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1: Article 12, Equal
recognition before the law
(2014) [17] and [18].
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(10 October 2024) p. 53.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(20 November 2024) p. 64.
The committee previously
raised concerns with Chapter 1,
, division 4 of the
that authorised supporters to exercise decision-making authority.
However, those provisions were removed from the bill prior to its
passage and as
such those concerns are alleviated.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Aged Care Bill 2024
, division 4.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (172 KB)
PDF format (129 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter