URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJCHR/2025/34.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:08:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Australian Centre for Disease Control Bill 2025; Australian Centre for Disease Control (Consequential Amendments and Transitional Provisions) Bill 2025 - New and Ongoing Matters [2025] AUPJCHR 34 (2 October 2025)
Chapter 1 :
New and ongoing matters
Australian Centre for Disease Control Bill 2025
Australian Centre for Disease Control (Consequential Amendments and Transitional Provisions) Bill 20251
Publication of public health advice
Preliminary international human rights legal advice
Rights to health and privacy
Committee view
Power to request information
Preliminary international human rights legal advice
Rights to health and privacy
Committee view
Power to direct people to give information
Preliminary international human rights legal advice
Rights to health and privacy
Committee view
Register of directions
Preliminary international human rights legal advice
Right to privacy
Committee view
Authorised disclosure of information in the public interest
Preliminary international human rights legal advice
Rights to health and privacy
Committee view
Data-sharing declarations for serious threat to public health
Preliminary international human rights legal advice
Right to health and privacy
Committee view
New and ongoing matters
1.1 The committee comments on the following bills, and in some instances,
seeks a response or further information from the relevant
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025
Australian Centre
for Disease Control (Consequential Amendments and Transitional Provisions) Bill
These bills seek to establish the Australian Centre for Disease Control, as
well as the office of the Director-General and the Advisory
Council of the
Australian Centre for Disease Control.
Health, Disability and Ageing
House of Representatives, 3 September 2025
Effective remedy; health; privacy
Publication of public health advice
1.2 The Australian Centre for Disease Control Bill 2025 (the bill) would
require the Director-General of the Australian Centre for
Disease Control
(Director-General) to publish the public health advice given in the performance
of their functions, with some exceptions,
on the website of the Australian
Centre for Disease Control (the
This would include any
supporting information, analysis or reasoning that was used to reach the
recommendations in the advice.
1.3 Public health advice is written advice that consists of or contains
recommendations; is given by the Director-General, in the
performance of their
functions or duties, to the Minister, a Commonwealth entity or an official of
the Commonwealth, or a State or
Territory government entity; that relates to
public health matters; was not prepared for the purpose of being published
than under this bill; and that the Director-General approves as final
and settled advice.
1.4 The Director-General must not publish public health advice if the advice
is ‘exempt material’.
Exempt material includes, most relevantly, a document or other material that, if
published, could risk causing physical harm, threats
of physical harm, social
stigma, bullying, vilification, or other harm (other than commercial or economic
harm) to an individual
or group, and it is unreasonable to take that
Exempt material also includes
documents affecting national security, defence or international relations;
documents to which secrecy
provisions apply; documents subject to legal
professional privilege; and documents containing material obtained in
confidence.
If the Director-General
can modify the advice to exclude or delete the exempt material, the
Director-General must do so and publish
the modified copy of the
Rules may be made (by way
of a future legislative instrument) in relation to the publication of public
health advice. The bill provides
a non-exhaustive list of things that the rules
may do, including requiring the Director-General to inform a recipient of advice
the advice is proposed to be published; provide for consultation that must
be carried out before publishing the advice; and provide
for procedures for
publishing the advice.
Preliminary international human rights legal
Rights to health and privacy
1.5 Insofar as the publication of public health advice helps to ensure that
the population has access to health information and advice,
this measure
promotes the right to health. The right to health is the right to enjoy the
highest attainable standard of physical
Relevantly, the right to
health requires states to take steps to prevent, treat and control epidemic
1.6 However, to the extent that the requirement to publish public health
advice involves the publication of an individual’s
personal health
information, the measure engages and limits the right to privacy. The right to
respect for private and confidential information, particularly the storing, use
and sharing of such
information.
It also includes the right to control the dissemination of information about
one’s private life.
1.7 The right to privacy may be subject to permissible limitations where the
limitation pursues a legitimate objective, is rationally
connected to that
objective and is a proportionate means of achieving that objective.
1.8 The statement of compatibility states that an objective of the bill is to
ensure transparency of the advice that the Centre is
providing to government and
decision-makers.
public access to health advice is likely a legitimate objective for the purposes
of international human rights law and
publishing the advice of the
Director-General, including any supporting information, appears to be rationally
connected to (that
is, effective to achieve) that objective.
1.9 A key aspect of whether a limitation on a right can be justified is
whether the limitation is proportionate to the objective being
sought. In this
respect, it is necessary to consider a number of factors, including whether a
proposed limitation is sufficiently
circumscribed; whether it is accompanied by
sufficient safeguards; and whether any less rights restrictive alternatives
could achieve
the same stated objective.
1.10 As to whether the measure is sufficiently circumscribed, it is not clear
whether public health advice would include personal
information and if so
whether the measure permits such personal information to be published. The
statement of compatibility does
not identify that the measure engages and limits
the right to privacy. In references to the bill in its entirety, it states that
the bill ensures that personal information is not used or disclosed, other than
for purposes prescribed in the bill as necessary
or reasonably
The explanatory
memorandum states that the requirement to include any additional supporting
information, analysis or reasoning that
was used to reach the recommendations in
the public health advice will not include sensitive or ‘protected
information’,
including an individual’s personal health
information.
information is defined as a kind of relevant information that is personal
information about any person (including a deceased
person) or is information, if
disclosed, that could reasonably be expected to found an action for breach of a
duty of confidence.
while the stated intention is not to publish personal information on the
Centre’s website, the bill itself does not
explicitly prevent the
publication of personal information. Only where personal information falls into
another category of exempt
material or protected information, will that
information be prevented from publication.
1.11 As to safeguards, the definitions of protected information and exempt
material may act as safeguards to prevent the publication
of certain personal
information. However, as set out above, it is unclear whether personal
information which does not meet the definition
of protected information or
exempt material may still be published. If this were the case, the potential
scope of personal information
which could be published is unclear. Safeguards
could be included in the rules that may be made with respect to the publication
public health advice. For instance, if the rules required the
Director-General to inform a recipient of advice that the advice is
proposed to
be published and the rules required consultation to be undertaken before
publishing any advice containing personal information,
that would constitute a
relevant safeguard. However, as the rules are to be made in a future legislature
instrument, it is not possible
to assess their safeguard value.
1.12 In relation to whether any less rights restrictive alternatives are
available, the explicit exclusion of all personal information
from publication
would appear to be a less rights restrictive alternative that would still
achieve the objective of the bill. Since
the explanatory materials to the bill
reveal the intention that personal information should not be published, it would
be appropriate
for the bill to explicitly include this safeguard.
Committee view
1.13 The committee notes that this bill would require the Director-General to
publish public health advice on the website of the Australian
Centre for Disease
Control (the Centre). The committee notes that the policy intention is for this
advice to be limited to public
health matters and not contain personal
information, however, nothing in the bill would restrict the inclusion of
personal information
in published material. The committee notes that to the
extent that this measure permits the publication of personal information,
engages and limits the right privacy.
1.14 The committee considers further information is required to assess the
compatibility of this measure with the right to privacy,
and as such seeks the
minister's advice in relation to:
(a) whether the bill permits the publication of personal information (if it
does not meet the definition of protected information
or exempt material);
(b) if the bill does permit the publication of personal information, what is
the nature and scope of personal information that could
be published;
(c) what safeguards are there to ensure any limit on the right to privacy is
proportionate; and
(d) will the rules contain any safeguards specifically relating to the right
to privacy, such as a requirement to inform a person
if their personal
information will be published, giving them an opportunity to request that that
information not be published.
Power to request information
1.15 The bill would empower the Director-General to gather information, and
to request that an entity give specific information to
the Director-General or
to a designated service
An entity includes
Australian government entities, bodies corporate, international organisations,
and individuals.
A designated
service provider is the Australian Bureau of Statistics, the Australian
Institute of Health and Welfare, and any other
government entity determined by
the Director-General.
1.16 The Director-General may also enter into an agreement with an entity for
the entity to give specific information to the Director-General
designated service provider.
Compliance with a request or agreement is not
1.17 The type of information that may be requested in the context of this
measure is information or a class of information that would
Director-General in the performance of the Director-General’s functions or
duties, or the exercise of powers, under
the bill, the
Biosecurity Act
National Health Security Act 2007
Occupational Respiratory Disease Registry Act
Preliminary international human rights legal
Rights to health and privacy
1.18 Insofar as this measure helps to ensure that the Director-General is
able to effectively carry out their functions and duties,
which may improve
access to health advice, data and services, this measure would promote the right
to health. The content of the
right to health is set out above.
1.19 However, empowering the Director-General to request, or enter into an
agreement to receive, specified information engages and
may limit the right to
relating to individuals. While an
entity or individual would consent to the
giving of information (noting that compliance with a request or agreement is not
mandatory),
the information given by the entity or individual may contain
personal information relating to other individuals who may not consent
provision of their personal information. Further, the measure enables the
provision of information to designated data service
providers who, despite being
limited to government entities, could use or treat the information differently
to the purpose for which
it was initially collected and
The statement of
compatibility identifies that this measure engages the right to
The content of the
right to privacy is set out above.
1.20 The right to privacy may be subject to permissible limitations where the
limitation pursues a legitimate objective, is rationally
connected to that
objective and is a proportionate means of achieving that objective.
1.21 The explanatory memorandum sets out that the objective of this measure
is to enable the Director-General to seek information
that would assist in the
performance of their functions, which would enable the Director-General’s
advice to consider a national
picture of public health
The promotion of public
health is a legitimate objective for the purposes of international human rights
law. Insofar as the ability
to request or enter into agreements for the
provision of information would assist the Director-General to perform their
public health
functions effectively, the measure appears rationally connected to
that objective.
1.22 In assessing proportionality, it is necessary to consider whether a
proposed limitation is sufficiently circumscribed; whether
it is accompanied by
sufficient safeguards; and whether any less rights restrictive alternatives
could achieve the same stated objective.
1.23 As to whether the measure is sufficiently circumscribed, the scope of
information that could be given to the Director-General
is unclear. The
statement of compatibility states that the Director-General may only request
specific information if the Director-General
is satisfied that it would assist
them in the performance of their
This requirement may
limit the scope of personal information being requested, however, the safeguard
value of this requirement may
be weakened by the breadth of the
Director-General’s functions under the specified legislation. As the
Director-General is
able to request information or enter into agreements for the
provision of information from individuals, the information requested
likely to include personal information. The explanatory memorandum states that
this measure does not authorise the Director-General
to request personal health
information from an individual or medical practitioner unless the
Director-General is satisfied the information
would assist them in performing
their functions.
The explanatory
memorandum states that as the core functions of the Director-General and the
Centre relate to public health (rather
than individual health), it is not
intended that the Director-General would make a request to an individual or
medical practitioner
for personal information and, in any case, such a request
is unlikely to meet the threshold required to make such a request (that
the information would assist the Director-General in performing their
functions).
If the measure is
not intended to capture personal information and requests for personal
information are unlikely to meet the required
threshold, it is unclear why the
bill does not explicitly exclude personal information from the type of
information that may be
requested by the Director-General.
1.24 As to safeguards, the bill does not appear to contain any specific
safeguards with respect to this measure, and the statement
of compatibility does
not provide any detailed information as to whether and how any limit on the
right to privacy would be proportionate.
1.25 A further consideration is the extent of any interference with human
rights. The greater the interference, the less likely the
measure is to be
considered proportionate. In this regard, as noted above, the measure enables
the provision of information to designated
data service providers who could use
or treat the information differently to the purpose for which it was initially
collected and
High Commissioner for Human Rights has raised concerns with changing the purpose
for which data can be used:
[p]ersonal data processing should be necessary and proportionate to a
legitimate purpose that should be specified by the processing
Consequently, the amount and type of data and the retention period need to be
limited, data must be accurate and anonymization
and pseudonymization techniques
used whenever possible. Changes of purpose without the consent of the person
concerned should be
avoided and when undertaken, should be limited to purposes
compatible with the initially specified
1.26 The ability to onwards share information for purposes beyond which the
information was collected may result in a greater interference
with the right to
1.27 In relation to whether any less rights restrictive alternatives are
available, it is not clear why it would not be possible to
require the consent
of individuals to the sharing of their personal information, or at least to
notify them that their personal information
is being shared.
Committee view
1.28 The committee notes that the bill would empower the Director-General to
request information or enter into agreements for the
provision of information.
To the extent that the information obtained includes personal information
relating to individuals, the
measure engages and may limit the right to privacy.
The committee considers that this power would likely pursue a legitimate
of promoting public health and is rationally connected to achieving
that objective. The committee notes that the scope of the information
be shared is unclear and there are questions as to whether there are sufficient
legislative safeguards to ensure that the
sharing of information would be
proportionate in practice.
1.29 The committee considers further information is required to assess the
compatibility of this measure with the right to privacy,
and as such seeks the
minister's advice in relation to:
(a) what is the purpose of including individuals in the types of entities
that may be requested to provide information to the Director-General;
(b) what safeguards, if any, are available to protect individuals’
personal information from collection, use and disclosure;
(c) whether an individual to whom personal information relates will be
informed of the use and sharing of their personal information
and will have an
opportunity to request that the information not be shared; and
(d) why the bill does not explicitly exclude personal information from the
Power to direct people to give information
1.30 The bill would create a discretionary power for the Director-General to
direct people to give information to the Director-General
or to a designated
data service provider
includes the Australian Bureau of Statistics, the Australian Institute of Health
and Welfare, and any other Australian government
entity determined by the
Director-General).
would prohibit the Director-General from giving a direction to an Australian
government entity, an international organisation,
or an individual employed or
engaged by the Commonwealth, a State, a Territory or any Australian government
entity or international
organisation.
1.31 The bill would enable the Director-General to specify information or a
class of information in a direction only if satisfied
that the information is
reasonably necessary for the performance of the Director-General’s
functions or duties under this bill;
it is reasonable in all the circumstances
to give the direction; and the Director-General has consulted the Advisory
Council of the
Australian Centre for Disease Control (Advisory Council) about
the proposed direction.
1.32 The bill would impose a civil penalty of 60 penalty units (currently
$19,800) for failure to comply with a direction from the
Director-General to
give information.
Director-General’s decision to give a direction is reviewable by the
Administrative Review
Preliminary international human rights legal
Rights to health and privacy
1.33 To the extent that this measure helps to ensure that the
Director-General is able to perform their functions effectively and
access to health information and advice, this would promote the right to health
as set out above.
1.34 However, by directing a person to give information, which may include
personal information, the measure engages and may limit
the right to privacy.
The content of the right to privacy is also set out above.
1.35 The promotion of public health is a legitimate objective for the
purposes of international human rights law. Empowering the Director-General
give directions to individuals in order to access public health information
appears rationally connected to this objective.
1.36 In assessing proportionality, it is necessary consider whether a
proposed limitation is sufficiently circumscribed, is accompanied
by sufficient
safeguards and whether any less rights restrictive alternatives could achieve
the stated objective.
1.37 The bill does contain some legislative safeguards. The decision of the
Director-General to give a direction is reviewable by
the Administrative Review
Access to review is
generally an important safeguard and assists with proportionality.
1.38 The bill also includes the requirements that the Director-General be
satisfied that the information contained in a direction
is ‘reasonably
necessary’ for the performance of the Director-General’s functions
or duties under the bill.
explanatory material states that the ‘reasonably necessary’ test
imposes a requirement that other means of obtaining
the information that are
viable in the circumstances must first be exhausted. This may include attempts
to obtain the information
via a request or agreement (as set out in the measure
above), and consideration of whether other sources of information may be a
viable alternative.
Further, the
explanatory memorandum states that the test of reasonableness must also have
regard to the extent to which information
subject to a direction is necessary
for the performance of the Director-General’s functions. This assessment
should have regard
to the severity of a public health threat, such as through
consideration of a risk
assessment.
1.39 These requirements may operate as safeguards, particularly if the
Director-General’s power is exercised in the manner set
explanatory memorandum (that is, a direction is given as a last resort after
other less rights restrictive alternatives
are exhausted). However, the bill
itself does not include such detailed guidance as to how ‘reasonably
necessary’ should
be interpreted and applied in practice. Further, noting
the breadth of the Director-General’s functions under this bill, the
of information that may be requested could be broad.
1.40 The bill also includes a requirement that the Director-General be
satisfied that it is ‘reasonable in all the circumstances’
Director-General to give the direction and that the Advisory Council has been
consulted about the proposed
The Advisory
Council’s function would be to provide advice to the Director-General on
public health matters and other
The explanatory
memorandum states that these requirements as well as the above requirement that
the information is reasonably necessary
together give effect to the intent that
this power should only be exercised in limited circumstances, such as to support
the functions
of the Director-General in responding to a current or emerging
public health emergency where other avenues to obtain information
necessary to
inform public health advice are not
While these requirements
may operate as safeguards, the strength of these safeguards will depend on how
the requirements are interpreted
and applied in practice. It is unclear what is
meant or intended by ‘reasonable in all the circumstances’ and what
circumstances
would specifically be considered by the Director-General in making
this assessment. For example, it is unclear whether the Director-General
required to consider whether the direction would constitute a proportionate
limit on an individual’s privacy.
1.41 Further, while the Director-General is required to consult the Advisory
Council, there is no requirement to follow the advice
or views of the Advisory
Council, which may undermine the effectiveness of this safeguard. The
explanatory memorandum states that
this requirement is intended to bring
scrutiny to the exercise of the direction
however, it remains
unclear what factors the Advisory Council should or would consider in their
consideration of the direction and
if there is any guidance available to the
Advisory Council to perform this consultation requirement.
1.42 As to the scope of personal information that may be the subject of a
direction, the explanatory memorandum states that the Director-General
authorised to direct an individual or medical practitioner to provide personal
health information unless the requirements
that the information is reasonably
necessary, the direction is reasonable in all the circumstances and the
Director-General has consulted
the Advisory Council are
The explanatory memorandum
notes that as the core functions of the Director-General pertain to public
health rather than individual
health, it is not intended that a direction be
made to an individual or medical practitioner for personal information. It
states that it is improbable that circumstances will transpire to result
in the threshold being met to enable the Director-General
to issue a direction
to an individual or medical
practitioner.
However, despite
the stated intention that individuals or medical practitioners will not be
subject to directions to provide personal
health information, the bill appears
to contemplate directions being given for this
The bill stipulates
that a person does not contravene medical or other professional standards as a
result of the collection, use
or disclosure of information in accordance with
This inclusion
suggests that medical practitioners are likely to be the subject of directions
and will be required to disclose information
that is likely to include personal
or sensitive information about patients. The inconsistencies between the text of
the bill and
the information in the explanatory memorandum make it difficult to
assess the scope of personal information that may be subject to
a direction, and
therefore the extent of the potential interference with the right to
1.43 In relation to whether any less rights-restrictive alternatives are
available, it is not clear why it is strictly necessary to
direct individuals to
give information as opposed to organisations, particularly if the intention is
to obtain public health information
rather than personal health information from
individuals or medical
practitioners.
Further, the bill
sets out that a person
comply with a direction, whereas an entity
comply with a
It is unclear why it
is mandatory for individuals to comply but not entities. A less rights
restrictive approach may be to afford
individuals the same discretion to not
comply with a direction.
Committee view
1.44 The committee notes that the Director-General’s power to direct
individuals to give specified information, including personal
information, to
the Director-General or a designated data service provider engages and limits
the right to privacy.
1.45 The committee notes that while the measure pursues a legitimate
objective, and appears rationally connected to that objective,
questions arise
as to proportionality. While there are some legislative safeguards that would
apply to the sharing of such information,
the committee considers that further
information is required to assess the adequacy of these safeguards, and as such
seeks the minister's
advice in relation to:
(a) why the requirement to ensure information is ‘reasonably
necessary’ does not explicitly include the requirement to
exhaust all
other means of obtaining the information (as described in the explanatory
memorandum);
(b) what is meant or intended by ‘reasonable in all the
circumstances’ and what circumstances would specifically be considered
the Director-General in making this assessment. For example, whether the
Director-General is required to consider whether the
direction would constitute
a proportionate limit on an individual’s privacy;
(c) what consultation with the Advisory Council would involve, what factors
are considered by the Advisory Council, and whether the
views of the Advisory
Council need to be taken into account in determining whether a direction should
(d) why government entities, international organisations, and their employees
are excluded from the Director-General’s power
to direct a person to give
specific information;
(e) how often will individuals and medical practitioners be subject to a
(f) what type of information is contemplated to be the subject of a
direction, including the nature and scope of any personal information;
(g) why it is mandatory for individuals to comply with a direction but not
entities and whether consideration was given to affording
individuals the same
discretion to not comply with a direction.
Register of directions
1.46 The bill would require the Director-General to publish a register of
directions given by the Director-General on the Centre’s
including the reason the direction was given and any other information to be
prescribed by the rules.
rules may require the register to include information relating to the recipients
of directions; provide for the form in which
the register must be published; and
provide for the circumstances in which directions may be removed from the
Preliminary international human rights legal
Right to privacy
1.47 To the extent that the rules may require the register to include
information relating to the recipients of directions, and this
information may
include personal information, the publication of the register of directions
engages and may limit the right to privacy.
The content of the right to
informational privacy is set out above. The right to privacy also protects
against arbitrary and unlawful
interferences with an individual's privacy and
reputation.
1.48 The right to privacy may be permissibly limited where the limitation
pursues a legitimate objective, is rationally connected
to that objective and is
a proportionate means of achieving that objective.
1.49 A legitimate objective is one that is necessary and addresses an area of
public or social concern that is pressing and substantial
enough to warrant
limiting the right. The stated objective of this measure is to provide
transparency about the Director-General’s
exercise of the power to give
directions, including the reason for the
To the extent that
this measure helps the Director-General to promote public health, it may pursue
a legitimate objective. To the
extent that the publication of this information
provides information and transparency about public health-related activities of
Director-General, it may be rationally connected to the broader objective of
promoting public health.
1.50 A relevant consideration in relation to proportionality is the scope of
information that may be published. The requirement that
the Director-General
take reasonable steps to ensure that the register does not include exempt
may limit the amount of
personal information published. However, as discussed above, the definition of
exempt material may not capture
all types of personal information, meaning that
personal information that falls outside of the definition of ‘exempt
may still be published.
1.51 Regarding access to review, while the decision to give a direction is a
reviewable decision, there does not appear to be access
to review with respect
to the decision to publish a direction on the register. It is also unclear how
applications for review would
interact with the public register and whether
information regarding a direction that is under review would be removed from the
In this regard, the ability for the rules to stipulate the
circumstances in which directions may be removed from the register may
safeguard, however, as the rules are yet to be made, it is difficult to assess
their safeguard value.
1.52 There appear to be minimal legislative safeguards in relation to this
measure, noting that much of the operational detail of
the register is to be set
out in future rules. Questions also remain about the extent of information that
may be included on the
register. It is therefore not clear that the measure is
accompanied by sufficient safeguards.
1.53 Another aspect of proportionality is to consider if a less rights
restrictive approach is available. It is not clear whether
individual recipients
of directions will have their personal information included on the register or
whether this information can
be captured in an anonymous way. For example, the
number of directions issued to individuals or classes of individuals such as
practitioners and the general reasons for giving the directions could be
published on the register without including personal information
such as names,
Committee view
1.54 The committee notes that the requirement that the Director-General must
publish a register of directions engages and may limit
the right to privacy to
the extent that personal information is published on the register. The committee
considers further information
is required to assess the compatibility of this
measure with this right, and as such seeks the minister's advice in relation
(a) whether personal information will be published on the register, such as
the names of individual recipients of directions;
(b) whether information relating to a direction that is under review will be
published on the public register; and
(c) whether there are any safeguards available to limit interference with the
right to privacy in relation to the publication of information
on the register,
and whether these safeguards could be included in the bill (rather than in
future rules).
Authorised disclosure of information in the public
1.55 The bill would authorise the collection, use and disclosure of
‘relevant information’ and ‘other information’
certain circumstances.
1.56 ‘Relevant information’ is defined in the bill to include
information obtained or generated by a person in the course
of performing
functions or duties or exercising powers under the bill, and information
obtained or generated by the Director-General,
the minister, an APS employee, a
designated data service provider or other specified person in various
circumstances.
information also includes records and documents transferred to the
Director-General under the
Australian Centre for Disease Control
(Consequential Amendments and Transitional Provisions) Bill 2025
consequential bill).
consequential bill would enable the transfer of records or documents that relate
to a function or power of the Director-General
of the Centre that were,
immediately before the commencement of the bill, in the possession of the Health
Secretary, Commonwealth
Chief Medical Officer, an APS employee of the Health
Department, or a delegate of the Health Secretary or the Commonwealth Chief
Medical Officer.
These records
or documents would be ‘relevant information’ for the purposes of the
primary bill and as such may be used
and disclosed in accordance with the
provisions of the bill.
1.57 The bill notes that the authorisations generally apply to protected
information, which is a kind of relevant information that
is personal
information about any person (including a deceased person) or is information, if
disclosed, that could reasonably be
expected to found an action for breach of a
duty of confidence.
information’ is not defined in the bill or explanatory materials.
1.58 The circumstances for which information is authorised to be collected,
used and disclosed include:
• for the purpose of performing functions, duties and powers under this
bill and other specified
• if it is in the pubic interest to do so and the purpose of the
disclosure could not be achieved without disclosing the protected
information;
• for the purposes of obtaining data services from a data service
• disclosure to Australian Bureau of Statistics, Australian Institute
of Health and Welfare and oversight or integrity bodies
for the purposes of
those organisations’
• for the purpose of obtaining legal
• disclosure to a court or tribunal for the purposes of enforcing a
• disclosure that is required or authorised under another
• disclosure to the entity that provided the information or the entity
to which the information
• where the information is already publicly available or where the
person to whom the information relates has
• for the purposes of preventing or lessening a serious threat to the
safety, health or wellbeing of the public or
individual(s);
• for the purpose of assisting a public health entity to carry out a
prescribed public health
1.59 Some authorisations specify the individuals or entities to whom
information may be disclosed, whereas other authorisations simply
purpose for which the information may be collected, used and disclosed.
Preliminary international human rights legal
Rights to health and privacy
1.60 The right to health, as set out above, may be promoted by this measure
as it is likely to assist the Director-General in carrying
out their functions
and duties, resulting in increased access to health advice and improved public
health data.
1.61 Authorising the collection, use and disclosure of information, including
personal information, engages and limits the right to
objective, is rationally connected
to that objective and is a proportionate
means of achieving that objective.
1.62 The objective for the disclosure of information under the bill is to
support the broader public health
In general terms, this
objective is capable of being a legitimate objective for the purposes of
international law and the measure
would likely be rationally connected to this
1.63 In terms of proportionality, it is relevant to consider the scope of
information that is authorised to be collected, used and
disclosed; the persons
or entities to whom the information may be shared; and the circumstances in
which information may be collected,
used and disclosed. Relevant information is
broadly defined, making it difficult to assess the potential scope of personal
information
that may be captured by the measure. Regarding to whom information
may be shared, some authorisations specify the relevant entities,
such as data
service providers, oversight and integrity agencies, the Australian Bureau of
Statistics and the Australian Institute
of Health and Welfare. Where entities
are specified, it assists with ensuring the measure is sufficiently
circumscribed.
1.64 However, other authorisations do not identify or restrict the entities
or individuals to whom information may be disclosed. For
example, the
Director-General is authorised to disclose information in the public interest,
but the authorisation does not specify
to whom that information may be
disclosed. In relation to this example, the explanatory memorandum states that
it is not generally
intended that this authorisation be used in a manner that
would directly identify an individual or other type of entity. Rather,
authorisation is intended to allow for disclosure of information in instances
where identifying information may be unavoidable,
such as in cases of disease
incursions affecting a small number of individuals or disease clusters in small
geographic areas.
information somewhat clarifies the circumstances in which this authorisation
would be relied on, it is not clear to whom
information may be shared and
concerns arise that the information may be broadly shared.
1.65 Further, as the minister may make rules which prescribe guidelines for
the exercise of the Director-General’s power to
certify that disclosure is
in the public interest, it is difficult to assess the extent of the potential
interference with the right
to privacy with respect to this authorisation.
1.66 The UN Human Rights Committee has stated that legislation must specify
in detail the precise circumstances in which interferences
with privacy may be
The authorisations
specify the circumstances in which information can be collected, used and
disclosed, however, the circumstances
are not always framed in precise terms.
For example, information may be disclosed in the ‘public interest’,
for the purpose
of ‘preventing or lessening a serious threat to the
safety, health or wellbeing’ of the public or individual(s), and
required or authorised under any other Commonwealth law. The breadth of some of
the circumstances raises questions as to whether
the measure is sufficiently
circumscribed.
1.67 In terms of safeguards, the explanatory memorandum notes that the
and the Australian Privacy Principles (APPs) apply. It
states that a range of protections apply under the APPs, including tests for
reasonableness and data minimisation requirements, and the application of
penalties for unauthorised use of information. While the
APPs may assist with
proportionality, compliance with the APPs and the
not a complete answer to concerns about interference with the right to privacy
for the purposes of international human rights
law. This is because the
principles and the Act contain a number of exceptions to the prohibition on use
or disclosure of personal
information for a secondary purpose, including where
its use or disclosure is authorised under an Australian law.
1.68 The explanatory memorandum also notes that the Centre:
...has negligible requirements to handle information about identified
individuals and any direct identifiers contained in information
received by the
Australian CDC under the authorisations in the Bill will be destroyed and
replaced with an anonymised identifier
as soon as is practicable. As such,
protections contained in this Division [the authorisations framework] that apply
to protected
information are predominantly intended to guard against attribute
disclosure (that is, where an individual may be indirectly identified
unique set of
characteristics).
1.69 A requirement to anonymise any identifying information would assist with
proportionality. However, this requirement does not
appear to be in the bill
itself and there is no other reference to it in the explanatory materials.
1.70 Another safeguard accompanying the measure is that any unauthorised use
or disclosure of personal information is an offence and
subject to penalty of 2
years imprisonment or 120 penalty units or
The statement of
compatibility states that the potential serious penalty for this offence reflect
the Centre’s high regard
for privacy and data safety and reflects its
trust in the highly reputable entities that it will authorise to use and collect
1.71 Some of the authorisations also contain specific safeguards that may
assist with proportionality. For example, the authorisation
to disclose
information for the performance of functions, duties and powers under this bill
and other specified Acts provides that
protected information may only be
disclosed to an ‘entrusted
or only if the
discloser is satisfied that the disclosure of protected information is:
• necessary for the purposes of the performance of functions or duties
or the exercise of powers under the relevant Acts;
• only the minimum amount of protected information necessary for that
purpose; and
• the disclosure is made only to such recipients as are necessary for
that purpose.
1.72 The authorisation for a designated data service provider to disclose
information to a prescribed public health entity requires
the public health
entity to give an undertaking to the Director-General that information will only
be used or disclosed in accordance
with the undertaking and principles to be
prescribed by legislative instrument, and the use and disclosure must be
reasonably necessary
to carry out a prescribed public health
However not all
authorisations contain such safeguards and it is not clear that the general
safeguards accompanying the measure would
be sufficient in all
circumstances.
1.73 Further, if this measure impermissibly limited a person’s right to
to address this
potential limitation as the bill removes civil liability for the collection, use
or disclosure of authorised
information.
The right to an
effective remedy requires the availability of a remedy which is effective with
respect to any violation of rights
and freedoms recognised by the International
Covenant on Civil and Political
While limitations may be
placed in particular circumstances on the nature of the remedy provided
(judicial or otherwise), states
must comply with the fundamental obligation to
provide a remedy that is
Committee view
1.74 The committee notes that authorising the collection, use and disclosure
of relevant information, which includes personal information,
engages and limits
the right to privacy. While the measure is capable of pursuing a legitimate
objective, questions remain as to
proportionality. As such, the committee
considers further information is required to assess the compatibility of this
measure with
the right to privacy, and as such seeks the minister’s advice
in relation to:
(a) what is the nature and scope of personal information that may be
collected, used and disclosed in accordance with the various
authorisations;
(b) who are the entities and/or individuals to whom relevant information may
be disclosed in circumstances where the authorisation
does not explicitly
specify the individual or entity (such as clauses 53 and 63);
(c) whether the measure is accompanied by other safeguards to ensure that any
limitation on privacy is proportionate in all circumstances;
(d) if an individual’s right to privacy is breached, whether that
individual will be notified and have access to an effective
Data-sharing declarations for serious threat to
public health
1.75 The bill would enable the Director-General to make a data sharing
declaration if satisfied that there is a severe and immediate,
or severe and
unforeseen, threat to public health and making the declaration is necessary to
respond to the threat.
sharing declaration is to be made by exempt legislative instrument.
1.76 The declaration must specify the kinds of information to which the
declaration applies; the extent to which the declaration applies
to personal
information or information, if disclosed, that could reasonably be expected to
found an action for breach of a duty of
confidence; the entity that may collect,
use or disclose the information; the entity that the information may be
disclosed to and
the permitted purposes of the collection, use or
disclosure.
The permitted
purpose must be a purpose that is directly related to preventing or reducing the
threat to public health.
sharing declaration may be subject to conditions.
1.77 At any time when a data sharing declaration is in force, an entity may
collect, use or disclose information if it is for a permitted
purpose specified
in the declaration; the information is of a kind specified in the declaration;
the entity is specified in the declaration;
the information is disclosed to an
entity specified in the declaration; and any conditions are
Preliminary international human rights legal
Right to health and privacy
1.78 To the extent that this measure helps respond to a public health threat
and improve access to health information and advice,
this would promote the
right to health as set out above.
1.79 However, by authorising the collection, use and disclosure of
information, including personal information, by way of a data sharing
declaration, the measure engages and limits the right to privacy. The content of
the right to privacy, including permissible limitations,
is set out above. The
statement of compatibility acknowledges that this clause limits the right to
1.80 The explanatory memorandum states that the data sharing declaration:
...is intended to enhance information exchange between Australian Government
agencies, State and Territory authorities, private sector
organisations,
non-government organisations and others, in the case of a severe and immediate,
or severe or unforeseen, threat to
public health. It does this by establishing a
clear and certain legal basis for the management of the collection, use and
of information. Use of the declaration power is not intended to be
limited to information sharing to and from the Australian CDC
[the Centre]. The
intent is to address historical challenges with intersectoral data sharing for
unforeseen public health challenges,
including the COVID-19 pandemic and the
2022 Japanese Encephalitis Virus Communicable Disease Incident of National
Significance.
1.81 The right to privacy may be permissibly limited where the limitation
pursues a legitimate objective, is rationally connected
to that objective and is
a proportionate means of achieving that objective.
1.82 Insofar as the declaration enables data sharing in times of severe
public health threats, this likely constitutes a legitimate
objective under
international human rights law and the measure would likely be rationally
connected to this objective.
1.83 Regarding proportionality, a number of factors need to be considered. In
considering whether there are other less rights restrictive
ways to achieve the
stated objective, it is noted that information may be disclosed without the
consent of the individual to whom
the information pertains. It is not clear
whether it is feasible to require the Director-General to seek the consent of
the affected
individuals or provide notification that their information has or
is likely to be shared. This is especially pertinent as the information
been disclosed by an individual to a certain entity for a specific purpose, and
this measure may authorise the sharing of
that information for a different
purpose. An individual's ability to keep track of what personal information is
collected about them,
and control the many ways in which that information can be
used and shared, becomes more difficult with larger datasets and the fusing
personal data from various
The UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights has noted that the sharing of data with third
parties as well as the long-term storage
of personal data often amounts to
further privacy intrusions and other adverse human rights impacts, many of which
may not have been
envisaged at the time of data
collection.
1.84 Regarding the existence of safeguards, a data sharing declaration
remains in force for a maximum period of 12 months from its
commencement.
important safeguard to prevent a declaration remaining in force indefinitely,
and requires the Director-General to turn
their mind to how long a declaration
will be required at the time of making the declaration. Further, the provisions
requiring the
declaration to specify the permitted purposes for the use and
disclosure of information, and that the making of the declaration is
to respond to the threat to public health, may act as safeguard to prevent the
unnecessary disclosure of personal information.
However, a data sharing
declaration made by the Director-General is a legislative instrument that is
exempt from disallowance.
removes an important safeguard in the ability of the Parliament to effectively
scrutinise the legislation, including for permissible
limitations on human
rights, and disallow the instrument if
1.85 The extent of the limitation on the right to privacy remains unclear as
although the declaration must prescribe the information
to which the declaration
applies, the detail of the measure and its potential limitation on the right to
in a future exempt legislative instrument. The extent
of the information that may be permissibly disclosed, and the purpose of
disclosure,
under the measure is therefore unclear and may encompasses a broad
spectrum of information.
1.86 If this measure impermissibly limited a person’s right to privacy,
it is not clear if there is an effective remedy to address
this potential
limitation as the bill removes civil liability for the collection, use or
disclosure of authorised
information.
The right to an
effective remedy requires the availability of a remedy which is effective with
respect to any violation of rights
and freedoms recognised by the International
Covenant on Civil and Political
While limitations may be
placed in particular circumstances on the nature of the remedy provided
(judicial or otherwise), states
must comply with the fundamental obligation to
provide a remedy that is
Committee view
1.87 The committee notes that the Director-General’s power to make a
data sharing declaration if satisfied there is a severe
and immediate, or severe
and unforeseen, threat to public health engages and limits the right to privacy
insofar as a declaration
may authorise the disclosure of personal information.
The committee considers further information is required to assess the
compatibility
of this measure with this right, and as such seeks the minister's
advice in relation to:
(a) whether individuals will be informed that their information has been or
is likely to be disclosed under a data sharing declaration;
(b) why a declaration is exempt from disallowance;
(c) whether the bill could include specific safeguards relating to the
collection, use and disclosure of personal information in data
declarations; and
(d) whether there are any effective remedies for the potential violation of
the right to privacy.
This entry can be cited as:
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights, Australian Centre for Disease
Control Bill 2025,
Report 5 of 2025
[2025] AUPJCHR 34.
Australian Centre for Disease
Control Bill 2025, clause 21.
Australian Centre for Disease
Control Bill 2025, subclause 21(2).
Australian Centre for Disease
Control Bill 2025, clause 20.
Australian Centre for Disease
Control Bill 2025, clause 5.
Australian Centre for Disease
Control Bill 2025, clause 5.
Australian Centre for Disease
Control Bill 2025, clause 5.
Australian Centre for Disease
Control Bill 2025, clause 22.
Australian Centre for Disease
Control Bill 2025, clause 23.
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, article 12(1).
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, article 12(2)(c).
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 17.
Statement of compatibility,
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, statement of compatibility, p. 10.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, explanatory memorandum, p. 36.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clause 5.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, paragraph 43(1)(a).
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, paragraph 43(2)(a).
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clause 42.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, paragraph 43(1)(b).
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clause 43.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, subclause 43(3).
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clause 42 defines ‘designated data service
provider’ as the Australian
Bureau of Statistics, the Australian Institute
of Health and Welfare, and any other Australian government entity determined by
Director-General.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, statement of compatibility, p. 11.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, explanatory memorandum, p. 48.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, statement of compatibility, p. 11.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, explanatory memorandum, p. 47.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, explanatory memorandum, p. 47.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clause 42 defines ‘designated data service
provider’ as the Australian
Bureau of Statistics, the Australian Institute
of Health and Welfare, and any other Australian government entity determined by
Director-General.
UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights,
The right to privacy in the digital age
, A/HRC/39/29 (2018)
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, subclause 45(1).
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clause 42.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, subclause 45(4).
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clause 48.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clause 47.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clause 47.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, paragraph 45(4)(a).
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, explanatory memorandum, p. 49.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, explanatory memorandum, pp. 49-50.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, paragraphs 45(4)(b) and 45(4)(c).
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clauses 26 and 27. Clause 30 provides for the
appointment of Advisory Council members.
At least one appointed member must be
an Aboriginal person and/or Torres Strait Islander, or have expertise,
qualifications or experience
in the health needs of Aboriginal persons and/or
Torres Strait Islanders. Members must have expertise, qualifications or
in specified fields, including public health, human rights or
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, explanatory memorandum, p. 49.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, explanatory memorandum, p. 50.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, subclause 45(4).
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, explanatory memorandum, p. 50.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, explanatory memorandum, p. 50.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, subclause 77(4).
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, explanatory memorandum, p. 50.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clause 46.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clause 49.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, paragraph 49(3)(c).
There is international case
law to indicate that this protection only extends to attacks which are unlawful.
RLM v Trinidad and Tobago
, UN Human Rights Committee Communication
No. 380/89 (1993); and
IP v Finland,
UN Human Rights Committee
Communication No. 450/91 (1993).
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, explanatory memorandum, pp. 51-52.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, subclause 49(4).
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, part 4, division 3.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clause 5.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clause 5.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025 (Consequential Amendments and Transitional Provisions)
Bill, Schedule 2, part 1,
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clause 5.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clauses 51 and 52.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clause 53.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clause 54.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clauses 55 and 56.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clause 57.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clause 58.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clause 59.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clauses 60 and 61.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clauses 62 and 64.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clause 63.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clauses 65 and 66.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, explanatory memorandum, p. 52.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, explanatory memorandum, p. 55.
NK v Netherlands
Human Rights Committee Communication No.2326/2013 (2018) [9.5].
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, explanatory memorandum, p.53.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clause 71.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, statement of compatibility, p. 11.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clause 5 defines ‘entrusted person’ as
any of the following: (a) the
Minister; (b) the Director-General; (c) any other
Advisory Council member; (d) an APS employee in the Centre; (e) a member of an
advisory board established by the Director-General under
subsection 24(1)
Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013
; (f) an APS
employee in the Department; (g) a person employed or engaged by the Commonwealth
to provide services to the Commonwealth
in connection with the Department; (h) a
person who is employed or engaged by a designated data service provider that has
been engaged
to provide data services to the Director-General, and who is
performing duties related to the provision of those services; (i) a
engaged to assist the Centre.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clauses 51 and 52.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clause 65.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, subclause 77(3).
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), article 2(3). See,
Kazantzis v
UN Human Rights Committee Communication No. 972/01
Faure v Australia,
UN Human Rights Committee Communication No. 1036/01
(2005). States must not only provide remedies for violations of the ICCPR,
but must also provide forums in which a person can pursue
arguable if
unsuccessful claims of violations of the ICCPR. Per
C v Australia
UN Human Rights Committee Communication No. 900/99 (2002), remedies
sufficient for the purposes of article 5(2)(b) of the ICCPR must
binding obligatory effect.
See UN Human Rights
General Comment No. 29: States of Emergency (Article 4)
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, subclause 67(1).
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, subclause 67(2).
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, subclause 67(3).
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clause 69.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, statement of compatibility, p. 10.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, explanatory memorandum, pp. 61–62.
UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights,
The right to privacy in the digital age
, A/HRC/39/29 (2018)
UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights,
The right to privacy in the digital age
, A/HRC/48/31 (2021)
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, clause 68.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, subclause 67(6).
The committee has
previously commented, in its consideration of COVID-19 legislation, that
legislation passed in times of emergency
in response to threats to public health
both promotes and limits rights and therefore the usual limitation criteria
continue to apply.
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human
Human rights scrutiny report of COVID-19 legislation: Report 5 of
(29 April 2020) pp. 1-4. In relation to exemption from disallowance during
times of emergency, the Senate Standing Committee
on the Scrutiny of Bills has
stated that Parliament’s oversight of Commonwealth law should be greater,
not lesser, when the
consequences of that law are significant...and that
emergency-related instruments...are more likely to impact upon individual rights
and liberties, see Senate Standing Committee on the Scrutiny of Bills,
Report: Review of exemption from disallowance provisions in the Biosecurity Act
(4 February 2022) p. 83. The Senate Standing Committee for Scrutiny of
Delegated Legislation has further noted that the disallowance
process does not
prevent an instrument coming into effect or hinder swift government action in an
emergency, and any actual disallowance
operates prospectively, see Senate
Standing Committee for Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation,
Inquiry into the
exemption of delegated legislation from parliamentary oversight: final
(16 March 2021) p. 55.
Australian Centre for
Disease Control Bill 2025, subclause 77(3).
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 2(3). See,
Kazantzis v Cyprus,
Human Rights Committee Communication No. 972/01
UN Human Rights Committee Communication No. 1036/01
(2005). States parties must not only provide remedies for violations of the
ICCPR, but must also provide forums in which a person
can pursue arguable if
unsuccessful claims of violations of the ICCPR. Per
C v Australia
UN Human Rights Committee Communication No. 900/99 (2002), remedies
sufficient for the purposes of article 5(2)(b) of the ICCPR must
have a binding
obligatory effect.
See UN Human Rights
General Comment No. 29: States of Emergency (Article 4)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (315 KB)
PDF format (169 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter