URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJCHR/2025/36.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:08:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Removal of natural justice
International human rights legal advice
Prohibition on the expulsion of aliens without due process
Right to non-refoulement; prohibition against torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment; and right to an effective remedy
Multiple human rights
Right to a fair hearing
Committee view
Amendment (2025 Measures No. 1) Bill
This bill (now Act) removes the rules of natural justice in relation to
third country reception arrangements, the giving of removal
pathway directions
and the collection, use and disclosure of certain information. The bill provides
for the retrospective validation
of things done or purportedly done in relation
to these matters if those things would otherwise be wholly or partly invalid
the rules of natural justice were not observed.
The bill also retrospectively validates certain visa decisions made on or
before 8 November 2023.
House of Representatives, 26 August 2025
Prohibition on the expulsion of aliens without due process;
non-refoulement; prohibition against torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment; criminal process rights; freedom of movement; health;
liberty; privacy; protection of the family; effective
remedy; freedom of
assembly; freedom of association; freedom of expression; fair hearing
Removal of natural justice
1.119 The bill (now Act) amends the
Migration Act 1958
(Migration Act)
to provide that the rules of natural justice do not apply to an exercise of
power in relation to:
• the collection, use or disclosure of criminal history information to
a person or body to inform the performance of a function,
or exercise of a
power, under the Migration Act or the
regulations;
• the collection, use or disclosure of information, including personal
information, about a removal pathway non-citizen or former
removal pathway
non-citizen who does not hold a substantive visa or criminal justice visa, to
the government of a foreign
• third country reception arrangements, including entering into such
arrangements and doing a thing in relation to such arrangements
with a foreign
country (including in relation to third country reception
functions);
• directions by the minister to a removal pathway non-citizen to do or
not do certain things to effect their removal (and where
failure to comply is an
1.120 The rules of natural justice, or procedural fairness, include the fair
hearing rule (a hearing must be conducted by an independent
and impartial court
or tribunal, before which all parties are equal, and have a reasonable
opportunity to present their
and the rule against actual
and apparent bias.
1.121 The bill applies these amendments to an exercise of power done before,
on or after commencement.
provides for the retrospective validation of things done or purportedly done in
relation to these matters if those things
would otherwise be wholly or partly
invalid because the rules of natural justice were not
International human rights legal advice
Prohibition on the expulsion of aliens without due
1.122 By disapplying the rules of natural justice in relation to the exercise
of certain powers that facilitate the removal of non-citizens
from Australia,
this measure engages the right not to be expelled from a country without due
1.123 The right not to be expelled from a country without due process is
protected by article 13 of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political
Rights, which provides that:
An alien lawfully in the territory of a State Party to the present Covenant
may be expelled therefrom only in pursuance of a decision
reached in accordance
with law and shall, except where compelling reasons of national security
otherwise require, be allowed to submit
the reasons against his expulsion and to
have his case reviewed by, and be represented for the purpose before, the
competent authority
or a person or persons especially designated by the
competent authority.
1.124 Article 13 incorporates notions of
due process also reflected in article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political
protects the right to a fair
In particular, the
United Nations (UN) Human Rights Committee has stated that article 13
encompasses ‘the guarantee of equality
of all persons before the courts
and tribunals as enshrined in [article 14(1)] and the principles of
impartiality, fairness and equality
of arms implicit in this guarantee are
applicable’.
The UN Human
Rights Committee has further stated that the article requires that 'an
alien...be given full facilities for pursuing
his remedy against expulsion so
that this right will in all circumstances of his case be an effective
1.125 The measure limits the due process requirements in article 13 to the
extent that it restricts a person’s ability to: correct
any information
shared about them to foreign governments; provide information about their family
and connection to Australia; or
provide reasons why they should not be returned
to a particular country, thereby restricting their ability to effectively
a removal pathway direction and pursue a remedy against
1.126 The due process guarantees in article 13 may be departed from, but only
when ‘compelling reasons of national security’
The UN Human Rights
Committee appears to have interpreted the exception of ‘compelling reasons
of national security’
to be a reasonably high threshold which states must
meet before departing from their due process
obligations.
1.127 In this case, the justification for the removal of natural justice
requirements (and therefore limiting due process guarantees)
does not appear to
be on the basis of national security. The statement of compatibility states
[r]emoving procedural fairness from these provisions is necessary to ensure
that removal and third country reception processes are
not subject to further
delay or uncertainty once the non-citizen has exhausted all avenues to remain in
Australia on a substantive
visa. These powers are intended to be exercised only
at the final stage after all other options have been exhausted. At this final
stage, the policy intent is that decisions should be implemented swiftly and
with certainty to give effect to the lawful removal
non-citizens.
1.128 Where there are no compelling reasons of national security not to allow
an alien to submit reasons against their expulsion,
the prohibition against
expulsion of aliens without due process may nevertheless be subject to
permissible limitations where the
limitation pursues a legitimate objective, is
rationally connected to that objective and is a proportionate means of achieving
1.129 A legitimate objective is one that is
necessary and addresses an issue of public or social concern that is pressing
and substantial
enough to warrant limiting the right. As
above, it appears that the objective of the measure is to ensure that once a
decision has been made to remove a non-citizen,
that this is carried out quickly
and is not delayed by challenges to the decision. It is not sufficient, however,
that a measure
simply seeks an outcome regarded as desirable or convenient.
Administrative convenience, in and of itself, is unlikely to be sufficient
constitute a legitimate objective for the purposes of international human rights
1.130 Further, no information is provided in the explanatory materials to
demonstrate that there is a pressing and substantial need
to ensure that removal
and third country reception processes are not subject to ‘delay or
uncertainty’.
therefore not clear why the measure is necessary. As such, it has not been
established that the measure pursues a legitimate
objective for the purposes of
international human rights law. As to rational connection, while removing
natural justice requirements
may expedite an individual’s removal from
Australia and therefore be effective to achieve the stated objective of
delay or uncertainty, concerns remain that the objective itself is
not legitimate.
1.131 A key aspect of whether a limitation on a
right can be justified is whether the limitation is proportionate to the
being sought. In this respect, it is necessary to consider a number of
factors, including whether a proposed limitation is sufficiently
circumscribed;
whether the measure provides sufficient flexibility to treat different cases
differently; and whether it is accompanied
by sufficient safeguards, including
where there is the possibility of oversight and the availability of review.
1.132 In relation to whether the measure is sufficiently circumscribed, the
statement of compatibility states that ‘the scope
of the relevant
provisions involves operational and administrative decisions that are not suited
to individual consultation
processes’.
However, no
information is provided as to why these powers may be ill-suited to individual
consultation, particularly if an individual
has not had the opportunity to
provide reasons as to why their removal to a particular country with which the
Commonwealth has a
third country reception arrangement is inappropriate.
1.133 Further, the statement of compatibility notes that the removal of
natural justice requirements in relation to third country
reception arrangements
is consistent with the Federal Court decision of
TCXM v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural
It states that the
decision ‘held that actions and things done in relation to third country
reception arrangements are not
conditioned on an obligation to afford procedural
fairness to an affected
However, this
case appears to expressly consider the exercise of executive power to enter into
third country reception arrangements
with a foreign country conferred by section
198AHB(2) of the Migration Act.
The decision did not engage with the exclusion of natural justice in relation to
the other provisions proposed in this bill and as
such it is unclear why these
decisions are considered ill-suited to individual consultation.
1.134 Further, a measure which imposes a blanket prohibition without regard
to the merits of an individual case is less likely to
be proportionate than
those which provide flexibility to treat different cases differently. In this
case, the removal of natural
justice applies to all non-citizens subject to
these provisions without consideration of the individual merits of the case. The
of compatibility justifies this on the basis that despite the
exclusion of procedural fairness, a non-citizen subject to removal
would already
have had opportunities to challenge the decision:
A person who is on a removal pathway will have had the opportunity to submit
reasons against their expulsion in the context of the
refusal or cancellation of
their substantive visa, and to have that decision reviewed, through merits
review and/or judicial review
avenues. Further, the cessation of the BVR
[Bridging visa R] and subsequent removal processes may be subject to judicial
In addition, a person may be able to submit reasons against being
removed to the particular third country that has granted the permission
and remain, for example if there are
refoulement
concerns, through
ministerial intervention or other
1.135 However, it is unclear whether these other processes of review
constitute sufficient safeguards in practice. Under the Migration
Act there are
certain bases on which a decision to cancel a visa is not discretionary, but
This includes when a
person has been sentenced to imprisonment for 12 months or more (which
incidentally would include imprisonment
for failure to comply with a removal
pathway decision). There is no discretion to consider any individual
circumstances. In relation
to the cancellation of a BVR, the visa automatically
ceases when a third country grants the person permission to enter and remain
the country. While this process may be subject to judicial review, with respect
to the safeguard value of judicial review in the
context of Australia’s
immigration detention regime, the UN Human Rights Committee has consistently
found that ‘the scope
of domestic judicial review of immigration detention
was insufficiently broad to examine an individual’s detention in
substantive
the recent case of
M.I. et al v Australia
, the UN Human Rights Committee
found that Australia had not demonstrated that Australian domestic courts have
the authority to make
individualised rulings on the justification for each
individual detainee’s detention and considered that Australia violated
article 9(4) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which
provides that a person who is deprived of their liberty
by detention must be
entitled to judicial review of the lawfulness of their detention and order of
release if the detention is unlawful.
1.136 The statement of compatibility states that there may be opportunities
for consideration of an individual’s circumstances
as part of a
ministerial intervention.
However, ministerial intervention powers are non-delegable and non-compellable;
they are not subject to review; and a person may
be removed from Australia
regardless of whether they have asked the minister to exercise their personal
ministerial intervention
1.137 As the measure does not appear to be sufficiently circumscribed, and in
the absence of effective safeguards and flexibility
to consider the
circumstances of each individual, the measure does not appear to be compatible
with the prohibition on expulsion
of aliens without due process.
Right to non-refoulement; prohibition against
torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment; and right to an effective
1.138 By disapplying the rules of natural justice, the measure may result in
a greater likelihood that individuals are removed from
Australia and that they
may not have the opportunity to provide reasons as to why they should not be
removed to a country where they
face a risk of persecution. Australia has
'non-refoulement' obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights
and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or
Punishment.
This means that
Australia must not return, deport or otherwise remove any person to a country
where there is a real risk that they
would face persecution, torture or other
serious forms of harm, such as the death penalty; arbitrary deprivation of life;
inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment.
The UN Human Rights
Committee has stated that a risk in this context ‘must be personal and
that there is a high threshold for
providing substantial grounds to establish
that a real risk of irreparable harm
The Committee
has observed that ‘it is generally for the organs of States parties to
examine the facts and evidence of the
case in question in order to determine
whether such a risk exists, unless it can be established that the assessment was
clearly arbitrary
or amounted to a manifest error or denial of
1.139 Australia’s non-refoulement obligations include the requirement
for independent, effective and impartial review of decisions
to deport or remove
a person. The UN Committee Against Torture has stated:
Each case should be examined individually, impartially and independently by
the State party through competent administrative and/or
judicial authorities, in
conformity with essential procedural safeguards, notably the guarantee of a
prompt and transparent process,
a review of the deportation decision and a
suspensive effect of the appeal. In each case, the person concerned should be
of the intended deportation in a timely
1.140 This obligation relates to the right to an effective remedy, which
requires the availability of a remedy which is effective
with respect to any
violation of rights and freedoms recognised by the
Such review mechanisms
are important in guarding against the potentially irreparable harm which may be
caused by breaches of Australia's
non-refoulement
obligations.
Non-refoulement
obligations are absolute and may not be subject to any
limitations.
1.141 The statement of compatibility states that subsection 197C(3) of the
Migration Act provides that a person cannot be removed
to a country in respect
of which a protection finding was
It further states that:
Despite the exclusion of procedural fairness prior to giving a removal
pathway direction, there remain various avenues for a person
to raise protection
claims against their removal to their country of origin, including through the
protection visa process...or if
the person has new protection claims in relation
to a country they have previously been assessed against and had no protection
made, ministerial intervention processes may be available to allow
consideration of the new claims to take place. There remain options
to identify
any such claims as part of the operational procedures that have been put in
place prior to the giving of a removal pathway
1.142 However, as noted above, ministerial intervention powers are limited in
that they rely on the discretion of the minister and
are not subject to review.
Additionally, the operational procedures of the department do not require
officers to consider any new
protection claims an individual may make.
Discretionary or administrative safeguards alone are unlikely to constitute
adequate safeguards
as they are less stringent than the protection of statutory
1.143 In relation to chain
refoulement
(a risk that the receiving
foreign country subsequently refouls the person to the country from which the
person had sought protection
persecution),
the statement of
compatibility states:
Where a person makes protection claims in relation to a third country to
which they may be removed, including a country with which
Australia has a
reception arrangement, or where there may be chain
refoulement
with respect to the third country, there is scope to identify such cases and
refer them for ministerial intervention consideration
prior to removal actually
taking place...while procedural fairness is excluded from processes relating to
third country reception
arrangements, the Department would nevertheless ensure
that any information relating to potential
refoulement
concerns with
respect to the third country would be assessed before removal
1.144 As noted above, the ministerial intervention powers and the
department’s processes are discretionary and it is unclear
whether they
provide sufficient safeguards to ensure that chain
refoulement
occur in practice.
1.145 Additionally, when this measure was initially introduced, the former
minister advised the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human
Rights that the risk
of chain refoulement will be mitigated via third country reception arrangements,
which can include safeguards
relating to the treatment of persons by the
reception country. The minister advised that such safeguards are not included in
Migration Act itself to enable the government to tailor safeguards,
processes and procedures to the individual circumstances of the
third country.
The minister further noted that existing policies, practices and procedures
relating to removal from Australia and
compliance with non-refoulement
obligations will also be relied on to ensure removals are conducted consistently
with Australia’s
human rights
obligations.
1.146 However, without further detail as to the nature of third country
reception arrangements and the type of safeguards that may
be included in such
arrangements, it is not possible to conclude whether such arrangements would
contain sufficient safeguards to
ensure that a person is not removed to a third
country pursuant to the measure where there is a real risk that they may be
to ill-treatment or torture in that country (for example, where the
person is detained in the third country and the conditions of
detention amount
to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or torture). While the Migration Act
includes safeguards with respect to
direct refoulement (insofar as an individual
cannot be removed to a country in respect of which non-refoulement obligations
there may be a risk of chain refoulement, depending on the strength of
the safeguards included in any third country reception
arrangements.
By disapplying
the rules of natural justice, an individual may not have adequate opportunity to
provide reasons for why they should
not be removed to a country due to concerns
refoulement
. This measure may therefore increase the risk that
an individual is removed to a country where they would face persecution, torture
or other serious forms of harm, which is not consistent with Australia’s
non-refoulement obligations.
1.147 Further, given the inadequacy of judicial review in the context of this
measure and the fact that a person may be removed notwithstanding
that they have
asked the minister to exercise their personal ministerial intervention power,
concerns arise that the measure may
not be compatible with Australia’s
non-refoulement obligations with respect to the availability of independent,
effective and
impartial review of decisions to remove a person.
Multiple human rights
1.148 As outlined above, the measure seeks to disapply the rules of natural
justice to an exercise of power in relation to the collection,
use or disclosure
of information (including to a foreign government), third country arrangements
and removal pathway directions.
These powers themselves engage and limit
multiple human rights. By disapplying the rules of natural justice, these
amendments likely
exacerbate the underlying human rights concerns with these
powers to the extent that they limit an individual’s ability to
the exercise of these powers.
1.149 The committee previously commented on the
Migration Amendment
which introduced the collection, use and disclosure of
information powers and the third country reception arrangements in
The committee
previously commented on the
Migration Amendment (Removal and Other Measures)
which introduced the power for the minister to give a removal pathway
direction in
1.150 The committee considered that these powers engaged and limited numerous
human rights, including criminal process rights; due
process rights with respect
to the expulsion of aliens; the rights to freedom of movement, health, liberty,
the family, freedom of assembly, association, expression
and effective remedy; non-refoulement obligations, and the prohibition on
torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. The relevant rights engaged
by each of these powers is summarised below.
Collection, use and disclosure of information
1.151 In particular, by providing for the collection, use and disclosure of
criminal history information to a range of authorities
in Australia, and the
collection, use and disclosure of personal information (which may include
criminal history information) to
foreign countries, these measures engage and
limit the right to privacy.
right to privacy includes respect for informational privacy, including the right
to respect for private and confidential information,
particularly the storing,
use and sharing of such
information.
It also includes
the right to control the dissemination of information about one's private
1.152 If the use and disclosure of such information led to a decision to
cancel a person’s visa and remove them to a foreign
country, there could
be a risk that the measures may (depending on the circumstances) engage and
limit further rights, such as the
right to life (if a person were exposed to the
risk of the death penalty in a foreign country), the prohibition on torture and
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (if they were exposed to
such a risk in a foreign country as a result of the disclosure),
non-refoulement (if the disclosure contributed to their return to a country in
which they faced persecution). The right to life
imposes an obligation on
Australia to protect people from being killed by others or from identified
risks. As Australia has prohibited
the death penalty, this prohibits Australia
from deporting or extraditing a person to a country where that person may face
Power to issue a removal pathway direction
1.153 In relation to the minister’s power to issue a removal pathway
direction and require non-citizens to do things that would
facilitate their
removal from Australia, this power engages and limits numerous human rights. The
imposition of a mandatory minimum
sentence of imprisonment for non-compliance
with a removal pathway direction, and the cessation of a person’s BVR and
mandatory immigration detention while they await removal to a third
country, engages and limits the right to liberty and right to
a fair trial. The
making of a removal pathway direction would require a person to disclose
personal information, and otherwise undertake
activities that may impact their
personal life, and would therefore engage and limit the right to privacy.
1.154 Further, a removal pathway direction may require the person to do (or
not do) ‘a thing’, if the minister is satisfied
that the doing or
not doing of the thing is reasonably necessary to determine whether there is a
real prospect of the removal of
the non-citizen from Australia becoming
practicable in the reasonably foreseeable future, or to facilitate the removal
of the non-citizen
from Australia. Depending on what ‘things’ were
directed pursuant to this measure, a removal pathway direction may engage
limit further rights, such as the rights to freedom of expression, assembly and
association. For example, if the minister directed
a person not to engage in
certain speech or protest, or meet with certain people, if to do so might make
the removal of the person
to another country more difficult (for example, if
attending such protests may make it more likely that the person would be owed
protection given what the other country’s views may be on the person
attending such a protest). The right to freedom of expression
includes the
freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, either
orally, in writing or print, in the form
of art, or through any other media of
an individual's choice.
right to freedom of assembly provides that all people have the right to peaceful
This is the right of
people to gather as a group for a specific purpose. It is strongly linked to the
right to freedom of expression,
as it is a means for people together to express
their views. The right to freedom of association protects the right of all
to group together voluntarily for a common goal and to form and join an
association.
supports many other rights, such as freedom of expression, religion, assembly
and political rights.
Third country reception arrangements and effective control
1.155 Third country reception arrangements engage and limit the right to
freedom of movement, which includes the right to enter one’s
Where it results in
separation of that person from their family in Australia, this may engage the
right to protection of the family,
which requires the state not to arbitrarily
or unlawfully interfere in family life and to adopt measures to protect the
This right may be
engaged where a person is expelled from a country without due process and is
thereby separated from their
Were a person exposed
to a risk of poor treatment in the foreign country, this may engage the absolute
prohibition against torture
and other cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment or
punishment. As outlined above, if there were a risk that the person’s
to the foreign country led to that person being refouled to a country
from which they had sought protection from persecution (‘chain
refoulement’), this may engage the right to non-refoulement. Further, as
the Migration Act establishes wide-ranging immunities
for the Commonwealth from
civil liability (including with respect to actions in foreign countries not done
in good faith), this engages
the right to an effective remedy.
1.156 Noting that the potential human rights violations arising from third
country reception arrangements may occur outside of Australia’s
Australia’s human rights obligations extend to
individuals outside its
territory is complex.
possible for Australia to have ‘effective control’ of persons even
if formal legal authority over those persons
lies with another
1.157 While much will depend on the nature of the arrangements negotiated and
implemented in practice, given the broad authority in
the Migration Act for the
Commonwealth to fund third country arrangements and take any action in relation
to a third party reception
function, there appears to be a high likelihood that
Australia would exercise ‘effective control’ over individuals under
a third country reception arrangement as a matter of international law and
therefore owe human rights obligations to such
individuals.
1.158 In this regard, the statement of compatibility states that:
The Government considers that, once a person has been lawfully removed from
Australia to a third country, that person falls under
the jurisdiction and
authority of the receiving state. Australia does not direct the day-to-day
operation of a third country reception
arrangement or the exercise of
governmental powers by the receiving state, including decisions about
accommodation and welfare. While
Australia may provide financial and
administrative support to enable these arrangements to operate, such support
does not equate
to the exercise of control over individuals in a manner that
would attract Australia’s international human rights
obligations.
1.159 The question as to whether Australia is exercising sufficient control
and authority is a question of fact and degree. In the
recent case of
v Australia
, the UN Human Rights Committee considered whether Australia
exercised effective control with respect to the detention of a refugee
The UN Human Rights Committee observed that in accordance with the Migration Act
and arrangements set out in a memorandum
of understanding between Australia and
Nauru, the refugee was transferred from Australia to authorities in Nauru, where
she was immediately
detained in a regional processing centre. The UN Human
Rights Committee considered that the refugee’s initial detention in
‘was a necessary and foreseeable consequence of [Australia’s]...
transfer of the author, at a minimum during the
processing of her asylum
1.160 The UN Human Rights Committee further observed that Australia:
...funded the detention operations in Nauru, was authorized to manage them,
participated in monitoring them, selected companies which
would be responsible
(directly or through subcontractors) for construction, security, garrison,
health, and other services at the
detention centre, and provided police services
to Nauru to help manage the detention
operations.
1.161 The UN Human Rights Committee concluded that:
...[Australia] exercised numerous elements of effective control over the
detention operations at the regional processing centre in
Nauru while the author
was detained there from 2014 to 2018. The Committee considers that those
elements of control went beyond a
general situation of dependence and support,
and that the physical transfer of the author to Nauru did not extinguish the
State party’s
obligations towards her under article 9 [the right to
liberty] of the Covenant. The Committee considers that while she was detained
the centre, the author was subject to the jurisdiction of the State party, and
that the fact of her detention there is attributable
to the State party [being
Australia].
1.162 No information is provided in the statement of compatibility as to the
detail of this third country reception arrangement. Further,
no information is
provided as to the recent UN Human Rights Committee comments which considered
Australia to have effective control
over its previous operations in Nauru.
However, in a recent hearing into this bill, the Department of Home Affairs
officers have
stated that under the current third country reception arrangement
with Nauru, Australia has committed $408 million to Nauru in the
first year of
operation with a payment of $70 million each subsequent year, to be managed in a
jointly governed trust fund with
It is expected to amount
to approximately $2.5 billion over the course of the
1.163 Given the breadth of authority for the Commonwealth to take actions
under a third country reception arrangement and the financial
control the
Commonwealth has and will maintain over the arrangement with Nauru, the removal
from Australia of non-citizens under
this arrangement, subsequent treatment in
the foreign country, and any risk of return to a country where they had faced
persecution,
would engage Australia’s human rights obligations.
Right to a fair hearing
1.164 By providing for the disapplication of natural justice to an exercise
of power done before, on or after commencement, and by
providing for the
retrospective validation of a thing done or purportedly done before commencement
of the bill, measures may interfere
with proceedings instituted on or before
commencement of the bill that have not yet concluded. In a recent hearing in
relation to
this bill, Department of Home Affairs officials stated that a
matter relating to three individuals subject to the interim third-country
reception arrangement with Nauru is on its way to being removed to the High
Court of Australia, following the Federal Court judgment
TCXM v Minister
for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
, which the Commonwealth won at
first instance.
In that case,
it was held that there was no obligation to afford procedural fairness in
relation to the entering into an agreement
between Australia and a foreign
By disapplying natural
justice rules and retrospectively validating things done before commencement of
the bill while proceedings
are on foot, this may interfere with the conduct of
these judicial proceedings, raising questions as to whether this may limit the
right to a fair hearing.
1.165 The right to a fair hearing applies to civil proceedings before both
courts and tribunals. The right is concerned with procedural
fairness, and
encompasses notions of equality in proceedings, and the requirement that
hearings are conducted by an independent and
impartial body. The statement of
compatibility does not identify that this aspect of the right to a fair hearing
may be engaged by
this measure.
1.166 While some elements of the right to a fair hearing may be subject to
permissible limitations,
requirement of competence, independence and impartiality of a tribunal is
absolute and may not be subject to any
The requirement of
independence requires:
actual independence of the judiciary from political interference by the
executive branch and legislature...A situation where the functions
competencies of the judiciary and the executive are not clearly distinguishable
or where the latter is able to control or direct
the former is incompatible with
the notion of independent
1.167 In this case, the legislature has passed legislation with the specific
purpose of affecting the outcome of a case soon to be
before the High Court of
Australia. If, in the absence of this legislation, the High Court would have
found that procedural fairness
is owed to the applicant (and the two other
persons part of the interim arrangement to be removed from Australia to Nauru),
the effect of this legislation is to interfere with that decision. This
raises concerns of interference by the legislature with the
decision-making of
the judiciary and may impermissibly limit the right to a fair hearing.
Committee view
1.168 The committee notes that this bill (now Act) amends the
(Migration Act) to provide that the rules of natural justice
do not apply to an exercise of power in relation to the collection,
disclosure of information (including to foreign governments); third country
reception arrangements; and removal pathway directions
to non-citizens. The
committee notes that this applies to an exercise of power done before, on or
after commencement of the bill,
and provides for the retrospective validation of
things done or purportedly done in relation to these matters if those things
otherwise be wholly or partly invalid because the rules of natural justice
were not observed.
1.169 The committee notes that by disapplying the rules of natural justice in
relation to the exercise of certain powers that facilitate
the removal of
non-citizens from Australia, this engages the right not to be expelled from a
country without due process. The committee
considers that ensuring that removal
and third country reception processes are not subject to ‘delay or
uncertainty’
is not a legitimate objective for the purposes of
international human rights law. The committee considers that as the rules of
justice are to be disapplied for numerous powers, and as the measure
imposes a blanket prohibition without regard to the merits of
an individual case
with limited other processes of review, the measure does not appear to be
compatible with the prohibition on expulsion
of aliens without due process.
1.170 The committee further notes that by disapplying the rules of natural
justice, this may result in a greater likelihood that individuals
are removed
from Australia and that they may not have the opportunity to provide reasons as
to why they should not be removed to
a country where they face a risk of
persecution. This engages Australia’s non-refoulement obligations and
right to an effective
remedy. The committee considers that it is not possible to
conclude whether third country reception arrangements would contain sufficient
safeguards to ensure that a person is not removed to a third country where there
is a real risk that they may be exposed to ill-treatment
or torture in that
country or a real risk of chain
refoulement
. The committee also considers
that given the inadequacy of judicial review in the context of this measure and
the fact that a person
may be removed notwithstanding that they have asked the
minister to exercise their personal ministerial intervention power, concerns
arise that the measure may not be compatible with Australia’s
non-refoulement obligations with respect to the availability
of independent,
effective and impartial review of decisions to remove a person.
1.171 The committee notes that it has previously commented on the
Amendment Bill 2024
which introduced the collection, use and disclosure of
information powers and the third country reception arrangements in
and that it has
previously commented on the
Migration Amendment (Removal and Other Measures)
which introduced the power for the minister to give a removal pathway
direction in
1.172 The committee previously considered that these powers engaged and
limited numerous human rights. The committee considers that
by disapplying the
rules of natural justice, the amendments in this bill likely exacerbate the
underlying human rights concerns with
these powers to the extent that they limit
an individual’s ability to challenge the exercise of these powers.
1.173 The committee further notes that the bill directly affects the outcome
of a case currently pending before the High Court of
Australia. The committee
considers there is a risk that this could constitute an impermissible
interference with the independence
and impartiality of the judiciary, an element
of the right to a fair hearing.
1.174 The committee notes that this bill passed both Houses of Parliament
within six sitting days of
introduction.
It notes that
this short timeframe did not provide the committee with adequate time to
scrutinise the legislation and seek further
information in order to provide
appropriate advice to the Parliament as to the human rights compatibility of the
bill. This is of
particular concern given the significant human rights
implications of this bill. The committee draws this matter to the attention
the minister and the Parliament.
1.175 As the bill has now passed, the committee makes no further comment in
relation to this legislation.
This entry can be cited as:
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights,
Amendment (2025 Measures No. 1) Bill 2025
Report 5 of 2025
[2025] AUPJCHR 36.
Schedule 1, item 7, proposed
subsection 501M(5).
Schedule 1, item 2, proposed
subsection 198AAA(5A).
Schedule 1, item 3, proposed
section 198AHAA. A ‘third country reception arrangement’ is an
arrangement the Commonwealth
enters into with a foreign country in relation to
the removal of non‑citizens from Australia and their acceptance, receipt
or ongoing presence in the foreign country, see
subsection 198AHB(1)
Migration Act 1958
. A ‘third country reception function’, of
a foreign country, means the implementation of any law or policy, or the taking
of any action, by that country (including, if the foreign country so decides,
exercising restraint over the liberty of a person)
in connection with the role
of that country as a country which has agreed to the acceptance, receipt or
ongoing presence of persons
who are not citizens of that country, whether the
implementation or the taking of action occurs in that country or another
subsection 198AHB(5)
Migration Act 1958
Schedule 1, item 6, proposed
subsection 199C(9).
See UN Human Rights
General Comment No. 32: Article 14, Right to Equality before
Courts and Tribunals and to Fair Trial
(2007) [18].
Schedule 1, item 9.
Schedule 1, item 10.
UN Human Rights Committee,
General Comment No. 32: The right to equality before courts and tribunals and
to a fair trial
(2007) [17], [62].
The UN Human Rights
Committee has held that immigration and deportation proceedings are excluded
from the ambit of article 14. See,
for example,
Omo-Amenaghawon v
, UN Human Rights Committee Communication No. 2288/2013 (2015) [6.4];
Chadzjian et al. v Netherlands
, UN Human Rights Committee Communication
No. 1494/2006 (2008) [8.4]; and
PK v Canada
, UN Human Rights Committee
Communication No. 1234/2003 (2007) [7.4]-[7.5].
UN Human Rights Committee,
General Comment No. 32: The right to equality before courts and tribunals and
to a fair trial
(2007) [17], [63].
UN Human Rights Committee,
General Comment No. 15: The position of aliens under the covenant
See Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination,
General Recommendation No. 30:
discrimination against non-citizens
(2004) [25], where the Committee
stressed the importance of the right to challenge expulsion and access
effective remedy, noting that States should ensure that ‘non-citizens have
equal access to
effective remedies, including the right to challenge
expulsion orders, and are allowed
effectively to pursue such
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 13; UN Human Rights Committee,
Comment No. 15: The position of aliens under the Covenant
(1986) [10].
See, for example,
Mansour Leghaei and others v Australia,
United Nations Human Rights
Committee Communication No. 1937/2010 (2015): the partially dissenting opinion
of Committee members Sarah
Cleveland and Víctor Manuel
Rodríguez-Rescia (dissenting only because the Committee as a whole did
not consider the
article 13 arguments) is noteworthy with respect to the
national security exception in article 13. The Committee concluded at [10.4]
that ‘the author was never formally provided with the reasons for the
refusal to grant him the requested visa which resulted
in his duty to leave the
country, except for the general explanation that he was a threat to national
security based on security
assessments of which he did not even receive a
summary’. In light of this finding, Committee members Cleveland and
Rodríguez-Rescia
concluded at [5] that the ‘invocation of
“compelling reasons of national security” to justify the expulsion
the author...did not exempt the State from the obligation under article 13 to
provide the requisite procedural safeguards. The fact
that the State failed to
provide the author with these procedural safeguards constitutes a breach of the
obligation under article
13 to allow the author to submit the reasons against
his expulsion...This means that he should have been given the opportunity to
comment on the information submitted to them, at least in summary form’.
Mansour Ahani v
United Nations Human Rights
Committee Communication No. 1051/2002 (2004) [10.8]: ‘Given that the
domestic procedure allowed
the author to provide (limited) reasons against his
expulsion and to receive a degree of review of his case, it would be
inappropriate
for the Committee to accept that, in the proceedings before it,
“compelling reasons of national security” existed to
State party from its obligation under that article to provide the procedural
protections in question’. Other jurisprudence
of the UN Human Rights
Committee indicates that states have previously been afforded 'wide discretion'
as to whether national security
reasons exist but that states should at least
demonstrate that there are 'plausible grounds' for exercising the national
exception: see also
Alzery v Sweden,
United Nations Human Rights
Committee Communication No. 1416/2005 (2006).
Statement of
compatibility, p. 21.
In relation to the
substantive provisions which this bill amends, the committee previously
concluded it was unclear whether they
pursued legitimate objectives, see
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights,
(5 February 2025) pp. 105 and 128.
Statement of
compatibility, p.21.
TCXM v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2025] FCA 540.
Statement of
compatibility, p. 20.
TCXM v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2025] FCA 540
[161]-[162].
Statement of
compatibility, p. 27.
Migration Act
subsection 501(3A)
which provides that the minister ‘must’
cancel a visa if satisfied the person does not pass the character test because
they are serving a sentence of imprisonment because of a substantial criminal
record (being sentenced to imprisonment of 12 months
or more) or sexually based
offences involving a child.
See most recently
et al. v Australia
, UN Human Rights Committee Communication No. 2749/2016
(2024) [10.6].
Statement of
compatibility, p. 26.
Migration Act 1958
sections 197E
. In relation to the substantive issues which this bill
amends, the committee previously sought further information from the minister
to ministerial intervention powers under the
Migration Act 1958
whether these decisions were subject to review, see Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(5 February 2025) pp. 90 and 101.
Australia also has
obligations under the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its
1967 Protocol, but it is noted
that these conventions do not form part of the
committee’s mandate under the
Human Rights (Parliamentary Scrutiny) Act
UN Committee against
General Comment No. 4 (2017) on the implementation of article 3 in
the context of article 22
(2018). See also UN Human Rights Committee,
General Comment No. 20: article 7 (prohibition against torture)
M.I. et al. v
, UN Human Rights Committee Communication No. 2749/2016 (2024)
M.I. et al. v
, UN Human Rights Committee Communication No. 2749/2016 (2024)
UN Committee against
General Comment No.4 (2017) on the implementation of article 3 of
the Convention in the context of article 22
(2018) [13].
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 2(3).
Alzery v Sweden
Human Rights Committee Communication No. 1416/2005 (20 November 2006) [11.8];
Singh v Canada
, UN Committee against Torture Communication No. 319/2007
(2011) [8.8]–[8.9].
UN Committee against
General Comment No.4 (2017) on the implementation of article 3 in
the context of article 22
(2018) [9].
Statement of
compatibility, p. 26.
Statement of
compatibility, p. 26.
The UN High Commissioner
for Refugees has emphasized that the obligation of non-refoulement includes
‘indirect’ (or
chain) refoulement and ‘encompasses any measure
attributable to a State which could have the effect of returning an
asylum-seeker
or refugee to the frontiers of territories where his or her life
or freedom would be threatened, or where he or she would risk
persecution’:
UN High Commissioner for Refugees,
Note on International
, A/AC.96/951 (2001) [16]. See also Fanny de Weck,
Non-refoulement under the European Convention on Human Rights and the UN
Convention against Torture
(Leiden, 2017) p. 435, which summarises the chain
refoulement
: states ‘have the responsibility not to deport a person
to a country from which there is a real risk of his being deported
violation of the principle of non-refoulement. The deportation to such an
intermediary country is referred to as submitting
individuals to a risk of
indirect removal or chain-refoulement, which is in itself incompatible with the
principle of non-refoulement.
In cases in which complainants allege a risk of
chain-refoulement, the Court usually proceeds to a two-step assessment: first it
assesses whether the complainant can arguably claim the removal to his home
country would breach Article 3 [European Convention on
Human Rights]. Second, it
assesses whether “the intermediary country offers sufficient guarantees to
prevent the person concerned
being removed to his country of origin without an
assessment of the risks faced”’.
Statement of
compatibility, p. 26.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(5 February 2025) p. 103.
In relation to the current
third country reception arrangement with Nauru, evidence provided by Department
of Home Affairs officials
noted that Nauruan regulations provide that a visa
holder shall not be removed from Nauru where there is a risk of chain
refoulement.
The officials also stated that due to the way the payment
mechanisms are structured, ‘there is a strong incentive for Nauru
maintain an arrangement that would allow Australia to comply with its
international law obligations’. However, they also
confirmed that there is
nothing in the agreement to prohibit Nauru from removing the protection against
chain refoulement. See Ms
Clare Sharp and Mr Michael Burke, Department of Home
Committee Hansard
, 3 September 2025, p. 19 to the Senate
Standing Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee,
Hearing into
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(20 November 2024) pp. 12-53.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(5 February 2025) pp. 74-150.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(17 April 2024) pp. 16-43.
Further, the proposed
sharing of information within Australia could include sharing and disclosure of
a broad range of criminal
history information which relates to children who are
not citizens (including matters for which the child was never convicted of
criminal offence), for the purpose of informing, directly or indirectly, the
performance of a function or the exercise of a power
Migration Act
the Migration Regulations. There may be a risk that this information sharing may
engage and limit the rights of the child.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 17.
Judge v Canada
Human Rights Committee Communication No. 929/1998 (2003) [10.4];
, UN Human Rights Committee Communication No. 1442/05 (2009) [9.4]
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 19(2).
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 21.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 22.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 12. The reference to a person's 'own
country' is not restricted to
countries with which the person has the formal
status of citizenship. It includes a country to which a person has very strong
such as long-standing residence, close personal and family ties and
intention to remain, as well as the absence of such ties elsewhere.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, articles 17 and 23; International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, article 10.
Leghaei v Australia,
UN Human Rights Committee Communication No. 1937/2010 (2015).
The scope of a State
party's obligations under human rights treaties extends to all those within the
State’s ‘jurisdiction’.
For instance, article 2(1) of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights requires states parties
‘to respect
and to ensure to all individuals within its territory and
subject to its jurisdiction the rights recognized in the present
In ‘effective
control’ cases, a State can be held accountable for the violation of
rights ‘of persons who are
in the territory of another State but who are
found to be under the former State’s authority and control through its
operating – whether lawfully or unlawfully – in the latter
State’: see
Issa and others v Turkey
, European Court of Human
Rights, Application No. 31821/96 (2004) [71]; see also
, European Court of Human Rights (Grand Chamber), Application No.
46221/99 (2005); and
Ilascu and others v Moldova and Russia
Court of Human Rights, Application No. 48787/99 (2004). In
European Court of Human Rights said ‘[a]ccountability in such
situations’, ... ‘stems from the fact that [the
of the European Convention on Human Rights (which is analogous to the
human rights treaties)] cannot be
interpreted so as to allow a State party to perpetrate violations of the
Convention on the territory
of another State, which it could not perpetrate on
its own territory’.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(5 February 2025) p. 100.
Statement of
compatibility, p. 22.
, UN Human Rights Committee Communication No. 3663/2019 (2024)
, UN Human Rights Committee Communication No. 3663/2019 (2024)
, UN Human Rights Committee Communication No. 3663/2019 (2024)
[7.15]. At paragraph [7.16], in relation to Australia’s assertion
there were no restrictions on individuals’ movement at the regional
processing centre in Nauru, the Committee considered
that ‘the extent of
restrictions on movement in an officially designated place of detention may be
relevant to the reasonableness
and proportionality of the detention but does not
alter the fact of detention’.
See Ms Clare Sharp,
Department of Home Affairs,
Committee Hansard
, 3 September 2025, p. 8 to
the Senate Standing Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee,
Hearing into the
See Ms Clare Sharp,
Department of Home Affairs,
Committee Hansard
, 3 September 2025, p. 17 to
the Senate Standing Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee,
Hearing into the
See Ms Clare Sharp and Mr
Peter Frank, Department of Home Affairs,
Committee Hansard
, 3 September
2025, p. 2 to the Senate Standing Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation
Hearing into the
No.1) Bill 2025
TCXM v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2025] FCA 540
[130]-[131].
Namely, for reasons of
morals, public order or national security in a democratic society, or when the
interest of the private lives
of the parties so requires, or to the extent
strictly necessary in the opinion of the court in special circumstances where
would prejudice the interests of justice, see International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights, article 14(1).
UN Human Rights Committee,
General Comment No. 32: Article 14, Right to Equality before Courts and
Tribunals and to Fair Trial
(2007) [19].
UN Human Rights Committee,
General Comment No. 32: Article 14, Right to Equality before Courts and
Tribunals and to Fair Trial
(2007) [19]. See also
Bahamonde v Equatorial
Human Rights Committee Communication No. 468/1991,
CCPR/C/49/D/468/1991.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(20 November 2024) pp. 12-53.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(5 February 2025) pp. 74-150.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(17 April 2024) pp. 16-43.
The bill was first
introduced in the House of Representatives on 26 August 2025 and finally passed
both Houses on 4 September 2025.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (255 KB)
PDF format (164 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter