URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBRp/2016/62.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:13:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
VET Student Loans Bill 2016 [2016] AUSStaCSBRp 62 (23 November 2016)
VET Student Loans Bill 2016
Trespass on personal rights and liberties—vicarious liability
Merits review
Rights and liberties dependent on insufficiently defined administrative powers—reconsideration of decisions
Clauses 77 and 81
Trespass on personal rights and liberties—infringement notices
Trespass on personal rights and liberties—absolute liability
Subclause 101(2)
Insufficiently defined administrative power—delegation of administrative powers
Delegation of legislative power
Subclause 116(5)
VET Student Loans Bill 2016
This bill seeks to introduce a new student loan program to replace the VET
FEE-HELP loan scheme from 1 January 2017
Education and Training
House of Representatives on 13 October 2016
The committee dealt with this bill in
Alert Digest No. 8 of 2016
Minister responded to the committee’s comments in a letter received on
21 November 2016. A copy of the letter is attached
to this report.
Alert Digest No. 8 of 2016 - extract
Trespass on personal rights and
liberties—vicarious liability
Subclauses 65(1) and (3) impose personal liability on executive officers of
approved course providers where the provider commits an
offence or contravenes a
civil penalty provision, if the officer knew that the offence would be committed
or the contravention would
occur and the officer was in the position to
influence the conduct of the provider and failed to take all reasonable steps to
the commission of the offence or the contravention. The explanatory
memorandum provides the following justification for this approach
This clause recognises the role of proper management and governance and the
serious nature of the problem when people in management
and governance roles in
the provider are involved in the commission of offences or contraventions of
civil penalty provisions. These
subclauses prevent executive officers from
avoiding personal responsibility but only in the limited circumstances described
where the officer was aware a contravention would occur and was in a
position to influence the provider’s conduct and did not
take steps to
prevent it. This clause should further incentivise persons of influence to
ensure the provider complies with the Bill.
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences, Infringement Notices and
Enforcement Powers
states that when criminal responsibility is imposed on
directors or officers of bodies corporate, the Council of Australian Government
Principles and Guidelines for assessment of directors’ liability must be
applied. It also indicates that Treasury should be
consulted on all provisions
that seek to impose personal liability for corporate fault
(at p. 33).
The committee has consistently taken the view that vicarious liability should
only be used where the consequences for the offence
are so serious that the
normal requirement for proof of fault can be put aside. The committee seeks the
Minister’s advice as
to whether the principles and processes identified in
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences, Infringement Notices and
Enforcement Powers
(at pp 32-33) in relation to the imposition of vicarious
liability have been followed in this instance.
Minister’s response - extract
In developing the Bill, regard was had to the
Guide to Framing
Commonwealth Offences, Infringement Notices and Enforcement Powers
This Guide was developed by the Attorney-General’s
Department to assist officers in Australian Government departments in the
framing of offences, infringement notices and enforcement provisions.
Clause 65 of the Bill provides for personal liability of executive officers
in limited circumstances. The Guide requires that when
criminal responsibility
is imposed on executive officers, the Council of Australian Government
Principles and Guidelines for assessment
of directors’ liability (the
COAG Principles)
must be applied. Clause 65 is consistent with the COAG
Principles.
The COAG Principles are not concerned with legislative provisions that impose
direct liability on executive officers or that provide
for executive officers to
be liable if they were personally and directly complicit as a knowing accessory
in the corporation’s
offence. In the latter case, for the executive
officer to be held accessorily liable, the prosecution must prove beyond
doubt, that the executive officer knew the essential facts that
constitute the corporate offence and, through his or her own act
or omission,
was a participant in that offence.
Subclause 65(1) (which imposes the criminal liability) is of the nature of an
accessorial liability provision and consequently does
not fall within the ambit
of the COAG Principles. Clause 65 requires the officer to know that the offence
would be committed, have
been in a position to influence the conduct of the
provider in relation to the commission of the offence and have failed to take
all reasonable steps to prevent the commission of the offence. Unlike other
‘directors’ liability’ provisions,
clause 65 does not extend
responsibility for when the officer is reckless or negligent as to whether an
offence would be committed;
it only applies if the officer knew the offence
would be committed. In the circumstances provided for in clause 65, it is fair
reasonable that the officer bear personal liability.
The COAG Principles are also not concerned with provisions (that is,
subclause 65(3)) that impose liability on officers for civil
provisions.
Consistency with the COAG Principles
Notwithstanding the view that the COAG Principles do not apply to clause 65,
regard has still been had to consistency with the core
principles. Clause 65
meets the following Principles:
a. Principle 1
is met since the provider must be held liable in the
first instance. Paragraph 65(1)(a) requires as a pre-condition to finding an
executive officer personally liable, that the provider has committed an offence
under the Act.
b. Principle 2 requires that officers should not be liable for corporate
fault as a matter of course or by blanket imposition of liability
entire Act. Under the Bill, personal liability is only extended to four
applicable offences (clauses 50 to 53). These offences
are critical for ensuring
that students are properly informed about their loan assistance, appropriate
information and documentation
is kept and the Secretary is able to access all
the information and documents from the provider required to ensure proper
with the requirements of the Bill. The remaining offences in the Bill
provide for personal liability in the first instance.
c. Principle 3 is met, as a “designated officer” approach to
liability is not applied under the Bill.
d. Principle 4 is met because there are compelling public policy reasons for
extending personal liability to executive officers. The
Bill is a result of
significant public harm being caused to the vocational education and training
sector through the VET FEE-HELP
scheme, substantial misuse of public funds and
fees being incurred by non-genuine students as a result of inappropriate conduct
some providers. Reforms were introduced last year to stem some of the less
scrupulous behavior (through the introduction of a civil
penalty and
infringement notice framework) but these have not proven to be sufficient to
promote a high enough level of compliance.
Extending liability to executive
officers recognises that the people who hold these positions of influence,
management and decision-making
have the ability to set the direction of the
provider’s conduct and to influence and control the behavior.
e. Principle 5 is met, as clause 65 only applies if the officer knew the
offence would be committed and was in a position to influence
the conduct of the
provider and failed to take all reasonable steps to prevent the offence.
f. Principle 6 is met, as under paragraph 65(1)(d), to be personally liable,
the officer must have failed to take all reasonable steps
to prevent the
commission of the offence. Clause 66 provides guidance about what the court may
have regard to in determining whether
the provider took reasonable steps.
In drafting the Bill, regard was also had to similar provisions in other
recent legislation, for example
section 245AT
Migration Act 1958
(introduced in 2015) and
section 133
National Vocational Education
and Training Regulator Act 2011
and the Attorney-General’s Department
was consulted on the Bill.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Minister for this response. The committee notes the
Minister’s advice in relation to the application
of the COAG principles
and the further information about the nature of the liability sought to be
imposed by clause 65 of the bill.
The committee requests that the key information be included in the
explanatory memorandum, noting the importance of these documents
as a point of
access to understanding the law and, if needed, as extrinsic material to assist
with interpretation (see
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act
In light of the explanation provided the committee leaves the
appropriateness of the imposition of vicarious liability to the consideration
the Senate as a whole.
Alert Digest No. 8 of 2016 - extract
Clause 74 sets out a table which lists the decisions that are reviewable
of the proposed Act. Division 2 of
sets out the process for
reconsideration of reviewable decisions, setting out a process for internal
merits review and later review
by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) of
reconsidered decisions. In contrast, decisions that are not classified as
‘reviewable
decisions’ may be reconsidered, but there is no
requirement that the decision be reviewed and there is no process for an
application
to the AAT for review of such a decision.
The explanatory memorandum provides no justification for limiting reviewable
decisions to the five decisions listed in the table.
There are other decisions
that can be made under the proposed Act, for example decisions made by the
Secretary under clauses 20,
25 and 34, which are therefore exempted from the
process of merits review.
The committee seeks the Minister’s advice as to why significant
decisions which are authorised to be made under the proposed
Act have been
excluded from the merits review process set out in the bill.
Minister’s response - extract
The Bill sets out in the table at clause 74 the significant decisions which
are appropriately subject first, to internal merit review
and second, to review
by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (the
Notably, all decisions
which directly impact the student are subject to merits review (for example,
whether a loan is approved and
a decision not to re-credit a student’s
FEE-HELP balance).
Other significant decisions made by the Secretary under the Bill are not
subject to the merits review process as they involve factors
that justify
excluding merits review. In considering which decisions should be subject to
merits review, consideration was also given
to the costs of merits review and
whether the additional burden on the AAT was justified by making the relevant
decision subject
to merits review.
A detailed explanation is provided below in respect to particular decision
making provisions and the rationale for excluding them
from the merits review
Clause 20 provides that the Secretary may decide not to pay a loan amount for
a student for a course if any of the circumstances set
out in paragraphs 20(a)
to 20(g) apply. These circumstances are clearly defined and limited only to
situations where it would be
reasonable and relevant for the Secretary not to
pay the loan. The circumstances set out in paragraphs (a), (b), (d) and (e)
a defined set of circumstances; and the discretion in paragraph (c) is
necessary to safeguard the interests of vulnerable prospective
students and
protect the integrity of the scheme. Moreover, the decision about whether or not
to approve a VET student loan –
made under section 18 – is subject
to merits review.
Clause 25 and clause 29
The decision whether or not to approve a course provider (clause 25) and the
decision about the period of the approval (clause 29)
were considered
inappropriate for merits review. These decisions involve elements that make them
subject to government financial
policy considerations. Subclause 116(7) of the
Bill requires a cap to be imposed on the amount of VET student loans that can be
for each calendar year. The decision to impose a cap was made following
consultation with the Department of Finance and was a consequence
extensive, unsustainable and rapid growth of the cost of the VET FEE-HELP
Proper process and natural justice will be provided in decision making,
including through the opportunity for the applicant for approval
as an approved
course provider to provide further information if requested by the Secretary
(clause 28) and the requirement for the
Secretary to give written notice of the
decision to the applicant. Further, for bodies that apply for re-approval when
their period
of approval is close to expiring, clause 33 allows the
provider’s current approval to continue in effect until a decision is
on the re-approval.
Under clause 32 the Secretary may decide not to consider an application for
approval as an approved course provider, either because
the application is
non-compliant with the application requirements under clause 28, or for reasons
specified in the rules. This decision
is not appropriate for merits review since
it relates to either a procedural administrative decision (whether the
application meets
the procedural requirements of clause 28) or the rules. The
reasons specified in the rules, as a legislative instrument, will be
‘parliamentary scrutiny’ and to the
accountability
that apply to legislative decisions.
A decision of the Secretary to impose or vary conditions on a
provider’s approval (clause 34) is not subject to merits review.
contains safeguards in the exercise of this power, including requiring the
Secretary to give the provider written notice
of, and reasons for, the decision.
In many instances the decisions will involve elements that make them subject to
government financial
policy parameters. For example, a condition to impose fee
limits on the total loan amounts that may be paid to a provider will be
by the need to ensure that the Government does not exceed the total loan cap for
VET student loans (subclause 116(7)).
Clauses 36 and 37
The decisions of the Secretary to suspend a provider’s approval (clause
36) or to immediately suspend a provider’s approval
circumstances (clause 37) are excluded from merits review. Merits review for
these preliminary, interim and operational
compliance decisions is not
appropriate as it would lead to unnecessary frustration or delay of the proper
operation of the decision-making
Clauses 36 and 37 enable the Secretary to adequately address compliance
matters where there are genuine and reasonably founded concerns
provider’s actions or omissions. This provides sufficient time for
substantive decisions around revocation to be made.
Notably, the ultimate
decision (which may flow from the earlier decision) under clause 36 to formally
revoke the approval of an approved
course provider will be subject to merits
In addition, the Bill includes safeguards around the exercise of these
powers, including that the Secretary must give the provider
written notice of
and reasons for the decision. Further, the immediate suspension under clause 37
is time limited.
A decision to issue a compliance notice is excluded from merits review.
Clause 44 requires the Secretary to consider any submissions
that are received
from the provider in respect to the compliance notice, when deciding whether to
vary or revoke a compliance notice.
Failure to comply with a compliance notice
is a civil penalty provision for which an infringement notice may be issued. The
notes that a decision to issue an infringement notice should not be
subject to merits review. Merits review for issuing a compliance
notice which is
a preliminary, interim compliance process would frustrate the proper operation
of the decision-making process for
which the costs of merits review is not
In addition to the safeguards mentioned above, general principles of
administrative law will apply to decision making under the Bill
- these include,
the need to accord procedural fairness, to exercise discretion for proper
purposes and to take into account all
relevant considerations.
Further, clause 81 provides that decisions made under the Bill other than the
reviewable decisions set out in clause 74, may be reconsidered
by the decision
maker. Therefore, where a provider wishes to submit further information
following decisions that are made, the Secretary
may reconsider the decision and
confirm or vary the initial decision, or set the initial decision aside and
substitute a new decision.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Minister for this response. In particular, the
committee notes the Minister’s advice that ‘all
decisions which
directly impact the student are subject to merits review’.
The committee notes the detailed information provided for the specific
clauses that are proposed to be excluded from merits review.
The committee
accepts that decisions relating to whether procedural administrative
requirements have been met; preliminary, interim
and operational compliance
decisions; or decisions that go to financial policy considerations, may be a
basis for the exclusion of
merits review.
However, the committee notes that in relation to paragraph 20(c), merits
review is excluded of the secretary’s decision not
to pay a loan amount
for a student if the secretary is satisfied that the student is not an eligible
student or not a genuine student.
The Minister’s response states that this
discretion is necessary to safeguard the interests of vulnerable prospective
and protect the integrity of the scheme. However, in general, it is
usually appropriate that merits review be made available in relation
exercise of a discretion that may adversely affect the interests of a party.
In addition, merits review is excluded under clause 32 when the secretary is
not required to consider or decide an application where
the application does not
comply with the proposed Act and ‘in the circumstances set out in the
rules’. The Minister’s
response states that this is not appropriate
for merits review as it relates to either a procedural administrative decision
rules. The Minister goes on to say that the rules, as a legislative
instrument, will be subject to Parliamentary scrutiny. However,
possible to say whether it is appropriate to exclude merits review of a decision
not to consider an application in circumstances
set out in the rules when no
detail has been provided as to what circumstances may be prescribed in the
rules. While the rules may
be subject to Parliamentary scrutiny, at that point
the exclusion of merits review will be provided for in the primary legislation
and not subject to amendment by the rules.
The committee requests that the key information be included in the
explanatory memorandum, noting the importance of these documents
as a point of
access to understanding the law and, if needed, as extrinsic material to assist
with interpretation (see
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act
The committee draws its scrutiny concerns to the attention of Senators and
in light of the explanation provided the committee leaves
the appropriateness of
the exclusion of merits review for specified decisions to the consideration of
the Senate as a whole.
The committee also draws the committee’s comments in relation to
clause 32 to the attention of the Senate Standing Committee
on Regulations and
Ordinances for information.
Alert Digest No. 8 of 2016 - extract
Rights and liberties dependent on insufficiently
defined administrative powers—reconsideration of
Clauses 77 and 81
Clause 77 provides for a decision-maker to reconsider a reviewable decision
if satisfied there is a ‘sufficient reason to do
so’, regardless of
whether there is an application to do so. Clause 81 provides for the same power
in relation to a decision
that is not a reviewable decision, on the same basis.
In exercising both powers the decision-maker must confirm or vary the initial
decision or set aside the initial decision and substitute a new decision.
In general, once an administrative decision is made the power to make that
decision is spent and the decision-maker has no power to
revisit the decision.
(Complications in the application of this general principle may arise if the
initial decision was beyond the
powers of the decision-maker, that is, based on
a ‘jurisdictional error’.) This principle serves the value of
and predictability as affected persons may rely on administrative
decisions that have been made (absent an application from a person
with standing
for judicial review). Allowing the decision-maker a general power to reconsider
applications, which does not appear
to be time limited, may be thought to make
their legal position unduly dependent on insufficiently defined or determined
administrative
Therefore the committee seeks the Minister’s advice as to why it is
necessary to enable a decision-maker to reconsider a decision
on their own
motion and whether consideration has been given to including limits on the
exercise of this power (for example, time
Minister’s response - extract
The Committee has raised concerns with clauses 77 and 81 having regard to the
traditional principle of
functus officio,
that an administrative
decision-making power is spent once the power has been exercised. However, as
the Committee itself noted, there
are complications with this general principle
in the event of a jurisdictional error in making the initial decision. The
may also be circumvented in instances where it may be argued there is
an implied power to revoke or vary a decision or if there is
statutory authority.
In drafting the Bill, it was considered preferable to provide for an express
statutory power to enable decision-makers to reconsider
a decision on their own
motion. Applying the traditional principle has the advantages of certainty and
predictability for decisions.
However, enabling a decision-maker to review a
decision of their own accord was preferred because:
a. it promotes good administration and fairness, ensuring the Commonwealth is
accountable and proactive in not leaving intact decisions
that are unfair or
have unintended consequences;
b. it provides an option for a low cost, efficient means for the Commonwealth
to reconsider a decision and, where necessary, correct
a decision, without
requiring the affected person to go through the lengthy and more resource
intensive process of either an AAT
or judicial review; and
including an express statutory right for own motion review provides
certainty about the review rights of the decision-maker rather
than relying on
the exceptions provided for in the common law to the general principle of
functus officio.
Regard was also had in drafting the Bill to legislative schemes similar to
the VET student loan program which had provisions similar
to clause 77. For
example, section 209-5 of the
Higher Education Support Act 2003
clause 95 of Schedule 1A to HESA and section 85-4 of the
Aged Care Act
Consideration was given to including limits on the powers under clauses 77
and 81, for example, as suggested by the Committee, introducing
time limits by
when the decisions must be reconsidered. Whilst there is value in such an
approach, the concern remains that any such
limits may result in an unfair
outcome which is a key goal to be avoided in the first place by allowing
decision-makers to review
their decisions.
Both clauses 77 and 81 require the decision maker to be satisfied that there
is sufficient reason to reconsider the decision. The
decision maker is also
required to give a statement of reasons. Any review of a decision will still be
subject to the general principles
of administrative law, including the need to
accord procedural fairness, to exercise discretion for proper purposes and to
account all relevant considerations. Relevant considerations arguably
would include the implications for the parties if an initial
decision is revoked
and the time from when the initial decision was made.
Parties affected by reconsidered decisions continue to have access to the
usual avenues of review:
a. for reviewable decisions, applicants may apply to the AAT for merits
review of a reconsidered decision;
b. judicial review under the
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review)
(noting the Bill does not limit this right in any way);
c. where there is no legal liability to pay compensation, an affected person
may also be able to apply under the discretionary Scheme
for Compensation for
Detriment caused by Defective Administration; and
d. persons who believe they have been treated unfairly or unreasonably by the
Australian Government can apply to the Commonwealth
Ombudsman for investigation
and resolution.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Minister for this response.
The committee notes the Minister’s advice in relation to why an express
statutory power enabling decision-makers to reconsider
decisions on their own
motion was included in the bill. The committee also notes the Minister’s
advice as to the rationale
for not including a time limit on the exercise of
this power.
The committee requests that the key information provided by the Minister
be included in the explanatory memorandum, noting the importance
documents as a point of access to understanding the law and, if needed, as
extrinsic material to assist with interpretation
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
In light of the detailed information provided, the committee leaves the
appropriateness of giving decision-makers a general power
to reconsider a
decision on their own motion to the consideration of the Senate as a
Alert Digest No. 8 of 2016 - extract
Trespass on personal rights and
liberties—infringement notices
Clause 85 provides that an offence or civil penalty provision of the proposed
Act is subject to an infringement notice under
Powers (Standard Provisions) Act 2014
. That Act creates a framework for the
use of infringement notices.
The discussion on the implementation of infringement notice schemes in the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences, Infringement Notices and Enforcement
is premised on the principle that not all offences are appropriately
enforced through infringement notices. In particular the Guide
states (at p.
An infringement notice scheme may be employed for relatively minor offences,
where a high volume of contraventions is expected, and
where a penalty must be
imposed immediately to be effective. The offences should be such that an
enforcement officer can easily make
an assessment of guilt or innocence.
The explanatory material does not explain why it is considered appropriate
that each offence and civil penalty provision in the bill
should be subject to
an infringement notice.
It is not clear to the committee why all of the offence and civil penalty
provisions in this bill are appropriately subject to an
infringement notice
scheme. The committee therefore seeks a more detailed explanation from the
Minister as to the approach taken.
Minister’s response - extract
Clause 85 provides that an offence or civil penalty provision is subject to
an infringement notice under
Regulatory Powers (Standard
Provisions) Act 2014
Part 5 of the RP Act creates a
framework for the use of infringement notices. Where an offence or civil penalty
provision is subject
to an infringement notice, a person who is given an
infringement notice can choose to pay an amount as an alternative to having
proceedings brought against them for contravention of the provision
(without any admission of guilt or liability). If the person
chooses not to pay
the amount, proceedings can be brought against the person in relation to the
contravention.
An infringement notice scheme provides an additional administrative option
for dealing with certain offences and civil penalty contraventions,
generally cheaper, faster and simpler than instituting court proceedings. It
offers the Commonwealth (as regulator), the
benefits of cost and efficiency; and
offers providers (as respondents) the benefit of being able to discharge their
obligation without
appearing before a court or admitting guilt or liability.
Since the Bill applies the infringement framework of the RP Act, this means
only those offences in the Bill which are strict liability
offences are subject
to infringement notices (section 100 RP Act). This is consistent with the
In terms of civil penalties, the Bill applies the infringement notice scheme
to all the penalty provisions. This is appropriate as
it provides the
Commonwealth the flexibility and discretion to select the most appropriate
penalty and/or sanction particular to
the contravention. This is consistent with
the approach taken to the reforms to HESA last year when the infringement notice
was introduced to the VET FEE-HELP scheme to stem the unscrupulous
behaviour of some providers. In a system which has been plagued
non-compliance, to the detriment of vulnerable students, it is critical for the
Commonwealth to have a broad range of tools
available to deter the non-compliant
Most civil penalties in the Bill are of a ‘low level’ with
penalty amounts of 60 penalty units; the maximum penalty amount
is 240 penalty
units. The Commonwealth retains discretion in each instance whether to issue an
infringement notice and must determine
if there are reasonable grounds to
believe a contravention has occurred before issuing such a notice (consistent
with the Guide).
In some instances infringement notices remain appropriate for a contravention
of a more serious provision where the circumstances
warrant less serious action
and the immediate deterrent of the sanction is advantageous. On other occasions,
it may be more appropriate
in the first instance to commence civil proceedings.
It is to be remembered that under the VET student loan program, the strongest
compliance tool will remain suspension and/or revocation, which are both outside
of the civil penalty process.
The Bill remains subject to the RP Act which is consistent with the Guide and
ensures personal rights and liberties are not trespassed
Committee response
The committee thanks the Minister for this response.
The committee notes the Minister’s advice in relation to the rationale
for applying an infringement notice scheme to all strict
liability offences and
civil penalty provisions in the bill. In particular, the committee notes the
advice that the VET system ‘has
been plagued with non-compliance to the
detriment of vulnerable students’ and therefore ‘it is critical for
the Commonwealth
to have a broad range of tools available to deter non-compliant
conduct’. The committee also notes that the bill remains subject
provisions of
Regulatory Powers (Standard Provisions) Act
(for example,
subsection 104(2)
of that Act provides that an amount
payable under an infringement notice must not exceed 12 penalty units where the
person is an
individual, or 60 penalty units where the person is a body
corporate).
The committee requests that the key information provided by the Minister
be included in the explanatory memorandum, noting the importance
documents as a point of access to understanding the law and, if needed, as
extrinsic material to assist with interpretation
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
In light of the detailed information provided, the committee leaves the
appropriateness of applying an infringement notice scheme
to all strict
liability offences and civil penalty provisions to the consideration of the
Senate as a whole.
Alert Digest No. 8 of 2016 - extract
Trespass on personal rights and
liberties—absolute liability
Clause 101 sets out an offence relating to unauthorised access to, or
modification of, personal information. Subclause (2) states
that absolute
liability applies to an element of the offence (relating to where the
information is held). The offence is subject
to 2 years imprisonment. The
explanatory memorandum provides no justification as to why an element of the
offence is subject to absolute
In a criminal law offence the proof of fault is
usually a basic requirement. However, offences of absolute liability remove the
element that would otherwise apply, and does not allow for a defence of
reasonable mistake of fact. The committee expects the explanatory
memorandum to
provide a clear justification for any imposition of absolute liability,
including commenting whether the approach is
consistent with the
Framing Commonwealth Offences, Infringement Notices and Enforcement
The committee seeks a detailed justification from the Minister for the
imposition of absolute liability in clause 101 with reference
to the principles
set out in the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences, Infringement Notices
and Enforcement Powers
(at pp 22–25).
Minister’s response - extract
Clause 101 sets out an offence relating to unauthorised access to, or
modification of, personal information, which is VET information.
101(2) provides that absolute liability applies to paragraph 101(l)(e) regarding
whether the information was held on a
computer of (or on behalf of) an approved
course provider or a Tertiary Admission Centre.
The effect of making this element of the offence subject to absolute
liability is that, if the prosecution shows that this physical
element existed,
the element will be made out, without the prosecution being required to prove
fault. In addition, the defence of
honest and reasonable mistake of fact would
not be available to the defendant for this element.
Subclause 101(2) is consistent with the equivalent provision in HESA (section
179-35) and Schedule IA of HESA (clause 78). It is also consistent with the
The Guide requires that absolute liability should only apply where there is
adequate justification and subject to certain limitations.
Applying absolute
liability to a particular physical element of an offence may be justified
a. requiring proof of fault of the particular element would undermine
deterrence and there are legitimate grounds for penalising persons
lacking fault
in that element; or
b. the element is a jurisdictional element rather than one going to the
essence of the offence.
Applying absolute liability to paragraph 101(l)(e) is appropriate; whether
the information is held on the computer of (or on behalf
of) an approved course
provider or Tertiary Admission Centre is essentially a precondition to the
offence and does not go to the
essence of the offence itself. The location of
the information is an objective fact established by reference to an objective
that does not relate to culpability. Therefore, the defendant’s
state of mind is not relevant to this question and the exclusion
of the defence
of honest and reasonable mistake of fact does not detrimentally impact on the
defendant. This satisfies the justification
requirement for applying absolute
liability to a particular physical element of an offence.
In contrast, the elements in paragraphs 101(l)(a) to 101(l)(d) of the offence
go to the essence of the offence and appropriately need
to be proved by the
prosecution beyond reasonable doubt.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Minister for this response.
The committee notes the Minister’s advice in relation to the rationale
for applying absolute liability to one element of the
offence relating to
unauthorised access to, or modification of, personal information. In particular,
the committee notes the Minister’s
advice that the relevant element of the
offence (i.e. the location of the information) ‘is an objective fact
established by
reference to an objective standard that does not relate to
culpability’.
The committee requests that the key information provided by the Minister
be included in the explanatory memorandum, noting the importance
documents as a point of access to understanding the law and, if needed, as
extrinsic material to assist with interpretation
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
In light of the detailed information provided the committee makes no
further comment on this matter.
Alert Digest No. 8 of 2016 - extract
Insufficiently defined administrative
power—delegation of administrative
Clause 114 allows the Secretary to delegate, in writing, any or all of his or
her powers under the Act to ‘an APS employee’.
There is no limit on
what level of the Australian Public Service the employee is employed at. The
explanatory memorandum provides
no explanation as to why there is a need to
enable the Secretary’s power to be delegated so broadly.
The committee has consistently drawn attention to legislation that allows
delegations to a relatively large class of persons, with
little or no
specificity as to their qualifications or attributes. Generally, the committee
prefers to see a limit set either on
the scope of powers that might be
delegated, or on the categories of people to whom those powers might be
delegated. The committee’s
preference is that delegates be confined to the
holders of nominated offices or to members of the Senior Executive Service.
Where broad delegations are made, the committee considers that an explanation
of why these are considered necessary should be included
in the explanatory
memorandum. In this case as there is no explanation for the approach in the
explanatory memorandum, the committee
seeks the Minister’s advice as to
the rationale for enabling the Secretary to delegate his or her powers to
‘an APS employee’
and whether consideration was given to limiting
the powers that might be delegated and/or confining the delegation to members of
the Senior Executive Service.
Minister’s response - extract
The rationale for enabling the Secretary to delegate his or her powers to
“APS employees” was to provide for flexibility
having regard to:
a. the many powers of the Secretary under the Bill, which may be
b. the broad range in those powers from high-profile, high impact decisions,
with consequences for providers and students, to acts
that are more
administrative or process-driven; and
c. the undesirability and impracticality in being unduly prescriptive in the
Bill about the appropriate delegate for each of the many,
wide-ranging powers
under the Bill.
By way of example, some powers, such as under subclause 36(1) to revoke or
suspend the approval of an approved course provider, are
appropriate to only be
delegated to senior members of the Senior Executive Service. In contrast other
powers, such as under subsection
17(4) requesting a student to provide further
information (for the purposes of deciding the student’s application for a
are arguably suitable to be delegated to less senior persons.
The power of the Secretary to delegate to “APS employees” is
fettered by other controls to ensure the appropriateness
of the delegation
a. duties of the Secretary as an “accountable authority” under
Public Governance Performance and Accountability Act 2013
(the PGPA),
which includes, amongst other duties, the duty to govern the Commonwealth entity
(section 15)
, the duty to establish and maintain systems relating to risk and
(section 16)
and a duty in relation to requirements imposed on others
(section 18)
b. internal to the Department, the Secretary’s Instructions made under
section 20A
of the PGPA. For example, despite a similarly broad power of
delegation under Schedule 1A to HESA, the delegations for the VET FEE-HELP
Scheme were primarily at the Senior Executive Service level, with a few
exceptions at the APS Executive Level 2 level; and
c. authorised persons and infringement officers for the purposes of
exercising the powers in the Bill in respect to the RP Act are
required to be a
member of the Senior Executive Service.
In considering the delegation power, regard has also been given to
comparative legislative schemes which are consistent with clause
similarly provide for the flexibility of a broad delegation power. For example,
section 238-1 of HESA and clause 98 of Schedule
1A to HESA, section 96-2 of the
Aged Care Act 1997
section 234
Social Security
(Administration) Act 1999
section 221
A New Tax System (Family
Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
Committee response
The committee thanks the Minister for this response.
The committee requests that the key information provided by the Minister
be included in the explanatory memorandum, noting the importance
documents as a point of access to understanding the law and, if needed, as
extrinsic material to assist with interpretation
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
The committee notes the Minister’s advice that allowing the secretary
to delegate his or her powers to APS employees of any
level is necessary to
provide flexibility in the context of the varied nature of the powers of the
secretary under the bill. At a
general level, the committee does not consider
that the varied nature of administrative powers is, of itself, a sufficient
justification
for allowing the delegation to a very broad class of persons. For
example, it may be possible to provide that different powers are
delegated to different classes of person depending on the particular nature of
However, in this instance, in light of the detailed information provided,
the committee leaves the appropriateness of allowing the
Secretary to delegate
his or her powers to APS employees of any level to the consideration of the
Senate as a whole.
Alert Digest No. 8 of 2016 - extract
Delegation of legislative
Subclause 116(5)
Clause 116 sets out a rule making power under the proposed Act. Subclause
116(5) provides that the rules may make provision in relation
to a matter by
applying, adopting or incorporating, with or without modification, any matter
contained in any other instrument or
other writing as in force or existing from
time to time (despite the requirements in the
Legislation Act 2003
At a general level, the committee will have scrutiny concerns where
provisions in a bill allow the incorporation of legislative provisions
reference to other documents because such an approach:
• raises the prospect of changes being made to the law in the absence
of Parliamentary scrutiny;
• can create uncertainty in the law; and
• means that those obliged to obey the law may have inadequate access
to its terms (in particular, the committee will be concerned
where relevant
information, including standards, accounting principles or industry databases,
is not publicly available or is available
only if a fee is paid).
The explanatory memorandum does not justify the need for such a provision or
provide any examples of instruments which may be so incorporated.
explanatory memorandum states that such rules ‘would ordinarily not
incorporate another instrument or written document
unless it is publicly
available’. This implies that in some instances instruments or written
documents which are not publicly
available may be incorporated.
The committee seeks a detailed explanation from the Minister as to why
subclause 116(5) allows for the incorporation of legislative
provisions by
reference to other documents (as in force from time to time) which addresses the
issues identified above.
Minister’s response - extract
Subclause 116(5) of the Bill provides that despite
subsection 14(2)
Legislation Act 2003
(the LI Act), the rules may make provision in
relation to a matter by applying, adopting or incorporating, with or without
modification,
any matter contained in any other instrument or other writing as
in force or existing from time to time.
While the LI Act does not require incorporated documents to be registered,
section 41 of that Act provides that either House of Parliament
may, at any time
while a legislative instrument is subject to disallowance, require any document
incorporated by reference in the
instrument to be made available for inspection
by that House. This provides an opportunity for Parliamentary scrutiny over the
In this case, the justification for the incorporation of other documents by
reference is that it is important to allow flexibility
to accommodate the
evolution of the program and the VET sector. This will facilitate responsiveness
to the needs of students and
industry and allow for measures to better protect
the integrity of the program. It also provides for simplicity, enabling the
to a document rather than having to duplicate a document that is
already published and freely accessible.
In developing the rules, the Minister is mindful of the Committee’s
concerns and will only include documents by reference where
the documents are
available publicly, for free or for minimal cost. Further, the Explanatory
Statement will describe (for those not
on the Federal Register of Legislation)
where copies of the documents may be obtained.
Examples of when the power in subclause 116(5) may be relied upon are as
follows. It is anticipated the rules will incorporate by
reference other
legislative instruments, such as
Standards for NVR Registered Training
Organisations (RTOs) 2015
Fit and Proper Person Requirements 2011.
It is also anticipated the rules will refer to other documents which are not
legislative instruments such as the Australian Qualifications
Framework, the
Australian Core Skills Framework and the Australian Quality Training Framework.
Notably, each of these documents are
national tools and well-regarded in the
Australian education and training systems and are publically available.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Minister for this response.
The committee notes the Minister’s advice that legislative rules made
under clause 116 of the bill will only incorporate documents
by reference
‘where the documents are available publicly, for free or for minimal
cost’. The committee further notes
that each of the examples provided by
the Minister of documents that may be incorporated by reference are publicly
available, although
there is no requirement on the face of the bill that
incorporated documents must be publicly and freely available.
The committee takes this opportunity to reiterate its scrutiny concerns where
material incorporated into the law is not publicly available
or is available
only if a fee is paid (and, as a result, persons interested in or affected by
the law may have inadequate access
to its terms).
A fundamental principle of the rule of the law is that every person subject
to the law should be able to freely and readily access
its terms. The issue of
access to material incorporated into the law by reference to external documents
such as Australian and international
standards has been an issue of ongoing
concern to Australian parliamentary scrutiny committees. Most recently, the
Joint Standing
Committee on Delegated Legislation of the Western Australian
Parliament has published a detailed report on this issue:
Australian Standards Adopted in Delegated Legislation
(June 2016). This
report comprehensively outlines the significant scrutiny concerns associated
with the incorporation of material
by reference, particularly where the
incorporated material is not freely available. The committee draws this report
to the attention
of Senators as the matters raised are relevant to all
Australian jurisdictions.
The committee also takes this opportunity to highlight the expectations of
the Senate Standing Committee on Regulations and Ordinances
that delegated
legislation which applies, adopts or incorporates any matter contained in an
instrument or other writing should:
- clearly state the manner in which the documents are incorporated—that
is, whether the material is being incorporated as in
force or existing from time
to time or as in force or existing at the commencement of the legislative
instrument. This enables persons
interested in or affected by the instrument to
understand its operation without the need to rely on specialist legal knowledge
advice, or consult extrinsic material (see also
Legislation Act 2003
- contain a description of the documents and indicate how they may be
obtained (see paragraph 15J(2)(c) of the
Legislation Act 2003
The committee requests that the key information provided by the Minister
be included in the explanatory memorandum, noting the importance
documents as a point of access to understanding the law and, if needed, as
extrinsic material to assist with interpretation
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
The committee leaves the appropriateness of subclause 116(5), which allows
the legislative rules to incorporate external documents
into the law, to the
consideration of the Senate as a whole.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (188 KB)
PDF format (237 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter