URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJStaCPW/2019/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:09:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Parliamentary Joint Standing Committee on Public Works (46th Parliament) --- "Report 06/2019 - Referrals madeSeptember 2019 - PP 528/2019" [2019] AUPJStaCPW 9 (2 December 2019)
Committee Secretariat
Structure of the report
Conduct of the inquiry
Need for the works
Options considered
Scope of the works
Community consultation
Bondi to Manly walk
Helipad location
Vehicle and traffic management
Cost of the works
Committee comment
Conduct of the inquiry
Need for the works
Options considered
Scope of the works
Community consultation
Cost of the works
Committee comment
Conduct of the inquiry
Need for the works
Options considered
Scope of the works
Community consultation
Consultation with traditional owners
Consultation with local contractors
Consultation on environmental matters
Cost of the works
Committee comment
Conduct of the inquiry
Need for the works
Options considered
Scope of the works
Proposed Work Elements
Community consultation
Cost of the works
Committee comment
HMAS Watson Redevelopment Project, New South Wales
Australian High Commission Property Replacement Project, Tarawa, Kiribati
Shoalwater Bay Training Area Remediation Project, Queensland
Navy Capability Infrastructure Sub-program
Thursday 31 October 2019—Sydney, NSW
Department of Defence
Private Citizens
Friday 15 November 2019—Parliament House, Canberra
Department of Defence
Friday 15 November 2019—Parliament House, Canberra
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
Wednesday 20 November 2019—Rockingham, WA
Department of Defence
PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Report 6/2019
Referrals made September 2019
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works
© Commonwealth of Australia
ISBN 978-1-76092-058-6 (Printed Version)
ISBN 978-1-76092-059-3 (HTML Version)
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 3.0 Australia License.
The details of this licence are available on the Creative Commons website:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/au/
The Hon Dr John McVeigh MP
Deputy Chair
Mr Tony Zappia MP
Ms Lisa Chesters MP
Senator Alex Gallacher
Senator Hollie Hughes
The Hon Barnaby Joyce MP
Senator Susan McDonald
Mr David Smith MP
Mr Rick Wilson MP
Committee Secretariat
Committee Secretary
Pauline Cullen
Inquiry Secretary
Dr Kate Sullivan
Senior Research Officer
Office Manager
Kristy Altieri
List of Recommendations
Recommendation 1
2.51 The Committee recommends that Defence ensure the proposed works at HMAS
Watson do not preclude the building of a cliff top track
along the eastern
perimeter of the base as part of the Bondi to Sydney Walk.
Recommendation 2
2.52 The Committee recommends that the House of Representatives resolve,
pursuant to
Section 18(7)
Public Works Committee Act 1969
is expedient to carry out the following proposed works:
HMAS Watson
Redevelopment Project, New South Wales.
Recommendation 3
3.36 The Committee recommends that the House of Representatives resolve,
pursuant to
Section 18(7)
Public Works Committee Act 1969
is expedient to carry out the following proposed works: Australian High
Commission Property Replacement Project, Tarawa,
Recommendation 4
4.43 The Committee recommends that the House of Representatives resolve,
pursuant to
Section 18(7)
Public Works Committee Act 1969
is expedient to carry out the following proposed works: Shoalwater Bay Training
Area Remediation Project.
Recommendation 5
5.42 The Committee recommends that the House of Representatives resolve,
pursuant to
Section 18(7)
Public Works Committee Act 1969
is expedient to carry out the following proposed works: Navy Capability
Infrastructure Sub-Program.
Table of Contents
List of Recommendations
1 Introduction
Structure of the report
2 HMAS Watson Redevelopment
Conduct of the inquiry
Need for the works
Options considered
Scope of the works
Community consultation
Cost of the works
Committee comment
3 Australian High Commission Property
Replacement Project, Tarawa, Kiribati
Conduct of the inquiry
Need for the works
Options considered
Scope of the works
Community consultation
Cost of the works
Committee comment
4 Shoalwater Bay Training Area Remediation
Project, Queensland
Conduct of the inquiry
Need for the works
Options considered
Scope of the works
Community consultation
Consultation with traditional
Consultation with local
contractors
Consultation on environmental
Cost of the works
Committee comment
5 Navy Capability Infrastructure
Sub-program
Conduct of the inquiry
Need for the works
Options considered
Scope of the works
Proposed Work Elements
Community consultation
Cost of the works
Committee comment
Appendix A. List of
Submissions
Appendix B. Public Hearing and
1. Introduction
1.1 Under the
Public Works Committee Act 1969
(the Act), the
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works is required to inquire into and
report on public works referred to
it through either house of Parliament.
Referrals are made pursuant to
of the Act, and by practice are made
by the Minister for Finance or their delegate in the House of Representatives or
the Senate.
1.2 All public works that have an estimated cost exceeding $15 million must
be referred to the Committee and cannot be commenced until
the Committee has
made its report to Parliament and the House of Representatives receives that
report and resolves that it is expedient
to carry out the
of the Act, a public work is a work proposed to be
undertaken by the Commonwealth, or on behalf of the Commonwealth concerning:
§ the construction, alteration, repair, refurbishment or fitting-out of
buildings and other structures;
§ the installation, alteration or repair of plant and equipment designed
to be used in, or in relation to, the provision of services
for buildings and
other structures;
§ the undertaking, construction, alteration or repair of landscaping and
earthworks (whether or not in relation to buildings
and other structures);
§ the demolition, destruction, dismantling or removal of buildings,
plant and equipment, earthworks, and other structures;
§ the clearing of land and the development of land for use as urban land
or otherwise; and
§ any other matter declared by the regulations to be a work.
of the Act requires that the Committee consider and report
§ the purpose of the work and its suitability for that purpose;
§ the need for, or the advisability of, carrying out the work;
§ whether the money to be expended on the work is being spent in the
most cost effective manner;
§ the amount of revenue the work will generate for the Commonwealth, if
that is its purpose; and
§ the present and prospective public value of the work.
1.5 The Committee pays attention to the above matters and any other relevant
factors when considering the proposed work.
Structure of the
1.6 In considering the works, the Committee analysed the evidence presented
by the proponent agencies, including submissions and evidence
received at public
and in-camera hearings.
1.7 In consideration of the need to report expeditiously as required by
Section 17(1)
of the Act, the Committee has only reported on significant issues
of interest or concern.
1.8 Chapter 2 addresses the proposed HMAS Watson Redevelopment Project, New
South Wales. The estimated cost of this project is $430.5
million (excluding
1.9 Chapter 3 addresses the proposed Australian High Commission Property
Replacement Project, Tarawa, Kiribati. The estimated cost
of this project is
$19.6 million (excluding GST).
1.10 Chapter 4 addresses the proposed Shoalwater Bay Training Area
Remediation Project, Queensland. The estimated cost of this project
$105 million and $140 million (excluding GST).
1.11 Chapter 5 addresses the proposed Navy Capability Infrastructure
Sub-program. The estimated cost of this project is $1.8 billion
1.12 Submissions for each project are listed at Appendix A, and hearings and
witnesses are listed at Appendix B.
2. HMAS Watson Redevelopment Project
2.1 The Department of Defence (Defence) seeks approval from the Committee to
proceed with the proposed redevelopment of
HMAS Watson
, the Royal
Australian Navy’s principal warfare and navigation training establishment.
The aim of the project is to address
functionality deficiencies and capacity
constraints in facilities and infrastructure at
HMAS Watson
which support
demand levels greater than what they were originally designed for. The project
also aims to address high risk issues
associated with non-compliant facilities,
and reduce ongoing operating costs by rationalising and consolidating similar
2.2 The estimated cost of the project is $430.5 million (excluding GST).
2.3 The project was referred to the Committee on 10 September 2019.
Conduct of the
2.4 Following referral, the inquiry was publicised on the Committee’s
website and via media release.
2.5 The Committee received nine submissions, three supplementary submissions
and one confidential submission. A list of submissions
can be found at Appendix
2.6 On 31 October 2019, the Committee conducted a public and in-camera
hearing in Sydney, New South Wales. A transcript of the public
available on the Committee’s website.
Need for the works
2.7 The Royal Australian Navy (RAN) has long been in residence at
Watson’s Bay with its origins going back to 1942 when the
Radio Detection Finding School was established there during World War
However the site has been
occupied by the military since 1871 with the development of Artillery
emplacements to defend the Port of
HMAS Watson
is the RAN’s principal warfare and
navigation training establishment and provides basic and advanced training for
Senior Sailors in the Combat System Category and Junior Seaman
Officers in ship handling, navigation and tactics. Advanced training
conducted for Principal Warfare Officers, and at the high end, Watson trains
newly appointed Commanding and Executive Officers,
giving them the finish needed
to succeed in commanding the highly professional people who crew the ships and
establishments that
make up Australia's
2.9 In its submission to the Committee, Defence stated:
HMAS Watson
currently facilitates training for approximately 1300
personnel each year; with this number gradually increasing with the delivery
new capabilities...
HMAS Watson
was established in 1945, prior to when
technology was used as a training tool. Training methods have since evolved to
meet the needs
of a contemporary Navy. Greater complexity of combat systems and
connectivity within the Defence environment has increased the reliance
technically skilled Sailors and Officers. Flexible modern learning centres are
required to achieve the desired training and capability
outcomes of modern
2.10 At the
public hearing Defence told the Committee that:
Whilst facilities at
HMAS Watson
have been maintained and adaptively
re-used, many of them have now reached the end of their design life and do not
meet contemporary
working, training or living standards, or are not fit for
their current purpose. The supporting base engineering services and security,
well as facilities for accommodation, catering and health support, are also
below the required standard to support the throughput
of the base.
2.11 Defence told
the Committee that the current state of the facilities at
HMAS Watson
represent a risk to Navy
capability.
2.12 The Committee was able to inspect a range of current facilities during
the site inspection and noted that many of the facilities
contemporary Defence standards.
2.13 Defence stated that although isolated works had occurred at
, ‘including in
,’ there has been no
significant investment in training facilities in over 30
Options considered
2.14 In its submission, Defence noted that it had considered three options to
‘meet Defence’s capability and estate requirements
The options
§ Option 1 – Do nothing.
§ Option 2 – Essential Scope with Limited Living in Accommodation
§ Option 3 – Essential Scope plus full Living in Accommodation
Upgrade and consequential
2.15 Defence stated that it had selected Option 3 as it ‘represents the
best value for money as it fully addresses functionality
deficiencies in
existing facilities, key engineering services high risk issues, and provides
robust training facilities to meet the
2.16 At the public hearing, Defence explained to the Committee that as part
of a 2006 review into future Navy training infrastructure
requirements,
the Government had
agreed that ‘Garden Island and those four bases that surround
HMAS, Waterhen, Penguin, Watson and Kuttabul
would also be
enduring bases.’
told the Committee that the decision ‘provided us the basis to then base
our future investment on the Defence estate
with the knowledge that there was
government approval that those locations would be
2.17 Defence further noted that to ‘start afresh and find a greenfields
site for another Garden Island and another series of
linked training base...
would be incredibly cost prohibitive,’ estimating that the cost would
‘be in the tens of
2.18 In response to questions by the Committee as to why
HMAS Watson
needed to remain located in the Sydney area, Defence explained that having
HMAS Watson
and similar training bases nearby to Garden Island was a
training benefit which realised a number of training efficiencies. Defence
HMAS Watson
they will coordinate between doing simulated work and then
having the young men and women on the courses then going across to Garden
and actually going on a ship and doing live what they've just trained
In addition, the command teams on board ships regularly come and use our
facilities to conduct their own individual and command team
training prior to
operations.
2.19 Defence
also noted that having
HMAS Watson
located near to Garden Island and
other linked bases benefited the Navy through increased retention and
recruitment of personnel.
Defence told the Committee that Navy personnel
‘can have their personnel and families based in one location for a
amount of time without the need to be posting them throughout the
countryside in regular postings that would move them around and
potentially
cause problems for retention for
2.20 Defence further explained:
Clearly we need the best and brightest to come and operate what is technically
challenging equipment in a difficult and challenging
role. Being able to recruit
and retain by being in an area such as Sydney certainly assists in
2.21 Defence
stated that it had also considered options for moving the function of
to nearby bases in the Sydney area, however, due to a lack of
required space, this option was discounted. Defence explained:
To be able to replicate [
HMAS Watson
’s] function elsewhere—it
was certainly looked at whether there was capacity and functionality on bases
nearby to be able
to do any of these functions that are performed at Watson.
Randwick Barracks was carefully looked at. Randwick Barracks already has
simulation systems there and will have another one added shortly. That base is
at capacity, though. Defence over the years has
sold off portions of that base,
to the point now where the physical room on that base is at capacity. There is
not the room there
to replicate what
HMAS Watson
does. Likewise with HMAS
Waterhen, Penguin and Kuttabul. They are very small, congested sites, much like
HMAS Watson
is as well. So there wasn't the ability to move them there,
Scope of the works
2.22 Defence stated that the objective of the works was to:
... upgrade key training and support facilities and base infrastructure...
including the construction of a new 24,500 square metre
training facility;
consolidating training staff and staff support functions into a modern flexible
fit-for-purpose facility; upgrading
base engineering services, including
electrical, hydraulics, civil and communications; upgrading base security,
including perimeter
upgrades and a new base entry; upgrading the base galleys;
constructing a minimum of 236 single occupancy units of living-in accommodation;
a new medical and support services facility; and finally constructing some
replacement car
its submission, Defence set out the proposed scope of the redevelopment, stating
that the works are comprised of six elements:
§ Work Element 1: Construct a new four story 24,500 metre squared
Training Precinct
§ Work Element 2: Upgrade and refurbish Base Engineering Services,
including fire/potable water, communications networks, and
infrastructure
§ Work Element 3: Install new Base Security Systems at the front entry,
conduct fencing upgrades and install CCTV I high risk
§ Work Element 4: Refurbish the existing Galleys through spatial layout
§ Work Element 5: Construct new Trainee Living In Accommodation for at
least 236 students in four new accommodation block, plus
consequential works
including Medical clinic and enabling services
§ Work Element 6: Construct replacement car parking with, at minimum,
100 spaces to offset all carparks removed through the proposed
consultation
2.24 In its submission to the Committee, Defence stated it had conducted a
number of community consultation sessions which were aimed
at ensuring
‘...the community, base residents and other stakeholders were well
informed about the project’s details;
and provided the opportunity to
raise any concerns or to seek further information so that, wherever feasible,
Defence could address
these in its program of
2.25 Defence stated that it had ‘engaged with a variety of internal and
external stakeholders’ and would continue to consult
with stakeholders as
part of the project’s community consultation plans and communications
2.26 The Committee received a number of submissions expressing concern over
the lack of community and local consultation made prior
to Defence submitting
the proposal to the Committee.
During the public hearing Defence told the Committee that ‘the project
achieved government approval in August [2019]. The project
was then referred to
[the Public Works Committee] in September, at which point we were able to then,
as far as the process runs,
to commence our community consultations, which are
Bondi to Manly
2.27 During the inquiry, the Committee received a number of submissions from
local residents in support of the Bondi to Manly Walk,
due to open in December
2019. The submissions received by the Committee raised concerns that the fencing
HMAS Watson
may restrict the future potential for the walk to be
expanded along the eastern side of the base, should funding become available
the future.
2.28 Mr John Faulkner told the Committee at the public hearing that:
...for many years, as part of the Bondi to Manly Walk I had hoped to see a
walking track established on the eastern—or, if
you like, the
ocean—side of HMAS Watson, effectively between The Gap and South Head. As
we've heard, at the moment the only
walking track or access to South Head is on
the western—or harbour—side of the HMAS Watson base. In my
submission, I
described my really strongly held belief that such a track would
be considered one of the most scenic and dramatic coastal walking
tracks in the
world. As part of its submission to this inquiry, Defence notes that included in
the HMAS Watson redevelopment project
is its preferred option to install 'new
fencing to the entire base perimeter'. I've got no issue with new fencing at
all, to be honest
with you, but I do sincerely hope that this committee and
Defence can be flexible enough—and I'm sure this really only means
of a tweak here or there—to take account of the possibility of a clifftop
walking track being built sometime in the future
on the eastern perimeter of the
2.29 At the
public hearing Defence stated that they were working with Mr Faulkner,
co-founder of the
Bondi to Manly Walk Supporters,
‘to see what the
art of the possible is’ and were ‘working with Mr Faulkner and
looking very closely at what we
can physically do on the ground to be able to
achieve that intent’. Defence noted that to accommodate the request, the
would need to be inset ‘to allow there to be the physical room to
make it feasible to do a walking track on the eastern side
2.30 The Sydney Harbour Association raised a number of issues with the
proposal, in particular, the relocation of the helipad
2.31 At the public hearing, Mrs Hylda Rolfe, president of the Sydney Harbour
Association, stated that:
...the return of the helipad from its present location back to Wilson's Field
would be found to be very objectionable by those of
us who have lived there long
enough to remember how it used to be. The grounds that originally led to its
removal are still valid
as far as we're
Vehicle and traffic
2.32 A number of submissions received by the Committee expressed concerns
that the volume of vehicles entering and exiting the base
during the five year
construction period would cause considerable disruption to local residents in
Defence acknowledged
that this issue had been discussed at the community consultation sessions and,
as a result of conducting assessments,
estimated that ‘the height of
construction would be...around the third quarter of
Defence told the
Committee that:
The assessment thus far has estimated that over that three-month period or so
where construction will be at its height, there will
be an increase in traffic
by way of trucks in and out of the base to the tune of up to 70 or more truck
movements per day. However,
that would be spread out throughout a 10-hour work
period, and our contractors will look very carefully at ensuring that we can
those truck movements with the peak traffic times so that we're not
causing any more disruption than we need to. There will also
be a number of
measures taken for noise and
2.33 Defence
also stated that it would ‘adopt a just-in-time approach for deliveries,
so that we don't have trucks banking up
idling outside the base. Combined with
that, where possible we'll have holding areas adjacent to the worksite within
2.34 At the public hearing Defence told the Committee that it had met with
representatives from Woollahra Municipal Council and had
made a commitment to
work closely with them to ensure the ‘council is satisfied and happy with,
particularly traffic management
Cost of the works
HMAS Watson
Redevelopment Project has an estimated cost of $430.5
million, exclusive of GST.
2.36 Defence noted that the operating costs of the completed facilities will
increase by $3.2 million annually due to:
§ The maintenance costs to support the large increase in ICT hardware
installed within the new facilities; and
§ The additional facilities operations costs increase to account for the
increased gross floor area across each work
2.37 Defence provided further details on project costings in its confidential
submission and during an in-camera hearing.
2.38 The Committee is satisfied that the costings for the project provided to
it have been adequately assessed by the proponent entity.
Committee comment
2.39 The Committee recognises
HMAS Watson
as the Royal Australian
Navy’s principal warfare and navigation training establishment, and
acknowledges its contribution to
training men and women for their careers in the
Australian Royal Navy.
2.40 The Committee notes the
HMAS Watson
Redevelopment Project aims to
address functionality deficiencies and capacity constraints in facilities and
infrastructure at
HMAS Watson
which support demand levels greater than
they were originally designed for.
2.41 The Committee acknowledges that some local residents expressed a view
HMAS Watson
to be moved to another location outside of the Sydney
area. This request falls outside of the Committee’s terms of reference
relation to this inquiry.
2.42 The Committee notes that a detailed review of the navy’s future
training infrastructure requirements was conducted in 2006,
and concluded that
‘In Sydney,
HMAS Kuttabul
, the primary support base for Fleet Base
East, plus training and operational support bases at
HMAS Watson
Watsons Bay,
HMAS Waterhen
at Waverton and
HMAS Penguin
would also stay at their present
locations.’
2.43 The Committee notes that while the option of Defence utilising water
transport options to reduce traffic congestion during the
construction period
was discussed, the Committee recognises the lack of supporting infrastructure at
the base limits the viability
of this option.
2.44 As part of the
HMAS Watson
redevelopment project, Defence
proposes to install new fencing to the entire base perimeter. The Committee sees
no reason as to why
the new fence cannot be installed to accommodate the
potential for a cliff top track to be built along the eastern perimeter of the
base as part of the Bondi to Sydney Walk should future funding become
2.45 The Committee was pleased to hear that Defence were working with Mr
Faulkner and other members of the community with regards
to the future options
for the Bondi to Manly Walking Trail, and encourage Defence to continue to work
towards an agreeable outcome.
2.46 Noting concerns from local residents in regard to the relocation of the
helipad site, the Committee encourages Defence to work
with the local community
to find a suitable outcome.
2.47 The Committee encourages Defence to continue to consult with Woollahra
Municipal Council and members of the local community with
regard to issues
surrounding parking availability and traffic management prior to the
commencement of the construction period.
2.48 Having had some presence on the site since 1871, the Committee
recognises Defence’s longstanding presence in Watson’s
Bay and was
encouraged to hear that HMAS Watson is regarded as a good neighbour by the local
community. The Committee encourages
Defence to continue working with the local
community and maintaining a level of openness with regards to finding solutions
and concerns raised by its neighbours.
2.49 The Committee did not identify any issues of concern with the proposal
and is satisfied that the project has merit in terms of
need, scope and
2.50 Having regard to its role and responsibilities contained in the
Public Works Committee Act 1969
, the Committee is of the view that this
project signifies value for money for the Commonwealth and constitutes a project
fit for purpose, having regard to the established need.
Recommendation 1
2.51 The Committee recommends that Defence ensure the proposed works at
HMAS Watson do not preclude the building of a cliff top track
along the eastern
perimeter of the base as part of the Bondi to Sydney Walk.
Recommendation 2
2.52 The Committee recommends that the House of Representatives resolve,
pursuant to
Section 18(7)
Public Works Committee Act 1969
is expedient to carry out the following proposed works:
HMAS Watson
Redevelopment Project, New South Wales.
2.53 Proponent entities must notify the Committee of any changes to the
project scope, time, cost, function or design. The Committee
also requires that
a post-implementation report be provided within three months of project
completion. A report template can be found
on the Committee’s website.
3. Australian High Commission Property Replacement
Project, Tarawa, Kiribati
3.1 The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) seeks approval from
the Committee to proceed with the proposed Australian High
Commission (AHC)
Property Replacement Project, Tarawa, Kiribati.
3.2 The purpose of the project is to provide new fit for purpose office
accommodation and residential housing for the AHC Mission
3.3 The estimated cost of the project is $19.6 million (excluding GST).
3.4 The project was referred to the Committee on 18 September 2019.
Conduct of the
3.5 Following referral, the inquiry was publicised on the Committee’s
website and via media release.
3.6 The Committee received one submission and one confidential submission. A
list of submissions can be found at Appendix A.
3.7 On 15 November 2019, the Committee conducted a public and in-camera
hearing. A transcript of the public hearing is available on
Committee’s website.
Need for the works
3.8 The project proposes to replace the existing Chancery, Chancery Annex and
staff residences at Tarawa
...with purpose built, prefabricated, low maintenance and highly sustainable
location appropriate facilities. The proposed investment
will address the
rapidly deteriorating condition and high maintenance cost of the existing
facilities, which are approaching the
end of their useful economic
notes that the current facilities ‘do not meet the requirement to provide
reasonable quality and functional working
accommodation for all staff and
appropriate living quarters’, and the ‘poor condition’ of the
properties ‘does
not reflect favourably on Australia’s role as a
lead partner in the Pacific
Australia’s
step‐up in engagement with the Pacific was ‘one of the highest
priorities of the 2017 Foreign Policy
White Paper, launched on 23 November
3.10 As DFAT noted at the public hearing, Kiribati has also recently shifted
its diplomatic recognition:
...they previously recognised Taiwan, until just recently, in September, they
made the decision to recognise China instead. China
does not yet have an embassy
actually based in Tarawa ... So there are just the New Zealand and the
Australian high commissions represented
has difficulty in attracting and retaining Australia based staff (A-based staff)
for postings across the Pacific.
Tarawa is classified as a Category E hardship post based on its remote location
and limited access to amenities and services. As
the Department further
...attracting, retaining and supporting staff, through the provision of a
high-quality work and living environment, is essential
to the government’s
broader strategy of building a Pacific region that is securely strategically,
stable economically and sovereign
politically.
to the role of the five A-based and 20 locally engaged staff at the AHC at
Tarawa, DFAT noted that the development program
with Kiribati formed an
important part of that role, as well as promoting Australia’s bilateral
relationship with Kiribati
through ‘various security initiatives under the
Pacific step-up, the Australia Pacific Security College and the Pacific Fusion
Staff are also
assisting Kiribati in preparations to host the Pacific Islands Forum in
3.13 Overall, DFAT observed that the key issues with the working and
residential accommodation were:
§ Office Accommodation (Chancery). The Chancery is not large enough for
existing accommodation requirements and has no room for
growth with the current
arrangement impractical and not functional; and
§ Residential Accommodation. There are only three houses available for
Mission employees against the requirement for five houses
and the current state
of the building are not considered fit for purpose. A fourth house, which has
been temporarily repaired after
extensive termite damage, is currently being
used as a Chancery Annex but is located approximately 300 metres from the
3.14 DFAT also provided details on the objectives for the project, as
§ Fit for purpose
§ Staff retention
§ Improved whole of life costs
§ Sustainability
§ Local labour
§ Outlay cost
§ Ease of delivery
Options considered
3.15 DFAT considered three options for the project:
§ Option 1—Do nothing
§ Option 2—Refurbish and extend
§ Option 3—Demolish and construct
3.16 DFAT considered option 3, demolish and construct new, as representing
the best value for money, for the following reasons:
§ Option 3 achieves the project objectives and provides greater
functionality, amenity and operational efficiency than Option
§ The higher cost of Option 3 is accounted for by the larger building
area of the houses, which need to be bigger than the existing
houses to achieve
the functional objectives, particularly in relation to helping improve staff
retention and attraction; and
§ The Chancery under Option 3 is smaller and more efficient than can be
achieved through Option 2.
Scope of the works
3.17 The scope of the project is to deliver the replacement of the following
AHC facilities at Tarawa:
§ Head of Mission (HOM) Residence—4 bedrooms
§ Deputy Head of Mission (DHOM) Residence—3 bedrooms
§ Senior Administration Officer (SAO) Residence—3 bedrooms
§ Second Secretary 1 Residence—3 bedrooms
§ Second Secretary 2 Residence—3 bedrooms
§ Chancery (office working accommodation for maximum 31 staff)
§ All associated demolition, civil and landscaping
3.18 DFAT noted that the challenges of constructing and maintaining
properties in Kiribati and the Pacific are significant, with lack
of contractor
and construction material availability, high shipping costs and challenging
environmental factors contributing to these
difficulties.
3.19 Accordingly, the Department explained that it had adopted innovative
planning and design concepts for the AHC facilities at Tarawa:
As part of the Project, Reeves International have partnered with the design
team, Unitised Building (UB) to develop a flexible façade
and structural
system that is adaptable to the buildings that will be constructed in this
The UB panel system is a unique system of precision manufactured prefabricated
floor, wall and façade panels. Each panel consists
of lightweight steel
elements encased in a cementitious infill. The panels are designed to lock
rapidly together with minimal backpropping
to create a building’s
superstructure and interface with a building’s chosen façade
specifications and bathroom
The UB design solutions include prefabricated bathroom ‘pods’, which
will be shipped complete as these elements comprise
the most critical
construction challenges for finishing trades, waterproofing and
key features of the UB panel system for the project include: minimal site works;
corrosion resistance; termite proofing;
maximum floor area space; safe, rapid
installation; and maximum design
flexibility.
DFAT further noted
that, with the prefabricated building system at Tarawa, it was seeking to
develop a ‘repeatable best-practice
design and construction model to
fast-track further building programs at other Australian missions throughout the
Asia-Pacific region’.
3.21 There was interest at the public hearing in further exploring the extent
of deterioration of the existing buildings at Tarawa.
DFAT observed that the
original buildings were not fit for purpose—from the outset, the buildings
‘were always going
to be challenged by the environment and always going to
require high levels of
maintenance’.
buildings had not been constructed by the Australian Government:
They were purchased in the mid-eighties ... The annex was actually formerly the
British high commission residence. They are a traditional
build ... termites are
particularly virulent in the Pacific ... which is specifically why we’ve
investigated alternative construction
to whether the staged build would effect AHC activities, DFAT confirmed that all
activities will be maintained—‘we’re
able to build the new
chancery behind the existing chancery’ and ‘because of the nature of
the phasing we’re able
to accommodate
3.23 Asked whether there might be a need to increase the office or
residential accommodation on Tarawa in the future, DFAT responded
current forecasts, it did not see that as an immediate
requirement—however, given its 25-year outlook in undertaking
the project,
it is ‘remaining sensitive and flexible to the necessity that may arise at
a future point’.
3.24 As part of the project, asbestos cement sheeting will need to be taken
off the island for disposal. DFAT confirmed that the contractor
will include the
‘Pacific-experienced services of an environmental remediation contractor
to undertake assessment and International
Asbestos Removals for safe
The contractor
has identified facilities in Victoria to receive the asbestos cement sheeting
upon receipt of the permit.
consultation
3.25 DFAT noted that it had undertaken numerous local stakeholder
consultation activities as part of the development of the
This included meeting
with the local government of Kiribati and the Ministry of Infrastructure and
Sustainable Energy to discuss
the project and brief them on the proposed
demolition and construction activities and the necessary approval
The project had been
‘well received with no major issues or concerns raised by local
stakeholders’.
3.26 In terms of local community benefits, DFAT explained that the project
seeks to ‘build local capacity through collaboration
with the DFAT funded
Kiribati Institute of
Technology’.
For example,
local craftsmen will be employed to construct the maneabas throughout the
properties, ‘fostering traditional skills
Cost of the works
3.27 The project has an estimated cost of $19.6 million (excluding GST).
3.28 DFAT provided further details on project costings in its confidential
submission and during an in-camera hearing.
3.29 In terms of public value, the project will be delivered in two stages to
provide maximum flexibility in the construction methodology
and opportunity for
innovation to be passed onto the
Commonwealth.
3.30 At the public hearing, DFAT emphasised that using prefabricated
structures is the most efficient and cost-effective method for
staging and
sequencing the works:
Improved quality control and significantly reducing waste, transport energy and
packaging, as well as time reduced on site, are additional
benefits of this
approach. The passive design principles adopted and materials selected will
promote sustainability and enhance the
environmental performance of the
developing the proposal, DFAT further explained that they had ‘worked
closely with industry to promote Australian content,
expertise, innovation and
excellence’, including Australian companies—Reeves International
construction group, James
Cubitt Architects and Unitised
3.32 DFAT pointed to the high maintenance cost of the existing facilities as
being of particular concern, noting that one of the objectives
of the project
was ‘reduced operating and maintenance costs over an extended building
life span (nominally 25
The Department
stated that it was currently spending ‘in the order of about $544,000 in
repairs, maintenance and other operating
expenses’, to maintain the DFAT
owned Tarawa buildings.
projected ‘a whole-of-life costings reduction from $544,000 to around
$233,000 going forward’,
with energy costs also being reduced ‘in the order of about $77,000 per
3.33 The Committee is satisfied that the costings for the project provided to
it have been adequately assessed by the proponent entity.
Committee comment
3.34 The Committee did not identify any issues of concern with the proposal
and is satisfied that the project has merit in terms of
need, scope and
3.35 Having regard to its role and responsibilities contained in the
Public Works Committee Act 1969
, the Committee is of the view that this
project signifies value for money for the Commonwealth and constitutes a project
fit for purpose, having regard to the established need.
Recommendation 3
3.36 The Committee recommends that the House of Representatives resolve,
pursuant to
Section 18(7)
Public Works Committee Act 1969
is expedient to carry out the following proposed works: Australian High
Commission Property Replacement Project, Tarawa,
3.37 Proponent entities must notify the Committee of any changes to the
project scope, time, cost, function or design. The Committee
also requires that
a post-implementation report be provided within three months of project
completion. A report template can be found
on the Committee’s website.
4. Shoalwater Bay Training Area Remediation Project,
4.1 The Department of Defence (Defence) seeks approval from the Committee to
proceed with the proposed Shoalwater Bay Training Area
(SWBTA) Remediation
4.2 The purpose of the project is to remediate selected elements of the
facilities and engineering infrastructure within the SWBTA
to ensure its
environmental sustainability is commensurate with introducing new capabilities
to the Australian Defence
4.3 The estimated cost of the project is between $105 to 140 million
(excluding GST).
4.4 The project was referred to the Committee on 18 September 2019.
Conduct of the
4.5 Following referral, the inquiry was publicised on the Committee’s
website and via media release.
4.6 The Committee received two submissions and one confidential submission. A
list of submissions can be found at Appendix A.
4.7 On 15 November 2019, the Committee conducted a public and in-camera
hearing. A transcript of the public hearing is available on
Committee’s website.
Need for the works
4.8 The project proposes to deliver works at numerous sites across the SBWTA,
which covers over 274,000 hectares of land and 180,000
hectares of sea and is
located approximately 80km north of Rockhampton in Central
Queensland.
Defence outlined the
need for the project as follows:
The SWBTA is one of Australia’s key training areas for domestic and
international Defence training, and is the Australian Defence
Force’s only
national location capable of supporting significant amphibious operations. It
can be accessed by air, sea and
land, and is of sufficient size to accommodate
large-scale training manoeuvres supported by air and naval gunfire. Given the
and expected future use of the training area, there is a need to
remediate the existing infrastructure to:
§ enable continued
environmental sustainability for Australian Defence Force exercises.
§ meet the Department of Defence’s obligations to manage the area
for both military operations and environmental conservation.
§ increase Defence’s Amphibious training capability.
§ enhance the quality and longevity of existing infrastructure for air,
sea and land manoeuvres into the
4.9 Defence noted that it had undertaken comprehensive master planning, site
investigations, stakeholder consultation, whole-of-life
cost analysis and design
development to establish the capital facilities and infrastructure works
required under the project to address
Options considered
4.10 Defence outlined four options for the project:
§ Option 1—take no action
§ Option 2—full scope
§ Option 3—priority scope elements
§ Option 4—rationalised
remediation
4.11 Defence considered option 4, rationalised remediation, as representing
the ‘best value for money solution to the Commonwealth
to address the need
from a whole-of-life
perspective’.
based on the ‘benefits of addressing most scope elements to varying
degrees and effectively managing the impacts of
reduced design solutions’
and allowing ‘flexibility to progressively re-invest savings into the
“below the line
items” and realise the full scope option (option 2)
as far as the project’s budget will
4.12 Priorities for re-investment are:
§ the camp facilities at Williamson Camp
§ further development of the Urban Operations Training Facility
§ greater pavement strengthening at Williamson
Scope of the works
4.13 Defence outlined the scope of the project as follows:
§ Urban Operations Training Facility Upgrade
§ Williamson Camp Development
§ Williamson Airfield Upgrade
§ Field Hospital Site Upgrade
§ Dingo Drive Remediation
§ Freshwater Beach Landing Site Remediation
§ Remediation of Selected Creek
4.14 Defence provided a summary of the above scope components, as
upgrading the urban operations training facility to support brigade-size
training activities of approximately 2,000 soldiers; upgrading
the Williamson
Airfield to support increased heavy-lift aircraft operations; upgrading an
existing clearing to be used as an aeromedical
evacuation landing zone and field
hospital site; developing a camp to support up to 1,000 personnel; upgrading
Dingo Drive to support
two-way military traffic; and upgrading up to 60 creek
crossings throughout the training
was interest at the public hearing in understanding more about the Urban
Operations Training Facility Upgrade. The proposal
for the construction of the
original Urban Operations Training Facility was approved by the Committee in
2006. This facility consisted
of repurposed shipping containers, which Defence
explained are now ‘beginning to corrode’ and will soon be
4.16 Defence noted that the design life of these containers would not have
been ‘much over the 10-year mark, given that they
were just a
containerised option’.
However, the building structures at the upgraded facility will have a design
life of 50 years, ‘so this one is planned on enduring
for many decades
without the need to come back ... there is certainly no thought that it would
need to be replaced, because it has
a long design life, given the nature of the
construction’.
4.17 The new construction will be ‘a combination of tilt-up concrete
panel construction, colorbond roof sheeting, colorbond
industrial style
sheds—all materials that are very hardy and low-maintenance that can be
left out in the bush without a lot
maintenance’.
confirmed that the managing contractor would be responsible for the disposal of
the containers, with ‘a rate of 70
per cent of the waste from the project,
including the containers’, going through recycling centres as opposed to
4.18 Another matter raised at the public hearing was the Williamson Airfield
Upgrade—in particular, whether there would be land
available if there was
a future need to extend the runway. Defence responded that there was land
available but a runway extension
is not proposed, because it can already
accommodate a fully laden C-17
Globemaster.
4.19 On the Williamson Camp Development, Defence further explained the
rationale behind providing austere accommodation for Defence
personnel. It was
noted that field forces ‘deploy to an environment where they have to
bring, where possible, their own equipment
in order to sustain them during that
deployment’.
‘shower bags on hooks, zero-discharge, low-water-usage toilets and the
like’ achieve both environmental and
4.20 There was also interest in understanding more about the Dingo Drive
Remediation, noting that, over recent years, the Committee
had approved a number
of medium works relating to road maintenance at the SWBTA. Of particular
interest was whether there was an
overall plan for road maintenance at the site
in the long term. Defence responded that:
that sort of routine maintenance would continue, even after we do this work on
Dingo Drive ... Whilst the piecemeal fixing of Dingo
Track will definitely be
reduced, there is still quite an extensive road network throughout that range
where there will be maintenance
work required ... But there is a plan. That is
planned maintenance that they
consultation
4.21 Defence noted it had developed a ‘community consultation and
communications strategy that recognises the importance of
providing local
residents and other interested stakeholders an opportunity to provide input
into, or raise concerns relating to,
4.22 Defence provided a detailed summary of key stakeholder
consultations,
and stated that,
as at the time of the above consultation processes, the feedback received from
those consulted had ‘generally
4.23 Concerns raised during these consultation activities had been addressed
as follows:
§ Defence’s approach towards maximising opportunities for, and
developing the capabilities of local industry, including
the Darumbal People
- Defence’s response detailed how the Managing Contractor would be
facilitating this through its Local Industry Capability
- Defence outlined the policies, agreements and contractual mechanisms that
it will utilise to maximise work and development opportunities
for the Darumbal
§ Defence’s approach towards Heritage Management during
construction
- Defence confirmed that a Management Plan would be developed by the Managing
§ the impact of construction activities on training exercises on
- Defence confirmed that elements of some training activities would need to
be relocated to other training areas throughout Australia
to enable construction
activities to occur. Defence confirmed that construction activities are
currently not expected to impact Exercise
§ the impact of the Project’s proposed Williamson Airfield Upgrade
on the usage of Rockhampton Airport
- Defence advised parties the proposed Williamson Airfield Upgrade is not
anticipated to reduce Defence’s use of Rockhampton
Airport, and that each
airfield is used for different purposes to support Training Activities at
§ the impact of the Project’s proposed hard-standing areas on
water flow and sediment runoff into the Great Barrier Reef
Marine Park
- Defence confirmed that water flow and sediment runoff were considered when
developing the design solution and that, by design, the
hardstand will decrease
sediment runoff. As a result, the construction of permanent hardstands will have
a positive environmental
4.24 As to whether the works were likely to cause any disruption to the
surrounding community outside the base, Defence observed that
construction sites
were well within the boundary of the base, ‘so they are a long distance
from any locals’.
4.25 Defence also provided further information on the scheduling of major
training exercises and construction activities in terms
of the SWBTA:
ADF Headquarters Joint Operations Command, Joint Capabilities Group, realise
that Shoalwater Bay is our premier, category 1 training
area. They’ve now
commenced their planning cycle for Talisman Sabre. They’ve concluded that
they’re not going to
be utilising Shoalwater Bay and that the upgrades are
the most important thing over the next 31 months ... That’s being worked
out at the moment, and it will allow Shoalwater Bay to be upgraded and
remediated as per the
submission.
Consultation with traditional
4.26 There was interest at the public hearing in further exploring
Defence’s consultation with the Traditional Owners of the
Darumbal People. Defence confirmed that the Darumbal people had been determined
as the native title holders—‘in
all the consultation we’ve
done, it’s been only the Darumbal people that have identified themselves
as that. We’ve
worked with them
accordingly’.
4.27 Defence also noted that it had undertaken extensive cultural heritage
investigations with the Darumbal people, and reinforced
its commitment to
‘partner with the Darumbal people in protecting their culturally
significant places and to promote their
people and businesses through
contracting
opportunities’.
has an Indigenous land use agreement in place with the Darumbal people, which
allows them to have first right of refusal
for contracts that are below
$250,000, with the expectation that there will be ‘employment
opportunities for either Darumbal
businesses or individual Darumbal people on
the project’.
Consultation with local
contractors
4.28 In terms of whether the proposed works would be carried out by local
contractors where possible, Defence confirmed that the major
contractors, the FK Group and Downer joint venture, had ‘signed themselves
up to an 80 per cent local participation
rate for the construction side of the
project’, with the contractors having undertaken ‘quite extensive
industry consultation
with key industry bodies in the
The managing
contractor for the project is contractually required to comply with a local
industry capability plan.
4.29 As Defence further noted:
Since the start of the project, we have done intensive investigations into the
market and have met with in excess of 200 local subcontractors,
got a sense of
their capabilities and what they can do, fed that into the design, so we have
designed certain materials in certain
processes that suit what the local
industry can do. In addition to that, we have also shaped the packaging plans of
the procurement
strategy so that we are creating subcontract work packages that
are of a size that will suit the general spread of that capability
and capacity
of the local
Consultation on environmental
4.30 Defence’s consultation on environmental matters at the SWBTA was
another matter of interest at the public hearing, noting
that the training area
is located within a World Heritage Area.
4.31 Defence noted it had ‘robust environmental policies and management
strategies in order to ensure that it meets its responsibility
Shoalwater Bay during military
activities’.
example, the
Great Barrier Reef Outlook Report 2019
stated that:
Defence has a mature environmental management system in place that has operated
very effectively for many years. The memorandum of
understanding between Defence
and the Marine Park Authority continues to underpin strong working relationships
and information sharing,
and instils a high level of confidence that defence
activities are environmentally sustainable in the
4.32 Defence
emphasised that its engagement with groups with environmental interests in the
SWBTA indicated they are ‘satisfied
that we have robust measures in
4.33 As to whether there were any outstanding issues relating to consultation
on environmental matters relating to the SWBTA, Defence
confirmed that:
The environmental management efforts we’ve had on this project, and in
previously managing Shoalwater Bay, have been quite
extensive, just in
recognition of the significance of the area, in particular the wetlands that are
recognised under the Ramsar Convention,
so a lot of consultation has been done
with all parties
4.34 Defence
explained that all relevant parties and jurisdictions with an interest in
Shoalwater Bay are on the Environmental Advisory
Committee, with Defence being
‘active on that committee to make sure that we’re actually meeting
all the obligations
that we need
4.35 As to how the environmental sustainability of the various facilities at
the SWBTA has been monitored in the past and will be
monitored in the future,
Defence explained that:
before any exercise, the condition is well documented ... so that over the years
whenever there has been a major exercise ... what
happens is that the range is
returned to what it looked like before you started ...
Whilst this work is heavily focused on doing environmental controls, it’s
not to say that we haven’t very closely monitored
the environment out
there up to date. But it’s been done in a piecemeal fashion, which has,
over the years, been expensive.
By doing this investment now, that piecemeal
repair work will be very much
terms of any PFAS contamination issues associated with the site, Defence
responded that there had been some investigations
done, with:
...some low levels identified in the Williamson Airfield area – very low
levels sitting at about 0.14 milligrams per kilo in
terms of concentration. That
sits on the lowest band of PFAS contamination. Within that band we are permitted
to re-use the material
as part of the works so that it doesn’t have to
Cost of the works
4.37 The project has an estimated cost of between $105 to 140 million
(excluding GST). This includes management and design fees, construction
information and communications technology, furniture, fittings, equipment,
contingencies and a provision for
escalation.
4.38 Defence noted that an increase in operating costs is expected as a
result of the proposed works, ‘due to the addition of
new facilities and
infrastructure which will increase the associated facilities maintenance,
cleaning and utilities
4.39 The department provided further details on project costings in its
confidential submission and during an in-camera hearing.
4.40 The Committee is satisfied that the costings provided for the project
have been adequately assessed by the proponent entity.
Committee comment
4.41 The Committee did not identify any issues of concern with the proposal
and is satisfied that the project has merit in terms of
need, scope and
4.42 Having regard to its role and responsibilities contained in the
Public Works Committee Act 1969
, the Committee is of the view that the
project signifies value for money for the Commonwealth and constitutes a project
that is fit
for purpose, having regard to the established need.
Recommendation 4
4.43 The Committee recommends that the House of Representatives resolve,
pursuant to
Section 18(7)
Public Works Committee Act 1969
is expedient to carry out the following proposed works: Shoalwater Bay Training
Area Remediation Project.
4.44 Proponent entities must notify the Committee of any changes to the
project scope, time, cost, function or design. The Committee
also requires that
a post-implementation report be provided within three months of project
completion. A report template can be found
on the Committee’s website.
5. Navy Capability Infrastructure
Sub-program
5.1 The Department of Defence (Defence) seeks approval from the Committee to
proceed with the Navy Capability Infrastructure Sub-program:
Facilities and
Infrastructure to Support New Navy Capabilities.
5.2 The 2016 Defence White Paper noted the Government’s commitment to
‘build a strong and sustainable naval shipbuilding
As part of this long-term
plan, shipbuilding will commence with construction in Australia of Offshore
Patrol Vessels from 2018 and
Hunter Class Frigates from
The shipbuilding
capacity will be consolidated at the Australian Naval Infrastructure’s
Osborne Naval Shipyard (SA), and at
the Australian Marine Complex at Henderson
5.3 The proposed works will provide fit for purpose facilities and
infrastructure to support the introduction into service of the
nine Hunter Class
Frigates and the 12 Arafura Class Offshore Patrol Vessels (OPV) at nine
locations in Australia, and support the
Navy Training Pipeline Simulation
Requirements at HMAS Stirling
5.4 The estimated cost of the project is $1.8 billion (excluding GST).
5.5 The project was referred to the Committee on 10 September 2019.
5.6 Subject to Parliamentary approval, construction activities are expected
to commence in 2020 and be completed by early 2027.
Conduct of the
5.7 Following referral, the inquiry was publicised on the Committee’s
website and via media release.
5.8 The Committee received eight submissions and two confidential
submissions. A list of submissions can be found at Appendix A.
5.9 On 20 November 2019, the Committee conducted a site inspection at HMAS
, public and in-camera hearings. A transcript of the public
hearing is available from the Committee’s website.
Need for the works
5.10 The project will support the two new capabilities, the Hunter Class
Frigates and the Offshore Patrol Vessels, which will replace
the Anzac class
Frigates and the Armidale Class Patrol Boat in an extended transition up to the
5.11 Defence told the Committee that the incoming fleet of Hunter Class
Frigates will:
...provide the Australian Defence Force with the highest levels of lethality and
deterrence that Australia’s major surface
combatants need during times of
global uncertainty...The Frigates will be able to conduct missions independently
or as part of a
task group, and will have sufficient range and endurance to
effectively.
5.12 Defence
noted that the Hunter Class Frigates ‘will also have the flexibility to
support humanitarian assistance and disaster
5.13 With regards to the 12 Arafura Class OPV, Defence stated that the Patrol
Vessels will:
...undertake constabulary missions, maritime patrol and response duties. State
of the art sensors and command and communications
systems will enable the
vessels to operate alongside Australian Border Force vessels, other Australian
Defence Force units and regional
partners. The design of these vessels will
support specialist mission packages, such as a maritime tactical unmanned aerial
The range and associated operational endurance of the Arafura Class
Offshore Patrol Vessels will permit support of most Australian
Defence Force
operations.
support the introduction of these new capabilities, Defence undertook:
...comprehensive master planning, site investigations, stakeholder consultation,
whole-of-life cost analysis and design development
during the development phase
of the project to establish the capital facilities and infrastructure works
required to support the
introduction into service and sustainment of these
capabilities.
the public hearing Defence explained:
The key drivers for the projects are: the berthing requirements for the new,
larger ships; the increased crewing numbers for these
ships; the implications of
the Naval Shipbuilding Plan for training, logistics and maintenance; the
facilities required to effectively
support the integration of combat systems for
these capabilities; and the opportunities for integrating the requirements. The
deficiencies identified in existing facilities and infrastructures
include: wharf structures and services that cannot accommodate
the increased
size or number of ships proposed at HMAS Stirling, HMAS Coonawarra and HMAS
Cairns; a lack of capacity and operational
support facilities for ship-specific
training, maintenance and logistics to meet the significantly increased
requirements of the
new capabilities; and a lack of capacity in domestic support
facilities, such as accommodation, to support the increased crew
5.16 Defence
explained in their submission how these key drivers and deficiencies provided a
rationale for this project to be undertaken
in a program approach, where the
overall facilities requirements would be undertaken as a single program of
5.17 Defence further stated that the ‘program approach...has been
designed to optimise value for money and capability
5.18 The program approach categorised the elements of the project into
functional groups:
1 Maritime Structures – wharves and associated structures and services
required to support the berthing of vessels
2 Operational Support Facilities - a range of support functions and address
requirements for the remote monitoring of berthed vessels
3 Ship Zero Facilities – proposed facilities will accommodate
Class-specific training, sustainment, logistics, engineering and
management of
the evolution of these complex capabilities
4 Shipbuilding Facilities - support the mature requirements of the Ship Build
Program Office, and Crew Zero
5 Domestic Support Facilities – include facilities for living in
accommodation, recreation and fitness, messing and medical
6 Engineering Services – required to be upgraded or installed at new
development sites to support the new
capabilities.
5.19 The project is taking place at nine locations around Australia:
§ WA - HMAS
Palmer Barracks, Henderson
§ NT - HMAS
Coonawarra,
RAAF Darwin
§ QLD - HMAS
§ SA – St Kilda Transmitting Station, Osborne Naval
Options considered
5.20 Defence described in their submission the range of design options for
each of the functional groups which were considered.
5.21 They noted that the considerations included in some cases refurbishment,
upgrading of existing facilities or building new facilities.
In the case of
marine structures, consideration was given to providing flexibility for future
capability requirements.
5.22 Where new facilities are required, Defence ensured that there were no
suitable or surplus facilities
Where Defence is
required to purchase land for new facilities, they will ensure that the land is
located appropriately to complement
Scope of the works
5.23 The proposed facilities and infrastructure involve new works and
refurbishment or upgrading of existing facilities and infrastructure
the proposed locations.
Proposed Work
5.24 There are 22 work elements with two being included as below the line
items. The proposed scope of the project are listed by location
- Element 1 -Maritime Structures – extension of the Parkes and Oxley
Wharves and provision of shore power
- Element 2 - Operational Support Facilities – construction and
expansion of maintenance and logistics support facilities
- Element 3 - Ship Zero Facilities – construction of a new training
- Element 4 - Domestic Support Facilities - construction of medium density
living in accommodation and upgrades to existing facilities
- Element 5 - Engineering Services Infrastructure – extend existing
services to support new, upgraded or refurbished facilities.
- Element 6 - Operational Support Facilities – construction of crew
support areas
- Element 7 - Ship Zero Facilities – construction of a capability
- Element 8 – Shipbuild Program Facilities - below the line item
- Element 9 - Engineering Services Infrastructure – new engineering
services infrastructure for each facility.
Palmer Barracks
- Element 10 - Operational Support Facilities – below the line item
- Element 11 -Maritime Structures – dredging, wharf works and
provisions of services to support berthing.
- Element 12 - Operational Support Facilities – construction of support
- Element 13 - Engineering Services Infrastructure – extend existing
services to support new, upgraded or refurbished facilities.
RAAF Darwin
- Element 14 - Operational Support Facilities – construction of new
explosive ordnance storage building
- Element 15 -Maritime Structures – construction of a new wharf and
upgrade and extension of existing wharf services.
- Element 16 - Operational Support Facilities – construction of new
facilities and upgrade of existing facilities
- Element 17 – Cadet Facility – demolition of existing facilities
and new facilities constructed
- Element 18 - Engineering Services Infrastructure – extend existing
services to support new, upgraded or refurbished facilities.
Cairns – other locations
- Element 19 - Operational Support Facilities – construction of new
explosive ordnance facilities and upgrade of existing facilities
- Element 20 – Shipbuild Program Facilities - construction of new
- Element 21 - Engineering Services Infrastructure – new engineering
services infrastructure for the new development.
St Kilda Transmitting Station
- Element 22 – Shipbuild Program Facilities - construction of a land
based test site.
5.25 These work elements will be undertaken to support the location of the
§ The fleet of Hunter Class Frigates will be homeported at HMAS Stirling
(WA) and at the Garden Island Defence Precinct
§ The fleet of Arafura Class Offshore Patrol Vessels will be homeported
(NT) and HMAS
5.26 Defence also noted that they intend to acquire and develop properties at
Henderson (WA), in the Cairns area, and at Osborne
consultation
5.27 In its submission to the Committee, Defence stated it had conducted a
wide range of consultations with local residents and other
stakeholders, both external and internal.
5.28 Defence advised that there was general support for the project from the
consultation process but advised that there were two
issues raised during the
consultation which were specific to
5.29 The first issue related to the demolition of a particular building at
which the Cairns Navy League considered had heritage value.
Defence responded that they are assessing whether the building has any
5.30 The second issue related to traffic in the Rockingham area, particularly
the traffic to and from HMAS
. The Mayor of the City of
Rockingham indicated a concern about the traffic but also noted that the concern
is related to the level
of classification of the road, which has been raised
with the WA Government.
Sammels also provided a letter of support for the project to the
5.31 Defence noted that during the consultation for the facility at St Kilda,
a significant percentage of the local population attended.
The local population
were interested in whether there would be any provision of sewage lines as part
of the project and Defence indicated
that they have provided a response for
5.32 The Committee received a range of letters of support for the
Cost of the works
5.33 The Navy Capability Infrastructure Sub-program has an estimated cost of
$1.8 billion, exclusive of GST.
5.34 Defence provided further details on project costings in its confidential
submission and during an in-camera hearing.
5.35 The Committee is satisfied that the costings for the project provided to
it have been adequately assessed by the proponent entity.
Committee comment
5.36 The Navy Capability Infrastructure Sub-program is an ambitious program
of works that aims to support the introduction of the
new capabilities, the
Hunter Class Frigates and the Armidale Class Offshore Patrol Vehicles.
5.37 The Committee was interested to hear the relationship between this
project and the Naval Shipbuilding Plan. The ongoing projects
to build the new
capabilities, while outside the remit of the Committee, will add capacity to the
areas of Osborne in South Australia
and Henderson in Western Australia and the
Committee is pleased to see the work that Defence is doing to ensure in this
5.38 In relation to the size of the project and the program based approach
which has been taken by Defence, the Committee was pleased
to hear that the
program will be split into 11 contracts. The opportunity for a wide range of
local builders to the area, including
tier 2, to be able to be involved in the
project is encouraging.
5.39 The community consultation undertaken for this project over the nine
locations was extensive and the Committee is encouraged
by the number of letters
of support it received in support of the project.
5.40 The Committee did not identify any issues of concern with the proposal
and is satisfied that the project has merit in terms of
need, scope and
5.41 Having regard to its role and responsibilities contained in the
Public Works Committee Act 1969
the Committee is of the view that this
project signifies value for money for the Commonwealth and constitutes a project
fit for purpose, having regard to the established need.
Recommendation 5
5.42 The Committee recommends that the House of Representatives resolve,
pursuant to
Section 18(7)
Public Works Committee Act 1969
is expedient to carry out the following proposed works: Navy Capability
Infrastructure Sub-Program.
5.43 Proponent entities must notify the Committee of any changes to the
project scope, time, cost, function or design. The Committee
also requires that
a post-implementation report be provided within three months of a project
completion. A report template can be
found on the Committee’s website.
Hon Dr John McVeigh MP
A. List of Submissions
HMAS Watson Redevelopment
Project, New South Wales
Department of Defence
§ 1.1 Department of Defence (Confidential)
§ 1.2 Department of Defence
John Menadue AO, Private Citizen
Sydney Harbour Association
§ 3.1 Sydney Harbour Association
Rodger Bayliss, Private Citizen
John Faulkner, Private Citizen
Terrence Stamp, Private Citizen
Willea Ferris, Private Citizen
§ 7.1 Willea Ferris, Private Citizen
Woollahra Municipal Council
Claudia Cullen, Private Citizen
Australian High Commission
Property Replacement Project, Tarawa, Kiribati
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
§ 1.1 Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (Confidential)
Shoalwater Bay Training Area
Remediation Project, Queensland
Department of Defence
§ 1.1 Department of Defence
§ 1.2 Department of Defence (Confidential)
§ 1.3 Department of Defence (Confidential)
Navy Capability
Infrastructure Sub-program
Department of Defence
§ 1.1 Department of Defence (Confidential)
§ 1.2 Department of Defence
The Hon Warren Entsch MP
Industry Capability Network NT
City of Cockburn
Mr Bob Manning, Cairns Regional Council
Mr Josh Wilson MP
Fremantle Chamber of Commerce
Mr Barry Sammels, City of Rockingham
B. Public Hearing and Witnesses
Thursday 31 October
2019—Sydney, NSW
Department of
Brigadier Matt Galton Director General Capital Facilities &Infrastructure
Captain John Stavridis, Commanding Officer of Defence Base HMAS Watson
Lieutenant Colonel, Doug Fox, Project Director for the HMAS Watson
Redevelopment Project
Mr David Neumann, Director, Navy Infrastructure Plans
Mr Mark Winder, RPS Group, Project Manager / Contract Administrator for the
HMAS Watson Redevelopment Project
Mr James Terry, Lendlease, Managing Contractor Representative for the HMAS
Watson Redevelopment Project
Private Citizens
Mr John Faulkner, Private Citizen
Mr John Menadue, Private Citizen
Mrs Hylda Rolfe, Secretary, Sydney Harbour Association
Mr Rodger Bayliss, Private Citizen
Ms Willea Ferris, Private Citizen
Ms Louise McElvogue, Private Citizen
Friday 15 November
2019—Parliament House, Canberra
Department of
Brigadier Matt Galton, Director General, Capital Facilities
&Infrastructure Branch
Mr Jonathan Pollard, Project Director, SWBTA Remediation Project
Mr Sheldon Kidd, Director Simulation, Training Areas and Health Knowledge
Mr Lachlan Waite, Project Manager/Contract Administrator for SWBTA
Remediation Project (Aurecon Group)
Mr Martin Macdonald, Managing Contractor for SWBTA Remediation Project (for
FK Gardner and Downer EDI Pty Ltd)
Mr Cameron Smith, Director, Rider Levett Bucknall (for FK Gardner and Downer
EDI Pty Ltd)
Friday 15 November
2019—Parliament House, Canberra
Department of Foreign Affairs
Mr Kevin Nixon, Executive Director, Overseas Property Office (Project
Ms Fleur Davies, Assistant Secretary, Pacific Division
Ms Annette de la Rue, Director, Overseas Property Office (Project
Mr Simon Gorman, Managing Director, Reeves International (Design
Contractor)
Mr Paul Chrismas, Director, James Cubitt Architects (Project Architect)
Mr James Osenton, National Director, WT Partnerships (Cost Planner)
Wednesday 20 November
2019—Rockingham, WA
Department of
Brigadier Matt Galton Director General Capital Facilities &Infrastructure
Commodore David Mann, Director General Surface Combatants and Aviation
Lieutenant Colonel Peter Sims, Project Director
Mr James Taylor, Project Manager and Contracts Administrator, RPS Consulting
APP Pty Ltd
Mr Rodney Adlam, Lead Design Manager, GHD Pty Ltd
The Act, Part III, Section
18(8). Exemptions from this requirement are provided for work of an urgent
nature, defence work contrary
to the public interest, repetitive work and work
by prescribed authorities listed in the Regulations.
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Royal Australian Navy,
HMAS Watson
History’, <
https://www.navy.gov.au/history/base-histories/hmas-watson-history
viewed November 2019.
Royal Australian Navy,
‘HMAS Watson’, <
https://www.navy.gov.au/establishments/hmas-watson
viewed November 2019.
Royal Australian Navy,
‘HMAS Watson’, viewed November 2019.
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Brigadier Matt Galton,
Director-General, Capital Facilities and Infrastructure, Department of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence, p.
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Public Works Committee,
: Facilities for air warfare destroyer ships and landing helicopter
dock ships, Sydney, NSW.
Public Works Committee,
Upgrading of Accommodation at
HMAS Watson
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
The Sydney Morning Herald,
‘Navy to keep major bases in NSW, Vic’, 13 December 2006 <
https://www.smh.com.au/national/navy-to-keep-major-bases-in-nsw-vic-20061213-gdp1ay.html
viewed November 2019.
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Captain John Stavridis,
Commanding Officer of Defence Base HMAS Watson, Department of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Captain Stavridis,
Department of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
, pp. 15-18.
Department of Defence,
Submission 1.2
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Sydney Harbour Association,
Submission 3
, p. 6; Ms Claudia Cullen, Private Capacity,
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Mr Roger Bayliss, Private
Submission 4
, p. 1; Mr John Faulkner, Private Capacity,
Submission 5,
p. 4; Ms Claudia Cullen, Private Capacity
, Submission
Mr John Faulkner, Private
Transcript of Evidence
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Sydney Harbour Association,
Submission 3
, p. 4; Sydney Harbour Association
, Submission 3.1
Mrs Hylda Rolfe, Sydney
Harbour Association,
Transcript of Evidence
Mr Roger Bayliss, Private
Submission 4
, p. 1; Ms Willea Ferris, Private Capacity,
Submission 7
, p. 2; Woollahra Municipal Council,
Submission 8
2-4; Ms Claudia Cullen, Private Capacity
, Submission 9
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Mr James Terry, Managing
Contractor Representative for the HMAS Watson Redevelopment Project, Lendlease,
Transcript of Evidence
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
The Sydney Morning Herald,
‘Navy to keep major bases in NSW, Vic’, 13 December 2006 <
https://www.smh.com.au/national/navy-to-keep-major-bases-in-nsw-vic-20061213-gdp1ay.html
viewed November 2019.
Submission 1
Submission 1
Submission 1
Ms Fleur Davies, Assistant
Secretary, New Zealand, Polynesia and Micronesia Branch, DFAT,
Transcript of
, 15 November 2019, p. 2.
Submission 1
Mr Kevin Nixon, Executive
Director, Overseas Property Office, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
15 November 2019, p. 1.
Ms Davies, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 2.
Ms Davies, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 2.
Submission 1
Submission 1
Submission 1
Submission 1
Submission 1
Submission 1
Submission 1
Submission 1
Mr Nixon, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 1.
Mr Nixon, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 1.
Ms Annette de la Rue,
Director, Pacific Property Program, Overseas Property Office, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 3.
Ms de la Rue, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 3.
Mr Nixon, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 3.
Submission 1
Submission 1
p. 30. See also on this point, Mr Nixon, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
15 November 2019, p. 2.
Submission 1
Submission 1
Submission 1
Mr Nixon, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 1.
Mr Nixon, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 1.
Submission 1
Mr Nixon, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 1.
Mr Nixon, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 1.
Submission 1
p. 5, p. 6.
Mr Nixon, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 1.
Ms de la Rue, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 2.
Mr Nixon, DFAT,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 2.
For more detail on these
options, see Defence,
Submission 1
For more detail on each of
these scope components, see Defence,
Submission 1
Brigadier Matt Galton,
Director General, Capital Facilities and Infrastructure Branch, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 1.
Brigadier Galton, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 3.
Brigadier Galton, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 3.
Martin Macdonald, Managing
Contractor Representative, Shoalwater Bay Training Area Remediation Project, FK
Gardner and Downer EDI
Works Joint Venture,
Transcript of Evidence
November 2019, p. 3.
Brigadier Galton, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 5.
Brigadier Galton, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 3, p. 6.
Lieutenant Colonel Jonathan
Pollard, Project Director, Shoalwater Bay Training Area Remediation Project,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 6.
Lieutenant Colonel Pollard,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 6.
Brigadier Galton, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 4.
, pp. 4-14.
Brigadier Galton,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 5.
Mr Sheldon Kidd,
Director, Simulation, Training Areas and Health Knowledge Management, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 5.
Brigadier Galton,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 2.
Brigadier Galton,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 1.
Brigadier Galton,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 2.
Brigadier Galton,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 4.
Brigadier Galton,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 1.
Mr Macdonald, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 5.
Brigadier Galton,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 1.
Great Barrier Reef Marine
Park Authority,
Great Barrier Reef Outlook Report 2019
, Commonwealth of
Australia, 2019, p. 201. (See Brigadier Galton, Defence, on the
Great Barrier
Reef Outlook Report 2019
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November
2019, p. 1.)
Brigadier Galton,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 2.
Brigadier Galton,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 2.
Brigadier Galton,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 2.
Brigadier Galton,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 4.
Mr McDonald, FK Gardner
and Downer EDI Works Joint Venture,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November
2019, p. 2.
Department of Defence,
Defence White Paper
, 2016, p. 114.
Department of Defence,
Defence White Paper
, 2016, p. 21.
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1, p. 2.
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Brigadier Matt Galton,
Director-General, Capital Facilities and Infrastructure, Department of Defence,
Transcript of evidence,
20 November 2019, p. 1.
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1.1
, pp. 13-20
Defence note that works
for Garden Island will be the subject of a future referral to the PWC.
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1.1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1.1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1.1
Mr Barry Sammels,
Submission 8
Lieutenant Colonel Peter
Sims, Project Director, Navy Capability Infrastructure Sub-Program,
Transcript of Evidence,
20 November 2019, p. 2.
The Hon Warren Entsch MP,
Submission 2
, Industry Capability Network NT,
Submission 3
of Cockburn,
Submission 4
, Mr Bob Manning,
Submission 5
Submission 6
, Freemantle Chamber of Commerce,
Mr Barry Sammels,
Submission 8.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (318 KB)
PDF format (629 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter