URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBRp/2016/60.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:13:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Industry Research and Development Amendment (Innovation and Science Australia) Bill 2016 [2016] AUSStaCSBRp 60 (23 November 2016)
Industry Research and Development Amendment (Innovation and Science Australia) Bill 2016
Delegation of legislative power—authorising spending activities
Schedule 1, item 34, proposed section 33
Schedule 1, item 34, section 33
Parliamentary scrutiny—section 96 grants to the States
Schedule 1, item 34, proposed subsection 35(1)
Schedule 1, item 34, subsection 35(1)
Broad delegation of administrative powers
Schedule 1, item 34, proposed section 36
Schedule 1, item 34, section 36
Industry Research and Development Amendment
(Innovation and Science Australia) Bill 2016
This bill amends the
Industry Research and Development Act 1986
• transition Innovation Australia to become Innovation and Science
Australia, an independent body responsible for strategic
advice on all industry,
innovation, science and research matters; and
• create a statutory framework to provide legislative authority for
Commonwealth spending activities in relation to industry,
innovation, science
and research programs
Industry, Innovation and Science
House of Representatives on 1 September 2016
This bill received the Royal Assent on 20 October 2016
The committee dealt with this bill in
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016
Minister responded to the committee’s comments in a letter received on
13 November 2016. A copy of the letter is attached
to this report.
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
Delegation of legislative
power—authorising spending
Schedule 1, item 34, proposed
This bill seeks to establish a statutory framework to provide legislative
authority for Commonwealth spending activities in relation
to industry,
innovation, science and research programs. Proposed
subsection 33(1)
ministers to prescribe industry, innovation, science and research programs in
disallowable legislative instruments, thereby
authorising expenditure of
Commonwealth money for the purposes of the prescribed programs. The legislative
instruments may also make
provision for operational elements of spending
programs, such as eligibility criteria, the process for making applications,
application fees are payable in relation to the program, and other
matters (proposed
subsections 33(4)
The committee notes that proposed
subsection 33(2)
confirms that a
constitutional head of power is required to support Commonwealth industry,
innovation, science and research spending
programs authorised by these
provisions.
The committee further notes that proposed
subsection 33(3)
will require
legislative instruments made under proposed
subsection 33(1)
to specify the
legislative power or powers of the Parliament in respect of which the instrument
is made. The committee welcomes the
inclusion of this provision which will
provide clarity in relation to the constitutional head(s) of power on which the
Commonwealth
is relying to support each industry, innovation, science and
research program authorised by these provisions.
The committee notes that this approach is consistent with the expectation of
the Regulations and Ordinances Committee in relation
to the authorisation of
spending initiatives by regulations made pursuant to the
Financial Framework
(Supplementary Powers) Act 1997
(the FF(SP) Act). In this regard, the
Regulations and Ordinances Committee expects that, where an instrument
establishes legislative
authority for spending activities, the explanatory
statement should explicitly state, for each new program, the constitutional
for the expenditure.
However, in relation to this delegation of legislative power generally, the
committee has consistently expressed its preference that
important matters be
included in primary legislation, and for the explanatory memorandum to outline a
clear justification when the
use of delegated legislation is proposed. In light
of this, and the High Court’s reasoning in the
Williams v Commonwealth
[2012] HCA 23
(2012) 248 CLR 156
Commonwealth
[2014] HCA 23
(2014) 252 CLR 416]
, the committee expects a detailed
justification in the explanatory memorandum in relation to the rationale for
delegating to the
executive (through the use of regulations) the authorisation
and establishment of new spending initiatives and programs.
In light of this, the committee seeks the Minister’s advice as to:
• the rationale for establishing this separate authorisation scheme
which appears to operate in parallel with the authorisation
of spending
activities under the FF(SP) Act (for example, the committee seeks advice as to
examples of the types of programs that
will be authorised under this provision
and whether all authorisations of spending activities in the industry,
innovation and science
portfolio will now be authorised under these proposed
provisions, rather than the FF(SP) Act);
• whether consideration has been given to amending this provision with
a view to ensuring that important matters are included
in primary legislation
and to ensuring the opportunity for sufficient Parliamentary oversight of these
this regard, the committee notes that if new spending
activities are not to be authorised by primary legislation it would be possible
to provide for additional scrutiny in a number of ways, for example by:
requiring the approval of each House of the Parliament before new
regulations come into effect (see, for example,
Health Insurance
incorporating a disallowance process such as requiring that
regulations be tabled in each House of the Parliament for five sitting
before they come into effect (see, for example,
Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013
Minister's response - extract
Schedule 1, item 34, section 33
This section provides a mechanism for me to prescribe programs in relation to
industry, innovation, science and research by disallowable
legislative
instrument, including in relation to expenditure of Commonwealth money under
prescribed programs. Together with Schedule
1, item 34,
mechanism will allow me to provide legislative authority for Australian
Government programs and arrangements, such as contracts
with service providers
and funding agreements with grant recipients. This mechanism is intended to
operate in parallel to the
Financial Framework (Supplementary Powers) Act
Financial Framework (Supplementary Powers) Regulations 1997
(FF(SP) Act and Regulations). That is, this provides a portfolio-specific
approach to supplement the whole of government solution
in the FF(SP) Act and
Regulations which are the responsibility of the Minister for Finance.
Benefits of this approach
The mechanism is designed for, and limited to, industry, innovation, science
and research programs. Programs will be authorised under
the IR&D Act, the
objects of which now explicitly include supporting and encouraging collaboration
in the development and delivery
of, and authorising spending on, programs
relating to industry, innovation, science and research. This will ensure the
link between
program activities and the authorising legislation is clear and
unambiguous.
The mechanism will allow me, as responsible Minister, to make legislative
instruments prescribing programs in consultation with the
Parliamentary Counsel, the Attorney-General’s Department, the Department
of Finance and the Australian Government
Solicitor, as appropriate. This results
in a more streamlined process for providing legislative authority to industry,
innovation,
science and research programs. The mechanism will substantially
reduce the administrative burden associated with obtaining legislative
authority, and allow the Australian Government to be more agile and respond more
quickly to opportunities to implement new and innovative
ideas and programs.
Circumstances when the mechanism will be used
In relation to the Committee’s query about when and for what programs
the mechanism will be used, this will be considered on
a case by case basis
having regard to the proposed program, Australian Government policy, and
relevant legal advice, and in consultation
with the Department of Finance and
the Attorney-General’s Department as appropriate. Once suitable processes
are put in place,
the mechanism may be used routinely by my department for
general spending activities relating to industry, innovation, science and
research programs.
Parliamentary oversight
In relation to the Committee’s concern about ensuring the opportunity
for sufficient Parliamentary oversight of prescribed programs,
the mechanism
shares the same disallowance process as would apply to an amendment regulation
made under the FF(SP) Act. Legislative
instruments made using the mechanism will
be subject to a 15 day disallowance period in both houses of Parliament, in
with the ordinary process under
Legislation Act
. They will be subject to scrutiny from the Senate Standing Committee on
Regulations and Ordinances. Spending programs will be subject
to the budget
process in the usual way, and a separate appropriation will still be required.
Expenditure will also be subject to
the requirements of the
Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013
(PGPA Act), the
Commonwealth Grant Rules and Guidelines (CGRGs) and the Commonwealth Procurement
Rules, as applicable.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Minister for this response and notes that it would
have been useful had this key information been included
in the explanatory
memorandum.
In relation to the committee’s concerns about Parliamentary oversight,
the committee notes the Minister’s advice that
‘the mechanism shares
the same disallowance process as would apply to an amendment regulation made
Financial Framework (Supplementary Powers) Act 1997
Act)’. The committee has previously commented on the need for sufficient
Parliamentary oversight of the authorisation
and establishment of new spending
initiatives through the mechanism established by the FF(SP) Act. In the
committee’s
Eleventh Report of 2014
(at p. 558) the committee
highlighted its preference that important matters, such as establishing
legislative authority for spending
arrangements and grants, should be included
in primary legislation to allow full Parliamentary involvement in, and
consideration
of, such proposals. At that time the committee also expressed its
disappointment that the government considered that it would not
be appropriate
to provide for some level of increased Parliamentary scrutiny of these proposals
through modified disallowance procedures.
The committee draws these comments
spending initiatives
to the attention of Senators.
The committee also draws this general matter to the attention of the
Senate Standing Committee on Regulations and Ordinances for information.
In light of the fact that this bill has already passed Houses of
Parliament the committee makes no further comment in relation to
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
Parliamentary scrutiny—section 96 grants to the
Schedule 1, item 34, proposed
subsection 35(1)
Under proposed subsection 35(1), where arrangements are made in relation to
an industry, innovation, science and research program
with a State or Territory,
the arrangement must be subject to a written agreement containing terms and
conditions under which money
is payable by the Commonwealth. The relevant State
and Territory must comply with the terms and conditions set out in the written
agreement. As the explanatory memorandum notes, these will be the terms and
conditions on the grant of the financial assistance to
a State for the purposes
Constitution
The committee has previously noted that the power to make grants to the
States and to determine terms and conditions attaching to
them is conferred
on the Parliament
Constitution
. If this provision is
agreed to and the Parliament is therefore delegating this power to the executive
in this instance, the committee
considers that it is appropriate that the
exercise of this power be subject to at least some level of parliamentary
scrutiny, particularly
noting the terms of
and the role of Senators
in representing the people of their State or Territory.
The committee therefore seeks the Minister’s advice as to whether the
bill can be amended to include a requirement that agreements
with the States
science and research program made under
subsection 35(1)
• tabled in the Parliament within 15 sitting days after being made;
• published on the internet within 30 days after being made.
Minister's response - extract
Schedule 1, item 34, subsection 35(1)
I note the Committee has asked for advice about whether the bill can be
amended to include a requirement that agreements with the
States about grants of
financial assistance relating to an industry, innovation, science and/or
research program made under proposed
subsection 35(1)
are tabled in Parliament
within 15 sitting days after being made, and published on the internet within 30
days after being made.
I can assure the Committee that any grants of financial assistance to the
States made subject to
subsection 35(1)
will be handled in the same way as
grants subject to the Commonwealth Grant Rules and Guidelines. Information about
grants to States
will be published on my department’s website no later
than fourteen working days after the grant agreement for the grant takes
Committee response
The committee thanks the Minister for this response and notes that it would
have been useful had this key information been included
in the explanatory
memorandum.
As the committee noted in its original comments, the power to make grants to
the States and to determine terms and conditions attaching
to them is conferred
on the Parliament
Constitution
. Where this power is
delegated to the executive the committee considers that it is appropriate that
the exercise of the power be
subject to at least some level of Parliamentary
scrutiny, particularly noting the terms of
and the role of Senators
in representing the people of their State or Territory.
The committee thanks the Minister for his indication that any grants of
financial assistance to the States will be handled in the
same way as grants
subject to the Commonwealth Grant Rules and Guidelines and, as a result,
information about these grants to States
will be published on the
department’s website no later than fourteen working days after the grant
agreement takes effect. The
committee welcomes this approach, although the
committee notes that there is no legislative requirement for this to occur, nor
there any requirement to publish or table the relevant agreements in the
Parliament.
In light of the fact that this bill has already passed both Houses of
Parliament the committee makes no further comment in relation
Alert Digest No. 7 of 2016 - extract
Broad delegation of administrative
Schedule 1, item 34, proposed section
Proposed section 36 provides that a minister or accountable authority of a
non-corporate Commonwealth entity may delegate their powers
under sections 34 or
35 (relating to the arrangements for, and terms and conditions attaching to,
industry, innovation, science and
research programs) to ‘an official of
any non-corporate Commonwealth entity’.
The committee has consistently drawn attention to legislation that allows
delegations to a relatively large class of persons, with
little or no
specificity as to their qualifications or attributes. Generally, the committee
prefers to see a limit set either on
the scope of powers that might be
delegated, or on the categories of people to whom those powers might be
delegated. The committee’s
preference is that delegates be confined to the
holders of nominated offices or to members of the Senior Executive Service.
Where broad delegations are made, the committee considers that an explanation
of why these are considered necessary should be included
in the explanatory
memorandum. In this case as there is no explanation for the approach in the
explanatory memorandum, the committee
seeks the Minister’s advice as to
the rationale for enabling a minister or accountable authority to delegate his
or her powers
to ‘an official of any non-corporate Commonwealth
entity’ and whether consideration was given to limiting the powers
might be delegated or confining the delegation to members of the Senior
Executive Service.
Minister's response - extract
Schedule 1, item 34, section 36
I understand the Committee is seeking my advice as to the rationale for
enabling me (as responsible Minister), or the accountable
authority, to delegate
our powers in relation to arrangements made under sections 34 and 35 to
‘an official of any non-corporate
Commonwealth entity’, and whether
consideration was given to limiting such powers or confining the delegation to
the Senior Executive Service.
The delegation powers in the bill are consistent with the delegation powers
of accountable authorities of non-corporate Commonwealth
entities, set out in
subsection 110(1) of the PGPA Act, as well as the delegation of powers of
Ministers and accountable authorities
under section 32D(1) and (3) of the FF(SP)
The risks associated with providing for delegations in this way are reduced
by the framework established by the PGPA Act, through
duties placed on
accountable authorities (sections 15-19) and officials (sections 25-29) which
facilitate high standards of governance,
performance and accountability. In
particular, section 16 of the PGPA Act requires accountable authorities to
establish and maintain
an appropriate system of risk oversight, management and
internal control over the entity, which includes delegation arrangements.
In relation to the current delegations, it has not been necessary for me to
delegate my powers with respect to arrangements under
the PGPA Act or the FF(SP)
Act. The accountable authority’s powers under the PGPA Act and the FF(SP)
Act are delegated to officials
subject to thresholds, limits and conditions as
are appropriate for the relevant position or classification. The powers in the
in relation to arrangements will be delegated consistently with this
approach. This approach facilitates flexibility and responsibility
with the significance of the decision being made. I also note that the powers
delegated in this way do not include the
power to sub-delegate, so
responsibility cannot be moved lower than the level of the delegate chosen by
the accountable authority.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Minister for this response and notes that it would
have been useful had this key information been included
in the explanatory
memorandum.
As the committee noted in its original comments, the committee has
consistently drawn attention to legislation that allows delegations
relatively large class of persons, with little or no specificity as to their
qualifications or attributes.
The committee takes this opportunity to
reiterate its preference that limits are placed either on the scope of powers
that might be
delegated, or on the categories of people to whom those powers
might be delegated. In this regard, the committee’s preference
delegation is confined to the holders of nominated offices or to members of the
Senior Executive Service.
In light of the fact that this bill has already passed both Houses of
Parliament the committee makes no further comment in relation
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (96 KB)
PDF format (184 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter