URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBSD/2025/77.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:15:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Treasury Laws Amendment (Strengthening Financial Systems and Other Measures) Bill 2025 - Initial Scrutiny [2025] AUSStaCSBSD 77 (29 October 2025)
Treasury Laws Amendment (Strengthening Financial Systems and Other Measures) Bill 2025298
Significant penalties299
Availability of judicial review
Procedural fairness308
Limited disclosure
General disclosure
Deferral of sunsetting324
Treasury Laws Amendment
(Strengthening Financial Systems and Other Measures) Bill
This omnibus bill proposes various amendments to legislation administered
by the Treasury. These include amendments to improve disclosure
regimes and
related regulatory powers under the
Corporations Act 2001
to create new
exceptions to secrecy offences under the
Australian Charities and
Not-for-profits Commission Act 2012
; and to extend the $20,000 instant asset
deduction under the
Income Tax (Transitional Provisions) Act 1997
June 2025 to 30 June 2026.
House of Representatives on 4 September 2025
Bill status
Before the Senate
Significant
1.336 Various provisions in Schedule 1 of the bill would amend Chapter 6C of
Corporations Act 2001
(Corporations Act) to renumber and remake
certain existing fault-based and strict liability with increased penalties. In
particular,
the bill proposes to remake and renumber the existing fault-based
offence in section 671B(8) of the Corporations Act, which applies
to a person
who fails to give specified
information
to a listed company,
listed registered scheme or notified foreign passport fund and the relevant
market operator (e.g. the Australian
Stock Exchange) about their substantial
holding in the company, scheme or
1.337 A person is considered to have a
substantial holding
in a listed
company, registered scheme, or notified foreign passport fund if they (alone or
with associates) have control over 5%
or more of the voting rights. This
includes direct holdings and certain indirect interests, such as options or
conditional agreements,
even if those interests don’t currently give them
voting power. A person is also considered to have a substantial holding if
have made a takeover bid and the bid period is still
1.338 Schedule 1, item 21, proposed section 671B (and items 25 and 26) would
resituate and restructure these requirements, while preserving
the existing
fault-based and strict liability offences that may be charged against a person
who has failed to disclose all required
information about their substantial
holding in a Chapter 6C body within the relevant timeframes and in the approved
manner and form.
1.339 Schedule 1, items 63 and 64 seek to double the respective penalties for
each of these offences. The proposed amendment in item
63 would have the effect
of increasing the custodial penalty for the fault-based offence from 2 years
imprisonment to 4 years imprisonment.
Item 64 would meanwhile increase the
maximum penalty for the strict liability offence from 60 penalty units to 120
penalty units.
In this regard, the explanatory memorandum notes that strict
liability is generally only appropriate where offences are punishable
of up to 60 penalty units and not imprisonment, as stated in the
Framing Commonwealth Offences
1.340 Other amendments in Schedule 1 of the bill would introduce two new
strict liability offences that build on existing section
672B(1B), preserving
its substantive intent while clarifying the regulatory
These proposed new
offences – in proposed sections 672AB(2) and 672BA(2) – would
differentiate between the authority
requiring the information—either
Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) or key persons in listed
entities—and
broaden the scope of potential recipients. Schedule 1, item
46, would increase the monetary penalty for each offence from 60 to 120
1.341 The committee's expectation is that the rationale for the imposition of
significant penalties will be fully outlined in the
explanatory memorandum. In
particular, penalties should be justified by reference to similar offences in
Commonwealth legislation.
This not only promotes consistency, but guards against
the risk that liberty of the person is unduly limited through the application
disproportionate penalties. In this regard, the committee notes that the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
states that a penalty 'should be
consistent with penalties for existing offences of a similar kind or of similar
seriousness. This
should include a consideration of... other comparable offences
in Commonwealth legislation.'
committee’s expectation in this regard is heightened where proposed
legislation provides for a custodial penalty for an
1.342 In relation to doubling the custodial penalty for failing to give
required information about a substantial holding under proposed
671B(4), the explanatory memorandum states:
Schedule 1 of the Bill preserves the fault-based and strict liability
offences for failing to comply with the requirement to give
a substantial
holding notice.
1.343 The explanatory memorandum later clarifies, in relation to item 63,
Schedule 1 to the Bill doubles the maximum penalties for existing offences in
Chapter 6C, as follows:
• 4 years’ imprisonment for the fault-based offence of failing to
give the information required in a substantial holding
notice (4,800 penalty
units in the case of a body corporate);
• 120 penalty units for the strict liability offence of failing to give
the information required in a substantial holding notice
(1,200 penalty units in
the case of a body corporate);
• 120 penalty units for the strict liability offence of failing to give
the information required in response to a tracing notice
issued by either ASIC
or a key person (1,200 penalty units in the case of a body
corporate);...
1.344 In this instance, the committee notes that the explanatory memorandum
does not substantively address why increasing the maximum
term of imprisonment
in section 671B(4) from 2 years’ imprisonment to 4 years’
imprisonment is appropriate. The explanatory
memorandum also does not appear to
examine whether the proposed custodial penalty is broadly equivalent to
penalties applying to
analogous regulatory offences under the Corporations Act
or other Commonwealth legislation.
1.345 By contrast, the explanatory memorandum provides greater detail
regarding the proposed increase in penalties—from 60 to
120 penalty
units—for the existing strict liability offences in subsections 671B(9)
and 672B(1) of the Corporations Act, which
the bill proposes to relocate to
subsections section 671B(5), and 672AB(2) and 672BA(2).
These penalty increases align offence provisions for the disclosure regime
with similar existing offence provisions in the Corporations
Act. For example:
• the offence of failure to comply with a direction by ASIC to submit
additional information to allow ASIC to decide whether
to register a document on
a register kept by ASIC (subsection 1274(9)); and
• the offence of failure by a person included on a register kept by
ASIC to comply with a direction by ASIC to provide information
of a kind included on that register (subsection 1274(16)).
Setting the maximum monetary penalties for these breaches among the higher
range for non-custodial Corporations Act offences reflects
the market-sensitive
nature of the information provided under the disclosure regime. While the
penalty for the strict liability offences
is above the maximum amount specified
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
, the increased penalty
reflects the seriousness of the offence and will act as a sufficient deterrent.
In addition, the offences
capture a small cohort of individuals and others
liable rather than the public at large.
Further, the punishment of offences not involving fault is likely to
significantly enhance the effectiveness of the enforcement regime
in deterring
certain conduct and ensuring the integrity of the regulatory model. The use of
strict liability offences is otherwise
consistent with the
Guide to Framing
Commonwealth Offences
For a failure to provide a copy of a tracing notice register, this change
would increase the penalty above the level currently applied
to a failure to
provide a copy of a member register. Again, this reflects the market-sensitive
nature of the information contained
in a tracing notice
1.346 The committee acknowledges that, given the financial incentives that
market participants may have to withhold the information
to which these offences
relate, higher maximum monetary penalties may be required to ensure effective
deterrence. It is also recognised
that, in practice, such penalties are likely
to apply to a limited cohort of individuals operating within a regulated and
specialised
field—namely, those with substantial holdings in listed
entities or those associated with them—who may be reasonably
expected to
understand their disclosure obligations or otherwise capable of accessing
professional advice to do so.
1.347 However, it is not clear to the committee that such information
provided in respect of these increased civil penalties could
also justify the
proposed increase of the custodial penalty in subsection 671B(4). The committee
considers that the explanatory materials
do not sufficiently justify why it is
appropriate to increase the maximum custodial sentence that would apply under
proposed section
671B(4). The committee’s examination of the bill would
therefore be assisted by further detailed advice from the minister with
to the justification for increasing the custodial penalties that apply to the
fault-based offence of failing to give required
information about a substantial
1.348 Accordingly, the committee requests the minister’s advice as
to whether the custodial penalty proposed in Schedule 1,
item 63 in respect of
proposed section 671B(4) is appropriate. The committee’s examination would
be assisted if the minister’s
response addresses whether the proposed
penalty is broadly equivalent to penalties for similar offences in Commonwealth
legislation
and, if not, why not.
Availability of judicial
1.349 Schedule 2, item 1 in the bill seeks to amend the
Charities and Not-for-profits Commission Act 2012
(ACNC Act) to authorise
disclosures of certain protected information regarding ‘recognised
assessment activities’ in relation
to registered entities by the
Commissioner of the Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission (ACNC)
or the Commissioner
of Taxation. It proposes to do so by creating two new
exceptions to the existing secrecy offence in the ACNC Act (under which unlawful
disclosures of ‘protected ACNC
information’
officers is punishable by 2 years imprisonment, 120 penalty units or
Limited disclosure
1.350 Proposed new section 150-51 would authorise an ACNC officer to make
limited disclosures of protected ACNC information indicating
whether or not the
ACNC Commissioner is carrying out a ‘recognised assessment activity’
in relation to an identified
entity and any other information already available
to the public.
1.351 Broadly, a ‘recognised assessment activity’ will mean any
action by the Commissioner to assess whether an organisation
qualifies for
registration or is complying with the ACNC Act, or any action by the
Commissioner of Taxation to assess whether a registered
organisation is
complying with tax laws.
1.352 The Commissioner may authorise this form of ‘limited
disclosure’ only where they are satisfied that:
• information is available to the public that reasonably suggests the
registered entity may have contravened the ACNC Act or
not complied with a
governance or external conduct
• the information that would be disclosed includes only the
entity’s identity; whether a recognised assessment activity
conducted in relation to it; and any other publicly available
information;
• the disclosure is necessary to prevent or minimise significant harm
in certain circumstances. The significant harm relates
to public health or
safety, an individual, the mismanagement or misappropriation of entity funds or
assets, or the public trust and
confidence in the Australian not-for-profit
• when personal information within the meaning of the
may be disclosed, the Commissioner is satisfied the disclosure would
achieve the objects of the ACNC
1.353 The Commissioner may authorise the disclosure only if any harm to an
individual who is employed, contracted, or a volunteer
of the entity is not
disproportionate to the significant harm that is being prevented or minimised by
the disclosure.
General disclosure
1.354 Proposed section 150-52 seeks to provide that an ACNC officer may
disclose protected ACNC information describing a recognised
assessment activity
that is being or is to be carried out (known as a ‘general
disclosure.’). Such information may only
be disclosed where authorised in
writing by the ACNC Commissioner and where they have given the registered entity
a notice under
proposed new section 150-53.
1.355 The Commissioner may authorise disclosure if satisfied it would prevent
serious harm to public health or safety, an individual,
public trust in the
not-for-profit sector, or significant misuse of an entity’s
Where the disclosure
would divulge any personal information, the Commissioner must be satisfied that
its disclosure is necessary
to achieve the objects of the ACNC
As with limited
disclosure, general disclosure may only be authorised if the potential harm to
individuals is not disproportionate
to the harm being
Notice requirements
1.356 Proposed section 150-53 requires that the Commissioner must notify a
registered entity before they can authorise a general disclosure
of information
has an opportunity to object and seek
review of the Commissioner’s
1.357 The committee notes that the Commissioner may, in their discretion,
notify an entity in writing, under section 150-54, that
they are considering
authorising a disclosure before they do so, however this is not mandatory.
Accordingly, the committee notes
that the ACNC would be authorised to indicate
or confirm that a registered entity is subject to a recognised assessment
without the entity having necessarily been made notified of its
decision to do so or having had an opportunity to provide submissions
1.358 In relation to this aspect of the bill, the explanatory memorandum
...Registered entities will only be denied a right to respond to the
authorisation if the limited disclosure power is being used.
This allows the
ACNC Commissioner to respond to suggestions of misconduct by an entity in a
prompt manner, where delay would result
in public harm. Information about the
entity's conduct is already available to the public, so the Commissioner
disclosing whether
an investigation is occurring is unlikely to do substantial
additional harm to the
1.359 The committee is concerned that such an approach may undermine
principles of procedural fairness, particularly the right to
a fair hearing.
Procedural fairness is a fundamental common law principle. Australian courts
have insisted that a right to a fair
and unbiased hearing will be implied into
statutory powers which are apt to affect individual interests and rights unless
the Parliament
has excluded this inference with plain words of necessary
intendment. The core rules of procedural fairness insisted upon through
approach are the fair hearing rule and the rule against actual and apparent
1.360 In this instance, it appears to the committee that the registered
entity would have no opportunity to object or make submissions
Commissioner prior to being identified as subject to a recognised assessment
activity. This, in turn, limits the scope for
judicial review to meaningfully
examine whether an entity has been afforded procedural fairness with respect to
any limited disclosure.
Although the committee acknowledges the ACNC’s
interest in responding promptly to allegations of non-compliance or misconduct,
it considers the justification —that the publicly available information is
unlikely to cause substantial additional harm—provides
limited support for
restricting procedural fairness, noting that what a fair hearing requires would
be calibrated to the circumstances
(including the need for prompt action).
1.361 The explanatory memorandum suggests that, in addition to the absence of
a notice requirement, decisions by the Commissioner
or an ACNC officer to make a
limited disclosure would not be ‘subject to merits or judicial
review’. In relation to judicial
review, the committee notes that decision
would be subject to the constitutionally entrenched minimum provision of
judicial review
section 75(v)
Constitution
(and also exercisable
pursuant to
section 39B(1)
Judiciary Act 1903
). For this reason,
the Committee asks for a further explanation as to the intended meaning of the
explanatory memorandum in this
1.362 In relation to merits review, the explanatory memorandum states:
The lack of merits review is consistent with the Administrative Review
Council’s guidance document,
What decisions should be subject to merits
, which states that decisions of a law enforcement nature, including
decisions relating to investigations, are unsuitable for review.
In the case of
a limited disclosure, the Commissioner is only authorising disclosure of whether
or not the ACNC is investigating
the registered entity (any other information
that may be disclosed must already be publicly available), and so the decision
relates to the investigation. Additionally, the information relates to
conduct that is in the public domain, and the information
released is limited to
whether the ACNC is investigating the matter. Any delay caused by a merits
review process could lead to public
harm. Therefore, allowing an entity to lodge
an objection to delay the limited disclosure is not
appropriate.
1.363 The explanatory memorandum further states that:
The Commissioner may authorise an ACNC officer to disclose whether the ACNC
is carrying out an investigation into a suspected contravention
non-compliance by a registered entity, where information about the suspected
contravention or non-compliance is already in the
public domain. The disclosure
is also subject to a public harm test as a safeguard. The decision to authorise
disclosure is not subject
to merits and judicial review to allow the
Commissioner to respond to the misconduct of an entity promptly, as delay would
in public harm.
1.364 The committee draws this scrutiny concern to the attention of the
senators and leaves to the Senate as a whole the appropriateness
provisions.
Deferral of
1.365 Part XICA in the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
which is due to expire on 1 January 2026, provides a framework for the
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC)
(or the Treasurer) to
respond to corporations that engage in prohibited conduct in the energy market.
1.366 The mechanisms under Part XICA include powers to issue public warnings
and infringement notices, set out proposed orders in
a prohibited conduct
notice, and enabling the Treasurer to make contracting orders or apply to a
court for divestiture orders. Part
XICA was inserted into the CC Act by the
Treasury Laws Amendment (Prohibiting Energy Market Misconduct) Act 2019
and was intended to sunset pending the outcome of a review determining that it
should operate beyond 2025.
1.367 Schedule 6 to the bill would amend sections 153A and 153B of the CC Act
to extend the operation of Part XICA until 1 January
1.368 The committee expects the explanatory memorandum for any bill deferring
a sunsetting date following the conduct of a statutory
review of the
effectiveness of a legislative scheme to address why that deferral is necessary
and appropriate.
1.369 The explanatory materials accompanying such a bill should provide a
comprehensive justification for the continued operation
of the powers and
functions provided in Part XICA of the CC Act, including outlining what
circumstances justify the extension and
whether those circumstances are expected
to continue.
1.370 In this instance, the explanatory memorandum states:
The DCCEEW’s (Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and
Water) review found that the PEMM Act (
Treasury Laws Amendment (Prohibiting
Energy Market Misconduct) Act 2019
) amendments are, on balance, likely to
have had a positive impact in constraining behaviour of market participants and
consumers. It recommended that
of the CCA be retained until
the national electricity market has reached a state of relative stability, to
allow for the alignment
of the PEMM Act with the future state of the electricity
1.371 The committee considers the high-level information included in the
explanatory memorandum provides limited guidance as to the
circumstances that justify extending the sunsetting date, including the relevant
findings of the DCCEEW’s review.
It is also noted, in this instance, that
the explanatory memorandum does not address whether such circumstances are
expected to continue
into the future.
1.372 Accordingly, the committee requests the minister’s advice as
to why it is appropriate for
sections 153A
Competition and
Consumer Act 2010
to extend the sunsetting date for
in that Act
from 1 January 2026 to 1 January 2031.
This entry can be cited as:
Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills, Treasury Laws Amendment
(Strengthening Financial
Systems and Other Measures) Bill 2025,
Digest 6 of 2025
; [2025] AUSStaCSBSD 77.
Schedule 1, various items.
The committee draws senators’ attention to these provisions pursuant to
Senate standing order 24(1)(a)(i).
Required information is to
be specified in proposed section 671BB.
Schedule 1, item 21,
proposed subsection 671B(4) and item 25.
Corporations Act
Schedule 1, items 31 and 33,
proposed sections 672AB and 672BA.
Attorney-General's
Department,
to Framing Commonwealth Offences, Infringement Notices and Enforcement
September 2011, p. 59.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Schedule 2, item 1,
sections 150
. The committee draws
senators’ attention to these provisions pursuant to Senate standing order
24(1)(a)(iii).
‘Protected ACNC
information’ refers to information that was disclosed or obtained under,
or for the purposes, of the
Australian Charities and Not-for-profits
; and relates to the affairs of an entity; and
identifies, or is reasonably capable of being used to identify, the entity.
Australian Charities
and Not-for-profits Commission Act 2012 (ACNC Act)
, section 150-25.
ACNC Act, section
Schedule 2, Part 1,
proposed new paragraph 150-51(3)(a).
Schedule 2, item 1,
proposed new paragraph 150-51(3)(b)
Schedule 2, item 1,
proposed new paragraph 150-51(3)(c).
Schedule 2, item 1,
proposed new paragraph 150-51(3)(d). ACNC Act, existing section 15-5 provides
the objects of the Act is to maintain,
protect and enhance public trust and
confidence in the Australian not-for-profit sector; to support and sustain a
robust, vibrant,
independent and innovative Australian
not‑for‑profit sector; and to promote the reduction of unnecessary
regulatory obligations
on the Australian not‑for‑profit sector.
Schedule 2, item 1,
proposed new subsection 150-51(4).
Schedule 2, item 1,
proposed new paragraph 150-52(3)(c).
Schedule 2, item 1,
proposed new paragraph 150-52(3)(d).
Schedule 2, item 1,
proposed new subsection 150-52(4).
Schedule 2, item 1,
proposed subsection 150-53(3).
Explanatory memorandum,
Explanatory memorandum,
Explanatory memorandum, p.
71, table 2.1.
Schedule 6, items 1 and 2.
The committee draws senators’ attention to these provisions pursuant to
Senate standing order 24(1)(a)(v).
Explanatory memorandum to
Treasury Laws Amendment (Prohibiting Energy Market Misconduct) Bill 2019
Explanatory memorandum, p.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (168 KB)
PDF format (144 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter