URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJStaCPW/2019/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:09:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Parliamentary Joint Standing Committee on Public Works (46th Parliament) --- "Report 05/2019 - CSIRO Sydney Consolidation Project, New South Wales - PP 386/2019" [2019] AUPJStaCPW 8 (16 October 2019)
Membership of the 45th Parliament
Membership of the 46th Parliament
Committee Secretariat
Dissolution of the 45th Parliament
Structure of the Report
Conduct of the inquiry
Need for the works
Options considered
Scope of the works
Staff consultation
Community consultation
Cost of the works
Committee comment
45th Parliament
46th Parliament
Thursday 26 September 2019 – Sydney, NSW
Private Citizen
PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Report 5/2019
Referral made July 2019
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works
© Commonwealth of Australia
ISBN 978-1-76092-045-6 (Printed Version)
ISBN 978-1-76092-046-3 (HTML Version)
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 3.0 Australia License.
The details of this licence are available on the Creative Commons website:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/au/
List of Recommendations
1 Introduction
Dissolution of the 45th
Structure of the Report
2 CSIRO Sydney Consolidation
Conduct of the inquiry
Need for the works
Options considered
Scope of the works
Staff consultation
Community consultation
Cost of the works
Committee comment
Appendix A. List of
Submissions
Appendix B. Public Hearing and
Membership of the
The Hon Dr John McVeigh MP
Deputy Chair
Mr Tony Zappia MP
Senator Alex Gallacher
Mr Ian Goodenough MP
Ms Justine Keay MP
Ms Joanne Ryan MP
Senator Amanda Stoker
Mr Andrew Wallace MP
Senator John Williams
Membership of the
The Hon Dr John McVeigh MP
Deputy Chair
Mr Tony Zappia MP
Ms Lisa Chesters MP
Senator Alex Gallacher
Senator Hollie Hughes
Hon Barnaby Joyce MP
Senator Susan McDonald
Mr David Smith MP
Mr Rick Wilson MP
Committee Secretariat
Committee Secretary
Pauline Cullen
Inquiry Secretary
James Bunce
Inquiry Secretary
Kate Sullivan
Senior Research Officer
Office Manager
Tanya Pratt
List of Recommendations
Recommendation 1
2.50 The Committee recommends that the House of Representatives resolve,
pursuant to
Section 18(7)
Public Works Committee Act 1969
, that it is
expedient to carry out the following proposed works: proposed CSIRO Sydney
Consolidation Project, New South Wales.
Recommendation 2
2.51 The Committee recommends that, prior to commencing the proposed works,
CSIRO provide:
§ all information previously requested by the Committee;
§ evidence of how they are addressing the concerns of the local
community regarding the impact on water pressure in the event
of a bushfire or
emergency in the area of the Lindfield facility.
1. Introduction
1.1 Under the
Public Works Committee Act 1969
(the Act), the
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works is required to inquire into and
report on public works referred to
it through either house of Parliament.
Referrals are made pursuant to
of the Act, and by practice are made
by the Minister for Finance or their delegate in the House of
Representatives.
1.2 All public works that have an estimated cost exceeding $15 million must
be referred to the Committee and cannot be commenced until
the Committee has
made its report to Parliament and the House of Representatives receives that
report and resolves that it is expedient
to carry out the
1.3 Under the Act, a public work is a work proposed to be undertaken by the
Commonwealth, or on behalf of the Commonwealth concerning:
§ the construction, alteration, repair, refurbishment or fitting-out of
buildings and other structures;
§ the installation, alteration or repair of plant and equipment designed
to be used in, or in relation to, the provision of services
for buildings and
other structures;
§ the undertaking, construction, alteration or repair of landscaping and
earthworks (whether or not in relation to buildings
and other structures);
§ the demolition, destruction, dismantling or removal of buildings,
plant and equipment, earthworks, and other structures;
§ the clearing of land and the development of land for use as urban land
or otherwise; and
§ any other matter declared by the regulations to be a
1.4 The Act requires that the Committee consider and report on:
§ the purpose of the work and its suitability for that purpose;
§ the need for, or the advisability of, carrying out the work;
§ whether the money to be expended on the work is being spent in the
most cost effective manner;
§ the amount of revenue the work will generate for the Commonwealth, if
that is its purpose; and
§ the present and prospective public value of the
1.5 The Committee pays attention to these and any other relevant factors when
considering the proposed work.
Dissolution of the
1.6 The Proposed CSIRO Sydney Consolidation Project, New South Wales was
referred to the Public Works Committee (PWC) of the 45
on 13 February 2019.
1.7 The Committee had received submissions from the entity and additional
submitters prior to the dissolution of the 45
Parliament, however,
it was unable to conduct a hearing before the Committee was dissolved. The
referral therefore lapsed.
1.8 The CSIRO Sydney Consolidation was referred to the PWC of the
Parliament on 31 July 2019. CSIRO advised that there had been a
number of changes to the proposal since the original referral in
Parliament so the Committee chose to call for submissions.
Evidence for the original and subsequent referral taken on the inquiry
available on the Committee’s website.
Structure of the
1.9 In considering the works, the Committee analysed the evidence presented
by the proponent agencies, submissions and evidence received
at public and
in-camera hearings.
1.10 In consideration of the need to report expeditiously as required by
Section 17(1) of the Act, the Committee has only reported
on significant issues
of interest or concern.
1.11 Chapter 2 addresses the proposed CSIRO Sydney Consolidation Project, New
South Wales. The estimated cost of this project is $107.26
million (excluding
1.12 Submissions are listed at Appendix A, and hearings and witnesses are
listed at Appendix B.
2. CSIRO Sydney Consolidation Project
2.1 The Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO)
seeks approval from the Committee to proceed with its
proposed Sydney
Consolidation Project. The Sydney Consolidation Project aims to consolidate and
redevelop CSIRO’s property
portfolio in the greater Sydney area, to reduce
surplus accommodation capacity; provide relief in managing currently escalating
operating, repair and maintenance costs; and advance current and
future science capabilities.
2.2 This outcome will be delivered through the divestment of Marsfield, the
expiration of the North Ryde lease and consolidation of
staff and capability to
Lindfield and other fit-for-purpose CSIRO facilities. These sites will include:
Eveleigh, Mayfield (Newcastle),
Kensington, Lucas Heights and the Western Sydney
Large scale fire test facility site.
2.3 The estimated cost of the project is $107.26 million (excluding GST).
2.4 The project was referred to the Committee on 31 July 2019.
Conduct of the
2.5 Following referral, the inquiry was publicised on the Committee’s
website and via media release.
2.6 In the 45
Parliament the Committee received three
submissions and one confidential submission. In the 46
the Committee received three submissions, one supplementary submission, and one
confidential submission. A list of submissions
can be found at Appendix A.
2.7 On 26 September 2019, the Committee undertook a site inspection of CSIRO
Lindfield site. On the same day, the Committee also conducted
a public and
in-camera hearing.
Need for the works
2.8 CSIRO is Australia’s national science agency and is one of the
largest and most diverse scientific research agencies in
2.9 Since its establishment in 1926, CSIRO has ‘continued to contribute
to the ongoing prosperity of Australia’s primary
and secondary industries
and to the creation of new technologies, products and techniques for the
continuing development of Australia’s
manufacturing and service-based
industries’.
2.10 In its submission to the Committee, CSIRO stated:
CSIRO requires property to undertake its specialised science capabilities. As
such, the organisation needs to ensure that all its
facilities are
fit-for-purpose, support science and have facilities that will attract leading
researchers and scientists to
2.11 CSIRO’s
current Sydney Property Portfolio comprises seven sites located at North Ryde,
Marsfield, Lindfield, Eveleigh,
Mayfield (Newcastle), Lucas Heights and the
University of New South Wales
(Kensington).
2.12 In its submission to the Committee, CSIRO noted that these sites:
...accommodate approximately 880 CSIRO full time staff and approximately 300
part time or occasional staff and students and comprise
a total of over
126,000sqm of laboratories, technical and specialist support facilities and
commercial office space. These sites
also accommodate 2583sqm of tenanted space,
typically let to small research organisations. In addition to this, the National
Measurement
Institute (NMI) currently occupies 54% of the gross floor area at
stated in its submission that:
Many of the existing buildings at North Ryde, Marsfield and Lindfield are no
longer fit-for purpose, both from a functional perspective
and from the
perspective of complying with modern regulations pertaining to safely
undertaking scientific
also identified a number of specific deficiencies with some of its Sydney
§ The larger buildings on the Marsfield site are approximately 50 years
old and do not meet current NCC or DDA requirements and
are no longer fit for
§ The North Ryde site comprises 30 buildings and sheds... (Building 12)
is 46 years old and has significant inherent health and
safety issues. Many of
the other buildings on the site are underutilised or unoccupied.
§ There is no opportunity for expansion beyond the current leased area
at Eveleigh. Additionally, as a “stand alone”
commercial office
building within a commercially zoned precinct there is no opportunity for
relocation of laboratories or other highly
technical facilities to these
§ The Mayfield facility has areas that are underutilised due to changes
in the areas of research undertaken by CSIRO. These underutilised
been identified as suitable for relocating research activities from other sites
without the need for major upgrades or
2.15 At the public hearing, CSIRO explained to the Committee that its seven
sites ‘represent an inefficient, under-utilised
and increasingly
maintenance-intensive component of our
portfolio.’
2.16 CSIRO advised the Committee that the Sydney Consolidation Project
‘aims to realign this property portfolio to more closely
meet industry and
Commonwealth spatial benchmarks and to provide modern, flexible science
facilities that can better address CSIRO's
research requirements now and into
the future.’
2.17 CSIRO further stated that:
The Sydney Consolidation Project will yield significant reductions in
CSIRO’s operating and maintenance costs. Key to these
savings is the
discontinuation of the lease at North Ryde resulting in a saving of $102.9m over
a typical 10-year lease period. These
savings, will in turn, ensure that
available budget allocations can more closely align with operational and
maintenance costs. The
divestment of the Marsfield site will also result in a
large reduction in operational and maintenance
CSIRO noted in its submission that the aim of its Property Strategy is to
consolidate current national footprint, aligning
infrastructure, science
directions and partnerships.
key objectives of CSIRO’s Property Strategy are to:
§ Stabilise the operating expenses and costs of repairs and maintenance
for CSIRO’s ageing properties to mitigate the need
for cuts to science to
support growing property costs;
§ Reduce the size of CSIRO’s now inefficient and under-utilised
property portfolio which has evolved in piecemeal fashion
over CSIRO’s
history, while remaining compliant with workplace health and safety requirements
and other regulatory standards;
§ Co-locate sites and buildings (including through lease arrangements
where appropriate) with other participants in the field
of science and
innovation to stimulate and encourage partnership in the delivery of science,
consistent with CSIRO’s focus
on the transfer of science and innovation;
§ Deliver fit-for-purpose and flexible (‘future proofed’)
scientific facilities that enable CSIRO to continue to
deliver its science
contribution for national
Options considered
2.19 CSIRO engaged specialist design consultants in 2015 to look at potential
consolidation options for CSIRO’s Sydney sites.
Over several years CSIRO
investigated and discounted a range of options. A fifth option was developed and
selected based on:
§ CSIRO’s desire to reduce its property footprint and achieve cost
savings through avoiding maintaining excessive infrastructure
and equipment;
§ The ability of the Lindfield facility to accommodate most of the
requirements of CSIRO’s Sydney based activities including
science and
workshop activities at a reasonable capital expenditure;
§ The ability of the Lindfield facility to accommodate foreseeable
growth by CSIRO should there be a requirement to enter new
science...;
§ The inability of any other existing CSIRO Sydney sites to accommodate
the full requirements of CSIRO’s Sydney activities
without very
significant capital expenditure;
§ The Lucas Heights site requires a land lease from ANSTO prior to the
construction of any CSIRO buildings. The Lucas Heights
site was also discounted
for large-scale development due to the limited public transport access to the
§ Selling the Marsfield site would provide a larger financial return to
CSIRO than the selling of Lindfield due to the nature
and location and
development potential of the respective sites; and
§ Closure of the Lindfield site would impose an additional liability on
the Commonwealth due to the high cost to relocate highly
specialised science
based NMI facilities to another
2.20 CSIRO emphasised to the Committee that the Lindfield site was
‘originally designed to accommodate in the order of 600 to
700 people and
that under the new arrangements, ‘we’re going to have a number in
the high 500s...so our [building] footprint
per se won’t
Scope of the works
2.21 In its submission, CSIRO set out the objectives of the proposed works,
as being to:
§ Consolidate and provide critical mass of CSIRO’s Sydney based
research capability;
§ Gain cost efficiencies through reduced duplication of support
facilities and amenities;
§ Enhance research capability by consolidating research into centres of
excellence and innovation in various areas of science
research including Data
and Information Communications Technology (ICT), High Tech Manufacturing and
Astronomy and Space Science;
§ Align post 2021 property requirements with long term research
requirements as determined by CSIRO;
§ Improve engagement between various CSIRO business units and maximise
the efficiencies and research opportunities associated
with co-location;
§ Improve staff morale by providing more modern and attractive research
facilities;
§ Provide fit for purpose facilities that will assist in better managing
CSIRO’s property operating costs within the Sydney
§ Rationalise and improve CSIRO’s ability to address ever more
complex Health and Safety and Environmental (HSE) compliance
frameworks by
locating research facilities with similar regulatory requirements on the one
§ Provide best practice, fit for purpose facilities that address
CSIRO’s Accommodation Principles as well as the National
Construction Code
– Building Code of Australia (NCC) and
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
(Cth) (DDA) requirements.
2.22 In order to achieve these objectives, CSIRO proposed the following scope
§ Refurbishing and reconfiguration of existing buildings with some new
build works at Lindfield and Mayfield (Newcastle) and
associated site works to
meet the science needs of staff relocated from the North Ryde and Marsfield
§ Refurbishing of existing premises at Mayfield (Newcastle) with some
minor new build works to meet the science needs of staff
relocated from the
North Ryde site;
§ Fit-out works to the existing leased premises at Eveleigh to better
meet the needs of the staff from Marsfield, North Ryde
and Lindfield relocating
to Eveleigh; and
§ Relocating staff and specialist science equipment to their new
facilities at these
2.23 In its submission CSIRO stated that concurrent with this project it was
currently in negotiation with the NSW Government to co-locate
its large-scale
fire test facility to a site in Western
CSIRO explained
This co-location with Fire and Rescue New South Wales is a collaborative
arrangement and will ensure a more appropriate location
for large-scale fire
testing and associated activities, other than other CSIRO sites. It's a joint
response with Fire and Rescue
New South Wales and is a pillar of our
collaborative
environment.
also noted that ‘concurrent with the project, some minor staff relocations
are also proposed at Lucas Heights’.
However, no works are proposed at
Lucas Heights with staff being relocated to suitable currently vacant office
Staff consultation
2.25 CSIRO noted that since 2016 it has conducted regular information and
consultation sessions during the planning and concept design
phases with CSIRO
Business Unit leaders, their representatives and CSIRO
In particular,
CSIRO emphasised that most ‘issues raised, particularly by staff, during
the consultation sessions have related
to open-plan office accommodation, child
care and transport’.
2.26 At the public hearing, CSIRO further noted that:
There's a lot more consultation that needs to happen from this point
forward...we're at about the 15 to 20 per cent design resolution.
We've got the
opportunity and, indeed, the need and desire to engage further with the
stakeholders—the principal stakeholders,
of course, being the
scientists—to make that
CSIRO Staff Association raised a number of concerns in its submission to the
Committee, including: the potential for expansion
of scientific capabilities and
staffing levels, impact of open plan accommodation, provision of on-site
childcare, and availability
of public transport at the Lindfield
In response to these
issues CSIRO informed the Committee that it had established several working
groups of CSIRO staff impacted by
the move, to look into addressing issues
surrounding the design works, traffic, and child
2.28 The possibility of moving the location of the CSIRO Astronomy and Space
Science (CASS) to Macquarie University’s campus
at North Ryde was also
raised by the CSIRO Staff Association in their submission to the
The CSIRO Staff
Association noted that ‘CSIRO Staff Association representatives have
worked with CASS management in recent
months to propose a viable and preferred
alternative option: relocation to Macquarie University’s campus at North
Ryde, which
is currently under
consideration.’
2.29 With regards to the issues raised concerning available transport to the
Lindfield site, CSIRO explained to the Committee that
it was aware of the
current limited services to the site, and had met with Transdev, part of
Transport NSW, and the local council
to discuss ‘what further bus services
can be provided to the
2.30 CSIRO also explained that it was currently in discussion with the local
council about improving cycle paths to the site, and
was looking into how CSIRO
could better link the site to the Lindfield and Chatswood train stations.
consultation
2.31 CSIRO informed the Committee that it had ‘developed a
comprehensive community consultation and communications strategy
that recognised
the importance of providing local residents, community groups, statutory
authorities, and other interested stakeholders
with the opportunity to provide
input into, or raise concerns relating to the proposed
2.32 In addition to its community consultation and communications strategy,
CSIRO explained that it had offered verbal briefings to
a number of key external
stakeholders, including local and federal members of Parliament, and the
Ku-ring-gai Council.
informed the Committee at the public hearing that, following on from the
briefing with the local council in May, the local
council ‘were very
interested in what CSIRO was looking to do on the [Lindfield] site’, and
‘offered their help
with discussions on transport, cycle paths and further
discussions around
footpaths.’
2.33 CSIRO Lindfield is located in an area that has experienced a number of
bushfires in the past. One submission received by the
Committee concerned
bushfire risk in the location, including road access and water pressure in the
event of a bushfire.
2.34 CSIRO noted that all of its sites have appropriate emergency management
plans, as part of health and safety legislation
requirements.
CSIRO further
explained that fire management outside of the CSIRO site was undertaken by local
and state authorities.
2.35 As to whether emergency management plans included local community
consultation, CSIRO noted that:
...we have taken on board the concerns of the community around the fire
management in the area, and what we’ve undertaken to
do through the course
of this project is communicate with council and the other authorities and try to
form a group that meets on
a regular basis to look at how we can assist and be
part of that broader planning as
Cost of the works
2.36 CSIRO Sydney Consolidation Project has an estimated cost of $107.26
million, exclusive of GST. This cost estimate includes the
construction costs,
consultant fees, furniture and fittings, and escalation and risk
provisions.
2.37 CSIRO noted that:
The Sydney Consolidation Project will yield significant reductions in
CSIRO’s operational and maintenance costs through the
expiration of the
North Ryde Lease and the divestment of the Marsfield site. Key to these savings,
is the discontinuation of the
lease at North Ryde resulting in a saving of
$102.9m over the 10 year period.
2.38 CSIRO provided further
details on project costings in its confidential submission and during an
in-camera hearing.
Committee comment
2.39 The Committee recognises CSIRO as a key contributor to the ongoing
prosperity of Australia’s primary and secondary industries,
acknowledges its contributions to the field of scientific research.
2.40 The Committee notes the Sydney Consolidation Project aims to consolidate
CSIRO's Sydney property footprint, reducing the whole-of-life
cost of its
property portfolio and provide modern, flexible science facilities to better
address CSIRO's research requirements.
2.41 The Lindfield site was built in the 1970’s as a bespoke physics
laboratory with a more traditional scientific
Informal discussions
with staff on site indicated to the Committee that there were still some areas
of concern in relation to proposed
new working arrangements.
2.42 The Committee acknowledges that CSIRO are currently at the 15 to 20 per
cent design resolution stage, and are continuing to work
representatives to find solutions to issues raised by principal stakeholders.
The Committee was interested to
hear at the public hearing that there are issues yet to be resolved and
encourages CSIRO to continue
to work with staff representatives to find
acceptable solutions to these issues.
2.43 The Committee recognises the effort made by CSIRO to engage with staff
and reiterates that changes to working environments need
to be carefully
undertaken to ensure minimal disruption to staff. The Committee encourages CSIRO
to continue to seek feedback from
staff and to ensure that staff remain informed
and engaged throughout the project.
2.44 The Committee notes that discussions regarding the location of the CSIRO
Astronomy and Space Science (CASS) are ongoing and encourages
CSIRO to continue
to discuss viable options with the CSIRO Staff Association and CASS
management.
2.45 The Committee notes that views of local community members in relation to
the water pressure in the instance of bushfires are
of serious concern
particularly given the history of bushfires in the area. The Committee
appreciates that the relevant emergency
services has the leading role in such
instances but believes CSIRO could take a more proactive role in ensuring that
the presence
of their facility in this area has less impact on water pressure
under bushfire and emergency conditions.
2.46 The Committee encourages CSIRO to continue consulting and engaging with
key external stakeholders and the local community with
regard to issues that
were raised throughout the inquiry process.
2.47 The Committee has observed at times some proponent entities providing
insufficient detail in their notifications particularly
around the present and
prospective value of the work. This is one of the key areas, identified in the
Public Works Committee Act 1969
for the Committee when considering and
reporting on a public work, and lack of this critical information impedes the
work of the Committee
as the Committee can only make decisions about project
based on the information provided to it.
2.48 While the Committee does not intend to delay this project, it considers
it important to reiterate to CSIRO that they need to
provide all information the
Committee requires, through the original notification and with reference to the
Public Works Committee Act 1969
and the PWC Procedure
. Notwithstanding this
provision of information matter, the Committee did not identify any issues of
concern with the proposal and
is satisfied that the project has merit in terms
of need, scope and cost.
2.49 Having regard to its role and responsibilities contained in the
Public Works Committee Act 1969
, the Committee is of the view that this
project signifies value for money for the Commonwealth and constitutes a project
fit for purpose, having regard to the established need.
Recommendation 1
2.50 The Committee recommends that the House of Representatives resolve,
pursuant to
Section 18(7)
Public Works Committee Act 1969
, that it is
expedient to carry out the following proposed works: proposed CSIRO Sydney
Consolidation Project, New South Wales.
Recommendation 2
2.51 The Committee recommends that, prior to commencing the proposed
works, CSIRO provide:
all information previously requested by the Committee;
evidence of how they are addressing the concerns of the local
community regarding the impact on water pressure in the event of a bushfire
emergency in the area of the Lindfield facility.
2.52 Proponent entities must notify the Committee of any changes to the
project scope, time, cost, function or design. The Committee
also requires that
a post-implementation report be provided within three months of project
completion. A report template can be found
on the Committee’s website.
Hon Dr John McVeigh MP
A. List of Submissions
CSIRO Sydney Consolidation Project, New South Wales
§ 1.1 Confidential
Mr Ian Stuart
CSIRO Staff Association
§ 1.1 Confidential
Name Withheld
§ 1.1 Name Withheld
CSIRO Staff Association
B. Public Hearing and Witnesses
Thursday 26 September 2019
– Sydney, NSW
Mr Dave Agnew, Director, CSIRO Business and Infrastructure Services
Mr Tony Cuzzillo, Project Director, CSIRO Business and Infrastructure
Dr Scott Martin, CSIRO Lindfield Site Leader
Mr John Stefanatos, Project Manager, RPS AAP Consulting Pty Ltd
Mr Leighton Thomas, Senior Architect, Jacobs Group (Australia) Pty
Private Citizen
Ms Helen Ferns, Private Capacity
All public works that have an
estimated cost exceeding $15 million must be referred to the Committee and
cannot be commenced until
the Committee has made its report to Parliament and
the House of Representatives receives that report and resolves that it is
to carry out the work.
The Act, Section 5.
The Act, Section 17.
Mr Dave Agnew, Director,
Business and Infrastructure Services, CSIRO,
Transcript of Evidence,
September 2019, p.1.
Submission 1
Submission 1
Submission 1
Submission 1
Submission 1
, pp. 10-14.
Submission 1
, pp. 13-14.
Mr Agnew, CSIRO,
Transcript of Evidence,
26 September 2019, p. 1.
Mr Agnew, CSIRO,
Transcript of Evidence,
26 September 2019, p. 1.
Submission 1
Submission 1
Submission 1
Submission 1
, pp. 21-23.
Mr Agnew, CSIRO,
Transcript of Evidence,
26 September 2019, p. 4.
Submission 1
Submission 1
Submission 1
Mr Agnew, CSIRO,
Transcript of Evidence,
26 September 2019, p. 2.
Submission 1
Submission 1
Mr Agnew, CSIRO,
Transcript of Evidence,
26 September 2019, p. 1.
Mr Leighton Thomas, Senior
Architect, Jacobs Group (Australia) Pty Ltd,
Transcript of Evidence,
September 2019, p. 6.
CSIRO Staff Association,
Submission 3
Mr Agnew, CSIRO,
Transcript of Evidence,
26 September 2019, p. 7.
CSIRO Staff Association,
Submission 3
CSIRO Staff Association,
Submission 3
Mr Tony Cuzzillo, Project
Director, Business and Infrastructure Services, CSIRO,
Transcript of
26 September 2019, p. 3.
Mr Cuzzillo, CSIRO,
Transcript of Evidence,
26 September 2019, p. 3.
Submission 1
Submission 1
, p. 18-19.
Mr Cuzzillo, CSIRO,
Transcript of Evidence,
26 September 2019, p. 5.
Name Withheld,
Submission 2
Mr Agnew, CSIRO,
Transcript of Evidence,
26 September 2019, p. 4.
Mr Cuzzillo, CSIRO,
Transcript of Evidence,
26 September 2019, p. 15.
Submission 1
Parliament Submission 1,
Mr Thomas, Jacobs Group
(Australia) Pty Ltd,
Transcript of Evidence,
26 September 2019, p. 6.
PWC Procedure Manual
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (166 KB)
PDF format (438 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter