URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBRp/2016/68.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:13:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Migration Amendment (Visa Revalidation and Other Measures) Bill 2016 [2016] AUSStaCSBRp 68 (30 November 2016)
Migration Amendment (Visa Revalidation and Other Measures) Bill 2016
Inappropriately defined administrative powers—definition of ‘adverse information’
Item 4, proposed subsection 96A
Delegation of legislative power—use of delegated legislation for important matters
Item 4, proposed subsection 96B(1)
Delegation of legislative power—disallowance
Item 4, proposed subsection 96E(1)
Merits review
Migration Amendment (Visa Revalidation and Other
Measures) Bill 2016
This bill seeks to
Migration Act 1958
(the Migration
• establish a visa revalidation framework within the Migration
• clarify the circumstances in which a visa can cease to be in effect
under the Migration Act; and
• enable the use of contactless technology to clear travellers
through the immigration clearance authority (SmartGates)
Immigration and Border Protection
House of Representatives on 19 October 2016
The committee dealt with this bill in
Alert Digest No. 8 of 2016
Minister responded to the committee’s comments in a letter dated
24 November 2016. A copy of the letter is attached to
this report.
Alert Digest No. 8 of 2016 - extract
Inappropriately defined administrative
powers—definition of ‘adverse
information’
Item 4, proposed subsection
The bill provides that the Minister may require a
person who holds a certain type of visa to complete a revalidation check.
subsection 96A sets out the definition of a ‘revalidation
check’ as meaning a check as to whether there is any adverse
information
relating to a person who holds a visa. What constitutes ‘adverse
information’ is not defined in the legislation.
The explanatory memorandum
explains this as follows (p. 11):
Adverse information is not defined in the Migration Act, and accordingly it
is to be given its ordinary general meaning when considering
whether the
information relating to the person is adverse. Whether the information is
adverse will also depend on the circumstances
of each particular case and depend
on the visa held by the person as a revalidation check will generally be
directed to determining
whether the person continues to meet the criteria for
the visa that has been granted.
The check is to see if there is any adverse information
the person who holds the visa. This is because the adverse information does not
need to be directly about the person, it is enough
person. While still capturing adverse information that is directly about the
person, it is intended that the definition will
be broader and capture any
adverse information if it relates to the person.
Examples of adverse information relating to the holder of the proposed new
longer validity Visitor visa may include, but is not limited
to, information
that the person:
• has been convicted of an offence since the grant of the visa or since
the last revalidation check;
• may present a health concern to the Australian community;
• has spent a period of time in Australia that may be considered de
facto residency;
• no longer genuinely intends to stay in Australia for a temporary
tourism or business visitor purpose; or
• may present a security risk to the Australian community.
Based on the explanation in the explanatory memorandum it appears that the
definition of ‘adverse information’ is intended
to be very broad.
However, it is not clear why information
to the person would be
included in a revalidation check and what this means, over and above information
directly about the person.
It is also not clear why it is necessary to link the
revalidation check to such a broad category of information given that the
legislation
sets out in detail the criteria for the grant of the initial visa.
It is not clear to the committee why the revalidation check is
not linked to
whether the person still meets the requirements set out for the initial grant of
The committee seeks the Minister’s advice as to why the revalidation
check is linked to whether there is any ‘adverse
information’ about
the visa holder and not to whether the person still meets the requirements for
the initial grant of the
visa. It also seeks the Minister’s advice as to
why the legislation does not contain a definition of ‘adverse
information’
which would give visa holders more certainty as to the type
of information that may be taken into account when a revalidation check
undertaken.
Minister’s response - extract
The committee seeks the Minister’s advice as to why the
revalidation check is linked to whether there is any ‘adverse
information’ about the visa holder and not to whether the person still
meets the requirements for the initial grant of the
A revalidation check will generally assess whether a visa holder continues to
meet the criteria for the visa that has been granted.
But, this check is not
intended to be a full reassessment of the visa holder’s ability to meet
the original requirements for
grant of the visa. A revalidation check is
intended to reduce red tape for frequent travellers by removing the requirement
visa holder to complete multiple visa applications over a 10-year
period, answering the same questions and providing the same level
of supporting
documentation, as the original visa application. In completing the check, in the
absence of any adverse information,
or where there is adverse information, but
it is reasonable to disregard that information, the visa would be revalidated.
no disadvantage to the visa holder of this approach.
The current criteria for grant of a visitor visa, including public interest
criteria, may change over time in response to changing
domestic and global
circumstances. Requiring the visa holder to continue to meet these criteria may
result in unintended anachronistic
revalidation decisions. Adopting the proposed
approach provides flexibility for the Minister to consider but, where
reasonable, disregard
this information.
Additionally, this approach provides for consideration of the visa
holder’s ongoing compliance with the conditions of their
visa, as well as
consideration of information relevant to any new grounds for visa cancellation
that are introduced in the future
Migration Act 1958
It also seeks the Minister’s advice as to why the legislation
does not contain a definition of ‘adverse information’
which would
give visa holders more certainty as to the type of information that may be taken
into account when a revalidation check
is undertaken.
The scope of possible adverse information is necessarily broad to allow for
flexibility in addressing future changes in both domestic
circumstances. But flexibility has also been provided for the Minister to
disregard adverse information when reasonable.
In these cases, the visa holder
would satisfy the revalidation check.
Where the delegate considers that it is not reasonable to disregard that
information, the information would be referred to a visa
cancellation delegate
to consider if grounds for cancellation exist. This may result in a decision to
cancel the visa, or a decision
that the person subsequently passes the
revalidation check.
It is not clear why information relating to the person would be
included in a revalidation check and what this means, over and above
information
directly about the person.
Adverse information ‘relating to’ the visa holder is used to
ensure that all relevant adverse information may be taken
into account. This
includes information that may not be directly about the person, but relevant to
the revalidation check.
For example, this could include circumstances relevant to the assessment of
the genuine temporary entrant criteria, including consideration
of both the
personal circumstances of the applicant in their home country and general
conditions in the home country that might encourage
them to remain in Australia.
These conditions include:
• economic disruption, including shortages, famine, or high levels of
unemployment, or natural disasters in the applicant’s
• civil disruption, including war, lawlessness or political upheaval in
the applicant’s home country.
Relevant information ‘relating to’ the visa holder may also
include the need to address emerging public health and safety
risks identified
in the visa holder’s country of citizenship or long term residence.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Minister for this response.
The committee notes the Minister’s advice that the revalidation check
will ‘generally’ assess whether a visa holder
continues to meet the
criteria for the visa, but it is not intended to be a full reassessment. The
committee notes the Minister’s
advice that the current criteria for the
grant of the visa ‘may change over time’ and requiring the visa
holder to continue
to meet these criteria may result in ‘unintended
anachronistic revalidation decisions’, and that the approach of assessing
‘adverse information’ provides flexibility for the Minister. The
committee also notes the Minister’s advice that
this allows for
consideration of information relevant to any new grounds for visa cancelation
that are introduced in the future into
Migration Act 1958
it is unclear to the committee why the bill could not reference the relevant
provisions of the migration legislation, so
that if the substance of those
provisions change over time, this would automatically be reflected in the
revalidation process.
The committee also notes the Minister’s advice that the phrase
‘adverse information relating to’ the visa holder
is intended to be
broad so as to allow for flexibility, and to facilitate assessment of
‘general conditions in the home country
[of the visa holder] that may
encourage them to remain in Australia’.
The committee notes this explanation, however the committee considers that
the current drafting of the provision, with reference to
information relating to’ the visa holder, is overly vague and it therefore
provides little certainty to visa
holders whose visas could be cancelled on
grounds unrelated to whether they meet the criteria for the grant of the visa.
provides limited scope for parliamentary scrutiny of the exercise of
this power as there is nothing on the face of the bill to clarify
Parliament what is meant by ‘adverse information’.
The committee requests that the key information provided by the Minister
be included in the explanatory memorandum, noting the importance
documents as a point of access to understanding the law and, if needed, as
extrinsic material to assist with interpretation
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
The committee draws its scrutiny concerns to the attention of Senators and
leaves the appropriateness of allowing any visa to be subject
to a revalidation
check that considers any ‘adverse information relating to’ the visa
holder (which is undefined) to
the consideration of the Senate as a
Alert Digest No. 8 of 2016 - extract
Delegation of legislative power—use of
delegated legislation for important matters
Item 4, proposed subsection 96B(1)
Proposed subsection 96B(1) provides that the Minister
may, from time to time, require a person who holds a visa ‘of a prescribed
kind (however described)’ to complete a revalidation check for the visa.
The explanatory memorandum explains that these amendments
were introduced in
response to the
White Paper on Developing Northern Australia
intended to trial a new longer validity Visitor visa (initially available to
Chinese nationals) (at p. 5). The discussion
in the explanatory memorandum
is limited to this new type of visa, as stating that the revalidation checks for
visas introduced by
the bill will only apply to this new Visitor visa.
However, the bill does not limit the application of the revalidation checks
to the Visitor visa. The power in the bill is to require
persons to complete a
revalidation check in relation to any visa ‘of a prescribed kind’.
This gives a broad power which
could result in the revalidation check being
applied to any category of visa (including spouse or family visas or protection
The explanatory memorandum does not explain why it is necessary to
include such a broad power in the bill.
The committee seeks the Minister’s advice as to why the power to
subject a person to a revalidation check for their visa is
expressed to relate
to a visa of a prescribed kind, without any limits set as to the type of visa
which could be prescribed.
Minister’s response - extract
Currently, only the new Frequent Traveler stream of the Subclass 600
(Visitor) visa will be prescribed for the purposes of requiring
a revalidation
check. This is to support the trial of a new longer validity visitor visa that
will initially only be available to
Chinese nationals.
The power to prescribe which visa can be subject to the revalidation check
process has not been limited for several reasons.
Flexibility had been provided as other longer validity visa products may be
implemented in the future. The revalidation framework
may be an appropriate
mechanism to manage identified risks in these products. Including a limit on the
prescribed would restrict the ability to use the
revalidation framework to reduce red tape and manage risks associated with newly
developed or reformed visa products.
There would be Parliamentary scrutiny over which visas, or the types of
visas, that were prescribed for the revalidation check framework
through the
disallowance process. If the Parliament considered it was inappropriate for a
visa which had been prescribed to be subject
to the revalidation check process,
a motion could be moved to disallow that regulation.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Minister for this response.
The committee notes the Minister’s advice that it is currently intended
that only one type of visa will be prescribed under
these powers, and that the
power to prescribe visas has not been limited to allow for flexibility, to
reduce red tape and to manage
risks ‘associated with newly developed or
reformed visa products’. The committee notes the Minister’s advice
‘other longer validity visa products may be implemented in the
future’. The committee also notes the Minister’s
comments that any
instrument prescribing the relevant visa would be subject to parliamentary
scrutiny through the disallowance process.
However, the committee notes that while the disallowance process allows for
some level of parliamentary scrutiny, the committee considers
it preferable that
the primary legislation set appropriate limits on the delegation of legislative
power. The committee notes that
the bill would allow for any type of visa to be
prescribed as being subject to the revalidation check. Yet the Minister’s
(and the explanatory materials) suggest that the revalidation check is
likely to be applied only to longer validity visa products.
It is not clear to the committee why the legislation could not set limits
on the type of visas to be prescribed (i.e. to apply to
visas over a specified
validity date) or to exempt certain categories of visas. As currently drafted,
it appears to the committee
that the power to prescribe any type of visa as one
subject to a revalidation check is inappropriately broad in scope.
The committee requests that the key information provided by the Minister
be included in the explanatory memorandum, noting the importance
documents as a point of access to understanding the law and, if needed, as
extrinsic material to assist with interpretation
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
The committee draws the delegation of legislative power in proposed
subsection 96B(1) of this bill to the attention of the Senate
Committee on Regulations and Ordinances for information.
The committee draws its scrutiny concerns to the attention of Senators and
leaves the appropriateness of enabling the prescription
of any type of visa as
subject to the revalidation check to the consideration of the Senate as a
Alert Digest No. 8 of 2016 - extract
Delegation of legislative
power—disallowance
Item 4, proposed
subsection 96E(1)
Proposed subsection 96E(1) provides that the Minister may, by legislative
instrument, determine that a specified class of persons
holding a visa of a
prescribed kind (however described) must complete a revalidation check for the
visa. The only condition for the
exercise of this power is that the
‘Minister thinks it is in the public interest’ to make the
determination.
The determination is not subject to disallowance (due to exemptions set out
Legislation (Exemptions and Other Matters) Regulation 2015
approach is justified in the explanatory memorandum (at p. 23) on the basis that
subsection 96E(3) provides for adequate Parliamentary
supervision of the power.
Subsection 96E(3) requires the Minister to cause to be laid before each House of
Parliament a statement
that a determination has been made and the reasons for
the determination, specifically the reasons why the making of the determination
is in the public interest.
The explanatory memorandum suggests that this subsection provides for
‘public and political accountability to the Parliament
regarding the
exercise of the power in new subsection 96E(1)’ and that the
‘tabling provisions will still ensure that
the Parliament can scrutinise
the Minister’s decision and provide comment on such a determination
through a motion of disapproval
or other mechanism’. The explanatory
memorandum also states that it is expected that the power will only be used in
rare circumstances
Although it is may be accepted that in exercising this power the Minister may
consider a broad range of factors relevant to the public
interest and that there
is a level of accountability to the Parliament through the reporting
requirements, it is not clear why it
is not feasible to provide for the
Parliament to disallow the exercise of legislative power.
The committee seeks the Minister’s advice as to why a legislative
instrument setting out a specified class of persons who are
to complete
revalidation checks should not be subject to disallowance.
Minister’s response - extract
The Ministerial power in new subsection 96E(1) would provide a mechanism to
manage specific, serious, or time-critical risks in relation
to an identified
cohort of visa holders, where the Minister determines it is in the public
interest to exercise this power.
It is intended that this power be exercised in circumstances necessitating an
immediate response, for example situations where there
has been an assessment of
increased risk to the Australian community resulting from a significant health
or national security incident.
It would not be appropriate for this legislative instrument to be subject to
disallowance, as the time-critical nature of the implementation
Minister’s determination is key to its effectiveness.
Affected visa holders would be notified under section 96F of both the
determination and how to complete and pass the revalidation
check. If they
completed and passed the revalidation check, their visa would come back into
effect. If they completed, but did not
pass the revalidation check, further
information may be requested and they may subsequently pass the revalidation
check. It is also
possible that in some cases their visa may be referred to a
cancellation delegate for consideration. This may result in a notice
intention to consider cancellation being issued, or a further decision made that
it is reasonable to disregard the information
and that the visa holder passes
the revalidation check.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Minister for this response.
The committee notes the Minister’s advice that the power to determine
that a specified class of persons holding a visa of a
prescribed kind must
complete a revalidation check, is necessary to manage ‘specific, serious,
or time-critical risks in relation
to an identified cohort of visa
holders’. The committee also notes the Minister’s advice that it
would not be appropriate
for the legislative instrument to be subject to
disallowance ‘as the time-critical nature of the implementation of the
determination is key to its effectiveness’.
The committee notes that while the Minister states that it is intended that
the provision is only used where the Minister identifies
a risk to the
Australian community, the bill is not limited in this way; rather it allows the
Minister to make such a determination
purely on the basis of what the Minister
considers to be in the ‘public interest’. While the committee
accepts that there
may be instances where the implementation of the
Minister’s determination is time-critical, a legislative instrument
commences immediately upon being made and enabling it to be subject to
disallowance would not affect the initial response by the
The committee requests that the key information provided by the Minister
be included in the explanatory memorandum, noting the importance
documents as a point of access to understanding the law and, if needed, as
extrinsic material to assist with interpretation
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
The committee draws its scrutiny concerns to the attention of Senators and
leaves the appropriateness of enabling the Minister to
specify, in a
non-disallowable instrument, a class of persons to be subject to a revalidation
check to the consideration of the Senate
as a whole.
Alert Digest No. 8 of 2016 - extract
It is not clear which of the decisions made under the proposed new
subdivision BA of Division 3 of
Migration Act
will be reviewable
decisions. The explanatory material is silent on this point.
The committee seeks the Minister’s advice as to which, if any, of the
decisions in the proposed new Subdivision are not reviewable.
Minister’s response - extract
Decisions under the proposed new subdivision BA of Division 3 of
Migration Act
would not be merits reviewable decisions.
If a visa holder does not pass a revalidation check, this would not
automatically result in cancellation of the visa. In this case,
the visa would
cease to be in effect; a person whose visa has ceased to be in effect may
subsequently pass a revalidation check during
the visa period (as discussed at
paragraph 13 of the Explanatory Memorandum). A decision that the person does not
pass a revalidation
check for the visa is a decision that can be reconsidered by
the Minister or delegate. During this period, an individual may subsequently
pass the revalidation check and this would result in the visa coming back into
Where a person does not pass a revalidation check for the visa, this will be
referred to a visa cancellation delegate who will consider
whether a visa
cancellation ground exists. If the delegate decided not to cancel the visa, this
would result in the person passing
the revalidation check for the visa. If the
delegate decided to cancel the visa, this decision may be subject to merits
Accordingly, the time and costs associated with seeking merits review of a
decision that a person does not pass a revalidation check
would be inefficient
and potentially unnecessary. It is likely that the person would either
subsequently pass the revalidation check
(following provision of further
information) or be notified of an intention to consider cancellation of their
visa before the merits
review process produced an outcome.
Committee response
The committee thanks the Minister for this response.
The committee notes in particular the Minister’s advice that while the
new provisions will not be merits reviewable decisions,
any decision to cancel a
visa may be subject to merits review and it is likely that ‘the person
would either pass the revalidation
check (following provision of further
information) or be notified of an intention to consider cancellation of their
visa before the
merits review process produced an outcome’.
The committee requests that the key information provided by the Minister
be included in the explanatory memorandum, noting the importance
documents as a point of access to understanding the law and, if needed, as
extrinsic material to assist with interpretation
section 15AB
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
In light of the information provided by the Minister, the committee draws
its scrutiny concerns to the attention of Senators and leaves
appropriateness of the exclusion of merits review of the revalidation check
process to the consideration of the Senate as a whole.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (112 KB)
PDF format (171 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter