URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJCHR/2025/30.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:08:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Biosecurity (Entry Requirements) Determination 2025 - New and Ongoing Matters [2025] AUPJCHR 30 (27 August 2025)
Legislative instruments
Biosecurity (Entry Requirements) Determination 2025197
Entry requirements
Preliminary international human rights legal advice
Rights to health; privacy; equality and non-discrimination; freedom of movement and liberty
Rights of the child and persons with disability
Committee view
Legislative
instruments
Biosecurity (Entry
Requirements) Determination
F2025L00820
This instrument revokes and remakes the Biosecurity (Entry Requirements)
Determination 2016 to set requirements for individuals entering
Health, Disability and Ageing
Authorising legislation
Biosecurity Act 2015
Disallowance
Children's rights; equality and non-discrimination; freedom of movement;
health; liberty; privacy; rights of persons with disability
Entry requirements
1.131 This instrument revokes and remakes the Biosecurity (Entry
Requirements) Determination 2016 to set requirements for individuals
Australian territory.
of the instrument sets out entry requirements
relating to yellow fever risk regions, countries or
In particular, individuals
entering Australia are required to provide information about whether they have
been in Africa, South America,
Central America or the Caribbean (‘yellow
fever risk regions’) at any time in the six days before entering
territory at a landing place or
This information is to be
provided to an official via a completed passenger card or an Automatic Travel
Declaration pass.
individual has been in a yellow fever risk region at any time in the six days
before entering the landing place or port, the
individual must provide
information about whether they stayed overnight or longer in a yellow fever risk
country or area (as specified
in Schedule 1 of the instrument) at any time in
the six days before entering the landing place or
This information is to be
provided by either answering the relevant question about the matter when
prompted by the SmartGate or declaring
the information to a relevant
If an individual has
stayed overnight or longer in a yellow fever risk country or area during the
specified time, a relevant official
may require the individual to declare
whether they have received yellow fever vaccine at least 10 days before entering
the landing
place or port and/or provide an international vaccination
certificate evidencing this fact.
A relevant official may also require the individual to declare their
international travel history for the six days before entering
the landing place
1.132 If an individual fails to comply with the entry requirement to declare
whether they have received yellow fever vaccine and/or
provide an international
vaccination certificate, an
has the power to impose a
human biosecurity control order on the
individual.
A human biosecurity
control order may be imposed on an individual if the officer is satisfied that:
the individual has signs or symptoms
of a listed human disease; or the
individual has been exposed to the disease or another individual who has signs
or symptoms of the
disease; or the individual has failed to comply with the
entry requirements in relation to the disease (such as the requirement relating
to yellow fever vaccine set out in this
instrument).
An individual may
fail to comply with an entry requirement even if they are unable to comply with
the requirement.
biosecurity control order may include various biosecurity
which would require
an individual, for example, to:
• report their health status to an
• remain at their place of residence and not visit a specified place or
come into close proximity with a specified class of
individuals;
• wear specified clothing and
• undergo, at a specified medical facility, a specified kind of
examination to determine the presence of the listed human disease
individual. This may include providing body samples for
• receive, at a specified medical facility, a specified vaccination,
form of treatment or medication in order to manage the
listed human
1.133 If an individual refuses to consent to a biosecurity measure, the
Director of Human Biosecurity may give a direction for the
individual to comply
with the measure. If such a direction is given and the person still fails to
comply with the biosecurity measure,
the person may commit an
Force must not be used
against an individual to require the individual to comply with the above
biosecurity measures. However, in
relation to the biosecurity measures that
require an individual to not leave Australian territory (traveller movement
and remain isolated at
a specified medical facility (isolation
force may be used
against an individual to require compliance with these
1.134 Part 3 of the instrument sets out entry requirements for individuals
who may be, or may have been, infected with a listed human
‘listed human disease’ is one that may be communicable and may cause
significant harm to human
A relevant official may
require an individual to be screened (including by equipment or by being
required to answer questions or
provide information in writing) for the purpose
of establishing whether they may be, or may have been, infected with a listed
This requirement
applies to an individual entering Australian territory if the individual:
• is identified as having signs or symptoms of an illness or infection;
• has, or has been exposed to, a listed human disease; or
• has been in a country where individuals are known to be, or to have
been, infected with a listed human
1.135 Part 4 of the instrument provides that a relevant official may ask an
individual who is entering Australian territory on a flight
or voyage that
commenced outside Australian territory to declare their international travel
history for the 14 days before the day
the international flight commenced, or
international voyage ended.
relevant official may ask an individual to provide this travel history
declaration if they reasonably suspect the individual
has, or has been exposed
to, a listed human disease.
1.136 A civil penalty (of 150 penalty units or $ 49,500) applies to an
individual who fails to comply with the entry requirements
set out in this
instrument.
individual is not able to comply with the entry requirements, they may still
contravene the civil penalty
1.137 Further, in relation to children or ‘incapable persons’ who
are subject to the entry requirements in this instrument,
there are certain
‘protections’ that apply under the
Biosecurity Act 2015
(Biosecurity Act). A ‘child or incapable person’ is defined to mean
a person who is less than 18 years old, or a person
who is at least 18 years old
and is considered to be incapable of either: understanding the general nature
and effect of, and purposes
of carrying out, a biosecurity measure; or
indicating whether they consent or do not consent to a biosecurity
A child or incapable
person who is subject to an entry requirement may be accompanied by an
‘accompanying
who is defined
to be a parent, guardian or next of kin, or another person who is authorised to
be an accompanying person by a parent,
guardian or next of
An accompanying person may
give consent on behalf of the child or incapable person for the purposes of
biosecurity measures under
a human biosecurity control
If the accompanying
person gives their consent, then the child or incapable person is taken to have
given their consent.
Additionally, if an officer gives a direction to an accompanying person for the
purpose of ensuring the compliance of the child or
incapable person with a
requirement in relation to a listed human
the accompanying
person must comply with the direction. Failure to do so is a fault-based offence
attracting a penalty of imprisonment
for five years or 300 penalty units (or
$99,000) or both.
Preliminary international human rights legal
Rights to health; privacy; equality and
non-discrimination; freedom of movement and liberty
1.138 To the extent that the measures in this instrument assist in preventing
a listed human disease that may pose a risk to human
health from entering,
establishing itself or spreading in Australian territory, they would promote the
right to health. The right
to health is the right to enjoy the highest
attainable standard of physical and mental health, and requires states to take
to prevent, treat and control epidemic
1.139 However, by requiring individuals to provide personal information to
officials, including medical information relating to vaccination
status, the
measures engage and limit the right to privacy. The right to privacy includes
respect for informational privacy, including
the right to respect for private
and confidential information, particularly the storing, use and sharing of such
information, and
the right to control the dissemination of information about
one's private life.
Additionally, by requiring an individual to be screened by equipment for the
purpose of establishing whether the individual is infected
with a listed human
disease, this measure may engage and limit the right to personal autonomy and
physical and psychological integrity
– an aspect of the right to privacy
– depending on what screening equipment is
The United Nations
(UN) Human Rights Committee has emphasised that personal and body searches must
be accompanied by effective measures
to ensure that such searches are carried
out in a manner consistent with the dignity of the person who is being searched,
and further
that persons subject to body searches should only be examined by
persons of the same sex.
1.140 Additionally, the measures relating to yellow fever risk countries or
areas would apply to individuals who have travelled from,
or spent time in,
specified countries in Africa, South America, Central America or the Caribbean.
The measures may therefore have
a disproportionate impact on persons with
particular attributes that are protected under international human rights law
this case, nationality or national origin and race. Where a measure
impacts a particular group disproportionately, this establishes
that there may be indirect
discrimination.
The right to
equality and non-discrimination provides that everyone is entitled to enjoy
their rights without discrimination of any
kind and that all people are equal
before the law and entitled without discrimination to equal and
non-discriminatory protection
The right to equality
encompasses both 'direct' discrimination (where measures have a discriminatory
intent) and 'indirect' discrimination
(where measures have a discriminatory
effect on the enjoyment of
Differential treatment
(including the differential effect of a measure that is neutral on its face)
will not constitute unlawful
discrimination if the differential treatment is
based on reasonable and objective criteria such that it serves a legitimate
is rationally connected to that objective and is a proportionate
means of achieving that
1.141 Further, the measure requiring an individual to declare whether they
have received yellow fever vaccine and/or provide an international
vaccination
certificate would engage and may limit other human rights because non-compliance
with this requirement (even where an
individual is unable to comply) triggers
powers in the
Biosecurity Act
. These powers allow an officer to impose a human
biosecurity control order on the individual, which in turn, may require an
to comply with various biosecurity measures. These biosecurity
measures may engage and limit the rights to privacy (by requiring
information to be provided to an officer); health (by requiring an individual to
undergo a medical examination or receive
a vaccination, form of treatment or
medication, potentially without genuine consent); freedom of movement (by
restricting movement
within Australian and preventing an individual from leaving
Australia); and liberty (by authorising the isolation and detention of
individual).
The rights to
the right to move freely within a
country for those who are lawfully in the
The right to freedom
of movement is linked to the right to liberty—a person's movement across
borders should not be unreasonably
limited by the
The right to liberty
prohibits the arbitrary and unlawful deprivation of
The notion of
'arbitrariness' includes elements of inappropriateness, injustice and lack of
predictability. Accordingly, any detention
must be lawful as well as reasonable,
necessary and proportionate in all of the
circumstances.
1.142 The above rights may be subject to permissible limitations where the
limitation pursues a legitimate objective, is rationally
connected to that
objective and is a proportionate means of achieving that objective.
1.143 The stated objective of the measures is to prevent a listed human
disease from entering, or establishing itself or spreading
in, Australian
This is a legitimate
objective for the purposes of international human rights
Imposing entry
requirements that assist to identify and manage the risk of diseases entering
or spreading in Australian territory,
including requiring the provision of
personal information, is rationally connected to this stated objective. The key
question is
whether the measures are proportionate. In assessing
proportionality, it is necessary to consider a number of factors, including
whether a proposed limitation is sufficiently circumscribed; whether it is
accompanied by sufficient safeguards, including the possibility
of oversight and
the availability of review; and whether any less rights restrictive alternatives
could achieve the same stated objective.
1.144 As to whether the measure is sufficiently circumscribed, the measures
clearly specify the type of information that is required
to be provided, which
assists with proportionality.
The instrument also specifies the countries that are yellow fever risk
countries, which assists in narrowing the scope of application
of the measures.
However, there is some uncertainty as to the nature and scope of some of the
powers, and how these powers may be
exercised. In particular, an official may
screen an individual, including by equipment, if they are identified as having
symptoms of an illness or infection. Whether an individual has signs or
symptoms of an illness or infection is based on a report
or information given to
the biosecurity officer by the operator of the conveyance or
Noting that the
operator of the conveyance or vessel and the biosecurity officer are unlikely to
be medical professionals, there
may be a risk that the threshold for triggering
the requirement for screening could be quite low in practice as there could be a
risk that a sign or symptom of illness is misidentified. Additionally, it is not
clear what screening by equipment involves in the
context of this measure. For
example, it is not clear whether physical searches, the taking of bodily samples
or any other invasive
procedure would be authorised under this measure. If this
were the case, the potential interference with the right to privacy would
1.145 As to the existence of safeguards, the instrument notes that the
information management framework in the
Biosecurity Act
confidentiality of personal information collected under the instrument and
While this framework
contains some important protections, such as the prohibition on unauthorised use
and disclosure of protected
information, it also authorises information sharing
in a broad range of circumstances, which may weaken the overall strength of this
safeguard. The committee has previously raised human rights concerns regarding
the information management framework in the
Biosecurity
In particular,
Biosecurity Act
authorise the disclosure of relevant
information for specified purposes without limiting to whom any such disclosures
may be made.
Limiting the persons who are authorised to disclose relevant
information and the purposes for which information may be disclosed
effect of limiting the persons to whom information may be disclosed. However, as
the text of the legislation does not itself
limit to whom information may be
disclosed, the extent of the potential limit on privacy is not clear. Further,
section 589
Biosecurity Act
authorises all information obtained using
powers under the
Biosecurity Act
to be shared for law enforcement purposes
unrelated to managing biosecurity risks or the administration of the
Biosecurity
. In the absence of a limit on the persons to whom information may be
disclosed in certain circumstances and the type of information
that may be
shared for law enforcement purposes, there is a risk that the privacy safeguards
Biosecurity Act
may not be adequate in all circumstances so as to ensure
that any limitation on the right to privacy will be proportionate in
1.146 As to the existence of other safeguards, noting that this instrument is
exempt and is therefore not required to be accompanied
by a statement of
compatibility with human rights, there is no information as to whether there are
other relevant safeguards in the
Biosecurity Act
that would apply to these
1.147 Another relevant factor is whether the measures contain sufficient
flexibility to treat individual cases differently. The measures
do not appear to
provide for any flexibility to consider the individual circumstances of each
case. The instrument states that an
individual who fails to comply with an entry
requirement that applies to them may contravene a civil penalty provision. Under
Biosecurity Act
, the applicable civil penalty is 150 penalty units or
$49,500 and a person may be liable even if they are unable to comply with an
entry requirement.
above, an individual may also commit an offence if they fail to comply with a
direction to comply with the measure requiring
an individual to declare whether
they have received yellow fever vaccine and/or provide an international
vaccination certificate.
As an individual may be liable even where they are
unable to comply with an entry requirement, there does not appear to be any
flexibility
to take into account individual circumstances that may be relevant
to a person’s non-compliance, such as a medical reason preventing
from receiving yellow fever vaccine. The apparent lack of flexibility is of
particular concern given the severity of the
consequences of non-compliance
(including a high civil penalty and potentially criminal liability). Flexibility
in a measure may
also assist in ensuring that the measure is the least rights
restrictive approach to achieving the stated objective.
1.148 While the measures pursue a legitimate objective and are rationally
connected to that objective, questions remain as to whether
the measures are
proportionate.
Rights of the child and persons with
1.149 To the extent that these measures apply to children and people with
disability, the measures engage and may limit the above
rights that equally
apply to children and people with disability, as well as specific rights that
apply to these groups under international
human rights law.
1.150 Children have special rights under international human rights law
taking into account their particular
vulnerabilities.
The rights of
the child require that, in all actions concerning children, the best interests
of the child are a primary
consideration.
This requires
legislative, administrative and judicial bodies and institutions to
systematically consider how children's rights and
interests are or will be
affected directly or indirectly by their decisions and actions. The UN Committee
on the Rights of the Child
has explained that ‘the expression "primary
consideration" means that the child's best interests may not be considered on
same level as all other considerations. This strong position is justified by
the special situation of the
Further, states
are required to assure to a child capable of forming their own views the right
to express those views freely in all
matters affecting the
The views of the child
must be given due weight in accordance with the age and maturity of the
The UN Committee on the
Rights of the Child has explained that any decision that does not take into
account the child’s views,
or does not give their views due weight
according to their age and maturity, does not respect the possibility for the
child or children
to influence the determination of their best
1.151 It is not clear that in applying the measures to children, the best
interests of the child are the primary consideration or
that due weight is given
to the views of the child (according to their age and maturity). Where an
accompanying person gives consent
on behalf of a child for the purposes of these
entry requirements or related biosecurity measures under the
Biosecurity Act
the accompanying person’s consent is taken to be the consent of the child,
it appears that the views and wishes of the
child would be overridden. In the
absence of any safeguards protecting the rights of the child in the instrument
Biosecurity Act
– including that the best interests of the child
are the primary consideration and that the child’s views are taken into
account, consistent with their evolving capacities and characteristics –
there is a risk that, to the extent that the measures
apply to children, they
may not be compatible with these rights.
1.152 Further, the measures may apply to ‘incapable’ persons, who
are defined to be persons who are at least 18 years
old and either: incapable of
understanding the general nature and effect of, and purposes of carrying out, a
biosecurity measure;
or incapable of indicating whether they consent or do not
consent to a biosecurity measure. A person may be ‘incapable’
permanently or temporarily. While ‘incapable person’ is not
explicitly defined to mean a person with disability, in practice,
people who are
assessed to lack capacity are invariably those with cognitive impairment. This
means that an ‘incapable person’
for the purposes of these measures
Biosecurity Act
would almost exclusively apply to people with
disability.
Biosecurity
allows an accompanying person to consent on behalf of an ‘incapable
person’, irrespective of whether the ‘incapable
person’ has
consented themselves to the particular biosecurity measure or expressed their
will or preference in relation to
the measure, the
Biosecurity Act
provides for
substituted decision-making.
1.153 The UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities has made
clear that practices that deny the right of people with
disabilities to legal
capacity in a discriminatory manner, such as substituted decision-making
regimes, are contrary to the right
to equal recognition before the law and must
be 'abolished in order to ensure that full legal capacity is restored to persons
disabilities on an equal basis with
The right to equal
recognition before the law includes the right to enjoy legal capacity on an
equal basis with others in all aspects
of life and, in all measures that relate
to the exercise of legal capacity, there should be appropriate and effective
to prevent abuse.
The UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities has confirmed that
there can be no derogation from article 12, which
describes the content of the
general right to equality before the law under the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights.
other words, 'there are no permissible circumstances under international human
rights law in which this right may be
In relation to how
legal capacity is assessed, the UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with
Disability has stated that the usual
approach taken by states is that:
...where a person is considered to have impaired decision-making skills,
often because of a cognitive or psychosocial disability,
his or her legal
capacity to make a particular decision is consequently removed... [This]
functional approach attempts to assess
mental capacity and deny legal capacity
accordingly. It is often based on whether a person can understand the nature and
consequences
of a decision and/or whether he or she can use or weigh the
relevant information. This approach is flawed for two key reasons: (a)
discriminatorily applied to people with disabilities; and (b) it presumes to be
able to accurately assess the inner-workings
of the human mind and, when the
person does not pass the assessment, it then denies him or her a core human
right — the right
to equal recognition before the
1.154 In the context of the provision of healthcare, the UN Committee on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities has said:
In conjunction with the right to legal capacity on an equal basis with
others, States parties have an obligation not to permit substitute
decision-makers to provide consent on behalf of persons with disabilities. All
health and medical personnel should ensure appropriate
consultation that
directly engages the person with disabilities. They should also ensure, to the
best of their ability, that assistants
or support persons do not substitute or
have undue influence over the decisions of persons with
disabilities.
1.155 The UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities has stated
that substitute decision-making should be replaced by
supported decision-making,
whereby individuals are supported to exercise their legal
Supports may include
peer support, advocacy, assistance with communication or advance planning,
whereby a person can state their
will and preferences in advance should they be
unable to do so at a later point in time. The UN Committee on the Rights of
with Disabilities has noted that 'where, after significant efforts have
been made, it is not practicable to determine the will and
preferences of an
individual, the "best interpretation of will and preferences" must replace the
"best interests"
determinations'.
also required to create appropriate and effective safeguards for the exercise of
legal capacity to protect persons with
disabilities from
Such safeguards must
ensure that measures relating to the exercise of legal capacity respect the
rights, will and preferences of
the person; are free of conflict of interest and
undue influence; are proportional and tailored to the person's circumstances;
for the shortest time possible; and are subject to regular review by an
independent and impartial body.
1.156 In relation to these measures, neither the instrument nor the
Biosecurity Act
appear to provide for supports for people considered to be
‘incapable persons’ to understand or consent to the biosecurity
measures. It is also not clear whether there are any safeguards in the
Biosecurity Act
to protect people with disability from abuse, noting that
accompanying persons do not appear to be required to respect the rights,
and preferences of the person. Further, the
Biosecurity Act
allows for an
accompanying person (defined as a parent, guardian or next of kin) to authorise
another person
to be an accompanying person for an ‘incapable
person’ (or child). Depending on who that other person is and their
relationship
with the ‘incapable person’, there may be a heightened
risk that the other person does not respect the rights, will and
preferences of
the ‘incapable person’, thereby exposing that person to a risk of
abuse. Further, an accompanying person
may be liable for a fault-based offence
carrying a penalty of five years’ imprisonment if they fail to comply with
a direction
relating to an incapable person. The deterrent effect of this
offence may mean that the accompanying person prioritises ensuring
the incapable
person complies with the direction rather than respecting the rights, will and
preferences of that person.
1.157 In light of the clear position under international human rights law
with respect to substituted decision-making regimes and
the fact that the
instrument and Act do not appear to contain any elements of supported
decision-making or safeguards to prevent
abuse, to the extent that the measures
in this instrument apply to ‘incapable persons’, they do not appear
to be compatible
with the right of people with disability to equal recognition
before the law. As this right is a 'threshold right', to the extent
measures apply to people with disability, they are also likely to impermissibly
limit associated rights, such as the right
to equality and non-discrimination.
In this regard, the UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities has
The right to legal capacity is a threshold right, that is, it is required for
the enjoyment of almost all other rights in the Convention,
including the right
to equality and non-discrimination. Articles 5 [right to equality and
non-discrimination] and 12 [right to equal
recognition before the law] are
fundamentally connected, because equality before the law must include the
enjoyment of legal capacity
by all persons with disabilities on an equal basis
with others. Discrimination through denial of legal capacity may be present in
different ways, including status-based, functional and outcome-based systems.
Denial of decision-making on the basis of disability
through any of these
systems is discriminatory.
1.158 The committee has previously considered the provisions in the
Biosecurity Act
that allow for accompanying persons to consent on behalf of
children and ‘incapable persons’ to biosecurity measures.
committee considered that it was not clear that the
Biosecurity Act
adequate safeguards to protect the rights of children and people with
disability, and considered that, at a minimum, guidelines
would be required to
guide the exercise of powers under the
Biosecurity Act
and to ensure due weight
is given to the views of the child (according to their age and maturity), and to
the rights of persons with
disabilities to give free and informed consent to any
biosecurity measures.
Committee view
1.159 The committee considers that to the extent that the measures in this
instrument assist in preventing the spread of a listed
human disease in
Australian territory, they would promote the right to health. However, the
committee also notes that by requiring
individuals to provide personal
information to officials, including medical information relating to vaccination
status, the measures
engage and limit the right to informational privacy. The
committee notes that the measures may also engage and limit other human
to the extent that they trigger powers relating to human biosecurity control
orders under the
Biosecurity Act
. Further, to the extent that the measures apply
to children and people with disability, the rights of these groups would also be
engaged and limited. The committee notes that this instrument is exempt from
disallowance so is not subject to parliamentary
The committee
therefore considers that it is particularly important that this committee
closely scrutinise the human rights concerns
in this instrument. The committee
reiterates its previous recommendation that the
Human Rights (Parliamentary
Scrutiny) Act 2011
be amended to require the rule-maker in relation to all
legislative instruments (not only disallowable legislative instruments) to
a statement of compatibility to be prepared in respect of that
instrument.
1.160 The committee considers that while the measures pursue a legitimate
objective and are rationally connected to that objective,
questions remain as to
whether the measures are proportionate. The committee therefore considers
further information is required
to assess the compatibility of these measures
with these rights, and as such seeks the minister's advice in relation to:
(a) what ‘screening by equipment’ involves in the context of
of this instrument. In particular, are physical searches, the taking
of bodily samples or any other invasive procedure authorised
(b) whether there is any flexibility to consider individual circumstances
when applying the entry requirements in this instrument
or to grant exemptions
from the requirements, and relatedly, whether individual circumstances may be
taken into account in considering
whether to impose a civil penalty on an
individual for non-compliance with a requirement in circumstances where the
person is unable
to comply, for example, due to medical reasons preventing the
person from receiving yellow fever vaccine;
(c) what safeguards, if any, in the
Biosecurity Act
are relevant to the
measures in this instrument; and
(d) whether guidelines have been developed to guide the exercise of powers
Biosecurity Act
and to ensure due weight is given to the views of the
child (according to their age and maturity), and to the rights of persons with
disabilities to exercise legal capacity and give free and informed consent to
any biosecurity measures (as recommended previously
by this committee in
Report 12 of 2021
Ms Zaneta Mascarenhas MP
This entry can be cited as:
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights, Biosecurity (Entry Requirements)
Determination 2025,
Report 4 of 2025
; [2025] AUPJCHR 30.
Schedule 1, item 1 specifies
42 yellow fever risk countries and areas.
subsection 6(2).
, paragraphs 6(2)(a)
subsections 7(1)
subsections
subsections 8(2).
Subsection 8(3)
sets out the requirements of an international vaccination
certificate, such as that it must be in the name of the individual; be
a designated yellow fever vaccination centre; and state that the vaccine
received by the individual is approved by the
World Health Organization for the
vaccination of persons against yellow fever.
subsections 8(4)
For the purposes of this
provision, an officer is a chief human biosecurity officer, a human biosecurity
officer or a biosecurity
officer. See
Biosecurity Act 2015
Biosecurity Act 2015
section 60.
Biosecurity Act 2015
subsection 60(3).
The biosecurity measures
are set out in Division 3, Subdivision B of the
Biosecurity Act 2015
Biosecurity Act 2015
section 86.
Biosecurity Act 2015
section 87.
Biosecurity Act 2015
section 88.
Biosecurity Act 2015
sections 90
Biosecurity Act 2015
sections 92
Biosecurity Act 2015
sections 72
Biosecurity Act 2015
section 96.
Biosecurity Act 2015
section 97.
Biosecurity Act 2015
sections 95
Biosecurity Act 2015
section 42.
section 10.
subsections 10(2)
See the Notes to
subsections 6(4)
(6); see also
Biosecurity Act 2015
subsection 46(1).
Biosecurity Act 2015
subsection 46(4).
Biosecurity Act 2015
Biosecurity Act 2015
sections 36
Biosecurity Act 2015
Biosecurity Act 2015
subsection 40(1).
Biosecurity Act 2015
subsection 40(2).
Under Chapter 2 of the
Biosecurity Act 2015
Biosecurity Act 2015
section 38.
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, article 12. Regarding state’s
obligations with respect to
the rights to health and life generally, see UN
Human Rights Committee,
General Comment No. 36, Article 6 (Right to Life)
(2019) [26].
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 17.
MG v Germany
UN Human Rights Committee Communication No. 1428/06 (2008) [10.1].
UN Human Rights Committee,
General Comment No. 16: The Right to Respect of Privacy, Family, Home and
Correspondence, and Protection of Honour and Reputation
Althammer v
, UN Human Rights Committee Communication No. 998/01 (2003) [10.2].
The prohibited grounds of discrimination are race, colour, sex,
religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth
or other status. Under 'other status'
the following have been held to qualify as
prohibited grounds: age, nationality, marital status, disability, place of
residence within
a country and sexual orientation. The prohibited grounds of
discrimination are often described as 'personal attributes'. See Sarah
and Melissa Castan,
The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights:
Cases, Materials and Commentary
, 3rd edition, Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 2013, [23.39].
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, articles 2 and 26. Article 2(2) of the International
Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights also prohibits discrimination
specifically in relation to the human rights contained in the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
UN Human Rights Committee,
General Comment No. 18: Non-discrimination
UN Human Rights Committee,
General Comment No. 18: Non-Discrimination
(1989) [13]; see also
Althammer v Austria
, UN Human Rights Committee Communication No. 998/01
(2003) [10.2].
To the extent these
measures are applied to children and people with disability, the rights of the
child and persons with disabilities
would also be engaged and limited. These
rights are discussed in more detail later in this entry.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 12.
UN Human Rights Committee,
General Comment No. 27: Article 12 (Freedom of Movement)
(1999) [8]. The
freedom to leave the territory of a state may not be made dependent on any
specific purpose or on the period of time
the individual chooses to stay outside
the country. The right of the individual to determine the state of destination
the legal guarantee.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 9. It is noted that, depending on the degree
and intensity, a restriction
on liberty, such as restricting a person’s
liberty of movement, may not necessarily constitute ‘deprivation’ of
liberty for the purposes of engaging this right. See United Nations Human Rights
General Comment No. 27: Article 12 (Freedom of Movement)
(1999) [7]. See also
Celepli v Sweden
, UN Human Rights Committee,
Communication No. 456/1991 (2 August 1994);
Amuur v. France
Court of Human Rights, Application Nos. 17/1995/523/609 (1996) [42]; and
Guzzardi v. Italy
, European Court of Human Rights, Application No.
7367/76 (1980) [92].
In relation to
administrative detention, the UN Human Rights Committee has stated that
administrative or security detention –
that is, detention not in
contemplation of prosecution on a criminal charge – 'presents severe risks
of arbitrary deprivation
of liberty', especially where there is no limit on the
overall length of possible detention and there is a risk that detention may
longer than absolutely necessary. See UN Human Rights Committee,
Comment No. 35: Liberty and security of person
(2014) [15].
Explanatory statement, p.
Measures that seek to
protect public health and the rights and freedoms of others are recognised as
legitimate objectives for the
purposes of international law. See, for example,
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, article 12(3) which
that a limitation on the right to freedom of movement may be
permissible where it is necessary and proportionate to achieve the objectives
protecting the rights and freedoms of others, national security, public health
or morals, or public order.
The UN Human Rights
Committee has stated that legislation must specify in detail the precise
circumstances in which interferences
with privacy may be permitted. See
Netherlands
, UN Human Rights Committee Communication No. 2326/2013 (2018)
, paragraph
Biosecurity Act 2015
Chapter 11,
See Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(6 September 2023) pp. 45–60; Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
(25 November 2022) pp. 16–33, and
(8 February 2023) pp. 61–93.
Biosecurity Act 2015
subsection 46(4).
Convention on the Rights
of the Child. See also, UN Human Rights Committee,
General Comment No.
17: Article 24
(1989) [1].
Convention on the Rights
of the Child
, article 3(1).
UN Committee on the Rights
of the Child,
General Comment No. 14 on the right of the child to have
his or her best interests taken as a primary consideration
(2013); see
IAM v Denmark
, UN Committee on the Rights of the Child
Communication No. 3/2016 (2018) [11.8].
Convention on the Rights
of the Child
, article 12.
UN Committee on the Rights
of the Child,
General Comment No. 14 on the right of the child to have his or
her best interests taken as a primary consideration
(2013) [43]. See also
General Comment No. 20 on the implementation of the rights of the child
during adolescence
(2016) [22].
UN Committee on the Rights
of the Child,
General Comment No. 14 on the right of the child to have his or
her best interests taken as a primary consideration
(2013) [53].
In this way the measure
would also engage and limit the right to equality and non-discrimination.
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1, Article 12: Equal
recognition before the law
(2014) [7]. For a discussion of the academic
debate regarding the interpretation and application of article 12, particularly
in relation
to substitute decision making, see, for example, Bernadette McSherry
and Lisa Waddington, 'Treat with care: the right to informed
consent for medical
treatment of persons with mental impairments in Australia',
Journal of Human Rights
, vol. 23, no. 1, 2017, pp. 109–129.
Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities, article 12.
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1,
Article 12: Equal recognition before the law
(2014) [1], [5].
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1, Article 12: Equal
recognition before the law
(2014) [5].
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1, Article 12: Equal
recognition before the law
(2014) [15].
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1, Article
recognition before the law (2014) [41]. See also Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities, article 25(d).
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1, Article 12: Equal
recognition before the law
(2014) [15]–[16], [21]. The features of a
supported decision making regime are detailed in paragraph [29].
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1, Article 12: Equal
recognition before the law
(2014) [21].
Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities, article 12; Committee on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1, Article 12: Equal recognition
before the law
(2014) [20]; Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, article 12(4).
Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities, article 12(4); see also article 17.
UN Committee on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 6 on equality and
non-discrimination
(2018) [47]. The Committee has also emphasised that the
denial of legal capacity to persons with disabilities often leads to the
deprivation of other fundamental human rights. See UN Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,
General Comment No. 1, Article 12: Equal
recognition before the law
(2014) [8].
Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills
Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation
inquiries into provisions which provide for delegated legislation to be exempt
from disallowance in the
Biosecurity Act 2015
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights,
Inquiry into Australia’s Human Rights
Recommendation
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (221 KB)
PDF format (147 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter