URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJStaCPW/2019/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:09:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Parliamentary Joint Standing Committee on Public Works (46th Parliament) --- "HMAS Watson Redevelopment Project - PP 528/2019" [2019] AUPJStaCPW 10 (2 December 2019)
Conduct of the inquiry
Need for the works
Options considered
Scope of the works
Community consultation
Bondi to Manly walk
Helipad location
Vehicle and traffic management
Cost of the works
Committee comment
2. HMAS Watson Redevelopment Project
2.1 The Department of Defence (Defence) seeks approval from the Committee to
proceed with the proposed redevelopment of
HMAS Watson
, the Royal
Australian Navy’s principal warfare and navigation training establishment.
The aim of the project is to address
functionality deficiencies and capacity
constraints in facilities and infrastructure at
HMAS Watson
which support
demand levels greater than what they were originally designed for. The project
also aims to address high risk issues
associated with non-compliant facilities,
and reduce ongoing operating costs by rationalising and consolidating similar
2.2 The estimated cost of the project is $430.5 million (excluding GST).
2.3 The project was referred to the Committee on 10 September 2019.
Conduct of the
2.4 Following referral, the inquiry was publicised on the Committee’s
website and via media release.
2.5 The Committee received nine submissions, three supplementary submissions
and one confidential submission. A list of submissions
can be found at Appendix
2.6 On 31 October 2019, the Committee conducted a public and in-camera
hearing in Sydney, New South Wales. A transcript of the public
available on the Committee’s website.
Need for the works
2.7 The Royal Australian Navy (RAN) has long been in residence at
Watson’s Bay with its origins going back to 1942 when the
Radio Detection Finding School was established there during World War
However the site has been
occupied by the military since 1871 with the development of Artillery
emplacements to defend the Port of
HMAS Watson
is the RAN’s principal warfare and
navigation training establishment and provides basic and advanced training for
Senior Sailors in the Combat System Category and Junior Seaman
Officers in ship handling, navigation and tactics. Advanced training
conducted for Principal Warfare Officers, and at the high end, Watson trains
newly appointed Commanding and Executive Officers,
giving them the finish needed
to succeed in commanding the highly professional people who crew the ships and
establishments that
make up Australia's
2.9 In its submission to the Committee, Defence stated:
HMAS Watson
currently facilitates training for approximately 1300
personnel each year; with this number gradually increasing with the delivery
new capabilities...
HMAS Watson
was established in 1945, prior to when
technology was used as a training tool. Training methods have since evolved to
meet the needs
of a contemporary Navy. Greater complexity of combat systems and
connectivity within the Defence environment has increased the reliance
technically skilled Sailors and Officers. Flexible modern learning centres are
required to achieve the desired training and capability
outcomes of modern
2.10 At the
public hearing Defence told the Committee that:
Whilst facilities at
HMAS Watson
have been maintained and adaptively
re-used, many of them have now reached the end of their design life and do not
meet contemporary
working, training or living standards, or are not fit for
their current purpose. The supporting base engineering services and security,
well as facilities for accommodation, catering and health support, are also
below the required standard to support the throughput
of the base.
2.11 Defence told
the Committee that the current state of the facilities at
HMAS Watson
represent a risk to Navy
capability.
2.12 The Committee was able to inspect a range of current facilities during
the site inspection and noted that many of the facilities
contemporary Defence standards.
2.13 Defence stated that although isolated works had occurred at
, ‘including in
,’ there has been no
significant investment in training facilities in over 30
Options considered
2.14 In its submission, Defence noted that it had considered three options to
‘meet Defence’s capability and estate requirements
The options
▪ Option 1 – Do nothing.
▪ Option 2 – Essential Scope with Limited Living in Accommodation
▪ Option 3 – Essential Scope plus full Living in Accommodation
Upgrade and consequential
2.15 Defence stated that it had selected Option 3 as it ‘represents the
best value for money as it fully addresses functionality
deficiencies in
existing facilities, key engineering services high risk issues, and provides
robust training facilities to meet the
2.16 At the public hearing, Defence explained to the Committee that as part
of a 2006 review into future Navy training infrastructure
requirements,
the Government had
agreed that ‘Garden Island and those four bases that surround
HMAS, Waterhen, Penguin, Watson and Kuttabul
would also be
enduring bases.’
told the Committee that the decision ‘provided us the basis to then base
our future investment on the Defence estate
with the knowledge that there was
government approval that those locations would be
2.17 Defence further noted that to ‘start afresh and find a greenfields
site for another Garden Island and another series of
linked training base...
would be incredibly cost prohibitive,’ estimating that the cost would
‘be in the tens of
2.18 In response to questions by the Committee as to why
HMAS Watson
needed to remain located in the Sydney area, Defence explained that having
HMAS Watson
and similar training bases nearby to Garden Island was a
training benefit which realised a number of training efficiencies. Defence
HMAS Watson
they will coordinate between doing simulated work and then
having the young men and women on the courses then going across to Garden
and actually going on a ship and doing live what they've just trained
In addition, the command teams on board ships regularly come and use our
facilities to conduct their own individual and command team
training prior to
operations.
2.19 Defence
also noted that having
HMAS Watson
located near to Garden Island and
other linked bases benefited the Navy through increased retention and
recruitment of personnel.
Defence told the Committee that Navy personnel
‘can have their personnel and families based in one location for a
amount of time without the need to be posting them throughout the
countryside in regular postings that would move them around and
potentially
cause problems for retention for
2.20 Defence further explained:
Clearly we need the best and brightest to come and operate what is technically
challenging equipment in a difficult and challenging
role. Being able to recruit
and retain by being in an area such as Sydney certainly assists in
2.21 Defence
stated that it had also considered options for moving the function of
to nearby bases in the Sydney area, however, due to a lack of
required space, this option was discounted. Defence explained:
To be able to replicate [
HMAS Watson
’s] function elsewhere—it
was certainly looked at whether there was capacity and functionality on bases
nearby to be able
to do any of these functions that are performed at Watson.
Randwick Barracks was carefully looked at. Randwick Barracks already has
simulation systems there and will have another one added shortly. That base is
at capacity, though. Defence over the years has
sold off portions of that base,
to the point now where the physical room on that base is at capacity. There is
not the room there
to replicate what
HMAS Watson
does. Likewise with HMAS
Waterhen, Penguin and Kuttabul. They are very small, congested sites, much like
HMAS Watson
is as well. So there wasn't the ability to move them there,
Scope of the works
2.22 Defence stated that the objective of the works was to:
... upgrade key training and support facilities and base infrastructure...
including the construction of a new 24,500 square metre
training facility;
consolidating training staff and staff support functions into a modern flexible
fit-for-purpose facility; upgrading
base engineering services, including
electrical, hydraulics, civil and communications; upgrading base security,
including perimeter
upgrades and a new base entry; upgrading the base galleys;
constructing a minimum of 236 single occupancy units of living-in accommodation;
a new medical and support services facility; and finally constructing some
replacement car
its submission, Defence set out the proposed scope of the redevelopment, stating
that the works are comprised of six elements:
▪ Work Element 1: Construct a new four story 24,500 metre squared
Training Precinct
▪ Work Element 2: Upgrade and refurbish Base Engineering Services,
including fire/potable water, communications networks, and
infrastructure
▪ Work Element 3: Install new Base Security Systems at the front entry,
conduct fencing upgrades and install CCTV I high risk
▪ Work Element 4: Refurbish the existing Galleys through spatial layout
▪ Work Element 5: Construct new Trainee Living In Accommodation for at
least 236 students in four new accommodation block, plus
consequential works
including Medical clinic and enabling services
▪ Work Element 6: Construct replacement car parking with, at minimum,
100 spaces to offset all carparks removed through the
consultation
2.24 In its submission to the Committee, Defence stated it had conducted a
number of community consultation sessions which were aimed
at ensuring
‘...the community, base residents and other stakeholders were well
informed about the project’s details;
and provided the opportunity to
raise any concerns or to seek further information so that, wherever feasible,
Defence could address
these in its program of
2.25 Defence stated that it had ‘engaged with a variety of internal and
external stakeholders’ and would continue to consult
with stakeholders as
part of the project’s community consultation plans and communications
2.26 The Committee received a number of submissions expressing concern over
the lack of community and local consultation made prior
to Defence submitting
the proposal to the Committee.
During the public hearing Defence told the Committee that ‘the project
achieved government approval in August [2019]. The project
was then referred to
[the Public Works Committee] in September, at which point we were able to then,
as far as the process runs,
to commence our community consultations, which are
Bondi to Manly
2.27 During the inquiry, the Committee received a number of submissions from
local residents in support of the Bondi to Manly Walk,
due to open in December
2019. The submissions received by the Committee raised concerns that the fencing
HMAS Watson
may restrict the future potential for the walk to be
expanded along the eastern side of the base, should funding become available
the future.
2.28 Mr John Faulkner told the Committee at the public hearing that:
...for many years, as part of the Bondi to Manly Walk I had hoped to see a
walking track established on the eastern—or, if
you like, the
ocean—side of HMAS Watson, effectively between The Gap and South Head. As
we've heard, at the moment the only
walking track or access to South Head is on
the western—or harbour—side of the HMAS Watson base. In my
submission, I
described my really strongly held belief that such a track would
be considered one of the most scenic and dramatic coastal walking
tracks in the
world. As part of its submission to this inquiry, Defence notes that included in
the HMAS Watson redevelopment project
is its preferred option to install 'new
fencing to the entire base perimeter'. I've got no issue with new fencing at
all, to be honest
with you, but I do sincerely hope that this committee and
Defence can be flexible enough—and I'm sure this really only means
of a tweak here or there—to take account of the possibility of a clifftop
walking track being built sometime in the future
on the eastern perimeter of the
2.29 At the
public hearing Defence stated that they were working with Mr Faulkner,
co-founder of the
Bondi to Manly Walk Supporters,
‘to see what the
art of the possible is’ and were ‘working with Mr Faulkner and
looking very closely at what we
can physically do on the ground to be able to
achieve that intent’. Defence noted that to accommodate the request, the
would need to be inset ‘to allow there to be the physical room to
make it feasible to do a walking track on the eastern side
2.30 The Sydney Harbour Association raised a number of issues with the
proposal, in particular, the relocation of the helipad
2.31 At the public hearing, Mrs Hylda Rolfe, president of the Sydney Harbour
Association, stated that:
...the return of the helipad from its present location back to Wilson's Field
would be found to be very objectionable by those of
us who have lived there long
enough to remember how it used to be. The grounds that originally led to its
removal are still valid
as far as we're
Vehicle and traffic
2.32 A number of submissions received by the Committee expressed concerns
that the volume of vehicles entering and exiting the base
during the five year
construction period would cause considerable disruption to local residents in
Defence acknowledged
that this issue had been discussed at the community consultation sessions and,
as a result of conducting assessments,
estimated that ‘the height of
construction would be...around the third quarter of
Defence told the
Committee that:
The assessment thus far has estimated that over that three-month period or so
where construction will be at its height, there will
be an increase in traffic
by way of trucks in and out of the base to the tune of up to 70 or more truck
movements per day. However,
that would be spread out throughout a 10-hour work
period, and our contractors will look very carefully at ensuring that we can
those truck movements with the peak traffic times so that we're not
causing any more disruption than we need to. There will also
be a number of
measures taken for noise and
2.33 Defence
also stated that it would ‘adopt a just-in-time approach for deliveries,
so that we don't have trucks banking up
idling outside the base. Combined with
that, where possible we'll have holding areas adjacent to the worksite within
2.34 At the public hearing Defence told the Committee that it had met with
representatives from Woollahra Municipal Council and had
made a commitment to
work closely with them to ensure the ‘council is satisfied and happy with,
particularly traffic management
Cost of the works
HMAS Watson
Redevelopment Project has an estimated cost of $430.5
million, exclusive of GST.
2.36 Defence noted that the operating costs of the completed facilities will
increase by $3.2 million annually due to:
▪ The maintenance costs to support the large increase in ICT hardware
installed within the new facilities; and
▪ The additional facilities operations costs increase to account for
the increased gross floor area across each work
2.37 Defence provided further details on project costings in its confidential
submission and during an in-camera hearing.
2.38 The Committee is satisfied that the costings for the project provided to
it have been adequately assessed by the proponent entity.
Committee comment
2.39 The Committee recognises
HMAS Watson
as the Royal Australian
Navy’s principal warfare and navigation training establishment, and
acknowledges its contribution to
training men and women for their careers in the
Australian Royal Navy.
2.40 The Committee notes the
HMAS Watson
Redevelopment Project aims to
address functionality deficiencies and capacity constraints in facilities and
infrastructure at
HMAS Watson
which support demand levels greater than
they were originally designed for.
2.41 The Committee acknowledges that some local residents expressed a view
HMAS Watson
to be moved to another location outside of the Sydney
area. This request falls outside of the Committee’s terms of reference
relation to this inquiry.
2.42 The Committee notes that a detailed review of the navy’s future
training infrastructure requirements was conducted in 2006,
and concluded that
‘In Sydney,
HMAS Kuttabul
, the primary support base for Fleet Base
East, plus training and operational support bases at
HMAS Watson
Watsons Bay,
HMAS Waterhen
at Waverton and
HMAS Penguin
would also stay at their present
locations.’
2.43 The Committee notes that while the option of Defence utilising water
transport options to reduce traffic congestion during the
construction period
was discussed, the Committee recognises the lack of supporting infrastructure at
the base limits the viability
of this option.
2.44 As part of the
HMAS Watson
redevelopment project, Defence
proposes to install new fencing to the entire base perimeter. The Committee sees
no reason as to why
the new fence cannot be installed to accommodate the
potential for a cliff top track to be built along the eastern perimeter of the
base as part of the Bondi to Sydney Walk should future funding become
2.45 The Committee was pleased to hear that Defence were working with Mr
Faulkner and other members of the community with regards
to the future options
for the Bondi to Manly Walking Trail, and encourage Defence to continue to work
towards an agreeable outcome.
2.46 Noting concerns from local residents in regard to the relocation of the
helipad site, the Committee encourages Defence to work
with the local community
to find a suitable outcome.
2.47 The Committee encourages Defence to continue to consult with Woollahra
Municipal Council and members of the local community with
regard to issues
surrounding parking availability and traffic management prior to the
commencement of the construction period.
2.48 Having had some presence on the site since 1871, the Committee
recognises Defence’s longstanding presence in Watson’s
Bay and was
encouraged to hear that HMAS Watson is regarded as a good neighbour by the local
community. The Committee encourages
Defence to continue working with the local
community and maintaining a level of openness with regards to finding solutions
and concerns raised by its neighbours.
2.49 The Committee did not identify any issues of concern with the proposal
and is satisfied that the project has merit in terms of
need, scope and
2.50 Having regard to its role and responsibilities contained in the
Public Works Committee Act 1969
, the Committee is of the view that this
project signifies value for money for the Commonwealth and constitutes a project
fit for purpose, having regard to the established need.
Recommendation 1
2.51 The Committee recommends that Defence ensure the proposed works at
HMAS Watson do not preclude the building of a cliff top track
along the eastern
perimeter of the base as part of the Bondi to Sydney Walk.
Recommendation 2
2.52 The Committee recommends that the House of Representatives resolve,
pursuant to
Section 18(7)
Public Works Committee Act 1969
is expedient to carry out the following proposed works:
HMAS Watson
Redevelopment Project, New South Wales.
2.53 Proponent entities must notify the Committee of any changes to the
project scope, time, cost, function or design. The Committee
also requires that
a post-implementation report be provided within three months of project
completion. A report template can be found
on the Committee’s website.
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Royal Australian Navy,
HMAS Watson
History’, <
https://www.navy.gov.au/history/base-histories/hmas-watson-history
viewed November 2019.
Royal Australian Navy,
‘HMAS Watson’, <
https://www.navy.gov.au/establishments/hmas-watson
viewed November 2019.
Royal Australian Navy,
‘HMAS Watson’, viewed November 2019.
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Brigadier Matt Galton,
Director-General, Capital Facilities and Infrastructure, Department of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence, p.
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Public Works Committee,
: Facilities for air warfare destroyer ships and landing helicopter
dock ships, Sydney, NSW.
Public Works Committee,
Upgrading of Accommodation at
HMAS Watson
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
The Sydney Morning Herald,
‘Navy to keep major bases in NSW, Vic’, 13 December 2006 <
https://www.smh.com.au/national/navy-to-keep-major-bases-in-nsw-vic-20061213-gdp1ay.html
viewed November 2019.
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Captain John Stavridis,
Commanding Officer of Defence Base HMAS Watson, Department of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Captain Stavridis,
Department of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
, pp. 15-18.
Department of Defence,
Submission 1.2
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
Sydney Harbour Association,
Submission 3
, p. 6; Ms Claudia Cullen, Private Capacity,
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Mr Roger Bayliss, Private
Submission 4
, p. 1; Mr John Faulkner, Private Capacity,
Submission 5,
p. 4; Ms Claudia Cullen, Private Capacity
, Submission
Mr John Faulkner, Private
Transcript of Evidence
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Sydney Harbour Association,
Submission 3
, p. 4; Sydney Harbour Association
, Submission 3.1
Mrs Hylda Rolfe, Sydney
Harbour Association,
Transcript of Evidence
Mr Roger Bayliss, Private
Submission 4
, p. 1; Ms Willea Ferris, Private Capacity,
Submission 7
, p. 2; Woollahra Municipal Council,
Submission 8
2-4; Ms Claudia Cullen, Private Capacity
, Submission 9
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Mr James Terry, Managing
Contractor Representative for the HMAS Watson Redevelopment Project, Lendlease,
Transcript of Evidence
Brigadier Galton, Department
of Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
Department of Defence,
Submission 1
The Sydney Morning Herald,
‘Navy to keep major bases in NSW, Vic’, 13 December 2006 <
https://www.smh.com.au/national/navy-to-keep-major-bases-in-nsw-vic-20061213-gdp1ay.html
viewed November 2019.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (183 KB)
PDF format (573 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter