URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJStaCPW/2019/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:09:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Parliamentary Joint Standing Committee on Public Works (46th Parliament) --- "ATO Proposed Fit-out of Leased Premises in Moonee Ponds, Victoria - PP 246/2019" [2019] AUPJStaCPW 6 (9 September 2019)
Conduct of the inquiry
Need for the works
Scope of the works
Cost of the works
Consultation
Committee comment
4. Australian Taxation Office Fit-out of Leased
Premises in Moonee Ponds, Victoria
4.1 The Australian Taxation Office (ATO) seeks approval from the Committee to
proceed with the Fit-out of leased premises in Moonee
Ponds, Victoria.
4.2 The estimated cost of the project is $35.5 million (excluding GST).
4.3 The project was referred to the Committee on 25 October 2018.
4.4 Subject to Parliamentary approval, it is anticipated that construction
will commence March 2019 and be completed by February 2020.
Conduct of the
4.5 Following referral, the inquiry was publicised on the Committee’s
website and via media release.
4.6 The Committee received two submissions and one confidential submission. A
list of submissions can be found at Appendix A.
4.7 On 7 December 2018, the Committee received a site inspection by
presentation. On the same day, the Committee also conducted a
public and in
camera hearing. A transcript of the public hearing is available on the
Committee’s website.
Need for the works
4.8 According to the ATO it has ‘an ongoing requirement for a presence
in the North West Melbourne
current leased premises in Moonee Ponds is due to expire on 5 February
4.9 In its submission, the ATO stated that it followed Commonwealth Property
Management Framework and Resource Management Guide No.
500 in seeking surplus
space suitable for its requirements. The Department of Finance identified no
surplus space suitable for these
requirements.
4.10 Following an approach to market the ATO has secured 14,000 square metres
located over four floors at 6-20 Gladstone Street in
Moonee Ponds. According to
the ATO it proposes to:
...remain in the current Moonee Ponds site with a reduction in Nett Lettable
Area (NLA) of approximately 7,200 square metres. The
new agreement for lease is
for 14,000 square metres located over four floors from ground to level 3
inclusive. The fit-out works
of the floors will coincide with a proposed upgrade
of the base building services as they approach the end of their acceptable life
4.11 The ATO
advised that the building was 27 years old, the current fit-out was completed in
2005, and the most recent update to
its breakout areas and meeting rooms was
completed in 2012 with fit-out and finishes having reached end of
4.12 The ATO elaborated on the deficiencies in the existing Moonee Ponds
The current fit-out does not provide the ATO with the ability to meet the
industry standards or government density benchmarks. The
workstations are
designed for cathode-ray tube monitors, including the no longer necessary
volumes of storage based on older, paper
based work processes that are
inefficient in their design. They are also designed for single focus work. They
do not reflect well
the current ATO aims set out in our 2024 plan, including
increased collaboration, innovation and providing a more purpose-built
environment
to support business needs and the professional requirements of
Scope of the works
4.13 The ATO stated that the ‘fit-out will include new work points,
upgraded security systems to cater for multi-tenancy occupancy,
meeting rooms
and general collaboration areas for
4.14 The ATO submission provided further detail on the proposed scope of
The fit-out design is a contemporary open-plan office space
▪ Modular work points that can be easily and quickly
reconfigured
▪ Collaboration, offices and meeting areas that are flexible and
designed for future reconfiguration
▪ A robust security system that protects ATO information, people, other
assets and operations
▪ Enhanced conference, training and video conference facilities to
support contemporary work practices
▪ New computer room designed to current specifications
▪ First aid room and amenities
4.15 The ATO stated that the proposed works included an increase in the
number of bike racks from 80 to 120 and provision of staff
lockers used by
cyclists and staff undertaking physical exercise (including at local gyms).
4.16 According to the ATO, the landlord for the leased premises in Moonee
Ponds will undertake a number of works at their own cost
...the refurbishment of the base building services, including but not limited to
upgrades to air conditioning systems; lifts; environmental
performance of the
building; staff amenities, including toilets, showers and change rooms; paint;
lighting; blinds; and other
protections.
ATO noted that the occupational density of the new lease is expected to reduce
space by approximately 34 per cent aligning:
...with the changes to [the ATOs] business model over time and also supports the
ATO to meet our Commonwealth targets, particularly
around occupational
Committee finds that the proposed scope of works is suitable for the works to
meet its purpose.
Cost of the works
4.19 The project has a budget of $35.5 million, excluding GST. The cost
estimate includes provision for the office fit-out, cost escalation,
contingencies, associated professional fees and the ATO’s internal
4.20 The ATO provided further detail on project costings in its confidential
submissions and during one in-camera hearing.
Consultation
4.21 The ATO submission states that it conducted, or intended to conduct,
consultations with a number of internal and external stakeholders
▪ Department of Finance
▪ Cushman & Wakefield Pty Ltd (Property Leasing, Project Management
and Facilities Management)
▪ Peckvonhartel PVH (Interior Designer)
▪ Umow Lai (Services Engineers)
▪ Aquenta (Quantity Surveyors)
▪ McKenzie Group (Building Surveyor)
▪ ATO Executive
▪ ATO business lines
▪ ATO Work Health & Safety
▪ Unions (Community and Public Sector Union and Australian Services
Union [ASU])
▪ ATO Workforce
4.22 The ASU Taxation Officers’ Branch made a submission on the
proposed works stating that ATO staff at Moonee Ponds had not
seen the latest
concept drawings for the proposed works or the ATO’s submission to the
4.23 When asked on whether the ATO had engaged with the ASU, the ATO advised
that there had been discussions around the proposed works
and that the
consultation was ongoing.
4.24 The ATO agreed that further consultation would be part of its next
Absolutely. I would just say 'further consultation'. There's been some; there
hasn't been none. We've certainly been out and engaged
with people about how
they work at the moment and what work they're doing. We've done some discussion
other fit-outs. Certainly members of the committee
that's already been formed, including the ASU member and the CPSU members, have
been invited and indeed have come in and spent time in Docklands to see that
environment and see how that is working for
ATO added that they were confident that they would address all concerns raised
by the ASU.
Committee comment
4.26 The Committee understands that the ATO has a long term operational
requirement in North West Melbourne. The Committee also accepts
that the current
facilities are ageing and in need of an upgrade to increase collaboration and
innovation and provide staff a purpose-built
environment to support business
needs and professional requirements.
4.27 The Committee recognises the concerns raised in the ASU submission from
staff who will be impacted by the proposed newly designed
office fit-out. The
impact of proposed public works is always an important facet of the
Committee’s scrutiny.
4.28 In any change, especially ones that affect employees, it is vitally
important to communicate with staff early and engage with
them through the
change process. The Committee has observed in other projects that involving
staff early in the consultation process
enables staff to understand and accept
the need for change and alleviate concerns which, in most cases, results in a
positive response
to the change process.
4.29 The Committee encourages the ATO to continue consulting with staff and
stakeholders about changes to their work environment.
4.30 The Committee did not identify any issues of concern with the proposal
and is satisfied that the project has merit in terms of
need, scope and
4.31 Having regard to its role and responsibilities contained in the
Public Works Committee Act 1969
, the Committee is of the view that this
project signifies value for money for the Commonwealth and constitutes a project
fit for purpose, having regard to the established need.
Recommendation 3
4.32 The Committee recommends that the House of Representatives resolve,
pursuant to
Section 18(7)
Public Works Committee Act 1969
is expedient to carry out the following proposed works: proposed fit out of
leased premises for the Australian Taxation
Office in Moonee Ponds,
4.33 Proponent entities must notify the Committee of any changes to the
project scope, time, cost, function or design. The Committee
also requires that
a post-implementation report be provided within three months of project
completion. A report template can be found
on the Committee’s website.
Hon Dr John McVeigh MP
Australian Taxation Office,
Submission 1
Australian Taxation Office,
Submission 1
Australian Taxation Office,
Submission 1
Australian Taxation Office,
Submission 1
Mr Andrew Closey, Australian
Taxation Office,
Transcript of evidence
, 7 December 2018, p. 3.
Mr Andrew Closey, Australian
Taxation Office,
Transcript of evidence
, 7 December 2018, p. 3.
Mr Andrew Closey, Australian
Taxation Office,
Transcript of evidence
, 7 December 2018, p. 3.
Australian Taxation Office,
Submission 1
Mr Andrew Closey, Australian
Taxation Office,
Transcript of evidence
, 7 December 2018, p. 3.
Mr Andrew Closey, Australian
Taxation Office,
Transcript of evidence
, 7 December 2018, p. 3.
Australian Taxation
, Submission 1
Australian Services Union
Taxation Officers’ Branch,
Submission 2
Mr Andrew Closey, Australian
Taxation Office,
Transcript of evidence
, 7 December 2018, p. 10.
Mr Andrew Closey, Australian
Taxation Office,
Transcript of evidence
, 7 December 2018, p. 10.
Mr Andrew Closey, Australian
Taxation Office,
Transcript of evidence
, 7 December 2018, p. 10.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (145 KB)
PDF format (467 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter