URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJCHR/2025/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:08:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Migration (Public Interest Criterion 4022-Code of Behaviour) Instrument 2025 - New and Ongoing Matters [2025] AUPJCHR 21 (26 March 2025)
Chapter 1 :
New and ongoing matters
Legislative instrument
Migration (Public Interest Criterion 4022—Code of Behaviour) Instrument 20251
Code of behaviour
International human rights legal advice
Rights to adequate standard of living; criminal process rights; equality and non-discrimination; freedom of assembly; freedom of association;
freedom of expression; liberty; privacy; protection of the family; social security
Committee view
New and ongoing matters
1.1 The committee comments on the following legislative instrument.
Legislative
Migration (Public Interest
Criterion 4022—Code of Behaviour) Instrument
F2025L00229
This legislative instrument specifies, for the Subclass 050 (Bridging
(General)) visa, a code of behaviour for the purposes of Public
Criterion 4022 and repeals the Migration (Code of Behaviour for Public Interest
Criterion 4022) Instrument (LIN 24/031)
Authorising legislation
Migration Regulations 1994
Disallowance
Exempt from disallowance
Adequate standard of living; criminal process rights; equality and
non-discrimination; freedom of assembly; freedom of association;
expression; liberty; privacy; protection of the family; social security
Code of behaviour
1.2 This legislative instrument specifies a code of behaviour which applies
to some applicants for the Subclass 050 (Bridging (General))
visa (BVE), for the
purposes of Public Interest Criterion 4022 (PIC
It is made pursuant to
clause 4.1 of Schedule 4 to the
Migration Regulations 1994
Regulations
), which requires the minister to approve a written code of behaviour
for specified subclasses of visas.
1.3 The BVE is a temporary bridging visa that permits an unlawful non-citizen
to stay in Australia until their immigration matter
is finalised or arrangements
have been made for their departure from Australia. Only certain applicants for a
BVE are required to
satisfy PIC 4022, namely, people aged at least 18 years old
at the time of application, and who hold or have previously held a Bridging
(Class WE) visa granted by the minister under
section 195A
Migration Act
It appears this would apply to persons previously held in immigration detention
where the minister has decided to grant the detainee
To satisfy PIC 4022, either
the applicant must sign a code of behaviour, or the minister does not require
them to sign the code of
1.4 The code of behaviour states that it ‘contains a list of
expectations about how [the applicant] will behave at all times
Australia’.
It cautions that
if the individual is found to have breached the code:
[Y]ou could have your income support reduced, or your visa may be cancelled.
If your visa is cancelled, you may be taken into immigration
detention and may
be transferred to a regional processing
1.5 The code states that while the individual is living in the Australian
community they must:
• not disobey any Australian laws including Australian road laws; and
cooperate with all lawful instructions given by police
and other government
• not make sexual contact with another person without that
person’s consent, regardless of their age or make sexual contact
someone under the age of consent;
• ‘not take part in, or get involved in’ any kind of
criminal behaviour in Australia, including violence against
any person;
deliberately damage property; give false identity documents or lie to a
government official;
• not ‘harass, intimidate or bully any other person’ or
group of people or engage in any ‘anti-social or disruptive
that are inconsiderate, disrespectful or threaten the peaceful enjoyment of
other members of the community’;
• not refuse to comply with any health undertaking given to the
Department of Home Affairs or direction issued by a Medical
Officer of the
Commonwealth to undertake treatment for a health condition for public health
purposes; and
• co-operate with all reasonable requests from the Department of Home
Affairs or its agents in regard to the resolution of their
status, including
requests to attend interviews or to provide or obtain identity and/or travel
1.6 This legislative instrument repeals and replicates the previous code,
which was made in March 2024 (with a self-repeal date in
The 2024 code substantially
replicated and extended the original code of behaviour (made in 2013) for a
further 12 months, pending
‘further consideration and
International human rights legal advice
Rights to adequate standard of living; criminal
process rights; equality and non-discrimination; freedom of assembly; freedom of
association;
freedom of expression; liberty; privacy; protection of the family;
social security
1.7 By way of background, the committee examined the legislative instruments
that created the requirement to sign a code of behaviour
and the code of
behaviour itself when they were introduced in
The committee concluded in
2013 that the two legislative instruments raised human rights concerns, and in
particular that the code
of behaviour did not satisfy the ‘quality of law
test’ and did not constitute a proportionate limit on a number of human
1.8 In 2024, the 2013 code was repealed and replaced with a substantially
similar code of behaviour.
explanatory statement accompanying the 2024 legislative instrument stated that
the instrument substantially replicated the 2013
code of behaviour for another
12 months, pending further consideration and
The committee commented
on this 2024 legislative instrument, concluding that it was not clear that the
code of behaviour satisfied
the quality of law test; was directed towards a
legitimate objective; was rationally connected to the stated objective; or the
rights restrictive means by which to achieve the stated
As such, the
committee considered there to be a risk that the imposition of the code of
behaviour, and corresponding enforcement
action, may constitute an impermissible
limit on multiple human rights. The committee recommended that in the event the
enforces the code, that the minister consider the committee’s
concerns, and human rights implications of the instrument. Noting
explanatory statement accompanying the 2024 instrument stated that the code of
behaviour was extended for 12 months ‘pending
further consideration and
the committee
recommended that the review of the code of behaviour requirement closely
consider the committee’s comments. Further,
the committee reiterated its
expectation that legislative instruments which are exempt from disallowance
should include a statement
of compatibility with human rights where the measure
engages and limits human rights and accordingly recommended that a statement
compatibility with human rights be prepared in relation to that instrument.
1.9 As this instrument replicates and maintains the 2024 code of behaviour,
the same human rights concerns previously raised by the
committee apply to this
instrument and are set out below.
Rights engaged by imposing the code of behaviour
1.10 Requiring certain BVE holders to sign an enforceable code of behaviour
engages and may limit numerous human rights, including
the right to equality and
non-discrimination (as the measure applies only to non-citizens, and appears to
disproportionately apply
to non-citizens of certain nationalities in
expression, association and assembly (if it prevented visa-holders from engaging
in protected expression or lawful acts
of public protest); and privacy (as it
may require a person to disclose personal information and would regulate aspects
personal life, including potentially interfering with a person’s
bodily integrity if they were required to undertake medical
treatment or
procedures without their consent or against their will).
1.11 The right to equality and non-discrimination provides that everyone is
entitled to enjoy their rights without discrimination
of any kind and that all
people are equal before the law and entitled without discrimination to equal and
non‑discriminatory
protection of the
The right to equality
encompasses both 'direct' discrimination (where measures have a discriminatory
intent) and 'indirect' discrimination
(where measures have a discriminatory
effect on the enjoyment of rights).
Indirect discrimination occurs where 'a rule or measure that is neutral at
face value or without intent to discriminate' exclusively
or disproportionately
affects people with a particular protected
1.12 The right to freedom of association protects the right of all persons to
group together voluntarily for a common goal and to
form and join an
association.
This includes the
right to join political parties, trade unions, professional and sporting clubs
and non-governmental organisations.
This right supports many other rights, such
as the rights to freedom of expression, religion, assembly and political rights.
right to freedom of expression extends to the communication of information
or ideas through any medium, including written and oral
communications, the
media, public protest, broadcasting, artistic works and commercial
advertising.
encompasses expression that may be regarded as deeply offensive and insulting,
although such expression may be restricted
in accordance with the limitation
clause in article 19(3) and article 20 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political
The right to freedom of assembly protects the right of individuals and groups to
meet and engage in peaceful protest and other forms
of collective activity in
1.13 The right to privacy includes respect for informational privacy,
including the right to respect for private and confidential
information,
particularly the storing, use and sharing of such
information.
It also includes
the right to personal autonomy and physical and psychological integrity. The
right extends both to protecting a
person's bodily integrity against compulsory
procedures,
and may obligate
access to opportunities to secure medical
Rights engaged by consequences for breaching the code
1.14 Enforcement of the code of behaviour may engage and limit the right to
liberty (if it resulted in a person being returned to
immigration detention
and/or transferred to a regional processing country); and the rights to social
security and an adequate standard
of living (if non-compliance resulted in a
reduction in social security
If visa cancellation
resulted in a person being separated from their family it may also engage and
limit the right to protection
of the family, which requires the state not to
arbitrarily or unlawfully interfere in family life and to adopt measures to
the family.
Further, if
the penalty for non-compliance was regarded as being ‘criminal’
under international human rights law, it
would also engage criminal process
1.15 The right to liberty prohibits the arbitrary and unlawful deprivation of
The notion of
'arbitrariness' includes elements of inappropriateness, injustice and lack of
predictability. Accordingly, any detention
must be lawful as well as reasonable,
necessary and proportionate in all of the circumstances. Detention that may
initially be necessary
and reasonable may become arbitrary over time if the
circumstances no longer require detention. In this respect, regular review must
be available to scrutinise whether the continued detention is lawful and
non-arbitrary. The right to liberty applies to all forms
of deprivations of
liberty, including immigration detention – both in Australia and in a
regional processing country. With
respect to the latter, Australia owes human
rights obligations to all persons subject to their jurisdiction or within their
Rights Committee has found, on multiple occasions, that Australia has exercised
effective control over immigration detention
operations at offshore regional
processing centres, such as in Nauru, and therefore owed human rights
obligations to persons detained
1.16 The right to social security recognises the
importance of adequate social benefits in reducing the effects of poverty and
an important role in realising many other economic, social and cultural
rights, in particular the right to an adequate standard of
living and the right
The right to an
adequate standard of living requires that the State party take steps to ensure
the availability, adequacy and accessibility
of food, clothing, water and
housing for all people in its
1.17 If visa cancellation led to immigration
detention for a protracted
the consequences of
breaching this visa condition may be considered so severe as to constitute a
'criminal' penalty for the purposes
of international human rights law. If so,
this would mean that the relevant provisions, which empower the minister to
cancel a visa
and re-detain a person who has not complied with a visa
must be shown to be
consistent with the criminal process guarantees set out in articles 14 and 15 of
the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, including the right
not to be tried twice for the same
and the right to be
presumed innocent until proven guilty according to
Assessment of the limitation on rights
1.18 Most of the above rights may be subject to permissible limitations where
the limitation is prescribed by law, pursues a legitimate
objective, is
rationally connected to that objective and is a proportionate means of achieving
that objective.
1.19 As this legislative instrument is exempt from disallowance, a statement
of compatibility with human rights is not required to
Consequently, there is
no assessment of the compatibility of the code with human
Quality of law test
1.20 Human rights standards require that interferences with rights must have
a clear basis in law (that is, they must be prescribed
by law). To meet the
quality of law test, the law must be 'accessible to the persons concerned and
formulated with sufficient precision
to enable them... to foresee, to a degree
that is reasonable in the circumstances, the consequences which a given action
and to regulate their
1.21 The code of behaviour ‘contains a list of expectations about how
[a person] will behave at all times while in
Australia’.
expectations are drafted in ambiguous terms and appear to potentially encompass
a broad range of behaviours. For instance,
the code provides that a person
‘must not take part in, or get involved in any kind of criminal behaviour
in Australia’.
The minister previously advised (in relation to the 2024
iteration of the code) that the code ‘gives the Government the ability
respond to unacceptable behaviour, prior to the escalation of behaviours which
could result in criminal matters and subsequent
cancellation’.
previous advice indicates that a person may be regarded as having breached the
code of behaviour for engaging in ‘criminal
behaviour’ even where
they have not been convicted of or charged with a crime. Another expectation
provides that a person must
not ‘harass, intimidate or bully any other
person or group of people’ or engage in any ‘anti-social or
activities that are inconsiderate, disrespectful or threaten the
peaceful enjoyment of other members of the community’. The
departmental form required to be used to sign the code states that the terms in
the code ‘take their ordinary meanings’
and provides some examples
that indicate that this expectation, in particular, may encompass a very broad
range of conduct.
For example,
harassing a person includes persistently or continually disturbing or irritating
another person; bullying a person includes
‘making threats, spreading
rumours, attacking someone physically or verbally, or excluding someone from a
group or place on
purpose’; and anti-social activities include
‘damaging property, spitting or swearing in public or other actions that
other people might find
offensive’.
Based on these
examples, it appears that a person could be regarded as breaching the code for
attending a lawful public protest that
was perceived by some people as
disruptive or for swearing in public, even if the swearing was not directed to a
particular person
but rather used in everyday speech to add emphasis or
reinforce a statement.
1.22 The full range of
behaviours or actions that
may be encompassed by these expectations remains unclear as does the threshold
or standard of proof that
would be applied to assess a breach of the
expectations in the code. For example, what standard is applied to assess
whether a person’s
actions or expression is deemed offensive to others,
noting that causing offense to another person is inherently subjective. It is
also not clear how a person will be found to have breached the code,
particularly where it does not involve the authorities (such
as committing a
crime or not cooperating with the department). For instance, it is unclear how
the department will become aware of,
and verify, allegations of bullying,
particularly if this is in a private context and not in a workplace or online.
The use of broad
and ambiguous terms in the code raises concerns that the
conditions are not sufficiently precise to enable visa holders to understand
what is expected of them and in what circumstances a breach is likely to occur.
1.23 Noting that the consequences of breaching the
code may be severe (involving potentially the loss of liberty), it is important
that visa holders understand how the expectations are to be interpreted, applied
and enforced so that they may regulate their conduct.
The visa cancellation
powers in the
Migration Act
confer a broad discretion on the minister,
authorising them to cancel a visa if they are satisfied that the holder has not
with a visa condition.
It is unclear what standard of proof must be met in order for the minister to be
satisfied that a visa condition has been breached,
and in what circumstances the
minister will elect to exercise their discretion to cancel a visa. Noting the
minister’s previous
advice in 2024 that the code has never been relied on
to cancel any subclass 050 BVE since 2010, it appears unlikely that clarity
to these matters has arisen out of practice. As noted by the United Nations (UN)
Human Rights Committee, laws should not confer
'unfettered discretion on those
charged with their execution' and should indicate 'with reasonable clarity the
scope and manner of
exercise of the relevant discretion conferred on the public
authorities'.
1.24 Noting the breadth of the minister's discretion and the vague and
open-ended nature of the expectations set out in the code of
behaviour, there
appears to be a risk that the code of behaviour may not satisfy the quality of
Legitimate objective and rational connection
1.25 While the objective underpinning this instrument is not explicitly set
out in the explanatory materials, the stated objective
in relation to the 2024
code was ensuring the ongoing safety of the Australian community. The minister
previously advised that the
expectations in the code are intended to draw a visa
holder’s attention to behaviours that are matters of ongoing social
and the code was introduced to provide a ‘messaging tool’
supplemented by the
character cancellation
The official
departmental form required to be used to sign the code states that the code was
introduced to ‘make sure that
people who are granted a bridging visa
behave appropriately while in the Australian
community’.
1.26 In general terms, ensuring community safety may be capable of
constituting a legitimate objective under international human rights
However, a legitimate objective must also be necessary and address an issue of
public or social concern that is pressing and
substantial enough to warrant
limiting human rights. In this regard, it is unclear whether such a pressing and
substantial concern
exists warranting the rights-limiting measures in the code,
particularly noting that some of the conduct to which the code applies
already subject to civil penalties or criminal offences.
1.27 It is unclear whether non-citizens on a BVE who are subject to PIC 4022
have been shown to be more likely to engage in concerning
behaviours and so
present some specific or heightened risk to community safety beyond the overall
risk of criminal or anti-social
activity that exists in the community generally.
Further, noting the minister’s previous advice that the code itself has
been relied on to cancel any Subclass 050 BVEs between 1 July 2010 and 30
April 2024, it is not possible to assess the effectiveness
of the code in
regulating a non-citizen’s behaviour and so promoting community
The lack of reliance on
the code also raises the question as to whether the code remains necessary. This
is particularly so given
the numerous other powers under the
Migration Act
cancel visas and monitor the behaviour of BVE holders, such as through the
imposition of mandatory reporting
conditions.
Migration Act
Migration Regulations
have undergone substantial legislative amendment
since this requirement was established in 2013. Notwithstanding these
legislative
amendments, the code has remained in substantially the same form.
While the explanatory statement accompanying the 2024 legislative
stated that the code of behaviour was extended for 12 months ‘pending
further consideration and
this review does
not appear to have been undertaken. Indeed, the minister previously advised the
committee that the department intended
to evaluate the code ‘from a policy
and operational perspective’ before it self-repealed on 31 March 2025.
However, the
explanatory statement accompanying this instrument states that no
external consultation was undertaken as the instrument replicates
and maintains
the code of behaviour in the same form as previously approved under the 2024
instrument. It states that:
The existing Code of Behaviour appropriately reflects the expectations of the
Australian Government and the community in relation
to the behaviour of
non-citizens released from immigration detention on a Bridging E visa. As such,
no additional consultation was
considered necessary in relation to this
instrument.
1.28 Without a comprehensive review of the code of behaviour and an
evaluation of its effectiveness, particularly in light of the
substantial
legislative amendments that have been made since the code was first introduced
in 2013, and having regard to the current
socio-political context, it is not
possible to conclude that the code is necessary and addresses a contemporary
pressing and substantial
social concern, or that the code is likely to be
effective to achieve the objective of community safety.
Proportionality
1.29 A key aspect of
whether a limitation on a right can be justified is whether the limitation is
proportionate to the objective
being sought. In this respect, it is necessary to
consider several factors, including whether a proposed limitation is
sufficiently
circumscribed; whether it is accompanied by sufficient safeguards;
and whether any less rights restrictive alternatives could achieve
stated objective. Another relevant factor in assessing whether a measure is
proportionate is whether there is the possibility
of oversight and the
availability of review.
1.30 As outlined above, the breadth of the
minister's discretion and the vague and open-ended nature of the expectations
the code of behaviour raise concerns that the measure may not be
sufficiently circumscribed. International human rights law jurisprudence
provides that laws conferring discretion or rule-making powers on the executive
must indicate with sufficient clarity the scope of
any such power or discretion
conferred on competent authorities and the manner of its
This is because,
without sufficient safeguards, broad powers may be exercised in such a way as to
be incompatible with human rights.
In this regard, it remains unclear in what
circumstances the minister will exercise their discretion to not require a
person to sign
the code of
In relation to the
2024 code of behaviour, the minister advised that approximately 71 per cent of
unauthorised maritime arrivals
in Australia who are on a BVE are currently
subject to the code of behaviour
requirement.
However, as raised
at the time, it is not clear whether this percentage reflected the exercise of a
discretion by the minister to
not require a person to sign the code, or that the
remaining BVE holders were not required to satisfy the PIC 4022 requirement. The
most recent statistics released by the Department of Home Affairs indicates a
slight decrease in the total number of unauthorised
maritime arrivals on BVEs
(9,203), but the statistics do not specify the proportion of BVE holders that
are required to sign a code
Questions therefore
remain as to whether the measure is sufficiently circumscribed and whether the
minister’s discretionary
power to not require a BVE holder to sign a code
of behaviour provides any safeguard value in practice.
1.31 Further, as discussed above, several of the expectations in the code are
drafted in broad and ambiguous terms, making it difficult
to discern how these
expectations will be interpreted, applied and enforced in practice. It remains
unclear how a person’s
compliance with the code is monitored in practice,
particularly in relation to behaviour that is not unlawful under Australian law
and may occur in a private context (for example, excluding someone from a group
or disturbing a neighbour when talking loudly with
others inside a private
also not clear what standard
of proof is applied to assess whether the breach in
fact occurred. If the department determined that a person has breached the code,
as stated in the code of behaviour, a person’s ‘income support may
be reduced or ceased’ or their ‘visa may
be cancelled’. If a
person’s visa is cancelled, they ‘may be taken into immigration
detention’ and ‘may
be transferred to a regional processing
The use of the
word ‘may’ in the code indicates that a particular consequence may
or may not be imposed on a BVE holder
for breaching the code, at the discretion
of the department/minister. Previous ministerial advice indicated that the code
had not been relied on to cancel a person’s visa and there was no
record of any bridging visa holder having had their visa
cancelled in relation
to a breach of the code being removed to a regional processing country. The
minister further advised that the
department ‘did not have the capacity to
report on any breaches of condition 8566 [the code of behaviour requirement]
may have occurred that did not lead to visa cancellation’, meaning
that it could not report any reductions in income support
payments (provided
through the Status Resolution Support Service Program or SRSS) that may have
occurred as a response to a person
breaching the code as an alternative to visa
cancellation action.
There is no
information in the explanatory statement accompanying this instrument as to
whether in the preceding year BVE holders
have breached the code of behaviour
and if so the resulting consequences (namely visa cancellation, detention and/or
reduction in
income support). Without this information, it is not possible to
assess whether the code is being interpreted and enforced in a proportionate
manner. For instance, if a person’s income support was reduced as a
consequence of non-compliance with the code, because it
is not clear how a
reduction would be calculated and whether an affected person would still be able
to meet their basic needs, it
cannot be concluded that such enforcement activity
would constitute a proportionate limit on the rights to social security or an
adequate standard of living.
1.32 As to whether there is a less rights restrictive way of achieving the
stated objective, if the stated purpose of the code is
to make BVE holders aware
of the behaviour that is expected of them while living in the community, it is
not clear why the code must
be enforceable in order to achieve this objective,
particularly if it has not been used to cancel a person’s visa, and if the
powers to cancel a visa or undertake other enforcement activity exist elsewhere
in the migration legislative framework. It appears
that the provision of the
information set out in the code to BVE holders in any other non-enforceable form
(for example, a letter)
would fulfil the same function of drawing the matters
contained within to their attention.
1.33 As to the availability of review, the minister previously advised that a
decision by a delegate of the minister to refuse to
grant a subsequent Bridging
visa or to cancel a Bridging visa (including on the basis of breaching the visa
condition to comply with
the code if the person signed it) is subject to merits
review and judicial review. The minister stated that only judicial review
available for decisions made personally by the minister. The availability of
merits review in some instances assists with the
proportionality of the measure.
However, judicial review in Australia represents a limited form of review in
that it allows a court
to consider only whether the decision was lawful (that
is, within the power of the relevant decision maker). The court cannot undertake
a full review of the facts (that is, the merits), as well as the law and policy
aspects of the original decision to determine whether
the decision is the
correct or preferable decision. Further, it is not clear that a decision to
impose the condition that a visa
holder must sign the code of behaviour is
itself reviewable.
1.34 Having regard to the breadth of the minister's discretion to impose and
enforce the code of behaviour, and the vague and open-ended
nature of the
expectations set out in the code, there is a risk that the code of behaviour may
not satisfy the quality of law test.
Noting that the code has remained in
substantially the same form since its introduction in 2013 and has not been
subject to any comprehensive
evaluation or review, it is not possible to
conclude that the code remains necessary, particularly in light of substantial
to the migration legislation framework during that period; addresses
a contemporary pressing and substantial social concern; or is
likely to be
effective to achieve the objective of community safety. As to proportionality,
the measure does not appear to be sufficiently
circumscribed or accompanied by
adequate safeguards, and there appears to be a less rights restrictive
alternative to achieving the
stated purpose of the code. As such, there is a
significant risk that the imposition of the code of behaviour, and corresponding
enforcement action, may constitute an impermissible limit on multiple human
rights, including the rights to liberty, social security,
an adequate standard
of living and protection of the family.
1.35 In relation to criminal process rights, as it is not clear whether
non-compliance with the code has resulted in a person’s
cancelled and consequent immigration detention (noting that the minister
previously advised that this had not occurred
as of 30 April 2024), it is not
possible to properly assess whether these rights are limited with respect to
this instrument and
if so whether the limitation is permissible.
Committee view
1.36 The committee notes that requiring certain Subclass 050 (Bridging
(General)) visa holders to sign an enforceable code of behaviour
engages and
limits numerous rights and that enforcement of the code (which may include visa
cancellation, potential immigration detention
and reduction in income support
payments) may result in the limitation of further human rights.
1.37 The committee notes that this instrument repeals and replaces the
previous legislative instrument, which was made in 2024. The
committee notes
that it raised numerous human rights concerns in relation to the code when it
was first introduced in 2013 and again
in 2024 when the code was extended for a
further 12 months, pending further consultation and review. In its consideration
2024 iteration of the code of behaviour, the committee concluded that it
had not been established that the measure was compatible
with multiple human
rights. The committee recommended that in the event the minister enforces the
code, that the minister consider
the committee’s concerns, and human
rights implications of the instrument. The committee further recommended that
of the code of behaviour requirement closely consider the
committee’s comments. However, the committee notes with concern that
instrument replicates the 2024 code of behaviour without any consultation or
apparent review, which is contrary to the government’s
prior commitment.
The explanatory statement accompanying this instrument does not refer to the
committee’s previous comments
or implement the committee’s previous
recommendations, including that a statement of compatibility with human rights
be prepared
for the legislative instrument, noting the numerous human rights
engaged and limited. As the code of behaviour specified in this
legislative
instrument replicates the 2024 code of behaviour, the committee’s previous
human rights concerns remain relevant.
The committee makes recommendations based
on legal advice and the human rights considerations of this instrument. The
expectation
is that these are taken seriously, and the committee is disappointed
that they have not been addressed.
1.38 The committee considers that it is not clear that the code satisfies the
quality of law test (as many of the terms used are vague
and it is unclear when
a person may engage in behaviour that would breach the code). As to legitimate
objective, the committee considers
that, as no information has been provided to
demonstrate that these BVE holders present a particular risk to community
is not clear that the measure is directed towards a legitimate
objective, which is pressing and substantial enough to warrant limiting
It is also not clear that the code remains necessary, having regard to the
numerous other powers under the
Migration Act
to cancel visas and monitor the
behaviour of BVE holders, and the fact that the migration legislation framework
has undergone significant
amendment since the code was introduced in 2013. The
committee notes that without comprehensive review of the code, including an
evaluation as to its effectiveness, it is not possible to conclude that the code
is effective to achieve the stated objective. The
availability of other
enforcement powers in the
Migration Act
also raises questions as to why the code
of behaviour is required to be enforceable, noting that the provision of the
information
in the code of behaviour to BVE holders itself may be a less rights
restrictive way of achieving the objective of making BVE holders
aware of the
government’s behaviour expectations. The committee further notes that the
measure does not appear to be sufficiently
circumscribed or accompanied by
sufficient safeguards. The committee therefore considers that there is a risk
that the imposition
of the code of behaviour, and corresponding enforcement
action, may constitute an impermissible limit on multiple human rights. The
committee notes that this reflects the committee’s previous conclusions in
2013 and 2024.
1.39 Further, the committee reiterates its expectation that legislative
instruments that are exempt from disallowance should include
a statement of
compatibility with human rights where the measure engages and limits human
rights, particularly where the committee
has previously raised concerns in
relation to the measure.
Suggested action
1.40 The committee reiterates its previous recommendations with respect to
the code of behaviour, namely that:
(a) in the event the minister enforces the code, that the minister consider
the committee’s concerns, and human rights implications
of the instrument;
(b) that a statement of compatibility with human rights be prepared in
relation to this legislative instrument, noting the numerous
human rights
engaged and limited.
1.41 The committee also recommends that the code of behaviour be reviewed,
including an evaluation of the effectiveness of the code
in achieving the stated
objective. Such a review should closely consider the committee’s comments
and be made publicly available
on completion.
committee draws these human rights concerns to the attention of the minister and
the Parliament.
Mr Josh Burns MP
This entry can be cited as:
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights, Migration (Public Interest
Criterion 4022—Code
of Behaviour) Instrument 2025,
Report 3 of
; [2025] AUPJCHR 21.
Section 4 provides that the
code of behaviour specified in Schedule 1 of the instrument is approved for the
Subclass 050 (Bridging
(General)) visa.
See, Migration Regulations
1998, clause 050.225 of Schedule 2. Section 195A of the Act provides the
minister with a personal and
non-compellable power to grant a visa of any class
to a person in immigration detention, if the minister thinks it is in the public
interest to do so.
Migration Act 1958
section 195A.
Migration Regulations 1998,
Schedule 4, Part 1, PIC 4022.
Schedule 1.
Schedule 1.
Schedule 1.
Migration (Code of Behaviour
for Public Interest Criterion 4022) Instrument (LIN 24/031) 2024. See
Parliamentary Joint Committee
on Human Rights,
(15 May 2024) pp. 55–65 and
(24 July 2024) pp. 25–44.
Explanatory statement
accompanying the Migration (Code of Behaviour for Public Interest Criterion
4022) Instrument (LIN 24/031)
2024, [7] and [9].
The Migration Amendment
(Bridging Visas – Code of Behaviour) Regulation 2013 [
F2013L02102
established the requirement for PIC 4022, and the Code of Behaviour for Public
Interest Criterion 4022 – IMMI 13/155 [
F2013L02105
specified the text of the code of behaviour itself. See, Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights, Migration Amendment (Bridging
Visas – Code of
Behaviour) Regulation 2013 [
F2013L02102
and Code of Behaviour for Public Interest Criterion 4022 – IMMI 13/155 [
F2013L02105
2, 4 and 7 of the 44th Parliament
See, Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights, Migration Amendment (Bridging Visas – Code of
Behaviour) Regulation 2013
F2013L02102
and Code of Behaviour for Public Interest Criterion 4022 – IMMI 13/155 [
F2013L02105
Report of the 44th Parliament
(June 2014) pp. 90–96. The
committee has also expressed concern regarding other similar codes of behaviour.
See, Parliamentary
Joint Committee on Human Rights,
Migration Amendment
(Bridging Visa Conditions) Regulations 2021
[F2021L00444],
(16 June 2021) pp. 50–75 and
(4 August 2021) pp. 66–108.
Migration (Code of
Behaviour for Public Interest Criterion 4022) Instrument (LIN 24/031) 2024.
Explanatory statement
accompanying the Migration (Code of Behaviour for Public Interest Criterion
4022) Instrument (LIN 24/031)
2024, [7] and [9].
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights, Migration (Code of Behaviour for Public Interest
Criterion 4022) Instrument (LIN
24/031) 2024,
(24 July 2024) pp.25–44.
Explanatory statement
accompanying the Migration (Code of Behaviour for Public Interest Criterion
4022) Instrument (LIN 24/031)
In the course of the
committee’s examination of the Migration (Code of Behaviour for Public
Interest Criterion 4022) Instrument
(LIN 24/031) 2024, the minister advised
that, at 31 May 2024, 7,024 out of 9,892 BVE holders were required to satisfy
PIC 4022 and
the code of behaviour (that is, approximately 71 per cent of
unauthorised maritime arrivals in Australia who were on a BVE at the
subject to the code of behaviour requirement). The minister further advised that
3,908 (55 per cent) of those persons subject
to the code were nationals of Sri
Lanka and Iran, indicating that the code of behaviour criterion has a
disproportionate impact on
people of certain national backgrounds. The most
recent statistics similarly reflect a disproportionate impact on people of
national backgrounds, particularly Sri Lanka and Iran. See Department of
Unauthorised
Maritime Arrivals on Bridging E visa
(6 February 2025).
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, articles 2 and 26. Article 2(2) of the International
Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights also prohibits discrimination
specifically in relation to the human rights contained in the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
UN Human Rights Committee,
General Comment 18: Non-discrimination
Althammer v Austria
UN Human Rights Committee Communication no. 998/01 (2003) [10.2]. The prohibited
grounds of discrimination are race, colour, sex,
language, religion, political
or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status.
Under 'other status'
the following have been held to qualify as prohibited
grounds: age, nationality, marital status, disability, place of residence within
a country and sexual orientation. The prohibited grounds of discrimination are
often described as 'personal attributes'. See Sarah
Joseph and Melissa Castan,
The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights: Cases, Materials
and Commentary
edition, Oxford University Press, Oxford,
2013, [23.39].
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 22.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 19.
UN Human Rights Committee,
General comment No. 34: Article 19: Freedoms of opinion and expression,
CCPR/C/GC/34 (2011) [11] and
[38]. Article 19(3) of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights provides that the right to freedom of expression
may be subject to restrictions that are necessary to protect the rights or
reputations of others, national security, public order,
or public health or
morals. Article 20 also places limits on freedom expression by prohibiting any
advocacy of national, racial or
religious hatred that constitutes incitement to
discrimination, hostility or violence.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 21, UN Human Rights Committee,
Comment No 25: Article 25 (Participation in public affairs and the right to
[8]. The Committee notes that citizens take part in the conduct of
public affairs, including through the capacity to organise themselves.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 17.
MG v Germany
UN Human Rights Committee Communication No. 1428/2006 (2008) [10.1]. The
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities also
protects the right to
respect for physical and mental integrity on an equal basis with others and the
right to be provided with quality
health care on an equal basis with others,
including on the basis of free and informed consent. See Articles 17 and 25.
Additionally,
article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights and article 15 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities prohibits subjecting a person to medical or scientific
experimentation without their free consent (an aspect of the
prohibition against
torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment).
Llantoy-Huamán v Peru
, Human Rights Committee Communication No.
1153/2003 (2005) [6.4]. In this case, the refusal by a public sector doctor to
act in accordance
with the applicant's decision to terminate her risky pregnancy
was unjustified, and amounted to a violation of article 17 of the
International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
In the course of the
committee’s examination of the Migration (Code of Behaviour for Public
Interest Criterion 4022) Instrument
(LIN 24/031) 2024, the minister advised that
the code had not been relied on to cancel any subclass 050 BVEs between 1 July
and 30 April 2024. The minister stated that as no visas have been cancelled
for breach of the code, no individuals have had Status
Resolution Support
Service (SSRS) financial support withdrawn because of a visa cancellation, but
that the department cannot report
any reductions in SRSS payments that may have
occurred as a response to a person breaching the code as an alternative to visa
cancellation
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, articles 17 and 23; and the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, article 10.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 9.
Nabhari v Australia,
UN Human Rights Committee Communication No. 3663/2019 (2024) [7.5]. For
earlier comments by the UN Human Rights Committee on this
issue, see UN Human
Rights Committee,
Concluding observations on the sixth periodic report of
, CCPR/C/AUS/CO/6 (2017) [35].
See most recently
Nabhari v Australia
, UN Human Rights Committee Communication No.
3663/2019 (2024) [7.15] and
M.I. et al. v Australia
, UN Human Rights
Committee Communication No. 2749/2016 (2024) [9.8].
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, article 9. See also, UN Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights Committee,
General Comment No. 19: The Right to Social
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, article 11. See also, UN Human Rights
General Comment No. 3: Article 2 (Implementation at a national
. The Committee explains that 'implementation [of the ICCPR] does not
depend solely on constitutional or legislative enactments, which
in themselves
are often not per se sufficient. The Committee considers it necessary to
draw the attention of States parties to the
fact that the obligation under the
Covenant is not confined to the respect of human rights, but that States parties
have also undertaken
to ensure the enjoyment of these rights to all individuals
under their jurisdiction'.
It is unclear if all
persons whose visas are cancelled for breach of these conditions could be
detained for long periods in light
of the High Court decision in
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
that held it was unconstitutional to detain people in immigration detention
where there is no real prospect of the removal of the
person from Australia
becoming practicable in the reasonably foreseeable future.
Migration Act 1958
subsections 116(1)(b)
(3). Note that
section 118
provides that the
powers to cancel a visa under
sections 116
(general power to cancel) and 133C
(Minister's personal powers to cancel visas on
section 116
grounds) are not
limited, or otherwise affected, by each other.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 14(7).
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, article 14(2).
Human Rights
(Parliamentary Scrutiny) Act 2011
When the committee examined
the 2013 version of the Code of Behaviour, it observed that ‘it would be
good practice for all
legislative instruments, particularly where they limit
human rights to be accompanied by a statement of compatibility, irrespective
whether such a statement is technically required’. See, Parliamentary
Joint Committee on Human Rights,
Report of the 44th Parliament
(February 2014) pp. 110–111.
The legislative instrument
that amended the
Migration Regulations 1994
in 2013 to establish the original
requirement to sign a code of behaviour was subject to disallowance and so
included a statement
of compatibility with human rights. That statement of
compatibility identified that providing for an enforceable code of behaviour
engaged and may limit numerous human rights. See Migration Amendment (Bridging
Visas—Code of Behaviour) Regulation 2013,
of compatibility
Gorzelik and others v
, European Court of Human Rights (Grand Chamber), Application No.
44158/98 (2004) [64]. See also,
Pinkney v Canada,
United Nations (UN)
Human Rights Communication No.27/1977 (1981) [34].
Schedule 1.
See Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights, Migration (Code of Behaviour for Public Interest
Criterion 4022) Instrument (LIN
24/031) 2024,
(24 July 2024) p. 32.
Department of Home Affairs,
(accessed 17 March 2025).
Department of Home Affairs,
(accessed 17 March 2025).
Migration Act 1958
subsections 116(1)(b)
General Comment No. 27,
Freedom of Movement (Art. 12)
(1999) [13];
Rotaru v Romania
Court of Human Rights (Grand Chamber), Application No. 28341/95 (2000) [61].
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights, Migration (Code of Behaviour for Public Interest
Criterion 4022) Instrument (LIN
24/031) 2024,
(24 July 2024) pp. 32–34.
Department of Home Affairs,
(accessed 17 March 2025).
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights, Migration (Code of Behaviour for Public Interest
Criterion 4022) Instrument (LIN
24/031) 2024,
(24 July 2024) p. 34.
For example conditions 8401
and 8402 require the visa holder to report at a specified time and place and/or
to report weekly at
a Visa and Citizenship Office. See Department of Home
visa details and conditions
(accessed 18 March 2025).
Explanatory statement
accompanying the Migration (Code of Behaviour for Public Interest Criterion
4022) Instrument (LIN 24/031)
Explanatory statement, p.
Hasan and Chaush v
, European Court of Human Rights App No.30985/96 (2000) [84].
Migration Regulations 1998,
Schedule 4, Part 1, PIC 4022 provides that either the applicant has signed a
code of behaviour that
has been approved by the minister (by way of this
instrument) and is in effect for the subclass of visa; or the minister
not require the applicant to sign a code of behaviour that is in
effect for the subclass of visa’.
The minister advised that,
at 31 May 2024, 7,024 BVE holders were subject to the requirement to satisfy PIC
4022 (the code of behaviour).
The minister stated that the grant of a BVE with
the application of the code reflected the cohort of persons who arrived in
by boat, without a valid visa (‘unauthorised maritime
arrivals’). Departmental statistics released on 30 May 2024 indicated
that, at March 2024, there were 9,892 unauthorised maritime arrivals with a BVE
in Australia. See Parliamentary Joint Committee on
Human Rights, Migration (Code
of Behaviour for Public Interest Criterion 4022) Instrument (LIN 24/031) 2024,
(24 July 2024) p. 38.
See Department of Home
Unauthorised
Maritime Arrivals on Bridging E visa
(6 February 2025).
Schedule 1.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights, Migration (Code of Behaviour for Public Interest
Criterion 4022) Instrument (LIN
24/031) 2024,
(24 July 2024) p. 41. It was noted at this time that it was
unclear why the department could not report on any reductions in SRSS
(noting that the SRSS appears to be a service delivered by the department).
See, Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights, Migration Amendment (Bridging Visas – Code of
Behaviour) Regulation 2013
F2013L02102
and Code of Behaviour for Public Interest Criterion 4022 – IMMI 13/155 [
F2013L02105
Report of the 44th Parliament
(June 2014) pp. 90–96; and
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights, Migration (Code of Behaviour for
Public Interest Criterion
4022) Instrument (LIN 24/031) 2024,
(24 July 2024) pp. 25–44. The committee notes that it
has also expressed concern regarding other similar codes of behaviour.
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights,
Migration Amendment (Bridging
Visa Conditions) Regulations 2021
[F2021L00444],
(16 June 2021) pp. 50–75 and
(4 August 2021) pp. 66–108.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (232 KB)
PDF format (169 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter