URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBSD/2025/78.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:14:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1) 2025 - Commentary on Ministerial Responses [2025] AUSStaCSBSD 78 (29 October 2025)
Chapter 2 :
Commentary on ministerial responses
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1) 2025327
Committee comment
Commentary on ministerial responses
2.1 This chapter considers the responses of ministers to matters previously
raised by the committee.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1)
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1)
seeks to extend the operation of the Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation’s compulsory questioning and detention warrant
framework in
Division 3 of
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act
for a further 18 months.
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2)
seeks to make the Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation’s compulsory questioning powers framework permanent; expand
the scope of adult questioning and detention
amend the eligibility
and termination provisions for prescribed authorities; impose additional
reporting requirements to ensure that
the Attorney-General is made aware of any
relevant information regarding the conduct of questioning under a compulsory
questioning
warrant; require that post-charge questioning occur only before a
prescribed authority who is a retired judge; and
to enable a further
review of the framework by the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and
House of Representatives on 23 July 2025
Bill status
Received Royal Assent on 5 September 2025
Undue trespass on personal rights and liberties—coercive
Parliamentary scrutiny—deferral and removal of
2.2 On 5 September 2025, the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation
Amendment Bill (No. 1) 2025
received royal assent. The bill, now Act, amended
section 34JF of the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act
(ASIO Act) to extend the sunsetting date applying to Division 3 of Part
III of that Act for 18 months (from 7 September 2025 until
7 March 2027).
2.3 Division 3 of Part III of the ASIO Act sets out a framework for the
exercise of compulsory questioning powers by the Attorney-General,
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation (ASIO) and other entities. The
compulsory questioning framework has been the subject
of regular commentary by
the committee with respect to extensive public and academic commentary relating
to the significant extent
to which the regime trespasses on rights and liberties
and a perception that it contains insufficient
safeguards.
Indeed, such
commentary is consistent with the significant scrutiny concerns raised by the
committee, many of which have been maintained
and reiterated in relation to the
various iterations of the regime over
Briefly, scrutiny concerns
expressed by the committee include:
issuing of warrants by the Attorney-General
, rather than
by a judicial officer, and under a broad discretionary
• the availability of
coercive powers
exercisable under a
warrant, which appear to depart from the traditional approach to restraining and
detaining persons;
• safeguards relating to the
independence of
authorities
, including the lack of fixed terms for prescribed authorities,
the fact that a prescribed authority is both appointed and terminated
Attorney-General, and the fact that prescribed authorities are not limited to
persons from bodies with a tradition of maintaining
robust independence from the
executive, such as former members of the
• that persons due to appear before a prescribed authority for
questioning may be subjected to
mandatory screening procedures
limited safeguards,
including no protections where a request by a police
officer may be unreasonable or the person subject to the procedure may have
understanding a
abrogation of the privilege against self-incrimination
without a corresponding protection in the form of a derivative use
• the existence of
significant matters in delegated legislation
including in
non-disallowable delegated legislation
, such as the
inclusion of the written statement of procedures to be followed in the exercise
of authority under a questioning warrant
in non-disallowable delegated
legislation;
reversal of the evidential burden of proof
, in relation to
matters that do not appear to be peculiarly within the defendant’s
knowledge, which impact a person’s
common law right to be presumed
innocent until proven
• the use of
strict liability offences
, for custodial
• the reliance on
broad discretionary powers
, including in
relation to the issuing of warrants by the Attorney-General and the
determination of authorisation of financial assistance
in respect of the subject
of a questioning warrant’s appearance before a prescribed
2.4 The committee’s initial examination of the bill, in
Digest 4 of 2025
, requested advice from the minister as to why it was both
necessary and appropriate to defer the sunset period applying to Division
Part III of the ASIO Bill.
2.5 The committee, in
Scrutiny Digest 4 of 2025,
also considered the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2)
(ASIO Bill No. 2), which seeks to permanently retain the compulsory
questioning powers framework in Division 3 of Part III of the
ASIO Act by
removing section 34JF of the ASIO
The ASIO Bill No. 2 was
referred to the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security
(PJCIS) for inquiry and report
on 27 August 2025 and is currently before the
Parliament.
Minister for Home Affairs’
2.6 The minister advised that extending the sunset date of the framework by
18 months is necessary and appropriate to ensure that
ASIO, the PJCIS, and
Parliament have sufficient time to consider the proposed reforms to the
compulsory questioning framework contained
in ASIO Bill No. 2 and the operation
and effectiveness of this framework more broadly.
2.7 The minister’s response further advised that deferral of sunsetting
for up to 18-months would ensure sufficient time for
the PJCIS to consider, at
the minister’s request, the legislated thresholds applying to ASIO’s
questioning framework
– including whether a statutory requirement to
assess necessity and proportionality in the issuing criteria for questioning
warrants should be implemented as a further safeguard. It was further noted that
the PJCIS recommended the bill’s passage as
soon as practicable to provide
sufficient time to finalise its in-depth review of these powers.
2.8 The minister advised that ASIO’s compulsory questioning powers are
a necessary and important tool to enable ASIO to collect
intelligence concerning
espionage, foreign interference and politically motivated violence, which are
subject to strict legal controls
and safeguards directed to ensuring their
targeted and judicious use. The minister noted that ASIO has used these powers
since their introduction in 2003, which reflects their targeted nature
and bespoke utility.
2.9 The minister highlighted the requirement that ASIO and the
Director-General must comply with ministerial guidelines when considering
applying for, or acting in execution of, a questioning
which apply important
safeguards. For example, the guidelines require that the collection and analysis
of information must be appropriate
and proportionate to the nature and
likelihood of the threat, and that inquiries and investigations must be
undertaken with as little
intrusion on individual privacy as is reasonably
required, consistent with the performance of ASIOs functions. Further, the
noted that the Attorney-General may only issue questioning warrants if
satisfied of particular matters concerning the utility of
the questioning and
availability of other methods.
2.10 The minister noted that extending the compulsory questioning framework
would also continue its extensive safeguards, oversight
mechanisms, and
accountability measures, including oversight by independent prescribed
authorities, the right to contact and have
a lawyer present, and limitations
around the use and disclosure of questioning material that go to protecting the
right to a fair
trial. It was further noted that the framework has been subject
to parliamentary and independent review, leading to the deferral
sunsetting on five occasions.
Committee comment
2.11 The committee thanks the minister for this response.
2.12 While noting the minister’s advice, the committee reiterates that
the compulsory questioning powers framework in Division
III of the ASIO Act
confers extraordinary powers on Australia’s intelligence services that
significantly trespass on a wide
range of rights and liberties considered
foundational in a liberal democracy. In this context, the committee considers
a temporary extension of the compulsory questioning powers framework,
such as this legislation deferring sunsetting for 18 months,
requires a robust
and compelling justification. Although the committee notes the stated intention
to ensure adequate time for parliamentary
scrutiny of the proposed amendments to
render the framework permanent, it does not consider such reasons alone provide
justification for continuing these extraordinary powers.
2.13 In this regard, the committee notes that the minister’s response
provides little additional information, compared to that
provided by the
explanatory memorandum, to justify why the compulsory questioning powers are a
necessary and important tool to collect
intelligence about espionage, foreign
interference and politically motivated violence. The committee recognises the
government’s
constitutional responsibility for making security
assessments, along with its access to sensitive intelligence and security
However, the committee’s scrutiny of the continuation of this
framework with respect to the scrutiny concerns identified by
the committee over
a number years would have been materially assisted by more detailed information
the unprecedented challenges and cumulative level
of potential harm that is said to justify the maintenance of such intrusive and
extraordinary powers for a further 18 months.
2.14 In particular, the committee notes the minister’s advice that the
limited use of the compulsory questioning framework,
on 19 occasions, is
indicative of its judicious application. However, in the absence of more
detailed information regarding the frequency,
patterns, and recency of both the
use of these powers and applications for their use, the committee is unable to
form a conclusive
view as to whether the powers have, in fact, been exercised
judiciously.
2.15 The limited additional information provided by the minister, including
in relation to safeguards taken into account in the committee’s
assessment, is not considered to fully address the committee’s
longstanding concerns regarding the use of these powers.
As a consequence, the
committee also cannot conclusively determine whether their continued operation
is sufficiently justified in
the current circumstances, particularly given the
extent to which they depart from established principles of the rule of law and
infringe upon traditional rights and liberties.
2.16 The committee reiterates its significant scrutiny concerns in
relation to the deferral of sunsetting under the Act, but in light
of the fact
that the Act has now passed both Houses of the Parliament, the committee makes
no further comment.
This entry can be cited as:
Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1) 2025
Scrutiny Digest 6 of
; [2025] AUSStaCSBSD 78.
Pursuant to section 34ZE
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
, persons as
young as 16 are subject to the regime with some modification to the rules.
Various provisions. The
committee draws senators’ attention to these provisions pursuant to Senate
standing order 24(1)(a)(i)
and (v). Schedule 1, item 1,
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 1) 2025
. Schedule 1, item 1
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 2025
Nicola McGarrity, Rishi
Gulati and George Williams, ‘Sunset Clauses in Australian Anti- Terror
See Senate Standing
Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Digest 7 of 2020
(10 June 2020), pp. 1–14;
Digest 9 of 2020
(6 August 2020), pp. 7–38. See, also,
Digest 5 of 2019
Digest 3 of 2019
Digest 6 of 2018
, pp. 13–16;
Digest No. 7 of 2016
No. 8 of 2016
relating to the Counter Terrorism Legislation Amendment (Foreign Fighters) Bill
, pp. 31–33;
report relating to the Counter Terrorism Legislation Amendment (Foreign
Fighters) Bill 2014
Digest relating to the Counter Terrorism Legislation Amendment (Foreign
Fighters) Bill 2014
Digest No. 4 of 2006
, pp. 9–11;
Report of 2006
Digest No. 4 of 2003
, pp. 5–10;
Report of 2002
Digest No. 4 of 2002
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
section 34B
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
, various provisions
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
section 34AD
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
section 34D
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
subsection 34GD(3)
See, for example,
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
subsections 34GD(4)
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
section 34GF
See, for example,
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
Senate Standing Committee
for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Digest 4 of 2025
(27 August 2025), pp. 31–34.
Senate Standing Committee
for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Digest 4 of 2025
(27 August 2025), pp. 27–34.
The minister responded to
the committee’s comments in a letter dated 3 September 2025. A copy of the
letter is available on
the committee’s
(see correspondence included with the committee’s assessment of this
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation (Statement of Procedures) Instrument 2025.
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
subsections 34BA(1)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (136 KB)
PDF format (143 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter