URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUPJStaCPW/2019/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:09:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Parliamentary Joint Standing Committee on Public Works (46th Parliament) --- "Navy Capabilty Infrastructure Sub-program - PP 528/2019" [2019] AUPJStaCPW 12 (2 December 2019)
Conduct of the inquiry
Need for the works
Options considered
Scope of the works
Community consultation
Consultation with traditional owners
Consultation with local contractors
Consultation on environmental matters
Cost of the works
Committee comment
4. Shoalwater Bay Training Area Remediation Project,
4.1 The Department of Defence (Defence) seeks approval from the Committee to
proceed with the proposed Shoalwater Bay Training Area
(SWBTA) Remediation
4.2 The purpose of the project is to remediate selected elements of the
facilities and engineering infrastructure within the SWBTA
to ensure its
environmental sustainability is commensurate with introducing new capabilities
to the Australian Defence
4.3 The estimated cost of the project is between $105 to 140 million
(excluding GST).
4.4 The project was referred to the Committee on 18 September 2019.
Conduct of the
4.5 Following referral, the inquiry was publicised on the Committee’s
website and via media release.
4.6 The Committee received two submissions and one confidential submission. A
list of submissions can be found at Appendix A.
4.7 On 15 November 2019, the Committee conducted a public and in-camera
hearing. A transcript of the public hearing is available on
Committee’s website.
Need for the works
4.8 The project proposes to deliver works at numerous sites across the SBWTA,
which covers over 274,000 hectares of land and 180,000
hectares of sea and is
located approximately 80km north of Rockhampton in Central
Queensland.
Defence outlined the
need for the project as follows:
The SWBTA is one of Australia’s key training areas for domestic and
international Defence training, and is the Australian Defence
Force’s only
national location capable of supporting significant amphibious operations. It
can be accessed by air, sea and
land, and is of sufficient size to accommodate
large-scale training manoeuvres supported by air and naval gunfire. Given the
and expected future use of the training area, there is a need to
remediate the existing infrastructure to:
continued environmental sustainability for Australian Defence Force
▪ meet the Department of Defence’s obligations to manage the area
for both military operations and environmental conservation.
▪ increase Defence’s Amphibious training capability.
▪ enhance the quality and longevity of existing infrastructure for air,
sea and land manoeuvres into the
4.9 Defence noted that it had undertaken comprehensive master planning, site
investigations, stakeholder consultation, whole-of-life
cost analysis and design
development to establish the capital facilities and infrastructure works
required under the project to address
Options considered
4.10 Defence outlined four options for the project:
▪ Option 1—take no action
▪ Option 2—full scope
▪ Option 3—priority scope elements
▪ Option 4—rationalised
remediation
4.11 Defence considered option 4, rationalised remediation, as representing
the ‘best value for money solution to the Commonwealth
to address the need
from a whole-of-life
perspective’.
This was based
on the ‘benefits of addressing most scope elements to varying degrees and
effectively managing the impacts of
reduced design solutions’ and allowing
‘flexibility to progressively re-invest savings into the “below the
items” and realise the full scope option (option 2) as far as the
project’s budget will
4.12 Priorities for re-investment are:
▪ the camp facilities at Williamson Camp
▪ further development of the Urban Operations Training Facility
▪ greater pavement strengthening at Williamson
Scope of the works
4.13 Defence outlined the scope of the project as follows:
▪ Urban Operations Training Facility Upgrade
▪ Williamson Camp Development
▪ Williamson Airfield Upgrade
▪ Field Hospital Site Upgrade
▪ Dingo Drive Remediation
▪ Freshwater Beach Landing Site Remediation
▪ Remediation of Selected Creek
4.14 Defence provided a summary of the above scope components, as
upgrading the urban operations training facility to support brigade-size
training activities of approximately 2,000 soldiers; upgrading
the Williamson
Airfield to support increased heavy-lift aircraft operations; upgrading an
existing clearing to be used as an aeromedical
evacuation landing zone and field
hospital site; developing a camp to support up to 1,000 personnel; upgrading
Dingo Drive to support
two-way military traffic; and upgrading up to 60 creek
crossings throughout the training
was interest at the public hearing in understanding more about the Urban
Operations Training Facility Upgrade. The proposal
for the construction of the
original Urban Operations Training Facility was approved by the Committee in
2006. This facility consisted
of repurposed shipping containers, which Defence
explained are now ‘beginning to corrode’ and will soon be
4.16 Defence noted that the design life of these containers would not have
been ‘much over the 10-year mark, given that they
were just a
containerised option’.
However, the building structures at the upgraded facility will have a design
life of 50 years, ‘so this one is planned on enduring
for many decades
without the need to come back ... there is certainly no thought that it would
need to be replaced, because it has
a long design life, given the nature of the
construction’.
4.17 The new construction will be ‘a combination of tilt-up concrete
panel construction, colorbond roof sheeting, colorbond
industrial style
sheds—all materials that are very hardy and low-maintenance that can be
left out in the bush without a lot
maintenance’.
confirmed that the managing contractor would be responsible for the disposal of
the containers, with ‘a rate of 70
per cent of the waste from the project,
including the containers’, going through recycling centres as opposed to
4.18 Another matter raised at the public hearing was the Williamson Airfield
Upgrade—in particular, whether there would be land
available if there was
a future need to extend the runway. Defence responded that there was land
available but a runway extension
is not proposed, because it can already
accommodate a fully laden C-17
Globemaster.
4.19 On the Williamson Camp Development, Defence further explained the
rationale behind providing austere accommodation for Defence
personnel. It was
noted that field forces ‘deploy to an environment where they have to
bring, where possible, their own equipment
in order to sustain them during that
deployment’.
‘shower bags on hooks, zero-discharge, low-water-usage toilets and the
like’ achieve both environmental and
4.20 There was also interest in understanding more about the Dingo Drive
Remediation, noting that, over recent years, the Committee
had approved a number
of medium works relating to road maintenance at the SWBTA. Of particular
interest was whether there was an
overall plan for road maintenance at the site
in the long term. Defence responded that:
that sort of routine maintenance would continue, even after we do this work on
Dingo Drive ... Whilst the piecemeal fixing of Dingo
Track will definitely be
reduced, there is still quite an extensive road network throughout that range
where there will be maintenance
work required ... But there is a plan. That is
planned maintenance that they
consultation
4.21 Defence noted it had developed a ‘community consultation and
communications strategy that recognises the importance of
providing local
residents and other interested stakeholders an opportunity to provide input
into, or raise concerns relating to,
4.22 Defence provided a detailed summary of key stakeholder
consultations,
and stated that,
as at the time of the above consultation processes, the feedback received from
those consulted had ‘generally
4.23 Concerns raised during these consultation activities had been addressed
as follows:
▪ Defence’s approach towards maximising opportunities for, and
developing the capabilities of local industry, including
the Darumbal People
− Defence’s response detailed how the Managing Contractor would
be facilitating this through its Local Industry Capability
− Defence outlined the policies, agreements and contractual mechanisms
that it will utilise to maximise work and development
opportunities for the
Darumbal People
▪ Defence’s approach towards Heritage Management during
construction
− Defence confirmed that a Management Plan would be developed by the
Managing Contractor
▪ the impact of construction activities on training exercises on
− Defence confirmed that elements of some training activities would
need to be relocated to other training areas throughout
Australia to enable
construction activities to occur. Defence confirmed that construction activities
are currently not expected to
impact Exercise
▪ the impact of the Project’s proposed Williamson Airfield
Upgrade on the usage of Rockhampton Airport
− Defence advised parties the proposed Williamson Airfield Upgrade is
not anticipated to reduce Defence’s use of Rockhampton
Airport, and that
each airfield is used for different purposes to support Training Activities at
▪ the impact of the Project’s proposed hard-standing areas on
water flow and sediment runoff into the Great Barrier Reef
Marine Park
− Defence confirmed that water flow and sediment runoff were considered
when developing the design solution and that, by design,
the hardstand will
decrease sediment runoff. As a result, the construction of permanent hardstands
will have a positive environmental
4.24 As to whether the works were likely to cause any disruption to the
surrounding community outside the base, Defence observed that
construction sites
were well within the boundary of the base, ‘so they are a long distance
from any locals’.
4.25 Defence also provided further information on the scheduling of major
training exercises and construction activities in terms
of the SWBTA:
ADF Headquarters Joint Operations Command, Joint Capabilities Group, realise
that Shoalwater Bay is our premier, category 1 training
area. They’ve now
commenced their planning cycle for Talisman Sabre. They’ve concluded that
they’re not going to
be utilising Shoalwater Bay and that the upgrades are
the most important thing over the next 31 months ... That’s being worked
out at the moment, and it will allow Shoalwater Bay to be upgraded and
remediated as per the
submission.
Consultation with traditional
4.26 There was interest at the public hearing in further exploring
Defence’s consultation with the Traditional Owners of the
Darumbal People. Defence confirmed that the Darumbal people had been determined
as the native title holders—‘in
all the consultation we’ve
done, it’s been only the Darumbal people that have identified themselves
as that. We’ve
worked with them
accordingly’.
4.27 Defence also noted that it had undertaken extensive cultural heritage
investigations with the Darumbal people, and reinforced
its commitment to
‘partner with the Darumbal people in protecting their culturally
significant places and to promote their
people and businesses through
contracting
opportunities’.
has an Indigenous land use agreement in place with the Darumbal people, which
allows them to have first right of refusal
for contracts that are below
$250,000, with the expectation that there will be ‘employment
opportunities for either Darumbal
businesses or individual Darumbal people on
the project’.
Consultation with local
contractors
4.28 In terms of whether the proposed works would be carried out by local
contractors where possible, Defence confirmed that the major
contractors, the FK Group and Downer joint venture, had ‘signed themselves
up to an 80 per cent local participation
rate for the construction side of the
project’, with the contractors having undertaken ‘quite extensive
industry consultation
with key industry bodies in the
The managing
contractor for the project is contractually required to comply with a local
industry capability plan.
4.29 As Defence further noted:
Since the start of the project, we have done intensive investigations into the
market and have met with in excess of 200 local subcontractors,
got a sense of
their capabilities and what they can do, fed that into the design, so we have
designed certain materials in certain
processes that suit what the local
industry can do. In addition to that, we have also shaped the packaging plans of
the procurement
strategy so that we are creating subcontract work packages that
are of a size that will suit the general spread of that capability
and capacity
of the local
Consultation on environmental
4.30 Defence’s consultation on environmental matters at the SWBTA was
another matter of interest at the public hearing, noting
that the training area
is located within a World Heritage Area.
4.31 Defence noted it had ‘robust environmental policies and management
strategies in order to ensure that it meets its responsibility
Shoalwater Bay during military
activities’.
For example,
Great Barrier Reef Outlook Report 2019
stated that:
Defence has a mature environmental management system in place that has operated
very effectively for many years. The memorandum of
understanding between Defence
and the Marine Park Authority continues to underpin strong working relationships
and information sharing,
and instils a high level of confidence that defence
activities are environmentally sustainable in the
4.32 Defence
emphasised that its engagement with groups with environmental interests in the
SWBTA indicated they are ‘satisfied
that we have robust measures in
4.33 As to whether there were any outstanding issues relating to consultation
on environmental matters relating to the SWBTA, Defence
confirmed that:
The environmental management efforts we’ve had on this project, and in
previously managing Shoalwater Bay, have been quite
extensive, just in
recognition of the significance of the area, in particular the wetlands that are
recognised under the Ramsar Convention,
so a lot of consultation has been done
with all parties
4.34 Defence
explained that all relevant parties and jurisdictions with an interest in
Shoalwater Bay are on the Environmental Advisory
Committee, with Defence being
‘active on that committee to make sure that we’re actually meeting
all the obligations
that we need
4.35 As to how the environmental sustainability of the various facilities at
the SWBTA has been monitored in the past and will be
monitored in the future,
Defence explained that:
before any exercise, the condition is well documented ... so that over the years
whenever there has been a major exercise ... what
happens is that the range is
returned to what it looked like before you started ...
Whilst this work is heavily focused on doing environmental controls, it’s
not to say that we haven’t very closely monitored
the environment out
there up to date. But it’s been done in a piecemeal fashion, which has,
over the years, been expensive.
By doing this investment now, that piecemeal
repair work will be very much
terms of any PFAS contamination issues associated with the site, Defence
responded that there had been some investigations
done, with:
...some low levels identified in the Williamson Airfield area – very low
levels sitting at about 0.14 milligrams per kilo in
terms of concentration. That
sits on the lowest band of PFAS contamination. Within that band we are permitted
to re-use the material
as part of the works so that it doesn’t have to
Cost of the works
4.37 The project has an estimated cost of between $105 to 140 million
(excluding GST). This includes management and design fees, construction
information and communications technology, furniture, fittings, equipment,
contingencies and a provision for
escalation.
4.38 Defence noted that an increase in operating costs is expected as a
result of the proposed works, ‘due to the addition of
new facilities and
infrastructure which will increase the associated facilities maintenance,
cleaning and utilities
4.39 The department provided further details on project costings in its
confidential submission and during an in-camera hearing.
4.40 The Committee is satisfied that the costings provided for the project
have been adequately assessed by the proponent entity.
Committee comment
4.41 The Committee did not identify any issues of concern with the proposal
and is satisfied that the project has merit in terms of
need, scope and
4.42 Having regard to its role and responsibilities contained in the
Public Works Committee Act 1969
, the Committee is of the view that the
project signifies value for money for the Commonwealth and constitutes a project
that is fit
for purpose, having regard to the established need.
Recommendation 4
4.43 The Committee recommends that the House of Representatives resolve,
pursuant to
Section 18(7)
Public Works Committee Act 1969
is expedient to carry out the following proposed works: Shoalwater Bay Training
Area Remediation Project.
4.44 Proponent entities must notify the Committee of any changes to the
project scope, time, cost, function or design. The Committee
also requires that
a post-implementation report be provided within three months of project
completion. A report template can be found
on the Committee’s website.
Submission 1
Submission 1
Submission 1
Submission 1
For more detail on these
options, see Defence,
Submission 1
Submission 1
Submission 1
Submission 1
For more detail on each of
these scope components, see Defence,
Submission 1
Brigadier Matt Galton,
Director General, Capital Facilities and Infrastructure Branch, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 1.
Brigadier Galton, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 3.
Brigadier Galton, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 3.
Martin Macdonald, Managing
Contractor Representative, Shoalwater Bay Training Area Remediation Project, FK
Gardner and Downer EDI
Works Joint Venture,
Transcript of Evidence
November 2019, p. 3.
Brigadier Galton, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 5.
Brigadier Galton, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 3, p. 6.
Lieutenant Colonel Jonathan
Pollard, Project Director, Shoalwater Bay Training Area Remediation Project,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 6.
Lieutenant Colonel Pollard,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 6.
Brigadier Galton, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 4.
, pp. 4-14.
Brigadier Galton, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 5.
Mr Sheldon Kidd, Director,
Simulation, Training Areas and Health Knowledge Management, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 5.
Brigadier Galton, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 2.
Brigadier Galton, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 1.
Brigadier Galton, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 2.
Brigadier Galton, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 4.
Brigadier Galton, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 1.
Mr Macdonald, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 5.
Brigadier Galton, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 1.
Great Barrier Reef Marine
Park Authority,
Great Barrier Reef Outlook Report 2019
, Commonwealth of
Australia, 2019, p. 201. (See Brigadier Galton, Defence, on the
Great Barrier
Reef Outlook Report 2019
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November
2019, p. 1.)
Brigadier Galton, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 2.
Brigadier Galton, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 2.
Brigadier Galton, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 2.
Brigadier Galton, Defence,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019, p. 4.
Mr McDonald, FK Gardner and
Downer EDI Works Joint Venture,
Transcript of Evidence
, 15 November 2019,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (183 KB)
PDF format (583 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter