URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/AUSStaCSBAD/2016/212.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:13:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Crimes Legislation Amendment (International Crime Cooperation and Other Measures) Bill 2016 [2016] AUSStaCSBAD 212 (30 November 2016)
Crimes Legislation Amendment (International Crime Cooperation and Other Measures) Bill 2016
Reversal of evidential burden of proof
Schedule 1, items 6 and 95
Right to liberty
Schedule 3, items 1 and 2
Broad delegation of administrative powers
Schedule 4, item 3
Retrospective application
Schedule 4, item 6
Retrospective application
Schedule 5, item 4
Delegation of legislative power—incorporation of external material into the law
Schedule 8, item 15, new subsection 40P(2)
Crimes Legislation Amendment (International Crime
Cooperation and Other Measures) Bill 2016
This bill seeks to amend a number of Acts relating to the criminal law, law
enforcement and background checking to:
• ensure Australia can respond to requests from the International
Criminal Court and international war crimes tribunals;
• amend the provisions on proceeds of crime search warrants, clarify
which foreign proceeds of crime orders can be registered
in Australia and
clarify the roles of judicial officers in domestic proceedings to produce
documents or articles for a foreign country,
and others of a minor or technical
• ensure magistrates, judges and relevant courts have sufficient
powers to make orders necessary for the conduct of extradition
proceedings;
• ensure foreign evidence can be appropriately certified and extend
the application of foreign evidence rules to proceedings
in the external
territories and the Jervis Bay Territory;
• amend the vulnerable witness protections in the
• clarify the operation of the human trafficking, slavery and
slavery-like offences in the
Criminal Code Act 1995
• amend the reporting arrangements under the
War Crimes Act
• ensure the Australian Federal Police’s alcohol and drug
testing program and integrity framework is applied to the entire
workforce and
clarify processes for resignation in cases of serious misconduct or
corruption;
• provide additional flexibility regarding the method and timing of
reports about outgoing movements of physical currency, allowing
departing Australia to report cross-border movements of physical currency
electronically;
• include the Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission in
the existing list of designated agencies which have direct
access to financial
intelligence collected and analysed by AUSTRAC enabling it to access AUSTRAC
information;
• clarify use of the Australian Crime Commission’s prescribed
alternative name; and
• permit the AusCheck scheme to provide for the conduct and
coordination of background checks in relation to major national
House of Representatives on 23 November 2016
Reversal of evidential burden of
Schedule 1, items 6 and 95
Items 6 and 95 of Schedule 1 introduce new exceptions
to existing offences. Subsection 13.3(3) of the
Criminal Code Act 1995
provides that a defendant who wishes to rely on any exception, exemption,
excuse, qualification or justification bears an evidential
burden in relation to
that matter.
While the defendant bears an evidential burden (requiring the defendant to
raise evidence about the matter), rather than a legal burden
(requiring the
defendant to positively prove the matter), the committee expects any such
reversal of the evidential burden of proof
to be justified. The
committee’s consideration of the appropriateness of a provision which
reverses the burden of proof is
assisted if it explicitly addresses relevant
principles as set out in the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences,
Infringement Notices and Enforcement Powers
(see in particular pp
As neither the statement of compatibility nor the explanatory memorandum
address this issue the committee seeks a justification from
the Minister as to
why the items propose to reverse the evidential burden of proof which addresses
the principles set out in the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences,
Infringement Notices and Enforcement Powers
(at pp 50–52).
Pending the Minister’s reply, the committee draws Senators’
attention to the provisions, as they may be considered to
trespass unduly on
personal rights and liberties, in breach of principle 1(a)(i) of the
committee’s terms of reference.
Schedule 3, items 1 and 2
Items 1 and 2 of Schedule 3 provide that where a person has been released on
bail and a surrender or temporary surrender warrant for
the extradition of the
person has been issued, the magistrate, judge or relevant court
order that the person be committed to prison to await surrender under the
The explanatory materials state that the provision gives courts the power to
remand the person into custody (pp 23 and 162–163).
However, the provision
is more than an enabling provision; it is phrased as an obligation to commit the
person to prison, without
any discretion as to whether this is appropriate in
all the circumstances.
The explanatory memorandum states that it is appropriate that the person be
committed to prison to await surrender as an extradition
country has a period of
two months in which to effect surrender and ‘[c]orrectional facilities are
the only viable option for
periods of custody of this duration’ (p. 162).
The statement of compatibility states that without this provision the police
need to place the person in a remand centre, for a period of up to two months,
yet remand centres ‘do not have adequate
facilities to hold a person for
longer than a few days’ (p. 24). The statement of compatibility also
states that the power
to remand a person pending extradition proceedings is
necessary as reporting and other bail conditions ‘are not always
to prevent individuals who wish to evade extradition by
absconding’. It also goes on to provide that the
Extradition Act
makes bail available in special circumstances which ensures that
‘where circumstances justifying bail exist, the person will
not be kept in
prison during the extradition process’ (p. 24). However, it is unclear how
these existing bail provisions fit
with the amendments which require the
magistrate, judge or court to commit a person, already on bail, to prison to
await surrender
under the warrant.
The committee seeks the Minister’s advice as to why the provisions
enabling a magistrate, judge or court to commit a person
to prison to await
surrender under an extradition warrant are framed as an obligation on the court
rather than a discretion and how
the existing bail process under the
Extradition Act 1988
fits with the amendments proposed by this
Pending the Minister’s reply, the committee draws Senators’
attention to the provisions, as they may be considered to
trespass unduly on
personal rights and liberties, in breach of principle 1(a)(i) of the
committee’s terms of reference.
Broad delegation of administrative
Schedule 4, item 3
Item 3 of Schedule 4 proposes repealing
Foreign Evidence Act 1994
and replacing it with a new, substantially
similar, provision. The section as it currently stands provides that the
Attorney-General
and an authorised officer can certify that a specified document
or thing was obtained as a result of a request made to a foreign
country by or
on behalf of the Attorney-General. This certificate provides prima facie
evidence to a court of the matters stated
in the certificate. Subsection (3) (as
it currently stands) defines an authorised officer for this purpose as a person
who is a Senior
Executive Service (SES) level employee (or acting SES) in the
Attorney-General’s Department. The bill proposes to omit subsection
(and allow the Attorney-General to issue the evidentiary certificate). The
explanatory memorandum (at p. 164) states that the
reason for the omission of
subsection (3) is that it is now proposed to rely on the delegation of the
Attorney-General’s power
Law Officers Act
. The explanatory memorandum states that a delegation under this
provision ‘would be to a person with an appropriate level of
not below the executive level, who has a close involvement in the matters to be
certified’.
Law Officers Act 1964
relevantly provides
that the Attorney-General can delegate his or her powers to any person holding
the office specified in the instrument
of delegation. There does not appear to
be any limit on the level or type of employee who may be specified in the
instrument of delegation.
The committee has consistently drawn attention to legislation that allows
delegations to a relatively large class of persons, with
little or no
specificity as to their qualifications or attributes. Generally, the committee
prefers to see a limit set either on
the scope of powers that might be
delegated, or on the categories of people to whom those powers might be
delegated. The committee’s
preference is that delegates be confined to the
holders of nominated offices or to members of the Senior Executive Service.
Where broad delegations are made (either through the bill or through other
legislation), the committee considers that an explanation
of why these are
considered necessary should be included in the explanatory memorandum.
In this case, the explanatory memorandum (at p. 164) states the reason for
removing the limit on the power of delegation as allowing
‘reliability, flexibility and promptness, with sufficient
oversight’. However, it is not clear to the committee why
proposes removing any detail regarding the office-holder who may be delegated
this important function. The explanatory memorandum
states that the delegation
will not be to persons below the executive level, yet there is nothing on the
face of the bill (or in
Law Officers Act 1964
restricts the delegation in this way.
The committee seeks the Minister’s detailed justification for the
rationale for removing the limit on the delegation of the
Attorney-General’s power to issue an evidentiary certificate and whether
the delegation could be confined on the face of the
legislation to Australian
Public Service employees not below the executive level.
Pending the Minister’s reply, the committee draws Senators’
attention to the provision, as it may be considered to make
rights, liberties or
obligations unduly dependent upon insufficiently defined administrative powers,
in breach of principle 1(a)(ii)
of the committee’s terms of
Retrospective
application
Schedule 4, item 6
Items 1 and 2 of Schedule 4 provide that the
Foreign Evidence Act 1994
applies to proceedings conducted in State or Territory courts in relation to the
external territories and the Jervis Bay Territory,
and ensures that the part of
that Act applying to certain proceeds of crime proceedings will apply to
prescribed external territories.
Item 6 of Schedule 4 provides that these
amendments will apply in relation to proceedings that commence before or after
commencement
of the item.
There is no discussion in the explanatory materials as to whether applying
these amendments to proceedings that occur before the item
commences (which has
a retrospective application) will cause anyone any hardship or detriment.
The committee seeks the Minister’s advice as to whether
retrospectively applying amendments relating to the application of the
Foreign Evidence Act 1994
to proceedings under a law of the external
territories and Jervis Bay causes any person any detriment or hardship.
Pending the Minister’s reply the committee draws Senators’
attention to the provision, as it may be considered to trespass
personal rights and liberties, in breach of principle 1(a)(i) of the
committee’s terms of reference.
Retrospective
application
Schedule 5, item 4
Item 2 of Schedule 5 inserts the word ‘child complainant’ into an
existing provision of the
Crimes Act 1914
, which has the effect of
extending the existing offence of publishing any matter identifying child
witnesses or vulnerable adult
complainants without the leave of the court, to
also cover the publication of information identifying a child complainant. Item
of this Schedule provides that these amendments apply in relation to
proceedings instituted after commencement of the item regardless
of when the
alleged offences were committed. As such, it applies in relation to offences
committed before commencement of the item
(but to proceedings initiated after
commencement). It is not clear to the committee whether, in applying this to
offences that occurred
before commencement and in circumstances where the
existing offence is being extended, this imposes retrospective criminal
The committee seeks the Minister’s advice as to whether applying the
amendments to proceedings instituted after commencement
but relating to offences
that may have been committed before commencement, in circumstances where the
amendments extend an existing
criminal offence, effectively imposes
retrospective criminal liability, and if so, what is the justification for doing
Pending the Minister’s reply the committee draws Senators’
attention to the provision, as it may be considered to trespass
personal rights and liberties, in breach of principle 1(a)(i) of the
committee’s terms of reference.
Delegation of legislative power—incorporation
of external material into the law
Schedule 8,
item 15, new subsection 40P(2)
This item amends a regulation making power in the
Australian Federal
Police Act 1979
(the AFP Act). The item adds a new subsection 40P(2) which
will allow regulations made for the purposes of sections 40LA, 40M and
the AFP Act (relating to drug and alcohol testing of AFP appointees) to
incorporate any matter contained in a standard published
by, or on behalf of,
Standards Australia as in force at a particular time or as in force from time to
At a general level, the committee will have scrutiny concerns where
provisions in a bill allow the incorporation of legislative provisions
reference to other documents because such an approach:
• raises the prospect of changes being made to the law in the absence
of Parliamentary scrutiny;
• can create uncertainty in the law; and
• means that those obliged to obey the law may have inadequate access
to its terms (in particular, the committee will be concerned
where relevant
information, including standards, accounting principles or industry databases,
is not publicly available or is available
only if a fee is paid).
The explanatory memorandum (at p. 179) states that the drug and alcohol
testing provisions in sections 40LA, 40M and 40N are applicable
only to AFP
appointees, and not the general public. Further, the explanatory memorandum
notes that the relevant standards as in force
from time to time will be
available on request to AFP appointees and ‘the standards are available to
the public for purchase
from SAI Global Limited’. Finally, the explanatory
memorandum states that allowing the AFP to incorporate the relevant standards
for alcohol and drug testing as in force from time to time allows the AFP to
keep pace with scientific and technology advances and
ensures that it is able to
employ the most appropriate procedures for conducting drug testing.
The committee notes this explanation and welcomes the indication that the
relevant standards incorporated into the law will be available
to AFP appointees
on request. However, the committee has scrutiny concerns where material
incorporated into the law is not freely
and readily available to all those who
may be interested in the law. In this case, for example, potential AFP recruits
may be interested
in the relevant standards. In any event, as a matter of
principle, any member of the public should be able to freely and readily
the terms of the law. As noted above, the committee’s scrutiny concerns in
relation to the incorporation of external
material into the law will be
particularly acute where incorporated materials are not freely and readily
available and therefore
persons interested in or affected by the law may have
inadequate access to its terms. In this case, the relevant standards will
be available to members of the public if a fee is paid to SAI Global Ltd.
The issue of access to material incorporated into the law by reference to
external documents such as Australian and international
standards has been an
issue of ongoing concern to Australian parliamentary scrutiny committees. Most
recently, the Joint Standing
Committee on Delegated Legislation of the Western
Australian Parliament has published a detailed report on this issue:
to Australian Standards Adopted in Delegated Legislation
(June 2016). This
report comprehensively outlines the significant scrutiny concerns associated
with the incorporation of material
by reference, particularly where the
incorporated material is not freely available.
Noting the above comments, the committee requests the Minister’s
further advice as to whether material incorporated by reference
under proposed
subsection 40P(2) can be made freely available to all persons interested in the
Pending the Minister’s reply, the committee draws Senators’
attention to the provision, as it may be considered to delegate
legislative
powers inappropriately, in breach of principle 1(a)(iv) of the committee’s
terms of reference.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (91.5 KB)
PDF format (134 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter