URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLPT/2009/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:44:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Legal Services Commissioner v Dempsey [2009] QLPT 20 (27 August 2009)
Legal Services Commissioner v Dempsey [2009] QLPT 20 (27 August 2009)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Legal Services Commissioner v Dempsey
[2009] LPT 20
LEGAL SERVICES COMMISSIONER
(applicant)
PAUL ANTHONY DEMPSEY
(respondent)
9435 of 2008
Legal Practice Tribunal
PROCEEDING:
Discipline Application
DELIVERED ON:
27 August 2009
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
1-4 June 2009
PRACTITIONER PANEL MEMBER
Ms C Endicott
LAY PANEL MEMBER
Dr M Steinberg
Tribunal finds the respondent guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct in
relation to charges 1 and 5.
Tribunal finds the respondent guilty of professional misconduct in relation to
charges 2,3,4 and 6.
CATCHWORDS:
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – LAWYERS – COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE
– PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT – GENERALLY –
where respondent
charged with failing to meet or maintain a reasonable standard of competence and
diligence and dishonestly or recklessly
misleading his client – where
respondent allegedly failed to advise client of right to obtain independent
legal advice in relation
to entering into a litigation funding agreement and
amendments to a client agreement – whether respondent guilty of
professional
misconduct or unsatisfactory professional conduct
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – LAWYERS – COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE
– PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT – TRUST MONEY –
where respondent
charged with dishonestly or recklessly drawing funds from trust account to
general account when he was not entitled
to – where discrepancy between
invoices issued to client and total monies transferred from the
applicant’s litigation
loan account to the respondent’s trust
account – whether respondent guilty of professional misconduct or
unsatisfactory
professional conduct
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – LAWYERS – COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE
– PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT – GENERALLY –
where respondent
charged of misleading the Queensland Law Society in relation to professional
fees and disbursements payable to him
by his client – whether respondent
guilty of professional misconduct or unsatisfactory professional conduct
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – LAWYERS – COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE
– PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT – GENERALLY –
where respondent
charged with charging excessive fees to client in relation to a personal
injuries matter – where matter was
a ‘speculative personal injury
claim’ – where respondent allegedly rendered fees in excess of
permitted prescribed
amount – whether respondent guilty of professional
misconduct or unsatisfactory professional conduct
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – LAWYERS – COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE
– PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT – GENERALLY –
where respondent
charged with preferring his own interests to those of his client – where
respondent allegedly purported to
require his client to waive the benefit of the
“50/50” rule – whether respondent guilty of professional
or unsatisfactory professional conduct
GP Long, SC with BI McMillan for the applicant
PJ Davis, SC with C Ryall C for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
Legal Services Commission for the applicant
Bottoms English Lawyers for the respondent
[1] The Legal Services Commissioner (the “Commissioner”) has brought
a discipline application pursuant to
Legal Profession Act 2007
(“the 2007 Act”) containing six charges against a legal
practitioner, Paul Anthony Dempsey, which relate to two of his
clients, Roma
Simmons and Rafaela Oats.
[2] Mr Dempsey has practised since his admission as
a solicitor on 16 September 1975. He has been in sole practice in Townsville
since January 1983. His practice is known as Dempseys Your Lawyers
(“Dempseys”). Since the late 1980s or early 1990s
his practice has
been almost exclusively in personal injury matters although he has never held
specialist qualifications in that
area. After the arrival in Townsville in
2005-2006 of law firms specialising in personal injury, Shine Lawyers and Carter
he decided to diversify into family law matters. His wife, Jutta
Dempsey, a psychologist, is his Practice Manager.
[3] The Commissioner
alleges that the charges constitute professional misconduct and/or
unsatisfactory professional conduct. The
first four charges concern Roma
Simmons; and the last two Rafaela Oats. Ms Simmons was a family law client and
Mrs Oats a personal
injury client. Ms Simmons was Dempseys’ first family
law client for some four years.
[4] The allegations against Mr Dempsey were
summarised in the applicant’s submissions as:
the respondent is guilty of professional misconduct (or unsatisfactory
professional conduct) in that he:
in a number of respects to reach or maintain a proper standard of competence and
diligence in the conduct of Ms Simmons’
matter when purporting to affect a
change to their client agreement and the way Ms Simmons was billed for the
Dishonestly
or recklessly misled Ms Simmons in various respects regarding the reasons for
and changes to her billing arrangements
and a litigation loan to fund her action
Dishonestly
or recklessly withdrew funds from his trust account on account of fees and
disbursements in the Simmons matter when he
knew or ought to have known he was
not entitled to draw those funds (
Dishonestly
or recklessly misled the Queensland Law Society by representing that certain
invoices had been billed to Simmons when
in fact they had not (
excessive fees to Mrs Oats in breach of s.481C of the
Queensland Law Society
1952 (“the 50/50 Rule”) (
his own interest to those of Mrs Oats in purporting to have her
‘waive’ the 50/50 rule so that he could charge
more for her matter
than he was entitled to charge pursuant to the rule (
The statutory regime
[5] When the conduct complained of occurred it was
governed by the
Legal Profession Act 2004
(“the 2004 Act”). The
charges were all brought under the 2007 Act which came into effect on 1 July
2007 since the transitional
provisions found in s 423 and Part 9 of the
2007 Act apply that Act to the relevant conduct so long as it occurred, as it
1 July 2004.
[6] The onus of
proof is upon the applicant. Section 649 of the 2007 Act provides:
649 Standard of proof
(1) If an allegation of fact is not admitted or is challenged when a
disciplinary body is hearing a discipline application, the body
may act on the
allegation if the body is satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the
allegation is true.
(2) For subsection (1), the degree of satisfaction required varies according
to the consequences of the relevant Australian legal
practitioner or law
practice employee of finding the allegation to be true.
(3) In this section –
Australian legal practitioner
includes a person to whom chapter
4 applies as mentioned in section 417.”
[7] Despite the fact that s 649(2) is not completely reflective of the
principles explained by Dixon J (as his Honour then was) in
Briginshaw v
Briginshaw,
as Mr Davis SC for the
practitioner submitted, the Briginshaw principles apply to the Tribunal’s
assessment of disciplinary
applications.
[8] The conduct which falls
within the meaning of unsatisfactory professional conduct is set out in s 418 of
the 2007 Act which provides:
418 Meaning of unsatisfactory professional
Unsatisfactory professional conduct
includes conduct of an
Australian legal practitioner happening in connection with the practice of law
that falls short of the standard
of competence and diligence that a member of
the public is entitled to expect of a reasonably competent Australian legal
practitioner.”
[9] The meaning of professional misconduct is set out in s 419 of the 2007 Act
which provides:
419 Meaning of professional
Professional misconduct
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of an Australian legal practitioner,
if the conduct involves a substantial or consistent failure
to reach or keep a
reasonable standard of competence and diligence; and
(b) conduct of an Australian legal practitioner, whether happening in
connection with the practice of law or happening otherwise than
in connection
with the practice of law that would, if established, justify a finding that the
practitioner is not a fit and proper
person to engage in legal practice.
(2) For finding that an Australian legal practitioner is not a fit and proper
person to engage in legal practice as mentioned in subsection
(1), regard may be
had to the suitability matters that would be considered if the practitioner were
an applicant for admission to
the legal profession under this Act or for the
grant or renewal of a local practising certificate.”
“Suitability matters” are dealt with in s 9 of the 2007 Act.
[10] Section 420 of the 2007 Act deals with examples of conduct capable of
constituting unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct. It
420 Conduct capable
of constituting unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
The following conduct is capable of constituting unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct –
(a) conduct consisting of a contravention of a relevant law, whether the
conduct happened before or after the commencement of this
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
Statutory Instruments Act 1992
, a contravention in relation to
this Act would include a contravention of a regulation or legal profession rules
and a contravention
in relation to a previous Act would include a contravention
of a legal profession rule under the
Legal Profession Act 2004
(b) charging of excessive legal costs in connection with the practice of
(c) conduct for which there is a conviction for –
(i) a serious offence; or
(ii) a tax offence; or
(iii) an offence involving dishonesty;
(d) conduct of an Australian legal practitioner as or in becoming an
insolvent under administration;
(e) conduct of an Australian legal practitioner in becoming disqualified from
managing or being involved in the management of any
corporation under the
Corporations Act;
(f) conduct of an Australian legal practitioner in failing to comply with an
order of a disciplinary body made under this Act or an
order of a corresponding
disciplinary body made under a corresponding law, including a failure to pay
wholly or partly a fine imposed
under this Act or a corresponding law;
(g) conduct of an Australian legal practitioner in failing to comply with a
compensation order made under this Act or a corresponding
(2) Also, conduct that happened before the commencement of this subsection
that, at the time it happened, consisted of a contravention
of a relevant law or
a corresponding law is capable of constituting unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct.
(3) This section does not limit section 418 or 419.”
Roma Simmons
[11] It is convenient to deal with the charges against Mr
Dempsey relating to Ms Simmons’ matter together.
Charges 1 -
[12] The charges are italicised. The charge and the practitioner’s
response is as follows. Where no response is mentioned,
the allegation was
admitted and therefore taken as proved.
Charge 1: Competence and
representing Roma Simmons in matrimonial matters the respondent failed to meet
or maintain a reasonable standard of competence
and diligence in that
(a) Failed to advise Simmons of her right to obtain
independent legal advice as to entering into a litigation funding
Mr Dempsey denied this allegation.
(b) Made application on behalf of Simmons and obtained litigation loan
funding in the amount of $40,000 notwithstanding his advice
to her that the loan
would be for $30,000.
The respondent admitted that he made application on behalf of Simmons and
obtained litigation loan funding in the amount of $40,000
but denied that he
advised the respondent Simmons that the loan would be for $30,000.
(c) When requiring an amendment to their client agreement, failed to
advise Simmons of her right to obtain independent legal advice
regarding the
Mr Dempsey denied this allegation.
(d) Failed to give effect to the amendment to the client agreement in
writing as required by the said agreement.
Mr Dempsey said he was unable to admit or deny this allegation as it was
unclear and/or confusing.
(e) Attempted to effect an amendment to the client agreement by
Mr Dempsey also said he was unable to deny this allegation because, he said,
it was unnecessarily vague. He relied on his responses
to paras 1.12, 1.13 and
1.14 below to the extent that they were relevant.
PARTICULARS
1.1 At all material times the respondent was an Australian Legal
Practitioner.
1.2 In February 2006, Roma Simmons engaged the respondent to act as her
solicitor in matrimonial matters.
1.3 On 23 June 2006, Simmons entered into a client agreement with the
respondent.
1.4 That agreement provided inter alia:-
“Accounts will be issued monthly.”
“Accounts will be paid at the conclusion of the matter immediately
upon receipt of settlement monies.”
“Estimate total fees of $10-15,000.”
“Any amendments to this agreement must be made in
1.5 In August 2006, the respondent advised Simmons that the terms of the
client agreement had to be changed and she would have to
pay his fees before the
proceedings were determined.
Mr Dempsey denied this allegation.
1.6 On 29 August 2006 the respondent told Simmons that:
(a) The government had changed the way solicitors could claim their money
in family law matters.
(b) That she would have to take out a loan to pay his fees and that he had
made arrangements with a loan company [Impact Capital]
for her to take out a
loan for that purpose.
(c) That the loan would be for $30,000.00.
(d) That if the cost of the proceedings exceeded $30,000 he would bear
that cost over $30,000.
(e) That he would pay any interest payable on the loan.
Mr Dempsey denied all except para 1.6(e).
1.7 On 29 August 2006 Simmons executed a loan application in the presence
of the respondent.
1.8 By letter to Simmons dated 30 August 2006, the respondent
(a) The loan was to be obtained from Impact Capital.
(b) Simmons would not be responsible for any expense, interest or fees
from the advance.
The respondent admitted a letter was sent to Simmons dated 30 August 2006 but
denies it stated “(a) the loan was to be obtained
from Impact
1.9 On 30 August 2006 the respondent submitted to Impact Capital a
litigation loan application on behalf of the respondent for an
1.10 On 30 August 2006 Impact Capital approved the loan to Ms Simmons in
the amount of $40,000.
Mr Dempsey said he was unable to admit or deny the particular because it was
not within his knowledge but otherwise said the loan
documents contain dates and
signatures relevant to the particulars.
1.11 On 29 August 2006, Simmons again executed a trust account authority
which was dated 29 August 2007
This authority
“I, Roma Simmons, authorize Dempsey’s to take their fees as
they are billed.”
Mr Dempsey denied the particular in 1.11 and said that Simmons signed a trust
account authority on 29 August 2006 in his presence.
1.12 By letter to Simmons dated 2 October 2006 the respondent
(a) “I have discovered it is to my advantage to change the client
agreement without in any way impacting on you.”
(b) “With client agreements, a solicitor can do two things, he can
either do an itemized bill along the way as we are doing
and at the end of the
day the total of those bills is what the bill is or he can quote a
(c) “What I propose to do on your file is to change the client
agreement to quote, quoting my professional fee at $30,000 but
as part of the
administration of your file I will continue to send you monthly bills/reports
for the work that is actually done and
at the end of the case, what I am paid
will be only what the total of those bills are. If the bills come to more than
then anything more than the quote I will not be paid. If the bills
come to less than the quote then I will only be paid what the
(d) “The client agreement can only be varied by agreement, so if I
don’t hear from you within 7 days disagreeing with
this proposal then we
will take it that this client agreement is varied on this basis.”
Mr Dempsey admitted these particulars but relied upon the whole letter to put
these passages in context.
1.13 Simmons did not respond to the letter of 2 October 2006 within 7 days
1.14 The respondent did not:-
(a) Advise Simmons of her right to independent legal advice.
(b) Provide for an amendment for the client agreement to be executed by
both parties incorporating the deemed amendment to quote and
the method of
payment of fees.
(c) Sought to rely on Simmons’ silence as the basis for amending the
client agreement.
Mr Dempsey admitted 1.14(b) but denied 1.14(a) and (c).
[13] Charge 2: Mislead client – Complaint of Simmons
the course of representing Roma Simmons in matrimonial matters, the respondent
dishonestly or recklessly misled his client, Roma
Mr Dempsey denied this allegation.
PARTICULARS
2.1 The applicant repeated and relied on particulars 1.1 to 1.6 and 1.11
The respondent relied on his response to those particulars.
2.2 The representations set out in paragraph 1.6(a)-(d) were false and
misleading because, as the respondent knew or ought to have
(a) “The government” had not in fact changed the way
solicitors could claim their money in family law matters; and
(b) By reason of the existing client agreement, there was no obligation on
Simmons to take out a litigation loan.
The respondent denied the particulars in 2.2 and repeated and relied upon his
answers to particulars 1.6(a) to (d). In respect of
2.2(a) and (b) the
respondent admitted the particulars but denied that those matters were said to
2.3 By reason of the matters set out in paragraphs 1.9 and 1.10, the
representation set out in paragraph 1.6(c) was false and misleading.
The respondent denied the particulars in 2.3 and repeated and relied upon
his responses to particulars 1.6(c), 1.9 and 1.10.
[14] Charge 3: Trust Monies – Complaint of Simmons
on 5 October 2006, the respondent, while representing Roma Simmons in
matrimonial matters, dishonestly or recklessly drew funds
from his trust account
to his general account, in purported payment of professional fees owing to him,
when he was not entitled to
draw said funds.
Mr Dempsey denied this allegation.
PARTICULARS
3.1 The Applicant repeated and relied on particulars 1.1 to 1.11
The respondent repeated and relied upon his answers to those
particulars.
3.2 Between 1 September 2006 and 4 October 2006 Impact Capital, at the
request of the respondent or made on his behalf, transferred
sums totalling
$33,000 from Simmons’ loan account to the respondent’s trust
This was denied by the respondent.
3.3 Between 11 May 2006 and 4 October 2006 the respondent issued the
following invoices which were received by Simmons for professional
disbursements; invoice # 1754 dated 11 May 2006; invoice #1938 dated 7 June 2006
and invoice #2383 dated 22 August 2006.
These invoices amounted to
Mr Dempsey said he was unable to admit or deny this particular since it was
not within his means of knowledge.
3.4 On 5 October 2006 the respondent issued Invoice #2682, which purported
to bill Simmons for professional fees in the sum of $30,000.
Simmons did not
receive this invoice.
The respondent denied the particular and said that on 5 October 2006 invoice
#2682 was issued to Simmons for professional fees in
the sum of $30,000.
3.5 On 5 October 2006, the sum of $27,578.85 was drawn from the
respondent’s trust account to his general account in purported
satisfaction of outstanding professional fees and disbursements owed by Simmons
in this matter.
This particular was denied.
3.6 On 5 October the respondent knew or ought to have known that he was
not entitled to draw the amount of $27,578.85 from his trust
(a) Simmons was not advised of the draw downs to the respondent’s
trust account from the Impact Capital loan account, nor did
she receive any
notice of the drawing from the trust account to the general account of the sum
of $27,578.85 on 5 October 2006.
(b) Invoices issued to Simmons between 11 May 2006 and 4 October 2006
amounted to only $2,329.31.
The respondent denied this particular.
3.7 By Invoice #235272910 dated 8 November 2006, the respondent billed
Simmons the sum of $4,224 for professional fees for the period
10 October 2006
to 31 October 2006. Simmons received this invoice.
The respondent admitted this particular but denied that the invoice included
disbursements.
3.8 By Invoice #3204 dated 11 December 2006, the respondent billed Simmons
the sum of $5,907.55 for professional fees and disbursements
for the period 1
November 2006 to 29 November 2006. Simmons received this invoice.
3.9 On a date between 29 November 2006 and 12 January 2007, Simmons
terminated her client agreement with the respondent and engaged
Ruddy Tomlins
Baxter to complete her matrimonial affairs.
3.10 On 12 January 2007, Ruddy Tomlins Baxter sent a facsimile to the
respondent requesting his client file in relation to Simmons’
matrimonial
The respondent admitted that on 12 January 2007 Ruddy Tomlins and Baxter
sent a facsimile to him requesting the file in relation
to Simmons’
matrimonial matter but denied the facsimile requested the respondent to
“transfer to them all monies drawn
from Impact Capital in respect of the
loan” and otherwise says that the facsimile speaks for
3.11 On 15 January 2007, the respondent wrote to Ruddy Tomlins Baxter
advising that the matter appeared to be finalised but that there
was a problem
with the Impact Loan and confirming that his total fees were not
The respondent admitted on 15 January 2007 he wrote to Ruddy Tomlins and
Baxter advising that the file was “literally finished”
“the only thing to be tidied up is the actual payment and that will be
it” and “with respect to the Impact
loan, there is something wrong
there, and that is what I am trying to sort out” and that “our fees
are absolutely not
3.12 On 16 February 2007, Ruddy Tomlins Baxter wrote to the respondent
requesting the balance of the loan money held in his trust
Mr Dempsey said he was not able to admit or deny the particular because he
was not in possession of the letter referred to.
3.13 On 5 March 2007, the respondent wrote to Ruddy Tomlins Baxter stating
that he was only entitled to some $13,860.90 in fees and
that he had been
overpaid the sum of $19,139.10 which he would repay.
The respondent admitted this particular and said that the sum of $13,860.90
was for fees and disbursements.
3.14 On 9 March 2007, the respondent paid to Ruddy Tomlins Baxter on behalf
of Simmons the sum of $19,139.10.
[15] Charge 4: Mislead QLS – Complaint of Simmons
13 March 2007, the respondent dishonestly or recklessly misled the Queensland
Law Society, in relation to the amount of professional
fees and disbursements
payable to him by Roma Simmons in relation to matrimonial matters.
The respondent denied this allegation.
PARTICULARS
4.1 The Applicant repeated and relied on particulars 1.1 to 1.11 and 3.1
to 3.14 above.
The respondent relied upon his responses to those paragraphs.
4.2 On 13 March 2007 Grenville Hughes, an auditor employed by the
Queensland Law Society, conducted an audit of the respondent’s
account pursuant to Section 31 of The Queensland Law Society Act 1952.
4.3 In the course of that audit, the respondent:
(a) Presented to Hughes or caused to be presented to Hughes the following
tax invoices:-
#2682 dated 5 October 2006 in the amount of $30,000 for professional
dated 4 September 2006 in the amount of $3,050.80 for professional fees and
disbursements in the period 7 April to 24 August
dated 12 September 2006 in the amount of $762.30 for professional fees and
disbursements in the period 6 to 13 September 2006;
dated 13 September 2006 in the amount of $155.38 for disbursements.
dated 22 September 2006 in the amount of $646.80 for professional fees in the
period 6 to 13 September 2006;
dated 28 September 2006 in the amount of $517.59 for professional fees and
disbursements in the period 6 to 13 September 2006.
presenting the above invoices, represented to Hughes that those amounts had been
billed to Simmons.
The respondent denied the particulars in 4.3(a) and (b) but admitted that the
invoices referred to
were shown to
Grenville Hughes.
4.4 None of the invoices referred to in paragraph 4.3 above were sent to
or received by Simmons.
The respondent said that he was unable to admit or deny the particular
because those facts were not within his knowledge but said
that if the
bookkeeper had followed the standard book keeping procedures those invoices
would have been sent to and received by Simmons.
4.5 The respondent told Hughes that he relied upon the trust account
authority of 29 August 2006 to draw upon monies held in trust
4.6 The respondent’s representations to Hughes as set out in
paragraph 4.3 above were false and misleading because, as the respondent
ought to have known:
(a) The invoices he presented to Hughes were not invoices which had been
sent to or received by Simmons;
(b) The total amount of the invoices in fact sent to Simmons as at the
date of Hughes’ audit was only $12,460.86.
The respondent denied these particulars.
Findings with regard to Roma Simmons
[16] As was admitted by the respondent,
Ms Simmons engaged him to act as her solicitor in her matrimonial matter in
February 2006
following her separation from her husband. She wrote to him in
that month and then subsequently saw him in his office in Flinders
Townsville on 14 March 2006. During that consultation Mr Dempsey told her that
another lawyer who was present, Cleo, would
be handling her matter. He also
informed her that he was tape recording the meeting and she observed what
appeared to be recording
equipment to the left of his desk. He told her that he
had read her letter and that he would be able to handle her case and that
had good prospects of receiving about 70 per cent of the matrimonial assets. So
far as fees were concerned, he explained that
he would send her a client
agreement which would explain all the costs involved and that he would send her
monthly accounts, but
payment of those accounts would not be required until the
end at settlement. He informed her that he required a copy of her marriage
certificate.
[17] Ms Simmons rang Cleo about her case and in particular
been married in England. Ms Simmons enquired whether she should write to
England to get a copy. Cleo told her she was not
able to speak about her case
because she did not have Ms Simmons’ file and Ms Simmons would have to
speak with Mr Dempsey.
Ms Simmons tried to contact Mr Dempsey but without
[18] The next contact Ms Simmons had with the respondent’s
firm was when she received a letter from Dempseys written by Caroline
18 April 2006 enclosing for her consideration a draft letter that was to be
forwarded to Ms Simmons’ husband. Ms
Simmons telephoned Ms Hay after
receiving the letter and Ms Hay told her she had taken over her matter and they
agreed to meet.
Ms Simmons saw her at Dempseys and Ms Hay told her the reason
the letter was to be sent to her husband and Ms Simmons agreed for
sent. Ms Simmons did not see Mr Dempsey on that day. Following that meeting,
Ms Simmons received a letter from Dempseys
with some credit union statements
that Ms Hay had received from Ms Simmons’ husband. There was no further
correspondence until
[19] In June 2006 Ms Simmons received a
letter dated 15 June 2006 from Mr Dempsey with regard to the costs of her
matter. That letter
provided as follows:
I said to you at the start of the Family Law case, the law in Queensland changed
as of 1 July 1998, in that all solicitors
must now have a cost agreement.
My Cost Agreement is
in duplicate, one copy for you to keep,
and one to be returned to me.
It is a document designed by the government, so it’s a classic
government document which doesn’t mean much to read.
The cost agreement needs to be signed and dated by you, and your signature
witnessed, so if you could do that and send it back to
me, I would appreciate
[20] Ms Simmons received another letter from Mr Dempsey about the client
agreement dated 20 June 2006 which provided as follows:
“It’s time to get things rolling on your
file, and before we can do that, at law I need to issue a Client Agreement.
It should have been sent out to you a long time ago, but we’ve had some
computer problems in the firm and it hasn’t happened,
so I apologize for
If you could have a look at it, and if you’re happy with it, sign it
and then make an appointment to come in and see me and
we can go through and
fill out the forms necessary to get the Application for Property Settlement
The sooner we do this, the better it would be.
I apologise for the delay and trust you understand.”
[21] Mr Dempsey said in evidence that the “cost agreement” referred
to in his letter of 15 June 2009 and the “client
agreement” referred
to in his letter of 20 June 2006 were the same document. That document was
entitled “Speculative
Client Agreement”. He said that, while he
could not specifically remember, he would have sent out both letters together.
He did not give any sensible explanation for sending out two letters with that
document. He signed the Speculative Client Agreement
on 22 June 2006. I infer
that he sent out a signed copy of the Speculative Client Agreement to Ms Simmons
on or before that date.
[22] Ms Simmons signed the speculative client
agreement on 23 June 2006. Mr Dempsey in his evidence said that calling it a
speculative
client agreement was an error made by Ms Anderson. He said she
neglected to remove the word “speculative” before sending
Simmons. This was not put to Ms Anderson when she gave evidence and in any
event he is responsible for supervising his
employees and he signed the
agreement and therefore adopted its contents.
The agreement sent out to Ms Simmons also included a document entitled
“Important Notice to Client” which was said to
be issued pursuant to
s 48(4) of the Queensland Law Society Act 1952 (the 1952 Act). The
agreement provided, inter alia, that accounts
would be issued monthly; accounts
would be paid at the conclusion of the matter immediately upon receipt of
settlement monies; and
that any amendments to the agreement must be made in
writing. The estimate of fees and costs of the matter was said to be between
$10,000 to $15,000 although the quote was said to be non-binding. It also
included the clause that the “client has been informed
that it should seek
independent advice in relation to this Agreement.” In fact the only
relevant advice which had been given
was in the “Important Notice to
Client” which was in the following terms, “You may obtain
independent legal advice
before signing this client agreement.”
[23] Ms Simmons gave the client agreement to Mr Dempsey when she saw him by
appointment at his Kirwan office after she had signed
it and had it witnessed by
a friend at home. Mr Dempsey told her that Ms Hay had left and that he was now
personally handling her
matter. She had two meetings with Mr Dempsey during
June-July 2006 to discuss issues involving her ex-husband’s
superannuation.
[24] The next contact Ms Simmons had with Dempseys was a
telephone call from Sandra Sinclair who advised her that she was now handling
her matter and wanted to meet with her. Ms Sinclair commenced working at
Dempseys as an employed solicitor in August 2006 predominantly
responsible for
the firm’s family law files. Ms Simmons saw Ms Sinclair and felt
comfortable with her conducting the matter
and Ms Sinclair then had carriage of
Ms Simmons’ matter at Dempseys until 29 November 2006 when she resigned
her position.
[25] On the morning of Ms Sinclair’s first day of
employment, Mr Dempsey told her, “It’s no secret in Townsville
I have a cash flow problem.” She was told to just bill her time and he
would determine the fees to be charged. He often
pressured her to bill more
than she was billing. Much cross-examination was centred on the material in her
affidavit about Mr Dempsey’s
billing practices and her unhappiness with
them. It is apparent that Mr Dempsey and Ms Sinclair did not get on with one
but I have not formed the view that that dislike has caused Ms Sinclair
to be anything but honest in her evidence before the Tribunal.
Simmons gave evidence that in August 2006, Mr Dempsey telephoned her and told
her there had to be a change to her client agreement
and she would now have to
pay his fees up front because he had ongoing costs. He asked her to come and
see him urgently. He said
it was his practice to have his secretary call but I
accept that Mr Dempsey called Ms Simmons, particularly as she remembers the
detail of what he said to her.
[27] Ms Simmons was very concerned because
she did not have any money and did not know how she was going to pay him. She
appointment and went to see Mr Dempsey on 29 August 2006. Ms Simmons
had expected that Ms Sinclair would be there as well but she
Dempsey told her that the government had changed the way solicitors could claim
their money in family law matters. He mentioned
a date from which that had
happened but she cannot now recall what that date was. It was put to her that
he did not say this but
I accept her evidence which was given clearly, carefully
and without embellishment, making concessions when required. Any inconsistencies
in her evidence were such as might be expected from a truthful law witness. He
did say this to her and it was not true.
[29] Ms Simmons recalls he
mentioned something about previously a client was not expected to pay money to
the law firm until the case
had been finalised or settled. He told her that it
had made it difficult for him to operate that way as he had staff and bills to
pay. He denied saying this or that it was true but there was no reason for her
not to be telling the truth about it and he admitted
the obvious truth in
cross-examination that, “everybody needs cash. You need cash to operate.
Income ebbs and flows.”
It was also consistent with what he told Ms
Sinclair when she started work with him and what he later told QLS
investigators. He
also said in evidence that he wanted to spend money to
advertise “to combat the inroads of Shine and Carter Capner into
Townsville.”
[30] Mr Dempsey told her that he was going to make an
arrangement with a loan company and that she would have to take out a loan.
did not tell her but this was the first time he had arranged a litigation loan
for a family law client. He began to joke about
the name of the company calling
it “Shark” or something similar. She was concerned about her
capacity to take out a
loan but he mentioned that she had a house, by which he
presumably meant that it could be used for security. She was concerned she
might lose her house. She said he laughed and said “Don’t worry
I need to pay the bills on
work that I’ve done. If there is any interest I’ll bear that
myself.” When she expressed
concern he appeared to become angry and told
her that he would send her a letter showing that he would bear any
[31] Mr Dempsey had a form which contained questions about Ms
Simmons’ weekly costs of living and whether she had any outstanding
He told her that the form was a standard loan form to send to the loan company
to see whether she could get a loan or not.
Mr Dempsey went through the
questions and filled out the form as she answered his questions. He gave her
the completed form to
sign which she did. Her evidence was that she felt quite
intimidated and believed that she had no alternative but to sign the form
trust him as he was her solicitor. He did not suggest that she should obtain
independent legal advice. He said that he has
no recollection of telling her,
but that such was the invariability of his practice when speaking to clients
to advise them that they should feel free to see
another solicitor and seek independent legal advice, that he believes he did
her that. Given he cannot actually recall doing so and Ms Simmons gave
sworn evidence that he did not, the Tribunal is satisfied
that he failed to
advise her of her right to obtain independent legal advice.
[32] The two page
form, which was before the Tribunal and which was signed by Ms Simmons on 28
August 2006, is entitled “Impact
Advance Application”. It is said
to be for matrimonial settlements. There are number of questions which are
filled out in
different handwriting. There appears to be at least three
different sources of handwriting on the form. Ms Anderson, and presumably
another employee, filled out formal details. Mr Dempsey filled out other
details. The amount of the advance has been filled in
as $40,000 by Mr Dempsey.
He said he did that in front of Ms Simmons. The amount of the loan was, he
said, his decision rather than
hers. It appears that it was made up of $30,000
he estimated for his fees and $10,000 for disbursements and GST. He said in
cross-examination
that it was possible he told her that. He asserted he
remembers telling Ms Simmons that the total costs looked like being $40,000.
She has no recollection of Mr Dempsey’s telling her that the loan was for
$40,000 or that that was his estimate of the total
costs. The Tribunal does not
accept that he did. The explanation in his affidavit was that $40,000 was
required “assuming
her matter proceeded to trial, as appeared to be
likely, or at the very least a strong possibility at that time”. This is
an ex post facto explanation not supported on the evidence. His statement in
his affidavit that the sum of $40,000 was recorded
on her instructions was
[33] There is a box on the first page which says
tick this box if you DO NOT want Impact to send corrspondence [
your home address.**
** in this event ALL correspondence will be sent to your solicitor’s
The box was ticked by Mr Dempsey. As a result, all loan documents were sent to
Ms Simmons at Dempseys’ address. They were
not sent on to her by
[34] At the time she signed the form, Ms Simmons did not notice
whether the form showed the amount of the loan or if it did, whether
that amount
was $30,000 or $40,000. She says however that had she realised it was for
$40,000 she would not have signed the form.
She said she did not know whom the
loan was going to be with at that time; that Mr Dempsey did not ask her to read
the form before
she signed it; and because of his demeanour she was afraid to
ask him to read it. She did not receive a copy of the form from Mr
[35] Mr Dempsey took a photocopy of Ms Simmons’ driver’s
licence once she had signed the form and she then left. She
estimates that she
would have been in his office for no more than five to ten minutes. He
estimated that she was there for 30 to
40 minutes, but he kept no record of the
time or notes of the meeting.
[36] It appears she also signed a document on
that day that said simply, “I, Roma Simmons authorize Dempseys to take
as they are billed.” Ms Simmons accepted that this contained
her signature although she could not specifically recall signing
the document.
She said that the consequences of signing the document were not explained to
her. Mr Dempsey said in his evidence
that the document enabled Dempseys to draw
down the loan into their trust account and transfer into their general account
after they were billed and sent to the client. He said that he told
her that. It did not, however, give carte blanche to Dempseys
to draw down
from the Impact loan into their trust account and withdraw from their trust
account sums of money for fees that had
not been billed to Ms Simmons by
invoices sent to her, and it certainly did not give them authority to transfer
amounts for fees
that had not only been billed, but had not even been
[37] The Impact Advance Application was faxed by Dempseys to Impact
Capital under cover of a letter by Mr Dempsey dated 30 August
included were a valuation summary of the property at 15 Carlisle Street,
Cranbrook, the Redbook valuation for her motor
vehicle and details of Mr
Simmons’ AMP Superannuation. The documents show that they were faxed at
10.36 in the morning.
[38] On the afternoon of that day, 30 August 2006, Ms
Simmons received a telephone call from someone who identified herself as Jaymie
from Dempseys who asked her to come in and see her at their office in Flinders
Mall. She went into Dempseys’ office on the
following day, 31 August
2006, and saw Jaymie Anderson at the front desk. Ms Anderson gave Ms Simmons a
bundle of documents for
the litigation loan. She asked her to sit down and read
through them and return to the front counter when she was ready to sign
Ms Anderson cannot now specifically remember this incident but it was consistent
with her usual practice.
[39] Ms Simmons’ evidence was that she was
still upset but believed that she should trust Mr Dempsey as he was her
She thought she had to sign the loan documents if she wanted her
matter to be finalised. She briefly looked through the documents
but says that
she was so upset so it did not register with her who the lender was or the
amount of the loan. After a brief look
at the documents she returned to the
front counter and signed them. Although the amount of the loan did not register
with her it
appears that she must have seen it as it preyed on her mind when the
matter came to be settled. By that time Jaymie had gone and
another young woman
witnessed her signature. Ms Simmons did not receive a copy of the loan
documents at that time or at any later
time. Ms Simmons’ signature
witnessed by a K Magarry appears on two pages of a five page application for
credit from Impact
Capital Limited (“Impact”).
[40] The maximum
amount of credit is said to be $40,000 which would be advanced progressively.
The only detail of those advances
which was filled in was the first stage which
provided for $4,000 to be advanced on 30 August 2006. The total ascertainable
fees and charges were said to be $200 and unascertainable credit fees and
charges said to be an assessment fee of $2,000, and an
annual fee of $2,200
payable to the lender on the yearly anniversary of the first progressive advance
pursuant to this credit contract.
So far as the mortgage was concerned the loan
contract provided, “The Borrower will grant or procure the granting of
mortgages (“Mortgage”) namely an Irrevocable Instruction, an
equitable mortgagee’s caveat and first ranking registered
mortgages to the
Lender from [Ms Simmons] over [the land at 15 Carlisle Street, Cranbrook
Queensland 4814].” Ms Simmons also
signed an Irrevocable Instruction to
her solicitors to pay the lender the amount of credit then outstanding and any
further sum being
fees, interest, charges and other monies owing as soon as the
matter settled.
[41] Ms Simmons later received a letter from Mr Dempsey dated
30 August 2006 saying:
a note to confirm with you what I said to you today, 29 August 2006 that with
respect to the Impact Funding, the arrangement
with you is that you will not be
responsible for any of their expenses or interest or fees or anything from the
I will bear that because this was not part of the deal when we started the
file so I can’t impose on you to pay something which
wasn’t part of
the deal when we started the file.”
[42] Mr Dempsey said that during his meeting with Ms Simmons on 29 August 2006
the need to comply with the term of his costs agreement
with Ms Simmons that any
amendments must be made in writing did not occur to him “but [he]
deliberately sent [his] letter of
29 August 2006 to evidence in writing the
change to the Agreement, so Ms Simmons was protected in writing.” It was
that he did not inform Ms Simmons in that or any other letter that
another variation to the original agreement was that she had applied
for $40,000 to pay fees and disbursements as they were billed before the matter
concluded. He said in evidence that he
did not include those details in the
letter because he “didn’t think anything had
[43] On 1 September 2006, Mr Dempsey sent an email to Jaymie
Anderson at 8.40am saying “Re Greenland Moneys & Simmons Moneys”
“Have IMPACT SENT THESE MONEYS YET?” After further emails between
them and Impact, Dempseys were informed by Impact
that $4,000 had been deposited
into their trust account with regard to the Simmons’ litigation loan,
which had by then been
approved in the sum of $40,000. Unbeknownst to Ms
Simmons, $4,462.44 was drawn on the Impact loan. That was made up of $4,000 for
Dempseys and fees, charges and interest on the loan of $462.44. At that time Ms
Simmons had only received invoices totalling $2,328.87
($412.06 on 11 May 2006
for work done from 7 to 19 April 2006 (invoice #1754); $527.51 on 7 June 2006
for work done from 5 to 24
May 2006 (invoice #1938) and $1389.30 on 22 August
2006 for work done from 5 to 30 July 2006 (invoice #2383)). The first two of
those invoices provided:
“As I said t
the Costs Agreement, I enclose a statement of costs for the work done in period
below. This is
not payable
until the end of the case, and then only if
we win, as per our agreement.”
[44] The invoice for 22 August 2006 provided:
“As I said t would in the Costs Agreement, I
enclose a bill of costs for the work done in period below.
A Costs Notice under the Family Law Act has been provided to you with your
Client Agreement.”
[45] A few days after she had applied for the loan Ms Simmons attended an
appointment with Ms Sinclair who did not appear to know
anything about Ms
Simmons’ taking out the loan. During September 2006, invoices were issued
with regard to Ms Simmons but
not sent to her. On 4 September 2006, #2461 for
$3,050.08 for work done from 7 April to 24 August 2006. This invoice required
deletion of the earlier invoices sent to Ms Simmons from the Open Practice
system because it included the periods covered by those
invoices. The earlier
invoices were deleted because this prevents clients being billed more than once
for the same work. This invoice
had the same text as the first two sent,
“As I said t [
] would in the Costs
Agreement, I enclose a statement of costs for the work done in period below.
not payable
until the end of the case, and then only if we win,
agreement.”
[46] The next invoice issued on 12 September 2006, #2495 for $762.30. It was
for work done from 6 to 13 September 2006. Table 2
shows three different
versions of that invoice. The next invoice issued on 22 September 2006, #2629,
was for $646.80. It was for
work done from 6 to 13 September 2006. The copy
produced pursuant to the warrant was said not to be payable until the end of the
On 28 September 2006, invoice #2648
was issued for $517.59.
It was for fees of
$435.27 from 6 to 13 September 2006 and disbursements of $82.32. None of
invoices #2461, #2495, #2629 or #2648
were sent to Ms Simmons.
invoice #2529 dated 13 September 2006, which in fact issued on 5 March 2007, was
for $155.38 was for disbursements. Invoice
#2609 dated 19 September 2006, which
was also created on 5 March 2007, was for $203.60 for disbursements and was said
payable until the end of the case.” Ms Simmons did not
receive these invoices. This does not necessarily mean that the disbursements
were not incurred but it does mean that in all likelihood the invoices for them
were not created until 5 March 2007.
[48] On 26 September 2006, another
$4,413.96 was drawn on the Impact loan. This was made up of $4,000 for Dempseys
and $413.96 for
fees, charges and interest.
[49] Ms Simmons said that her
matter progressed with Ms Sinclair and she did not have any further contact with
Mr Dempsey until she
received a further letter from him dated 2 October 2006
regarding what he said was an administrative change that he wanted to make
her client agreement. That letter provided as follows:
a note in relation to an administrative charge I would like to make.
On your file we have a Client Agreement, and of recent times I have
discovered it is to my advantage to change that Client Agreement
without in any
way impacting on you.
With Client Agreements a solicitor can do two things, he can either do an
itemised bill along the way as we are doing and at the end
of the day the total
of those bills is what the bill is, or he can quote.
He can quote a figure.
What I propose to do on your file is to change the Client Agreement to a
‘quote’ quoting my professional fees at $30,000,
but as part of the
administration of your file I will continue to send you monthly bills/reports
for the work that is actually done
and at the end of the case, what I am paid
will be only what the total of those bills are.
If the bills come to more than the quote, then anything more than the quote I
will not be paid.
If the bills come to less than the quote, then I will only be paid what the
bills total.
That way you are no in any way disadvantaged.
So that you can monitor the work being done, I will continue to send the
bills so that you can read them and you can see what work
is being done. If you
think I am doing unnecessary work then, as is part of the client agreement, you
just have to report it to
the Law Society and they will discipline me.
I don’t ‘pad’ my fees, I never have and I never will. I am
only doing this because there is advantage to me in
it income tax wise, and
there is no disadvantage to you at all.
The client agreement can only be varied by agreement, so if I don’t
hear from you within 7 days disagreeing with this proposal,
then we will take it
that the client agreement is varied on this basis.
If you have got any questions please do not hesitate to contact me or come in
and see me. I have been trying to get you in to discuss
this with you, but we
have been missing each other.”
Mr Dempsey said in a letter to QLS on 16 March 2007 that he wrote that letter
only after taking advice from a number of practitioners
and thinking about that
carefully. It is, however, abundantly clear and it must have been obvious to
any competent legal practitioner
that an agreement which specifically provided
that any amendments must be in writing could not be amended in the way set out
second last paragraph.
[50] Ms Simmons said she did not respond to
this letter as she thought that everything was going smoothly with her matter
Sinclair and it was only an administrative change.
Dempsey’s evidence was inconsistent with that of Ms Simmons. He gave
evidence that he met with Ms Simmons on 28 September
2006 at his Thuringowa
office where he told her that it would be to his advantage to give a quote for
his fees and she said she had
no difficulties with that. Unfortunately it
appears that he was being untruthful. None of the independent evidence supports
version. There was an appointment in his electronic diary for 10-11am on 28
September 2006 where Jaymie Anderson sent the message
“Left message on
Roma Simmons phone. Has not phoned me back.” Mr Dempsey asserted to QLS
in a letter dated 5 April
2007 that he overlooked the clause in the client
agreement that any amendment must be in writing. “However, I explained
process fully to her, and she agreed. I have a diary entry for 10am on 28
September 2006, where I met with her.” He must
have known that his diary
entry did not support his assertion that he met with her.
Simmons’ evidence was that no such meeting had taken place. Mr
Dempsey’s letter of 2 October 2006 is entirely
inconsistent with the
meeting’s having taken place. He said he believed he dictated that letter
on the afternoon of 28 September.
Not only does it not refer to a meeting which
on Mr Dempsey’s version had occurred only hours earlier on the day it was
it concludes with the words, “If you have got any questions
please do not hesitate to contact me or come in and see me. I
have been trying
to get you in to discuss this with you, but we have been missing each
other.” Given the difficulty this placed
him in, he then posited that
perhaps he drafted the letter before he saw her and signed a letter which said
they had not seen each
other without really reading it. This was an
adventitious explanation. This contemporaneous document under Mr
Dempsey’s hand
reveals the truth. There was no such meeting and Mr
Dempsey’s protestations in evidence that he clearly remembers such a
were false.
[53] His evidence reveals why he said there was a meeting
when there was not. He agreed that the letter did not inform Ms Simmons
would be immediately charging her a lump sum for the fee he had quoted. He said
that he told her that and she agreed to
that orally when he met her on 28
September. He could not possibly justify taking the $30,000 unless he had told
her about it and
she had agreed to it. The letter of 2 October 2006 did not
even mention any such agreement made at any such meeting. He falsely
the Queensland Law Society (“QLS”), then the Commission and then the
Tribunal that he had a meeting with Ms
Simmons where such an agreement was made
to justify his subsequent behaviour in transferring the money to his general
account, not
because such a meeting had actually taken place.
[54] That he
did not tell the truth to the Tribunal was not of course part of the charge
against him. It is relevant at this stage
only to determining the truth of what
actually occurred where there is a conflict in this evidence between himself and
Ms Simmons.
It will also be relevant to subsequent findings regarding penalty
if the charges presently laid against him are
[55] Notwithstanding the letter
of 2 October 2006, Mr Dempsey had no agreement whether orally or in writing as
required, to vary his
client agreement with Ms Simmons. The letter was not apt
to achieve that outcome unless it was countersigned by her. There was
provision in the document for her to do so and she was not asked to. Rather she
was, inappropriately, just given seven days to
disagree with his proposal or be
taken to have agreed to it.
[56] Mr Dempsey said at the time he wrote the
letter he instructed Ms Anderson to send Ms Simmons an invoice for $30,000.
at odds with the terms of the letter which he had just sent to her which
refers to monthly bills for the work actually done so she
could monitor them.
The Tribunal does not accept Mr Dempsey’s evidence about what he
instructed Ms Anderson to do.
[57] On 4 October 2006, a further $27,490.99
was drawn by Dempseys on the Impact loan without Ms Simmons’ knowledge.
Ms Anderson
emailed Mrs Dempsey to let her know this was to happen on the
following day. It was made up of $25,000 for Dempseys and $2,490.99
charges and interest on the loan. The evidence shows that Ms Anderson was
instructed to draw down the $25,000 by Mr Dempsey.
This instruction was given
even before the seven days referred to in the letter of 2 October 2006 had
elapsed. At this time, Ms
Simmons had not received any accounts since 22 August
2006. Mr Dempsey said that the bills were supposed to be sent and blamed Ms
Anderson for not sending them out but it was his law firm and therefore his
responsibility to ensure that procedures were followed.
[58] On 5 October
2006 invoice #2682 for $30,000 was issued but not sent to Ms Simmons. Ms
Andersen denied creating this invoice.
However it seems likely that she must
have because she would not have been able to transfer the moneys out of the
trust account
unless an invoice was posted in the Open Practice software that
was used. It was said to be to be for professional fees. The version
on the warrant also said, as before:
I said t would in the Costs Agreement, I enclose a statement of costs for the
work done in period below. This is
not payable
until the end of the
case, and ten only if we win, as per our
agreement.”
[59] Like all of the other invoices, it concluded:
“If you have any queries with it, please do
not hesitate to contact me.”
[60] As the invoice was not in fact sent to her, this was a hollow
invitation.
[61] On the same day $27,867.85 was transferred from
Dempseys’ trust account to the general account for Ms Simmons’
Ms Anderson said that this was on Mr Dempsey’s instructions. I
accept that this is what happened. Mr Dempsey in an email
to Mrs Dempsey on 6
October 2006 referred to a debt that required immediate payment saying “I
know we are broke but is there
any way we can pay him.” He referred to
taking “the $25 from Impact for Simmons.” Referring to the debt he
“He has been quite good I guess, as the bill, though very high, is
as a dirty -----!
But, we do owe him.” It appears that it was the need to pay that debt
rather than fees generated on Ms
Simmons’ file that led to the transfer of
$25,000 to Dempseys trust account from Ms Simmons’ Impact loan and then
of the trust account to his personal bank account. It must be inferred that
his behaviour in having those moneys to which he was
not entitled drawn from
Impact and then transferred from his trust account was dishonest by the
standards of ordinary decent people
and he must have known that it
[62] On 8 November 2006, Ms Simmons received an invoice (#235272910) for
$4,224 for professional fees for the period 10 to 31 October
2006. The invoice
enclose a statement of costs for the work done in period below.”
[63] On 28 November 2006, Ms Sinclair acted for Ms Simmons in negotiations with
regard to her property settlement at the Federal
Magistrates Court. When an
offer was made by Mr Simmons’ solicitors, Ms Simmons expressed concern
because she said she owed
Mr Dempsey $40,000 or more. She told Ms Sinclair that
she was upset because she had been pressured by Mr Dempsey into taking out
[64] Ms Sinclair reassured Ms Simmons that, notwithstanding what she
might have been told by Mr Dempsey, her fees were nothing like
$40,000. Little
had been done on her file before Ms Sinclair had started work on it and since
then they had issued proceedings and
very quickly got to a pre-trial conference.
Ms Sinclair told Ms Simmons that she would check what her fees were and let her
However, Ms Sinclair resigned from Dempseys on the following day before
she had the opportunity to revert to Ms Simmons about her
December 2006, Ms Simmons received invoice (#3204) for $5,907.55 for
professional fees of $5643 for the period from 1 to
29 November 2006 and
disbursements of $264.55. The invoice said:
enclose a statement of costs for the work done in the period below.”
[66] In January 2007 Ms Simmons decided to change solicitors in her family law
matter. She discovered that Ms Sinclair was then
working with Ruddy Tomlins
& Baxter Solicitors (“RTB”). She had previously been happy with
Ms Sinclair’s conduct
of her matter so she contacted her and asked her if
she would take over. Ms Sinclair agreed and Ms Simmons asked her to notify
to terminate her instructions. Ms Simmons was concerned that Mr
Dempsey had not furthered her matter even though it had effectively
28 November 2006. All that had to be attended to were the tax implications in
regard to capital gains tax on the proposed
settlement.
Sinclair’s advice, Ms Simmons then contacted Impact and asked them to
transfer her loan to RTB. She completed a
new loan application form and signed
an Irrevocable Instruction addressed to RTB. Both of these documents were
signed on 4 January
2007. The loan application was for
It appears to have been filled in
by one person as it is all in the same handwriting. The box preventing
correspondence to be sent
to her home address was not ticked and the reason for
the loan was said to be “This is for the transfer of my litigation loan
from Paul Dempsey Law Firm to RTB c/- of Sandra Sinclair.”
Sinclair later informed Ms Simmons that Dempseys had drawn down $33,000 from her
loan on account of their professional fees.
Ms Simmons was shocked as she had
only received invoiced amounts from Dempseys for a far less amount. Ms Sinclair
too was surprised
as she had done the majority of work on the matter and knew
that it had not generated anything like that amount of legal fees. Ms
provided Ms Simmons with a copy of a statement from Impact dated 12 January 2007
in respect of her loan. That showed the
draw downs that had been made on:
September 2006 $4,462.44
26 September 2006 $4,413.96
2006 $27,490.99
TOTAL $36,367.39
[69] On 12 January 2007, RTB sent a
letter by facsimile transmission to Dempseys about their repeated attempts to
collect the Simmons
file from Dempseys. Dempseys had failed to contact RTB.
They required production of the file on that day. Mr Dempsey provided
under cover of letter dated 15 January 2007 querying why “this woman has
pulled the pin on this file at this time,
because it is literally
finished.” He said he was not sure what had happened with the Impact loan
as too much had been taken
for their fees. Ms Sinclair’s review of the
Simmons file showed that documents including her handwritten notes and notes of
Mr Dempsey’s first conference with Ms Simmons were missing.
Sinclair finalised Ms Simmons’ property settlement and paid out the Impact
loan on receipt of the settlement moneys.
Included in that amount was $3,367.39
in interest, fees and charges on the $33,000 advanced to Dempseys by Impact. Mr
Dempsey said
he would pay the interest, fees and charges on the loan but had
not. On 16 February 2007, RTB wrote to Mr Dempsey saying:
note from a security contract between Impact Capital and our client that a total
amount of $33,000 was advanced by them
to your trust account and that your fees
totalled only $5,907.55. Would you therefore, as a matter of urgency, provide
cheque payable to Ruddy Tomlins & Baxter trust account in an
amount of $27,092.45.”
[71] Mr Dempsey replied on 5 March 2007 as follows:
“Thank you for your letters of
February, 2007, and I apologise for the delay in
answering, but as I said to you (Alex) when I spoke to you, there is something
on this file, and I think it is that we have drawn down too much on
account of fees.
My delay is that I was waiting on data from our new bookkeeper that we
pinched from Raoul Guides, but it didn’t come, and I
sent her away, and it
is only this afternoon that I got something.
Enclosed is what I got this afternoon.
It seems that our fees (being fees rendered by Sandra Sinclair who now works
for you) come to $13,419.50 inclusive of GST. Outlays
are $441.30 – a
total of $13,860.90.
It seems you are right in your letter of 16
February in that $33,000 (albeit $32,762.30) has been advanced to us.
However, that seems to be $19,139.10 too much.
I have to repay your client, or Impact, (whoever you choose) $19,139.10 plus
the interest on that component.
I am raising a loan to do that and should be able to do that by the end of
this month.
Your second letter of 16
February challenges the
quantum of my fees – I think that is a bit much.
Sandra Sinclair is obviously running this file and the fees are literally as
she billed them. For her to turn around now and attack
her own billings is a
bit much. She did the work so surely it must be fairly done?
I said to you when you pinched this file that there was something wrong on
the file and so it has proven.
Do you, Alex Baxter, not Sandra Sinclair, agree with my figures, or do you
see it differently.
It has to be straightened out, it has taken far too long on my end
], but that is because of serious ability problems in my book keeping
department which hopefully I have now resolved.
I await our response.”
[72] Under cover of an undated handwritten letter by Mr Dempsey sent on 9 March
2007, Dempseys sent a cheque for $19,139.10. The
letter was in the following
“Further to my letter of
March, I enclose my cheque in the sum of
$19,139.10.
You have apparently reported me to the Legal Services Commission, and the Law
Society is trying very hard now to strike me off.
I have not, as I thought done anything wrong, I quoted Roma Simmons $30,000
and I enclose my letter of 2/10/06 in that regard.
I, in fact, think Sinclair settled this woman short by 10% ($90,000), and it
would be interesting to see what your fees now amount
to, I’ll bet the
total of yours and mine comes to more than $30,000.”
[73] Ms Simmons had sent a complaint to the Commissioner on 17 January 2007,
which was received on 19 January 2007. On 23 January
2007, the Commissioner
referred Ms Simmons’ complaint to the QLS for investigation pursuant to
Legal Profession Act 2004
(“the 2004 Act”). On 6
March 2007, QLS informed Mr Dempsey of the complaint and on 9 March 2007 issued
two notices for
him to show cause as to whether he was no longer a fit and
proper person to hold a practising certificate.
[74] On 13 March 2007 in his
role as a QLS auditor, Grenville Hughes conducted an audit of the law practice
of Mr Dempsey pursuant
to s 31 of the 1952 Act. He provided an analysis of
the financial dealings with regard to Ms Simmons. The audit confirmed that
sum of $33,000 had been received into Mr Dempsey’s trust account from the
litigation loan funds and that amount had been
transferred into his general
account in accordance with the signed trust authority dated 29 August 2006. Mr
Dempsey produced a series
of invoices including an invoice for $30,000
justifying the withdrawals from his trust account. He admitted in
cross-examination
that he did not check that the invoices had in fact been sent
to Ms Simmons before giving them to Mr Hughes. His behaviour was in
respect reckless.
[75] The invoices provided to the auditor appeared to be
different from the invoices provided by Ms Simmons. As a result a warrant
issued and executed on Mr Dempsey’s office during which computer records
and other documentation were seized. Subsequent
computer forensic analysis lead
to the identification of four different sets of invoices in respect of this
[76] Graham Inch, an investigator employed by QLS, conducted an
investigation and prepared a report dated 29 October 2007. Mr Inch’s
report showed that the independent forensic technology company, McGrathnicol,
engaged by the Commissioner to analyse the computer
material seized under
warrant, discovered that two of the invoices (#2529 and #2609) dated 13
September 2006 and 19 September 2006
respectively had only been created on 5
March 2007 and that seven invoices had been accessed and modified on 13 March
nature of the modification was not able to be identified.
reported that the search warrant was executed under s 551 of 2004 Act on Mr
Dempsey’s business at Flinders Mall on 14
May 2007. A quantity of
documents was seized and a number of computer hard drives forensically imaged.
Mr Dempsey cooperated in
the search and volunteered the information that a
number of documents regarding the complainant were with his counsel, Ken Fleming
QC, in Brisbane. That documentation was subsequently provided to
[78] There appears to have been four sets of invoices created. They
were firstly the invoices sent to Ms Simmons, which totalled
$12,460.86;
secondly those recorded in Dempseys’ ledger and provided to the auditor,
which totalled $35,132.15; a third set
found when the warrant was executed
relating to Ms Simmons’ file. These were similar to the invoices produced
to Mr Hughes
as the QLS auditor on 13 March 2007 with the addition of an extra
invoice #2609 in the amount of $203.60 for disbursements and changes
narrative within the invoice as set out in Table 2. The total for the third set
of invoices was $35,180.37. A fourth set
was obtained from the chambers of Mr
Fleming QC on 17 May 2007. The total of those invoices was $14,883.94. None of
these amounts
is the same as what Mr Dempsey asserted in his letter to RTB on 5
March 2007 were the fees and outlays on Ms Simmons’ file
of $13,860.90.
Table 1 showing the various invoices is set out below.
Invoices sent to SIMMONS
Invoices produced to QLS Auditor
Invoices held by
Invoices produced on WARRANT
$ 12 460.86
$ 14 883.94
$ 35 180.37
[79] In addition some invoices which have the same invoice number, date and
amount, nevertheless inexplicably have a different narrative
in the invoice.
Table 2 illustrates these
variations.
QLS Auditor
“As I said t would in the Costs Agreement, I enclose a statement of
costs for the work done in period below. This is
not payable
end of the case, and then only if we win, as per our agreement.”
“As I said t would in the Costs Agreement, I enclose a statement of
costs for the work done in period below. This is
not payable
end of the case, and then only if we win, as per our agreement.”
“As I said t would in the Costs Agreement, I enclose a statement of
costs for the work done in period below. This is
not payable
end of the case, and then only if we win, as per our agreement.”
“As I said t would in the Costs Agreement, I enclose a statement of
costs for the work done in period below. This is
not payable
end of the case, and then only if we win, as per our agreement.”
“As I said t would in the Costs Agreement I enclose a bill of costs
for the work done in period below. A Costs Notice under
the Family Law Act has
been provided to you with your Client Agreement.”
“As I said t would in the Costs Agreement, I enclose a tax invoice
for the work done in period below.”
“As I said t would in the Costs Agreement, I enclose a tax invoice
for the work done in period below.”
“As I said t would in the Costs Agreement, I enclose a statement of
costs for the work done in period below. This is
not payable
end of the case, and then only if we win, as per our agreement.”
“As I said t would in the Costs Agreement, I enclose a tax invoice
for the word done in period below.”
“I enclose statement of costs for the work done period
“As I said t would in the Costs Agreement, I enclose a statement of
costs for the work done in period below. This is
not payable
end of the case, and then only if we win as per our agreement.”
“As I said t would in the Costs Agreement I enclose a tax invoice for
the work done in period below”
“As I said t would in the Costs Agreement, I enclose a statement of
costs for the work done in period below. This is
not payable
end of the case, and then only if we win as per our agreement.”
“As I said t would in the Costs Agreement I enclose a tax invoice for
the work done in period below.”
“As I said t would in the Costs Agreement, I enclose a statement of
costs for the work done in period below. This is
not payable
end of the case, and then only if we win as per our agreement.”
“As I said t would in the Costs Agreement I enclose a tax invoice for
the work done in period below.”
“As I said t would in the Costs Agreement, I enclose a statement of
costs for the work done in period below. This is
not payable
end of the case, and then only if we win as per our agreement.”
“As I said t would in the Costs Agreement I enclose a tax invoice for
the work done in period below.”
“As I said t would in the Costs Agreement, I enclose a statement of
costs for the work done in period below. This is
not payable
end of the case, and then only if we win as per our agreement.”
“I enclose a statement of costs for the work done in period
“I enclose a statement of costs for the work done in period
“I enclose a statement of costs for the work done in period
“I enclose a statement of costs for the work done in period
[80] Mr Hughes said his general impression of Jaymie Anderson was that she was
an inexperienced bookkeeper in a legal office. She
had been employed in July
2005 as a typist/legal secretary and was then asked to assist in processing
accounts and to help out with
bookkeeping. Mr Dempsey’s wife, Jutta
Dempsey, was the practice manager. Ms Anderson had never previously worked in
for a legal firm and had no previous experience with trust accounts.
She was however enthusiastic and willing. She was never given
training by Mr or Mrs Dempsey in the operation of the trust account or made
aware there was a Trust Accounts Act to be
complied with. After about three
months she was made office manager which involved managing work flow, monitoring
the staff and
delegating duties. Her evidence was from the time she commenced
work at Dempseys she was aware there were cash flow problems with
the business.
It was usual that she would be directed, as soon as moneys were received into
trust from a litigation loan, to raise
a final invoice for the amount of funds
to be transferred from the trust account to the general account. Mr Dempsey
sought to explain
what went on in the Simmons’ file by his inadvertence
and Ms Anderson’s incompetence. However, his explanations given
Tribunal were, as detailed in these reasons, sometimes untruthful. To the
extent that problems were due to Ms Anderson’s
inexperience or lack of
competence, she was Mr Dempsey’s employee and he was responsible for her
[81] Table 3 showing the payments from the Impact loan and from
Dempsey’s trust account is set out below. The total amount
debited on the
Impact loan by 4 October 2006 was $36,367.39 of which Dempseys received $33,000
into its trust account and $3,367.39
was attributable to fees, interest and
charges on the loan. $33,203.58 was transferred from Dempsey’s trust
account to its
general account. Mr Dempsey repaid Ms Simmons $19,139.10,
meaning he effectively charged her $17,228.29, being $36,367.39 (her total
indebtedness to Impact) less $19,139.10.
IMPACT LOAN DEBIT
FEES, INTEREST AND CHARGES
RECEIVED INTO TRUST ACCOUNT
TRANSFER FROM TRUST ACCOUNT
REPAID TO MS SIMMONS
[82] Mr Dempsey asserted in a letter to QLS on 5 April 2007 that he had
subsequently repaid the interest component on her loan once
counsel had brought
to his attention that QLS had provided him with the figure owing in the
complaint from Ms Simmons which he had
received under letter from QLS on 6 March
[83] In oral evidence Mr Dempsey said he did not know now much money he
had paid for the interest on Ms Simmons’ loan, which
he had agreed to pay.
He referred to the payment of $19,139.10 paid by cheque to RTB on 9 March 2007
which was his estimation of
moneys owed by him to Ms Simmons. He then gave
evidence that he subsequently paid $3,000 to RTB and then a further $4,000 to
on dates not specified.
[84] Charge 5: Overcharging – Complaint by
on or about 15 October 2004, the respondent charged excessive fees in connection
with the practice of law to his client Rafaela
The respondent denied this allegation.
PARTICULARS
5.1 At all material times the respondent was an Australian Legal
Practitioner.
5.2 In August 2003 Rafaela Oats engaged the respondent to act as her
solicitor in a personal injury matter.
5.3 The claim by Oats was a ‘speculative personal injury
claim’ within the meaning of ss.481A and 481C of the Queensland
Society Act 1952.
5.4 On 30 September 2004, the claim settled following a compulsory
conference.
5.5 On or about 19 November 2004, the practitioner rendered an account for
professional fees and outlays.
5.6 At all material times, the respondent was bound by the provisions of
s.481C of the Queensland Law Society Act in relation to the
fees he could render
Mr Dempsey denied this allegation because it particularises a conclusion of
5.7 In breach of those provisions, the respondent rendered fees to Oats in
excess of the amount permitted by s.481C of the Queensland
Law Society Act,
particulars of which are as follows:
Settlement received after deduction of refunds by defendant
Less disbursements (including GST but not photocopying or fax
Balance settlement
Maximum professional fees (including GST permitted by s.481C)
Fees actually charged including GST
The allegation in this particular was denied.
[85] Charge 6: Preferred Own Interest – Complaint of Oats
or about 30 September 2004 the respondent, while representing Rafaela Oats
(‘Oats’) in a personal injury matter preferred
his own interests to
those of his client by purporting to require Oats to agree to
‘waive’ the benefit of s.481C of the
Queensland Law Society Act in
respect of his professional fees in the matter.
The respondent denied this allegation.
PARTICULARS
6.1 The applicant repeated and relied on particulars 5.1 to 5.7
The respondent also relied on his answers to those particulars.
6.2 On 30 September 2004, the respondent represented Oats to a compulsory
conference in Brisbane. Oats and her husband, Jeffrey Clive
Oats, were present
at the conference.
6.3 In the course of that conference, the respondent prepared a
hand-written document, which stated, inter alia:-
“Paul Dempsey has explained the ‘50/50’ rule to me, my
husband Geoff (sic) and I understand it, and I waive the
benefit of the 50/50
rule. I am happy to pay Dempseys (sic) costs.”
6.4 At the request of the respondent, Oats and her husband signed the
The respondent denied this particular.
6.5 Contrary to the purported terms of the document, the
respondent:-
(a) Did not in fact explain the ‘50/50 rule’ to Oats or to her
husband; and
(b) Represented to them that the document was an ‘indemnity against
negligence’.
The respondent denied these allegations.
6.6 The sole, or alternatively, the dominant purpose for the respondent
purporting to have Oats ‘waive’ the benefit of
s.481C of the
Queensland Law Society Act was so that the respondent could charge Oats an
amount of fees which would likely exceed
the amount allowable pursuant to the
The respondent denied these allegations.
Findings with regard to Oats
[86] In August 2003, Mrs Oats retained Mr
Dempsey to act for her in a personal injury claim arising from her work as a
teacher’s aide. Mr Dempsey dealt with both Mrs Oats and her
husband, Jeffrey Oats, who held an enduring power of attorney
from her. As Mr
Dempsey admitted, the claim was conducted on a speculative basis. The fees that
could therefore be charged were
governed by s 48I of Div 2A of the
Queensland Law Society Act 1952 (“the 1952 Act”). Section 48IC of
the 1952 Act set
out what is colloquially referred to as the 50/50 rule, whereby
a legal practitioner acting for a client in a speculative personal
injury claim
could not charge in legal fees more than half of the client’s damages once
statutory refunds and disbursements
were deducted. The purpose of this
statutory provision was to protect litigants for whom legal practitioners act on
a speculative
basis by regulating and restricting the practitioner’s
capacity to charge those clients and setting out the only way in which
restrictions could be varied, i.e. by written approval in the particular case by
the Council of the QLS. There was a clear
public policy reason for this
which precluded a client’s
contracting out of it or waiving its
To have contemplated that a
client could contract out of it or waive it would be to defeat not only the only
mechanism set out in
the section for enabling a practitioner to charge more, but
also its public policy objectives.
[87] Section 48IC
48IC Maximum payment for conduct of speculative personal injury
(1) The maximum amount of fees that a practitioner or firm may charge and
recover from a client for work done in relation to a speculative
personal injury
claim must not be more than the amount worked out using the formula –
[E – (R + D) ] X 0.5
means the amount to which the client is entitled under
a judgment or settlement.
means the total amount the client must, under an Act,
or a law of the Commonwealth or another jurisdiction, or otherwise, refund
receipt of the amount to which the client is entitled under the judgment or
settlement.
means the total amount of disbursements the client
must pay, or reimburse, to the practitioner or firm in relation to the
speculative
personal injury claim.
(a) the amount of fees that a practitioner or firm may charge and recover
from a client is more than the amount calculated under subsection
(b) the practitioner or firm wishes to charge and recover the amount (the
“greater amount”
) from the client:
the practitioner may apply, in writing, to the council for approval to charge
and recover the greater amount.
(3) The council may, in writing, approve an amount up to the greater
(4) This section applies despite part 4A and section 48I.
(5) This section applies to any request for payment made on or after the day
this section commences, whether or not a client agreement
was entered into
before that date.”
[88] On 23 and 27 September 2004 Mr Dempsey had two meetings with Mr and Mrs
Oats where he explained various aspects of the claim
including quantum and
likely prospects. During those meetings he made notes on a white board in his
office. Those notes were printed
off. A compulsory conference was set down in
Brisbane for 30 September and Mr Dempsey told Mr and Mrs Oats that WorkCover
Mrs Oats to be present.
[89] On 30 September 2004, Mr Dempsey
attended the compulsory conference in Brisbane with Mr and Mrs Oats. In the
early stages of
the conference, allegations were made against Mrs Oats that
caused both Mr and Mrs Oats to become upset. Mrs Oats was particularly
distressed at being called a liar. Mr Oats was also concerned because his wife
was upset and also because of Mr Dempsey’s
belligerent attitude and use of
foul language.
[90] Upon retiring to a private room, Mr Oats asked Mr Dempsey
what her chances were. Mr Dempsey told them 30/70, which they took
to mean a 30
per cent chance of winning. In view of the fact that Mr and Mrs Oats therefore
felt that there was a chance the case
would be lost and Mr Dempsey had informed
them by letter of 21 September 2004 that going to trial would be likely to cost
Mrs Oats wanted the matter to be finalised as soon as possible.
In those circumstances Mrs Oats instructed Mr Dempsey that she did
not wish to
pursue the action any further. At that time, WorkCover were not prepared to
make an offer.
[91] Mr Dempsey told the Tribunal he had made an opening offer
of $263,232.64 as evidenced on a schedule of damages he took to the
conference.
WorkCover’s solicitors refused the offer and were not prepared to make any
offer in return. He said he made notes
on the schedule of damages after
speaking to WorkCover’s solicitors. The large handwritten note made by
him on that schedule
was “Contributory Negligence” which was not
factored in on the original schedule. Mr Dempsey says he explained to Mr
Mrs Oats that it was common for WorkCover to offer strong resistance at the
commencement of the compulsory conference but he
thought that they would settle
down and make a counter offer. He produced notes he made at the conference of
various matters raised
by WorkCover which he said he explained to Mr and Mrs
Oats. This included an explanation of contributory negligence. A handwritten
document which supports this is entitled “Contrib Neg”. It
At the top is written
50% contrib. 130.”
[92] Mr Dempsey said in evidence that WorkCover was suggesting a 50/50 split on
liability. Later in the page after detailed figures
on quantum Mr Dempsey has
written an allowance for contributory negligence of 25 per cent which would
reduce her clear payout figure
to $81,107.50 being 75% of $149, 690 less a
WorkCover charge of $31,160. On the figures on that sheet, if contributory
were assessed at 50 per cent, her clear payout figure would have been
$43,685, although that figure was not on the document. After
discussing the
matter with Mr Dempsey, Mr Oats instructed him to get whatever he could from
WorkCover but that they would certainly
not be taking the matter to trial.
[93] Mr Dempsey then went to see the representatives for WorkCover. He
returned and said that WorkCover were prepared to offer $25,000
to settle the
claim. He thought it was unrealistically low but Mr and Mrs Oats said that they
did not want to go to trial. Mr Dempsey
told Mr and Mrs Oats that he was sick,
that his wife was sick, that two doctors were suing him for something like one
million dollars and that he “could not afford to waive his fees
if the matter was lost.” Mr Oats told him to get what
[94] Mr Dempsey said a number of offers were made on instructions from
the Oats. His handwritten notes support that he made a number
offers. He did so to try to get WorkCover’s settlement offer raised
rather than because he had specific instructions
to make each offer. After
initially making no offer at all, WorkCover then continued to make an offer of
$25,000 and finally said
they wanted to go to mandatory final offers. Mr
Dempsey’s version of what then happened is that he returned to the
room where the Oats were and explained the process of making mandatory
final offers. He advised that it appeared to him that $25,000
clear of refund
of about $20,000 would be WorkCover’s mandatory final offer. He then said
that it was silly to settle this
case for $25,000 when it was worth $200,000,
and that if the case is settled for $25,000, his fees were more than that. Mr
said that they did not want to go to trial and were happy to pay his fees.
Mr Oats also said that they did not want Mr Dempsey to
be out of pocket, but
really did not want to go to trial. Mr Dempsey said he understood from those
words that Mr Oats was offering
to pay him his costs over and above the
settlement figure, along with the outlays that were owing at the
[95] Up to this point the versions of what occurred do not diverge in
any significant way. Where they do diverge is in what Mr Dempsey
made of what
Mr Oats said. He said that he explained the 50/50 rule to Mr and Mrs Oats and
illustrated that by “short-hand
schedule showing the worst case scenario
in terms of damages following a trial”. That handwritten document is in
the following
= 30 x 20 60
[96] Mr Dempsey said that this is evidence that he referred to the 50/50 rule as
he wrote “50/50” to evidence that he
had dealt with the 50/50 rule.
This evidence is not without its problems. The first is that the figures for
individual heads of
damages do not add up to 85,000 – 90,000 (presuming
that the figures are meant to represent thousands of dollars). They add
$153,000. The second problem is that it could easily be inferred that
“50/50” may refer to contributory negligence
particularly as that is
normally the part of the calculation of damages where the discount for
contributory negligence is made.
The third problem is that the document written
by Mr Dempsey which he had Mr and Mrs Oats sign shows that Mr Dempsey was, as he
aware of the 50/50 rule but this document, even if the “50/50”
does refer to the 50/50 rule, is not evidence that he
verbally explained it to
them nor that Mr or Mrs Oats understood the rule and that, contrary to what the
statute provided, they were
waiving it. Had he properly explained the 50/50
rule, he would have had to tell them that the only way he could charge them more
would have been for him to apply in writing to the Council of the QLS for
[97] The Tribunal is satisfied that Mr Dempsey did not fully
explain the effect of the 50/50 rule and the circumstances in which it
waived to the Oats. He was content to rely on the Oats’ telling him that
they did not want Mr Dempsey to be out of
pocket. He wrote out the handwritten
release setting out that he had explained the 50/50 rule, that they understood
it and waived
the benefit of it. He did not in fact explain those matters.
They did not read or understand what they were signing but signed
request when he represented to them that it was an “indemnity against
negligence”.
[98] Mr Oats said that Mr Dempsey produced a handwritten
document which he presented to them to sign. It was several pages in length.
Mr Oats asked Mr Dempsey what it was about and he said it was an
“indemnity against negligence” that he required to
“protect” himself and his employee, Melissa Newport, with whom they
had dealt on occasion during the course of the matter.
Neither Mr nor Mrs Oats
recall reading the document. They said that they assumed that it was what Mr
Dempsey said it was. They
trusted Mr Dempsey because he was their solicitor and
therefore, as they thought, a “man of integrity”. Both recognised
their signature on a handwritten document which states:
Rafaela Oats instruct Paul Dempsey to settle my claim.
I instruct him to accept WorkCovers mandatory final offer whatever it is, I
expect it to be $25,000 clear of any refund to WorkCover.
If it is more than
that I am happy.
I am settling my claim because I do not wish to go through the process of
going to court.
Paul Dempsey has explained the ‘50/50’ rule to me, my husband
] and I understand it, and I waive the benefit of the 50/50
rule. I am happy to pay Dempseys costs.”
[99] Neither Mr nor Mrs Oats recalled reading or signing that document. Mr Oats
said that it is possible that that document was
included in the other pages
signed by him at the conference and he recalls that the document presented at
the conference was much
longer running to four or five pages. Mrs Oats said
that she did not sign any handwritten document relating to her case at any other
time so she assumes that it must have been in the pages that Mr Dempsey
presented to her at the conference.
[100] Both Mr and Mrs Oats said that at
no time prior to signing the document did Mr Dempsey mention the “50/50
to them. He did not explain to them what the “50/50
rule” meant in the context of the case. He did not mention or explain
that the document he was presenting to them “waived” that rule, or
explained the effect of “waiving” that
[101] As the
Commissioner submitted, the sole purpose for Mr Dempsey’s purporting to
have Mrs Oats “waive” the benefit
of s 48IC of the 1952 Act was
so that he could charge her an amount of fees which would likely exceed the
amount allowable pursuant
to the section.
[102] Mr Dempsey then went back to
speak with WorkCover’s representatives. When he returned, he advised they
were now offering
an amount of $50,000 including refunds and costs. Mrs Oats
gave instructions to Mr Dempsey to accept WorkCover’s offer. At
Mr Oats was happy because he thought his wife would get something out of it. Mr
Dempsey did not tell them that the offer
had to remain open for 14
[103] Mr Oats said he did not become aware that a “50/50
rule” even existed until July 2005, when he raised the matter
of fees with
another solicitor. Mrs Oats had never heard of any such rule until her husband
told her about it in July 2005. At
no time did Mr Dempsey suggest or mention
that they could or should take independent legal advice before having them sign
the document.
He said in evidence it did not seem necessary in the
circumstances; but he also conceded that he did not think of it. He accepted
cross-examination that he should have so advised them.
[104] On 15 October
2004 Mr Dempsey sent an account to Mrs Oats for $18,581.02, being $14,543.10 in
fees and $4,037.92 in disbursements.
[105] On 19 November 2004, a statement
of moneys by Dempseys showed settlement moneys received of $41,883.99 on 15
October 2004, and
fees and disbursements of $48,212.92, being fees of $32,765.04
and outlays of $15,447.88 (including disbursements of $13,654.48,
photocopying
of $1,601.40 and fax fees of $192), leaving Mrs Oats $6,328.93 out of pocket.
As she had already paid $11,960.00 into
trust for disbursements, Mrs Oats
received reimbursement of $5,631.07. That statement and a cheque for $5,631.07
dated 19 October
2004 were sent to Mr Oats under cover of a letter from Mr
Dempsey dated 19 November 2004. In that letter Mr Dempsey criticised the
inexperience, incompetence and “cupidity” of the solicitor for
[106] Mr Oats made a complaint to the Commissioner on behalf of
his wife on 9 January 2006. The complaint was received on 13 January
[107] On 16 March 2007, Mr Dempsey wrote to QLS responding to the two
“show cause” notices served on him. In that letter
he said he had
paid $7,579 to his trust account in September 2006 on behalf of Mrs Oats after
the QLS told him he owed Mrs Oats money.
He withdrew it about a month later
because he was ill and required urgent medical treatment. He was of the view
that Mrs Oats had
waived the benefit of the 50/50 rule. Then he sought advice
from Queen’s Counsel who were of the same view as the QLS so he
money into trust again on 30 and 31 October 2006.
[108] On 5 April 2007, Mr
Dempsey wrote to Mr O’Donnell at QLS referring to his earlier assertion
that he was of the view that
Mrs Oats had waived the benefit of the 50/50 rule.
He said after taking advice from two Queen’s Counsel, he repaid the
[109] Section 48IC has been considered by the Court of Appeal in a
case concerning the practitioner now before the Tribunal: Legal
Commissioner v Dempsey
[2008] QCA 122.
McMurdo P said at [8] –
Courts should not interpret statutory provisions as interfering with the
contractual rights of parties unless that legislative
intent is plain. The
legislative intent of Pt 4B Div 2A (which comprises only s 48IB and
s 48IC) is contained in s 48IB. This
is clear from both the heading
and the terms of s 48IB. Relevantly, it is to provide for the maximum
payment for Mr Dempsey's conduct
of the clients' claims. The heading to
s 48IC strongly suggests that the section will specify how that maximum
payment is to be calculated.
The legislative intent in respect of the amount of
fees recoverable by a practitioner or firm from a client for work done in the
conduct of speculative personal injury claims is clearly discernable from the
terms of Pt 4B Div2A. It is that the amount of fees,
as defined in s 3 and
calculated according to the formula in s 48IC, cannot be exceeded. It
follows that Pt 4B Div 2A is intended
to apply notwithstanding a contractual
agreement between a client and a practitioner or firm that higher fees will be
paid. A reading
of s 48IC(1) in its statutory context supports this
conclusion. Pt 4B Div 2A displaces the usual position (that the client agreement
governs what can be charged) in respect of speculative personal injury claims.
The QLS Act does provide a mechanism for a practitioner
or firm to charge more
than the formula amount under s 48IC(1) for a speculative personal injury
claim but only by applying in writing
to the Council of the Queensland Law
Society for approval: s 48IC(2). There is no suggestion in the QLS Act that
any other mechanism,
such as a client agreement, will allow a practitioner or
firm to charge more than the formula amount under s 48IC(1) in respect of
the conduct of speculative personal injury claims.
[9] That view is also supported by the explanatory notes to the
and Other Legislation Amendment Bill
(Qld), which inserted
into the QLS Act. The notes state that "[t]he amendments ensure that a
practitioner may receive no more by way of professional
fees from a judgment or
settlement than does his or her client". This does not suggest that the
legislature intended to enable a
practitioner or firm to charge more than the
formula amount under s 48IC(1) through a client agreement. Pt 4B Div 2A was
intended to limit the maximum fees able to be charged and recovered from
a client by a practitioner or firm for the conduct of a
speculative personal
injury action.”
[110] Mr Dempsey appears to have thought that, notwithstanding the terms of the
statute stating that the only way that a practitioner
could charge more than the
formula set out in s 48IC(1) was by applying to the Council of the QLS for
approval; and that there was
no suggestion in the 1952 Act that there was any
other mechanism, even an agreement with the client, by which more could be
that nevertheless the benefit of s 48IC could be waived by the
client, thereby allowing the practitioner to charge more than that
allowed under
the statutory formula without applying to the Council of the QLS. It was not
capable of being waived and any legal
practitioner who read the section
objectively rather than with an eye to his or her own interests would have known
that. The practitioner
had to charge in accordance with the statute. The
statute aimed to stamp out precisely the problem that arose in this case where
the lawyer’s costs were more than the damages awarded to the plaintiff by
capping the amount that the plaintiff’s lawyer
could claim in fees
according to a statutory formula capable of variation only by the Council of
[111] The fact that Mr Dempsey had previously held an incorrect view
litigated in Legal Service Commissioner v Dempsey at first instance,
, and on appeal by him,
[2008] QCA 122
, does not assist him. The judgment of
Keane JA in the Court of Appeal records that the professional fees charged by Mr
the speculative claims therein referred to, which were matters in
which he was retained in 1999 and 2002, were sufficiently high
to have become of
concern to the Legal Services
Commissioner.
[112] Applying the formula
found in s 48IC of the 1952 Act, the maximum amount of fees that could be
charged by Mr Dempsey was $14,114.75
rather than the $32,765.04 he did charge
Mrs Oats. He therefore overcharged her
$18,650.29.
[113] Dishonesty
[114] As Mr Davis SC submitted, charges 2, 3
and 4 each involved allegations of dishonesty. In view of the seriousness of
this allegation
the Tribunal will apply the test of dishonesty found in R v
[1982] EWCA Crim 2
[1982] 1 QB 1053
(1) Whether the conduct was dishonest by the
ordinary standards of reasonable and honest people; and
(2) Whether the
respondent must have realised that what he was doing was by those standards
rather than the purely objective text favoured in Peters v The
[1998] HCA 7
(1998) 192 CLR 493
at 503-504, 508,
Tribunal is satisfied to the relevant standard that Count 1 has been proved,
with the exception that the Commissioner has
not proved that Mr Dempsey told Ms
Simmons the amount of the litigation loan on 29 August 2006, so the Tribunal is
not satisfied
that he told her that the loan was for $40,000 rather than $30,000
on that date. It appears that he told her in his letter of 2
October 2006 that
his fees would be quoted at $30,000 and she would not be charged any more than
[116] The Tribunal is satisfied that while representing Roma Simmons in
matrimonial matters Paul Anthony Dempsey failed to meet or
maintain a reasonable
standard of competence and diligence in that he:-
to advise Ms Simmons of her right to obtain independent legal advice as to
entering into a litigation funding agreement.
(b) Made application on behalf of Ms Simmons and obtained litigation loan
funding in the amount of $40,000.
(c) When requiring an amendment to their client agreement, failed to advise
Ms Simmons of her right to obtain independent legal advice
regarding the
(d) Failed to give effect to the amendment to the client agreement in writing
as required by the said agreement.
(e) Attempted to effect an amendment to the client agreement by omission.
[117] The Tribunal is satisfied that the following particulars of count 1 have
been proved.
1.1 At all material times Mr Dempsey was an
Australian legal practitioner.
1.2 In February 2006, Roma Simmons engaged Mr Dempsey to act as her solicitor
in matrimonial matters.
1.3 On 23 June 2006, Ms Simmons entered into a client agreement with Mr
1.4 That agreement provided inter alia:-
“Accounts will be issued monthly.”
“Accounts will be paid at the conclusion of the matter immediately
upon receipt of settlement monies.”
“Estimate total fees of $10-15,000.”
“Any amendments to this agreement must be made in writing.”
1.5 In August 2006, Mr Dempsey advised Ms Simmons that the terms of the
client agreement had to be changed and she would have to pay
his fees before the
proceedings were determined.
1.6 On 29 August 2006 Mr Dempsey told Ms Simmons that:
(a) The government had changed the way solicitors could claim their money in
family law matters.
(b) That she would have to take out a loan to pay his fees and that he had
made arrangements with a loan company for her to take out
a loan for that
(e) That he would pay any interest payable on the loan.
1.7 On 29 August 2006 Ms Simmons executed a loan application in the presence
of Mr Dempsey.
1.8 By letter to Ms Simmons dated 30 August 2006, Mr Dempsey stated:-
(a) The loan was to be obtained from Impact.
(b) Ms Simmons would not be responsible for any expense, interest or fees
from the advance.
1.9 On 30 August 2006 Mr Dempsey submitted to Impact a litigation loan
application on behalf of Ms Simmons for an advance of $40,000.
1.10 On 30 August 2006 Impact approved the loan to Ms Simmons in the amount
of $40,000.
1.11 On 29 August 2006, Ms Simmons executed a trust account authority which
was dated 29 August 2006. This authority read:-
“I, Roma Simmons, authorize Dempseys to take their fees as they are
1.12 By letter to Ms Simmons dated 2 October 2006 the respondent stated:-
(a) “I have discovered it is to my advantage to change that client
agreement without in any way impacting on you.”
(b) “With client agreements, a solicitor can do two things, he can
either do an itemised bill along the way as we are doing
and at the end of the
day the total of those bills is what the bill is or he can quote.”
(c) “What I propose to do on your file is to change the client
agreement to a ‘quote’, quoting my professional fees
at $30,000, but
as part of the administration of your file I will continue to send you monthly
bills/reports for the work that is
actually done and at the end of the case,
what I am paid will be only what the total of those bills are. If the bills
come to more
than the quote, then anything more than the quote I will not be
paid. If the bills come to less than the quote, then I will only
be paid what
the bills total.”
(d) “The client agreement can only be varied by agreement, so if I
don’t hear from you within 7 days disagreeing with
this proposal, then we
will take it that this client agreement is varied on this basis.”
1.13 Ms Simmons did not respond to the letter of 2 October 2006 within 7 days
1.14 Mr Dempsey did not:-
(a) advise Ms Simmons of her right to independent legal advice;
(b) provide for an amendment for the client agreement to be executed by both
parties incorporating the deemed amendment to quote and
the method of payment of
(c) sought to rely on Ms Simmons’ silence as the basis for amending the
client agreement.
[118] The Tribunal is also satisfied that charge 2 has been proved to the
requisite standard against Mr Dempsey in that in the course
of representing Roma
Simmons in matrimonial matters, the respondent dishonestly misled his client,
Roma Simmons. The acts in question
were dishonest by the standards or ordinary
decent people and Mr Dempsey must have known that.
[119] The Tribunal is also
satisfied that the particulars of that charge as set out in 1.1 to 1.6 and 1.11
have been proved. The
Tribunal is also satisfied that:-
2.2 The representations set
out in paragraph 1.6(a)-(b) were false and misleading because, as the respondent
(a) “The government” had not in fact changed the way solicitors
could claim their money in family law matters; and
(b) By reason of the existing client agreement, there was no obligation on Ms
Simmons to take out a litigation loan.
[120] Contrary to submissions on behalf of the respondent, it was not an abuse
of process to bring both charges one and two since
the facts set out in each
charge support the different allegations in each charge of incompetence (charge
1) and dishonesty (charge
[121] The Tribunal is also satisfied that
charge 3, that on 5 October 2006 Mr Dempsey, while representing Roma Simmons in
matrimonial
matters, dishonestly drew funds from his trust account to his
general account in purported payment of professional fees owing to
him when he
was not entitled to draw said funds, has been proved to the requisite standard.
The withdrawal of the funds from his
trust account to his general account were
in the circumstances dishonest by the standards of ordinary decent people and he
known that. He admitted that the authorisation signed by Ms Simmons
did not give him authority to transfer money for accounts that
had not been
billed. She was not billed for that amount. But more importantly he knew she
had never agreed to pay the quoted amount
up front so he had no right to bill
her for that amount and transfer these moneys to his general account from his
trust account.
He was not protected by
Trust Accounts Act
as he was not entitled to the payment nor was it in accordance with her
directions.
[122] The Tribunal is satisfied of the particulars of that charge
3.1 Particulars
1.1 to 1.11 to the extent set out above.
3.2 Between 1 September 2006 and 4 October 2006 Impact, at the request of Mr
Dempsey or made on his behalf, transferred sums totalling
$33,000 from Ms
Simmons’ loan account to the respondent’s trust account.
3.3 Between 11 May 2006 and 4 October 2006 the respondent issued the
following invoices which were received by Ms Simmons for professional
disbursements: invoice # 1754 dated 11 May 2006; invoice #1938 dated 7 June
2006; and for professional fees, invoice #2383
dated 22 August 2006. These
invoices amounted to $2,329.31.
3.4 On 5 October 2006 the respondent issued Invoice #2682, which purported to
bill Ms Simmons for professional fees in the sum of
$30,000. Ms Simmons did not
receive this invoice.
3.5 On 5 October 2006, the sum of $27,867.85 was drawn from the
respondent’s trust account to his general account in purported
satisfaction of outstanding professional fees and disbursements owed by Ms
Simmons in this matter.
3.6 On 5 October the respondent knew or ought to have known that he was not
entitled to draw the amount of $27,867.85 from his trust
account because:
(a) Ms Simmons was not advised of the draw downs to the respondent’s
trust account from the Impact loan account, nor did she
receive any notice of
the drawing from the trust account to the general account of the sum of
$27,867.85 on 5 October 2006.
(b) Invoices issued to Ms Simmons between 11 May 2006 and 4 October 2006
amounted to only $2,329.31.
3.7 By Invoice #235272910 dated 8 November 2006, the respondent billed Ms
Simmons the sum of $4,224 for professional fees for the
period 10 October 2006
to 31 October 2006. Ms Simmons received this invoice.
3.8 By Invoice #3204 dated 11 December 2006, the respondent billed Ms Simmons
the sum of $5,907.55 for professional fees and disbursements
for the period 1
November 2006 to 29 November 2006. Ms Simmons received this invoice.
3.9 On a date between 29 November 2006 and 12 January 2007, Ms Simmons
terminated her client agreement with the respondent and engaged
Ruddy Tomlins
Baxter to complete her matrimonial affairs.
3.10 On 12 January 2007, Ruddy Tomlins Baxter sent a facsimile to the
respondent requesting his client file in relation to Ms Simmons’
matrimonial matters.
3.11 On 15 January 2007, the respondent wrote to Ruddy Tomlins Baxter
advising that the matter appeared to be finalised but that there
was a problem
with the Impact Loan and confirming that his total fees were not $30,000.
3.12 On 16 February 2007, Ruddy Tomlins Baxter wrote to the respondent
requesting the balance of the loan money held in his trust
3.13 On 5 March 2007, the respondent wrote to Ruddy Tomlins Baxter stating
that he was only entitled to some $13,860.90 in fees and
that he had been
overpaid the sum of $19,139.10 which he would repay.
3.14 On 9 March 2007, the respondent paid to Ruddy Tomlins Baxter on behalf
of Simmons the sum of $19,139.10.
[123] The Tribunal is satisfied to the requisite standard that charge 4, that on
13 March 2007, the respondent recklessly misled
the QLS, in relation to the
amount of professional fees and disbursements payable to him by Roma Simmons in
relation to matrimonial
matters, has been proved. The Tribunal has found that
Mr Dempsey acted recklessly in his presentation of the invoices to Mr Hughes
without checking that they had in fact been sent.
[124] The Tribunal accepts
the following particulars of Charge 4 have been proven:
4.1 Particulars 1.1 to 1.11
to the extent set out above.
4.2 On 13 March 2007 Grenville Hughes, an auditor employed by the Queensland
Law Society, conducted an audit of the respondent’s
trust account pursuant
to Section 31 of The Queensland Law Society Act 1952.
4.3 In the course of that audit, the respondent:
(a) Presented to Mr Hughes or caused to be presented to Mr Hughes the
following tax invoices:-
#2682 dated 5 October 2006 in the amount of $30,000 for professional fees;
dated 4 September 2006 in the amount of $3,050.08 for professional fees in the
period 7 April to 24 August 2006;
dated 12 September 2006 in the amount of $762.30 for professional fees in the
period 6 to 13 September 2006;
dated 13 September 2006 in the amount of $155.38 for disbursements.
dated 22 September 2006 in the amount of $646.80 for professional fees in the
period 6 to 13 September 2006;
dated 28 September 2006 in the amount of $517.59 for professional fees and
disbursements in the period 6 to 13 September 2006.
presenting the above invoices, represented to Mr Hughes that those amounts had
been billed to Ms Simmons.
4.4 None of the invoices referred to in paragraph 4.3 above were sent to or
received by Ms Simmons.
4.5 The respondent told Mr Hughes that he relied upon the trust account
authority of 29 August 2006 to draw upon monies held in trust
4.6 The respondent’s representations to Mr Hughes as set out in
paragraph 4.3 above were false and misleading because, as the
respondent ought
to have known:
(a) The invoices he presented to Mr Hughes were not invoices which had been
sent to or received by Ms Simmons;
(b) The total amount of the invoices in fact sent to Ms Simmons as at the
date of Mr Hughes’ audit was only $12,460.86.
[125] The Tribunal is also satisfied to the requisite standard that Charge 5,
that on or about 15 October 2004, the respondent charged
excessive fees in
connection with the practice of law to his client Rafaela Oats, has been
[126] The Tribunal is satisfied that the following particulars are
5.1 At all material times
the respondent was an Australian legal practitioner.
5.2 In August 2003 Rafaela Oats engaged the respondent to act as her
solicitor in a personal injury matter.
5.3 The claim by Mrs Oats was a ‘speculative personal injury
claim’ within the meaning of ss.481A and 481C of the Queensland
Society Act 1952.
5.4 On 30 September 2004, the claim settled following a compulsory
conference.
5.5 On or about 19 November 2004, the practitioner rendered an account for
professional fees and outlays.
5.6 At all material times, the respondent was bound by the provisions of
s.481C of the Queensland Law Society Act in relation to the
fees he could render
5.7 In breach of those provisions, the respondent rendered fees to Mrs Oats
in excess of the amount permitted by s.481C of the Queensland
Law Society Act,
particulars of which are as follows:
Settlement received after deduction of refunds by defendant
Less disbursements (including GST but not photocopying or fax fees)
Balance settlement
Maximum professional fees (including GST permitted by s.481C)
Fees actually charged including GST
[127] The Tribunal is also satisfied to the relevant standard that Charge 6,
that on or about 30 September 2004 the respondent, while
representing Rafaela
Oats in a personal injury matter preferred his own interests to those of his
client by purporting to require
Mrs Oats to agree to ‘waive’ the
benefit of s.481C of the Queensland Law Society Act in respect of his
professional fees
in the matter, has been proved.
[128] The Tribunal is
satisfied that the following particulars of that charge are true.
6.1 Particulars 5.1 to 5.7
6.2 On 30 September 2004, the respondent represented Mrs Oats to a compulsory
conference in Brisbane. Mrs Oats and her husband, Jeffrey
Clive Oats, were
present at the conference.
6.3 In the course of that conference, the respondent prepared a hand-written
document, which stated, inter alia:-
“Paul Dempsey has explained the ‘50/50’ rule to me, my
husband Geoff (sic) and I understand it, and I waive the
benefit of the 50/50
rule. I am happy to pay Dempseys (sic) costs.”
6.4 At the request of the respondent, Mrs Oats and her husband signed the
6.5 Contrary to the purported terms of the document, the respondent:-
(a) Did not in fact explain the ‘50/50 rule’ to Mrs Oats or to
her husband; and
(b) Represented to them that the document was an “indemnity against
negligence”.
6.6 The sole purpose for the respondent purporting to have Mrs Oats
‘waive’ the benefit of s.481C of the Queensland Law
Society Act was
so that the respondent could charge Mrs Oats an amount of fees which would
likely exceed the amount allowable pursuant
to the section.
[129] The Tribunal finds Paul Anthony Dempsey guilty of each of
the six charges laid against him. The conduct in charge 1 showed
a failure to
reach and maintain the reasonable standard of competence and diligence that a
member of the public is entitled to expect
of a reasonably competent Australian
legal practitioner and so represented unsatisfactory professional conduct
pursuant to s 418(1)(a)
of the 2007 Act. In the case of charge 5, that
unsatisfactory professional conduct also involved the charging of excessive
costs contrary to s 420(b) of the 2007 Act. The conduct in charges
2, 3, 4 and 6 involved conduct of an Australian legal practitioner
in connection
with the practice of law that justifies a finding that he is not a fit and
proper person to engage in legal practice,
and so represented professional
misconduct.
[130] Paul Anthony Dempsey is therefore found to have committed
two counts of unsatisfactory professional conduct and four counts
professional misconduct. The Tribunal will hear submissions as to appropriate
orders under s 456 of the 2007 Act and costs.
Legal Services Commissioner v Richardson
[2009] LPT 17 at [4]-[8].
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
at 360-361.
Services Commissioner v Baker
[2005] LPT 2 and [26]. This decision was
overturned on appeal in
Legal Services Commissioner v Baker (No 1)
[2005] QCA 482
but not on this point.
The particulars
of the charge were amended after the response was received.
The particulars
of the charge were amended after the response was received.
The particulars
of the charge were amended after the response was received.
Thompson v LM & S Railway Co
[1930] 1 KB 41.
This error is
repeated in every invoice where this phrase is used.
The version
produced pursuant to the warrant had a different narrative from that produced to
the QLS Auditor and given to counsel:
see Table 2.
See Table 2.
narrative on the invoice, see Table 2.
Legal Services Commission v Maddern
[2008] QCA 301.
version given to the QLS auditor: see Table 2.
This was consistent with the amount referred to in Dempseys’ letter of 2
October 2006.
All also include the notation, “If you have any queries with it, please
do not hesitate to contact me.”
See Explanatory Notes to the
Justice and Other Legislation Amendment Bill
Commonwealth v Verwayen
(1990) 170 CLR 394 at 404, 486.
The 1952 Act was repealed by s 767 of the 2007 Act; s 48IC of the
1952 Act has been substantially replicated in s 347 of the 2007
LSC v Dempsey
Harle v Legal Practitioners Liability Committee
[2003] VSCA 133
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (372 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter