URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QMHC/2019/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:47:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SAL, Re [2019] QMHC 3 (19 March 2019)
MENTAL HEALTH COURT
In the matter of SAL
[2019] QMHC 3
PROCEEDING:
DELIVERED ON:
19 March 2019
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
4 February 2019
ASSISTING PSYCHIATRISTS:
Dr E N McVie and
Dr A E Simpson
DETERMINATION:
1. Appeal allowed.
2. Set aside the order below.
3. Impose a Forensic Order Community.
SAL in person
A K Lossberg for the Attorney-General
S J Hamlyn-Harris
for the Chief Psychiatrist
SOLICITORS:
Crown Law for the Attorney-General
The Office of the Chief
Psychiatrist
NOTE: This judgment is published pursuant to
Mental Health
It has been anonymised and one redaction has been made to
preserve anonymity.
[1] This is an appeal from a decision of the Mental Health Review Tribunal
(MHRT) of 26 October 2018. The reasons of the Tribunal
were given on 28
November 2018.
[2] [Redacted]. From age 18 he began using alcohol and cannabis. By 2001 he
had six convictions for driving under the influence
of alcohol. He reports that
from the age of 20 years he began hearing “the voices of demons”.
Notwithstanding the fact
that he almost completed an apprenticeship as a chef,
he had to cease work in 1998 when he became preoccupied with such matters.
the middle of that year (16-30 July 1998) SAL had his first mental health
admission at the Nambour General Hospital. He was
diagnosed with schizophrenia.
[3] The MHRT decision confirmed a Forensic Order, category Inpatient, with no
limited community treatment (LCT).
[4] The Forensic Order to which SAL is currently subject was made by Justice
Boddice on 31 October 2012. Justice Boddice described
him as a 38 year old
who was at that time serving a 22 year sentence for multiple rape
SAL was before Justice
Boddice in relation to eight offences alleged to have been committed between
9 January 1995 and 14 February
2012. They were: deprivation of liberty
(two); entering a dwelling and committing an indictable offence; entering a
dwelling with
intent; rape (two); assault with intent to rape, and serious
assault of a Corrections Officer. The medical evidence before Justice
was that SAL was suffering from schizophrenia at the time of that offending.
However, in relation to all of it but the assault
on the Correctional Officer,
he was not deprived of any relevant capacity, but had engaged in
“purposive predatory
behaviour”.
In relation to
the assault on a Corrections Officer, the evidence was that SAL was deprived of
[5] When SAL was before Justice Boddice he was suffering an exacerbation of his
schizophrenia and Justice Boddice found the defendant
temporarily unfit for
trial in relation to the seven offences for which he did not have the defence of
[6] Justice Boddice explained that simply considering the assault on a
Corrective Services Officer alone, he thought that a Forensic
necessary to protect the community, notwithstanding the defendant would be
imprisoned for a long time.
well, because of his finding of temporary unfitness, Justice Boddice was
required to make a Forensic Order. Accordingly he made
a Forensic Order and
detained SAL to The Park High Secure Authorised Mental Health Service.
[7] Dr Tie’s report of 13 September 2018 records that on 18 January 2013
the MHRT found SAL fit for trial and I was told from
the bar table by counsel
for the AttorneyGeneral that he received a further three years cumulative to his
existing sentence, so that
his current sentence is one of 25 years, with a final
release date in 2027.
[8] SAL said he wanted to be off a Forensic Order
(a) Forensic Orders were only for murderers;
(b) Forensic Orders are understood only to be for murderers, and therefore
there is a stigma attached to him in jail;
(c) he is eligible for parole (there was no independent evidence of this) and
if he received parole the existence of a Forensic Order
would mean that he had
to be taken to The Park, rather than be allowed to live in the sex
offenders’ precinct (where he aims
(d) the Forensic Order now attaches only to one offence, which in the context
of his offending, is relatively minor. He has been
punished by a jail term for
the other offences and it is therefore unfair if he is also
“punished” by being on a Forensic
Order for the one relatively minor
(e) he could be equally well managed on an Involuntary Treatment Order.
[9] The first point raised by SAL is of course wrong. He is properly on a
Forensic Order for the assault on the Corrections Officer.
[10] In the context of SAL’s offending and his severe mental health
problems, the second point he raises is not one with which
[11] The other points raised by SAL are related. To consider them it is
necessary to have regard to the medical evidence which was
before the MHRT.
That was Dr Tie’s report of 13 September 2018. It gives the history of
SAL’s illness developing and
then his being diagnosed in 1998. It gives a
history that SAL suffers from very severe schizophrenia which has not responded
to medication. In addition, it is clear that SAL from time to time stops
co-operating with his treating doctors and refuses his
medication.
[12] To take up the narrative from paragraph [7] above, on 25 August 2004 SAL
was transferred from The Park High Secure Authorised
Mental Health Service to
jail. In 2009 he had to be admitted to the High Secure Inpatient Service for a
month. He was transferred
to The Park High Secure Service again and remained
there between 20 September 2012 and 27 February 2013. He was returned to
on 27 February 2013. He has remained there except for admissions to
The Park High Secure Service between 18 March 2015 and 2 February
2016; 21 June
2016 and 7 September 2016 and 9 March 2017. He was returned to custody in
March 2017.
[13] Dr Tie says that “there have been persistent concerns about his
brittle mental state”. He still reports bizarre
hallucinations even
though he is now medicated with Clozapine, a medication of last resort. Dr Tie
“[SAL] has numerous convictions for extreme
violence against women. He has previously assaulted a Correctional Officer and
nursing staff at the High Secure Inpatient Service.
[SAL] has a past history of ceasing prescribed psychotropic medications in
custody. He demonstrates poor insight into his psychiatric
illness and only
passively accepts psychiatric management.
[SAL] requires a Forensic Order to ensure continued assertive psychiatric
management of his chronic psychiatric illness, to prevent
deterioration in his
brittle mental state, which would occur rapidly if he were to discontinue
treatment.”
[14] As well as the report of September 2018 which was before the MHRT, I have
an update report from Dr Tie dated 14 January 2019.
Dr Tie reports that in
November 2018 SAL experienced a deterioration in his mental state in which he
voiced persecutory themes and
once again had to be managed assertively as an
inpatient with an increase in his dose of Clozapine.
[15] Dr Tie points out that even in the absence of a relapse of his psychotic
illness, SAL has offended very violently. In fact,
I would recast that a
little; his offending has all taken place in the absence of illness which
deprived him of capacity (except
for one assault Corrective Services Officer).
Dr Tie goes on to say that when psychotically unwell, SAL manifests physical
aggression.
Further, he has a history of alcohol and cannabis dependence.
While in a controlled custodial environment, this is in remission
definitely a risk factor in the community. As well, “[SAL] has
persistently demonstrated minimal insight into his chronic
severe and psychotic
[16] I might record that Dr Tie is a very experienced forensic psychiatrist and
he gives his opinions having been treating SAL since
the middle of 2012 (at
[17] In all these circumstances, it is quite clear that SAL ought to remain on a
Forensic Order and that any other form of Involuntary
Treatment Order, such as a
Treatment Authority, is inappropriate. That was certainly the only medical
evidence before the Court
and was the advice of my Assisting Psychiatrists.
[18] The question then becomes whether a Forensic Order Inpatient, with no LCT
is appropriate. In my view it is not.
[19] The decision of the MHRT was that the order needed to be inpatient because
it was inappropriate for SAL to be living “at
his mother’s place or
the houses at Wacol”. The reasons go on to say, “Given [SAL] is
incarcerated, the Tribunal
considers it prudent that [SAL] should undergo risk
assessment upon release prior to any leave in the community. For that reason,
the Tribunal has not approved any limited community treatment.”
[20] It seems to me that the decision of the MHRT, and the submissions of the
AttorneyGeneral on this appeal, fundamentally misunderstand
the scheme of the
legislation so far as it involves interaction between the
Corrective Services
(Qld) and the
Mental Health Act 2016
Section 6(1)
Corrective Services Act 2006
provides that a
person sentenced to a period of imprisonment must be detained for the period in
a Corrective Services facility.
Section 6(3)(d)
of the same Act provides that
is subject to the provisions of the
Mental Health Act 2016
[22] In my opinion, that latter provision allows the transfer of a prisoner to a
Secure Authorised Mental Health Facility as a classified
patient – see
chapter 3 of the
Mental Health Act 2016
“Persons in
custody”, and the detailed provisions there for the circumstances in which
a person in jail may be transferred
out of jail and into an Authorised Mental
Health Service. It will be noted from the recitation of SAL’s history
above, that
on several occasions since his incarceration in jail in 2004, his
illness has become so severe that he is unable to be treated in
requires an inpatient stay. On those occasions he has been a classified
patient, and for the duration of the stay in hospital
has been in the custody of
the Authorised Mental Health Service rather than in the custody of the Chief
Executive of the Department
of Corrective Services – see
Corrective Services Act
[23] The advice of my Assisting Psychiatrists was that SAL will likely continue
in this way. In fact, apart from the obvious need
to protect the community,
including the community in jail – t 1-24 – the Assisting
Psychiatrists advised that, “...
looking at the potential long-term
trajectory for this man, I think having a Forensic Order in place is going to be
of benefit to
him and to other people who are involved in his management and
will assist his long-term management well into the future.”
Most of the
time he needs to be overseen by a psychiatrist, and needs to be taking
psychotropic medication, but he does not need
to be in The Park; he can remain
in jail. From time to time his illness is likely to worsen, as it has in the
past, and he will
need inpatient admissions to The Park High Secure Mental
Health Service.
[24] The Chief Psychiatrist’s submission on this matter was that I ought
to allow the appeal and make a Forensic Order Community
to allow SAL to remain
in jail until he is lawfully released either on parole; at his full-time release
date, or as is likely, after
a period of detention and review under the
Dangerous Prisoners (Sexual Offenders) Act 2003
[25] The Chief Psychiatrist submitted that I ought to take a similar approach to
that which I took in
ought to interpret the
Mental Health Act 2016
as I interpreted the
Mental Health Act 2000
as meaning that on a Forensic
Order with full LCT the prisoner would remain in prison custody subject to his
lawful release, but receiving
ongoing treatment under the Forensic Order. The
Forensic Order should provide that the Authorised Psychiatrist has power to
the category of the order so that, should SAL’s illness relapse,
the Authorised Psychiatrist can make the order an inpatient
order and have SAL
transferred to The Park High Secure Service. Lastly, for the protection of the
community, the Forensic Order
should provide that before SAL’s lawful
release from prison custody he is to be reviewed by the Authorised Psychiatrist
would consider at that time whether or not the category of Forensic Order
ought to be changed to inpatient (with or without some
LCT) on SAL’s
release from prison. I accept this submission.
was a significant decision in the sense that it took a
different view of the Act from that taken in the case of
Justice Ann Lyons had interpreted the
Mental Health Act 2000
meaning that a person in prison could not be regarded as being in the community
and that therefore if a prisoner was to be on a
Forensic Order the only option
was that it be an inpatient order. For reasons which I explain in
I do not interpret the 2000 Act that way. However, both
Re M (No 2)
proceed on the common basis that someone who is on a
Forensic Order as an inpatient must be kept in hospital, not in prison. The
Re M (No 2)
was not that M remained in jail on an inpatient
Forensic Order; it was that he could not be in jail – arrangements had to
made for him to go to hospital.
[27] The decisions of
Re M (No 2)
were both decisions
made about the provisions of the
Mental Health Act 2000
believe the
Mental Health Act 2016
should be interpreted any differently.
If anything the provisions of the
Mental Health Act 2016
make it clearer
than those in the 2000 Act that this is how the legislature intended persons
such as SAL to be managed.
[28] The defined meaning of community has not changed. The definition of
inpatient under the 2016 Act still makes it very clear
that someone who is on a
Forensic Order which is an Inpatient Order “must be detained in an
inpatient unit”, although
they may receive LCT.
Mental Health Act 2016
provides at (1) that it
applies to a person in custody who is subject to,
, a Forensic
Order. Section 66(2) provides that that person may be taken to an inpatient
unit of an Authorised Mental Health Service
to receive treatment and care.
Subsection (4)(a) provides that when the person is admitted to the inpatient
unit of an Authorised
Mental Health Service the person’s Forensic Order,
if categorised as Community, becomes categorised as Inpatient. This is
indication that persons in jail on a Forensic Order will be on a Forensic Order
[30] I do not think the fact that the 2016 Act does not contain an equivalent
provision to s 540(1)(b)(i) of the
Mental Health Act 2000
bearing on the matters for determination in this case.
[31] Section 199 subsections (2) and (3) of the 2016 Act tend to show that the
result I reached in
is intended to apply under the 2016 Act.
Although, I must acknowledge that the Explanatory Notes to s 199 do not give any
indication that that is so.
[32] The Chief Psychiatrist made reference to the objects of the Act –
Mental Health Act 2016
and submitted:
terms of the objects of the
Mental Health Act 2016
the protection of the
community and [SAL’s] own health, wellbeing, and prospects of recovery are
best served by orders which
allow for his assertive treatment while in prison
and in the community in the event of his lawful release from prison. A Forensic
Order means that treatment can be enforced if necessary. A construction of the
Mental Health Act 2016
which allows him to be treated under a Forensic
Order while he remains in prison is the one that best achieves the Act’s
[33] I agree with those submissions. As outlined above, SAL, like Mr Florey,
can be managed for the most part by Prison Mental Health
Services in prison. He
will from time to time, like Mr Florey, need to return to hospital as an
inpatient, as his illness fluctuates.
When that happens he can be returned to
The Park Authorised Mental Health Service, High Secure Division, for the time
such treatment
is necessary. As I commented in
Secure facility at The Park has very restrictive detention facilities designed
to manage and confine very dangerous
patients. Life in a low secure part of a
jail is no doubt less restricted than such confinement; indeed I suspect life in
parts of a jail is also less
restricted.”
SAL definitely
needs to be on a Forensic Order but it would be a waste of mental health
resources at The Park High Secure Service
were he to be detained there
full-time. If he were on a Forensic Order Inpatient he would have to be
detained there full-time.
As I say, I suspect that life in a jail is less
restrictive than life at the High Secure part of The Park. It is certainly in
interests in terms of him obtaining parole (perhaps), or at least
supported accommodation in the Wacol precinct (when the time comes),
in prison on a Forensic Order Community, rather than in The Park High Secure
Service on a Forensic Order Inpatient.
[34] The Attorney-General’s submissions rest on the assertion that there
is a well understood and longstanding practice that
“warrants for
imprisonment override any Forensic Order detaining a patient to [an Authorised
Mental Health Service]”.
This is said to be the effect of
Corrective Services Act
I must say that my experience on the Mental
Health Court is that a Forensic Order Inpatient is inconsistent with detention
This was the basis for the decision in
decision in
Mental Health Act 2000
Mental Health Act 2016
require persons subject to inpatient orders to be
in an Authorised Mental Health Service. If there has been a practice in the
consistent with the order under appeal in the current case, that practice
has ignored these provisions. It has also ignored the
position as set out in
Re M (No 2).
The assertion that in some way making a Forensic Order
Community for someone in SAL’s position detracts from the authority of
warrant for imprisonment, or is inconsistent with
Corrective Services Act
is not logical.
[35] I am satisfied that here the Forensic Order ought be a Forensic Order
Community. This would allow SAL to remain in custody.
If I made a Forensic
Order Inpatient he would be required to be taken to the High Secure section of
The Park. In jail SAL is not
an inpatient, he is living in the community,
albeit a restricted part of the community. As counsel for the Chief
Psychiatrist submitted,
and as my Assisting Psychiatrists advised in this
matter, while SAL is in jail a Forensic Order is necessary to protect other
and Corrective Services officers. In a very real sense they are the
community which must be considered for the purpose of determining
whether or not
there ought to be a Forensic Order.
[36] When SAL eventually comes to be lawfully released from jail, it is
appropriate that the question of whether or not his Forensic
Order should remain
a Community Order with full LCT be revisited. He will be in a very different
community upon release and there
will be very different concerns as to the
protection of the community in which he will find himself. The terms of the
Forensic Order
which I make will be that the Authorised Psychiatrist at the time
of SAL’s lawful release from jail must consider whether or
not to change
the category of the order to Inpatient. Such a term does not (as was submitted
by the Attorney-General) contradict
a recent unpublished decision of Justice
Flanagan in this Court.
[37] I will ask counsel to bring in minutes of
The history of that offending
is contained in Dr Tie’s report of 13 September 2018. The rape charges
were referred to the
Mental Health Court and on 23 April 2004 the Mental Health
Court found that SAL was not of unsound mind and was fit for trial. He
convicted of eight charges of rape on 25 August 2004 and sentenced to 22 years
imprisonment.
Page 5 of the Reasons for
judgment, 31/10/2012.
The assault on the Corrections
Officer was serious. SAL approached a Corrective Services Officer, apparently
at random, in an agitated
state. He made nonsensical demands of her before
punching her repeatedly in the face. He later gave a psychotic explanation for
his behaviour.
[2018] QMHC 12.
This was a decision of Justice
Ann Lyons made on 30 September 2010. It remains unpublished because M
has not yet been dealt with in the criminal courts for the offences which
were the subject of that reference.
[2018] QMHC 12
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (230 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter