URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCCTPAMD/2009/51.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:34:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Chief Executive, Office of Fair Trading v Filippini, Penny also known as Filippini [2009] QCCTPAMD 51 (29 October 2009)
_______________________
Commercial and Consumer
THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE, OFFICE OF FAIR TRADING, DEPARTMENT OF EMPLOYMENT,
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT & INNOVATION v FILIPPINI and PENNEY
ALSO KNOWN AS
[2009] CCT PD001-09
THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE, OFFICE OF FAIR TRADING, DEPARTMENT OF EMPLOYMENT,
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT & INNOVATION
FILIPPINI Heather Isobel
PENNEY Sarah Louise also known as FILLIPINI
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
29 October 2009
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
15 October 2009
DECISION OF:
Mr J Thomas AM QC
CATCHWORDS:
Disciplinary proceedings – Real Estate Agent-
Property Agents
and Motor Dealers Act
Sections 26
Acting as a real estate agent without a licence- acts amounting
Continuation of interest and involvement in real estate business by
disqualified person-
Meaning of “not a suitable person to hold a
licence” in
s 496(1)(g)(ii)
section 26.
REPRESENTATION:
Mr R Vize of Counsel
RESPONDENT:
Mr S F Farrell of Counsel
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
are proceedings brought by the Chief Executive against two real estate agents,
Heather Filippini and Sarah Penney (also known
as Sarah Filippini). They are
disciplinary proceedings under the
Property Agents and Motor Dealers Act 2000
(“the PAMD Act”). The two applications were consolidated by
Relevant Background
respondents are mother (Heather Filippini) and daughter Sarah Filippini. During
the hearing, with the respondents’ acquiescence,
they were referred to
respectively as
For convenience I shall continue to use those abridged references.
speaking the allegations are that Heather continued to act as a real estate
agent after her licence had been cancelled and
that Sarah knowingly carried on
business with her.
was and the principal of a real estate agency in Surfers Paradise known as
Heather Filippini Island Realty (“HFIR”).
However, in 2002 and
2003, she was guilty of malpractice which came to the attention of the Office of
Fair Trading. This led to
disciplinary proceedings against her in this Tribunal
which on 22 August 2006 ordered that her licence be cancelled for four years,
and imposed fines totalling $11,250.00. The gravamen of her misconduct was her
purchase (by her self or an associate) of properties
she was entrusted to sell
for vendor clients.
bought an appeal against that decision to the District Court, and obtained a
stay of the Tribunal’s order pending that
appeal. She was successful in
the District Court which ordered the suspension removed. However, on further
appeal by the Chief
Executive to the Court of Appeal, the District Court order
was set aside and the Tribunal’s decision was confirmed.
the result, the original orders (primarily a disqualification of four years)
became effective from the date of delivery of the
Court of Appeal judgment, 24
April 2008.
follows that Heather was entitled to practise as a real estate agent up to 24
April 2008 but not after that date.
Presentation of evidence in the present hearing
Negotiations
between the legal representatives of the parties resulted in both Heather and
Sarah admitting certain or the charges
against them. Specifically –
(a) Heather
admitted charge 2, i.e. that she contravened section 160(1)(a) of the PAMD Act
in that, as an agent for someone else for
reward, she performed an activity that
may be under the authority of a real estate agent’s licence when she did
real estate agent’s licence;
(b) Charge 1
against Heather (that she is not "a suitable person to hold a licence") was not
admitted, and remained in issue for the
tribunal to determine on the admitted
admitted charge 3 i.e. that she carried on business under a licence with someone
who is not a suitable person to hold a
licence (see section 496(1)(g) of the
the light of this, the Chief Executive indicated that he was content not to
proceed with the other charges in the applications.
A letter recording the
parties agreement (exhibit 1) and
agreed statement of
(exhibit 2) comprised the only evidence presented by the
parties to the Tribunal. I understand Counsel to have agreed that I may
have regard to known facts such as the dates of issue of licences, and of course
the circumstances revealed by the previous
litigation between the parties.
expressed concern to Counsel that in the absence of oral evidence to flesh out
the agreed facts, a meaningful appreciation of the
circumstances might be very
difficult. However, in the event, neither party was willing to call any further
in a disciplinary proceeding, the licensee/practitioner gives evidence, faces
cross-examination and acts in a manner that
provides the Tribunal with an
opportunity to assess the fitness of that person to hold a licence and to deal
with the public. That
has not occurred here. However I infer that there was
give and take
in the negotiations, and that
admissions may have been agreed to which the applicant may otherwise have had
difficulty in establishing.
is that the Tribunal has been
denied the opportunity of seeing and hearing the licensees whose conduct is in
question. But in such
circumstances it would, I think, be unfair to hold
against the respondents their failure to present themselves for
cross-examination.
It will be my duty to study the admitted facts and to draw
such inferences as seem reasonably open in the light of the circumstances
mentioned above.
Relevant facts and circumstances
conduct that led to the cancellation of Heather’s licence is discussed in
the judgement of the Court of Appeal (
Filippini v Chief Executive of the
Department of Tourism Fair Trading and Wine Industry Development
QCA96). That decision shows that since at least 2002 Heather was the principal
of HFIR, an agency described as operating
at the higher end of the real estate
market. Her misconduct, shortly stated, was her causing properties placed with
her for sale
to be sold to herself or her daughter Sarah.
particularly there was a transaction in 2002 in which a client’s property
was sold to Sarah (under the name of Sarah Fedotov)
and to Mr Fedotov with whom
she was in a
traditional matrimonial relationship
in breach of section 145 of the PAMD Act. Again in 2003, as agent for a client
(Loves) she arranged for the property to be sold
for $1.3 million dollars, and a week later
nominated herself as the nominee and obtained title to the property herself.
agreed facts
occupy 129 paragraphs, and for present
purposes it is sufficient to present a short summary.
are concerned with the period after 24 April 2008.
departmental officers spoke to the respondents shortly after that date, the
position taken by them was that Sarah was now the
principal of the business and
that Heather would be involved in the business only
administrative capacity
(see exhibit 2 para 10).
acts now admitted show that Heather did indeed
act as a real
estate agent
during that period, and that she was not a purely
administrative assistant. They fall into seven categories –
(a) display of
window advertisements (“listing cards”) of properties for sale,
containing Heathers photograph;
(b) kerbside
advertisements asserting or implying Heather’s involvement in the HFIR
(c) HFIR signs
on various properties asserting or implying Heather’s involvement in the
(d) continued
registration of Heather as proprietor of the business HFIR, accompanied by
attempts to amend that registration to show
the persons carrying on the business
as Heather and Sarah;
(e) continued
use of Heather’s trust account which remained at material times the only
trust account of the business;
(f) Heather’s
involvement in sales by Hill and Keep;
(g) Heather’s
attendance on
days and her involvement in
the negotiation process.
the evidence shows a range of matters in which Heather seems to have maintained
a presence and involvement in the conduct
of the business. The main difficulty
lies in evaluating the extent of her involvement when no evidence has been
provided of the
financial arrangements that existed between Heather and Sarah.
No information is available concerning the manner in which profits
of HFIR were
distributed or how either respondent was remunerated.
discussing the evidence at length, it is clear that Heather continued to act as
a real estate agent after 24 April 2009.
At the same time it is fair to say
that the conduct of the respective respondents reflected some attempt to limit
involvement, and that an effort was made, albeit an ineffectual
one, to limit her role in the business and increase Sarah’s.
done however did not even come close to an observance of the tribunal’s
order of disqualification.
most difficult task confronting me is to determine the extent to which Heather
continued to perform real estate agent activities
of the kind recognised in the
Legal Background
496 of the PAMD Act identifies the grounds for commencing a disciplinary
proceeding. Sub-section 1(b) provides as one of
these grounds that a
has contravened or breached the Act. The
is widely defined in section 469 as
a former licensee and a person who is not licensed, but
who acts as a licensee
. Jurisdiction therefore exists to proceed
against Heather notwithstanding that she does not currently hold a licence.
relevant offence which Heather is said to have contravened is section 160(1).
It provides that a person must not
“as an agent for someone else for
reward, perform an activity that may be done under the authority of a real
estate agent’s
licence, unless the person ... holds a real estate
agent’s licence ... ”.
An example of the way in which a person may act as a real estate agent is
given in section 160(3) which (non-exhaustively) includes
an activity mentioned
in section 128(1). This expressly includes
to negotiate for the
buying, selling, exchanging or letting
of places of residence or
should also be noted that
“a person does not act as a real estate agent
only because the person, whilst performing duties as an employee of a real
agent’s registered office or other place of business - ... does
something of an administrative nature in relation to a thing
the real estate
agent does as a real estate agent”
(section 160(4)(a))
my view, the respondents plainly failed to bring themselves within that
128 lists the activities that a licence authorises a real estate agent to
perform. These include negotiating for the buying,
selling or exchanging of
places of residence or land (section 128(1)(e). The term “sell”
is further defined in schedule 2 to include –
“agree to sell, advertise or display for sale, attempt to
sell, have for sale, negotiate for sale, and in any way be concerned
if (contrary to my view of the evidence) Heather was an employee of Sarah as
distinct from a principal, her activities would
still infringe section 160. It
is expressly stated in section 128(2) that –
“a real estate agent may perform the activities in the
carrying on of a business, either alone or with others, or as an employee
someone else”.
is the performance of an activity that is the gist of section 160(1), not the
capacity in which the offender is employed.
question arises in both Heather’s and Sarah’s cases whether Heather
suitable person to hold a licence” under section
496(1)(g)(2). On this question section 26 expressly declares that –
“an individual is not a suitable person to hold a licence
if the person is ... currently disqualified from holding a
licence...”
“an individual who is not a suitable cannot hold a
Counsel for the respondents submitted that Heather’s disqualification
cannot be the basis for a finding under charge 1 (i.e.
respondent (Heather) is not a suitable person to hold a licence”) as
her previous conduct has already been subject of a penalty.
He submitted that
the Tribunal must consider whether the facts of the case in their own right
support such a categorisation. It
is true that the present proceedings could
not have been brought based solely on the previous disqualification, as such
further proceedings,
in the absence of further misconduct, would be pointless.
But the true issue here is whether Heather is now, in the light of her
suspension and subsequent conduct
“not a suitable person to hold a
I do not think that section 26 leaves room for a contrary finding. Even in the
absence of section 26, on the ordinary meaning of
“suitable person”
I would decide against the respondent on this issue. The term “suitable
person” has been
used in a variety of licensing statutes, and a number of
observations have been made by courts and tribunals on the factors that
to be weighed in determining whether a person satisfies that description or
similar descriptions. In the High Court case
Hughes & Vale Pty Ltd v
New South Wales
[1955] HCA 28
(1955) 93 CLR 127
the Court observed that the
expression “fit and
proper” gives the widest scope for
judgment, and that this issue is not just confined to an inquiry into the
applicant’s
character, noting that it would be “unwise to
attempt any definition of the matters which may legitimately be enquired
into; each case must depend upon its own circumstances”.
Comments on the
special role of the relevant tribunal in making such determinations were made by
Mason CJ in
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
[1990] HCA 33
(1990) 170 CLR 321.
Counsel for the applicant Chief Executive also referred to
Sobey v Commercial
and Private Agents Board
20SASR70 and
Trelin v Department of Fair
(1999) NSWADT72 in which similar questions are usefully
there is no real difficulty in determining this issue in the present case. The
circumstances of Heather’s disqualification
demonstrate unfitness, and far
from demonstrating any rehabilitation, her subsequent actions show further
misconduct.
is therefore open to find that she was at material times (as is not now) a
suitable person to hold a licence. Indeed, quite apart
from section 26, on the
evidence it would be impossible to hold otherwise.
Preliminary
indicated earlier, charge number 1 (that under section 496(1)(g)(1), she is not
a suitable person to hold a licence) remains in
issue. It is therefore my task
to decide whether, on the admitted facts, this charge has been made out.
the reasons already given I am satisfied that it has.
I shall now proceed to consider why consequences should follow Heather’s
misconduct on her charges 1 and 2 and Sarah’s
misconduct on her charge
Discussion – characterisation of respondents
refer to the seven categories of acts relied on to show that Heather continued
to act as a real estate agent. (See paragraph 17
above). When Heather’s
disqualification was re-imposed in April 2008, she and Sarah were obliged to
cancel current advertising
that displayed together as active in the business.
The steps taken to achieve this were little more than perfunctory. Sarah
for” the owner of one website on which these
advertisements were displayed to omit references to Heather, and an email was
sent to another such website in late April 2008 requesting deletion of
references to Heather. Several months elapsed before the
website owners made
the necessary deletions. On the current state of the evidence, it may be
inferred that both respondents were
lax about this matter. They did not follow
it up, and failed to ensure that Heather’s presence in the business was
terminated, as a conscientious real estate agent wishing to obey the
directions of the court and tribunal would have done. Standing
failure might not be regarded as particularly reprehensible. It is however,
just one aspect of a much wider course of
property signs and window cards in which Heather was displayed as actively
associated with the business, all predated the disqualification.
respondents had removed 150 of these cards by 29 May 2008, which was the date
when the inspectors drew their concern to the
respondents. But the evidence
suggests that there were 30 properties still advertised with a connection to
Heather. A substantial
number of offending cards and signs remained there more
than a month after the disqualification became effective. This failure by
respondents to remove or amend the cards and signs shows a lack of conscientious
response to the orders of the court and the
actions of both respondents in relation to attempted amendment of business names
register are in my view quite significant. Their
Counsel admitted that they
should have removed Heather’s name from that register, but submitted that
their failure and their
belated attempts to register both names as proprietors
of HFIR were “an honest, if mistaken, attempt to comply with the
consequences
of (Heather’s) disqualification”. I do not see the
matter in that light. They belatedly made an attempt to have Sarah
as a person carrying on the business, as a
co-proprietor of the business name. It seems to have been intended in all
material times
that Heather would remain a member of the business.
mildest description I can give this conduct is that it was reckless. No attempt
seems to have been made to obtain responsible
legal advice as to what role, if
any, Heather might continue to be used in the business, or of what needed to be
done in relation
to transfer of items such as goodwill, work in hand, chattels,
leases, trust account or any other indicia of the real estate practice.
Experience suggests that careful planning of such matters is usually necessary
following disqualifications of professional persons
or licensees such as real
estate agents from the right to practice.
the event both respondents proceeded to continue to operate the same business
under what seems to have been the pretext of confining
Heather to mere
administrative duties while she in fact continued to remain an active member of
the business.
seems to me that Heather was having her cake while pretending not to eat it, and
of Sarah knowingly co-operated in circumstances
where she obtained an increased
part of it.
Furthermore
the circumstances of continued abuse of Heather’s trust account are
concerning. It is true that an early notice
was given of Sarah’s
intention to open a trust account, but her applications in that behalf were
never properly supported.
The fundamental error that inevitably prevented the
grant of a separate trust account to Sarah was the determination of both
respondents
to remain co-proprietors of the business. This wrong-headed
approach was demonstrated in Sarah’s email of 29 September 2008
that Heather was a partner in the business of HFIR, but asserting that she did
not undertake any activity requiring her
to hold a real estate agent’s
licence (see admitted facts paragraph 41). In the event Heather’s trust
account continued
to be used. In my opinion the responsibility for and the
conduct of a real estate agent’s trust account lies at the heart
running of a real estate business. The provision of and continuing
responsibility for such an account in a real estate practice
is not in my view
merely “administrative”.
circumstance is further indicative of a degree of continuing control of the
business by Heather.
for the respondents submitted that the course of action followed by the
respondents was influenced by advice from investigators
or agents of the Office
of Fair Trading whom had had conversations with the respondents on 30 April 2008
and 29 May 2008, relevant
transcripts of these interviews are included in the
admitted facts showing that inter alia Sarah was advised that mere attendance
Heather at an open house was not of itself a breach of the Act and that she
could for example “open the door and allow
somebody in”.
Discussion touched upon whether Heather might be performing in an
“administrative position” in various
circumstances, but I do not
think that the investigator’s comments can be regarded as misleading or as
capable of inducing
the course of conduct which the respondents chose to follow.
There was an express statement to Sarah that “the person who carries
the business needs to be you” but further statements by Sarah in this
rather confusing conversation suggest a degree of
confused thought on her part
as to how that might be achieved.
do not think it can be fairly suggested that the subsequent actions of the
respondents were contributed to in any material way by
any advice given by these
officers. The comments appear to have been offered in a friendly fashion, and
it is possible that the
respondents did not see them as contradicting the course
that they proposed to follow. But the point is that at no stage did they
any clear disclosure to those officers of their business arrangements or how
they intended to proceed. They did little more
than assert generalities such as
that Sarah would be carrying on the business and that Heather would only be
doing things in an administrative
Submissions in
for the respondents submitted that the factual matrix was identical in relation
to both respondents, and broadly speaking
I think that it correct. He pointed
out in every situation Heather was accompanied by Sarah who was dually licensed,
that she never
identified herself to potential vendors as an agent, or sought
authority to act for a vendor or claim commission on any sale.
further submitted, in my view quite correctly, that there was no dishonesty
involved in the course of conduct, no dealing in money
or misrepresentations and
that no member of the public was shown to have suffered by reason of the actions
by either respondent.
further indicated that although Heather attended a number of open houses the
evidence suggests that a relatively early stage
of contact with interested
parties she would refer the enquiry to Sarah.
essence of the submissions for the respondents is that they took significant,
albeit insufficient steps to adjust the business
to the disqualification of
Heather. Their counsel submitted that both respondents “are deeply
remorseful” but I take
this as an assertion by counsel which is not
supported by the admitted facts or by evidence. The respondents certainly acted
responsibly
in retaining their present solicitors and in agreeing to the
admitted facts and admitting the charges they have admitted. That is
mitigating factor. However in the absence of actual evidence I am not prepared
to accept counsel’s assertion that
“(Heather) deeply regrets her
actions and ensures the tribunal that she will in the future disassociate
herself from any open
houses or intentional client contact for the duration of
her disqualification”. This seems to imply that she still has some
intention of remaining associated with the business and maintaining a presence
under the banner of “mere administrative activity”.
In the light of
past events that course seems fraught with risk.
contrast, counsel for the Chief Executive submitted that the respondents had
adequate time to put in place a detailed strategy
to remove Heather from the
business following the court decision, and failed to do so. He pointed out that
Heather continued to
attend open houses, meet with vendors and purchasers in a
capacity beyond that of administration and that penalties should be imposed
encourage the maintenance of standards in the real estate profession by other
licensees. He submitted that the offending by
Heather was contemptuous of the
court’s decision.
Final characterisation
do not accept either ultimate submission, that is to say the applicant’s
submission that the respondent’s actions reflect
contempt of the court
order, or the respondent’s submissions that their actions were basically
an error of judgement. In my
view Heather’s original disqualification was
for misconduct displaying a degree of greed, and her actions following
disqualification
show an intention to retain control of the ongoing real estate
business. At best the conduct of both respondents could be described
pachydermatous and reckless. There was no attempt to obtain reputable legal
advice and superficial adjustments were made that
were little more than a
pretence of obeying the Tribunal’s order.
Determination of
Heather’s case
disqualification raised an obligation to modify her business to accommodate it.
The steps that she took to do so
were wrong-headed and inadequate.
is no doubt that she must be held to be “not a suitable person to hold a
main question is for how long any further period of disqualification ought to be
ordered. The original suspension was for four
years, of which two and a half
years remain.
there are a number of mitigating features, including the absence of harm to
members of the public, the fact that some misguided
attempt was made to restrict
her activities, are in effect a plea of guilty in the present proceedings
accompanied by statements
of remorse and good future intent, I do not think that
a mere extension of the present period of disqualification would be a proper
response from this Tribunal. Experience in the disqualification of professional
persons suggests to me that when further misconduct
is proven against a person
already suspended it does not take very much to tip the matter over the edge and
require absolute disqualification.
I do not suggest that the level of conduct
expected of professional persons such as solicitors should be transposed to real
agents, but note that Tribunal Members have taken a stern view in
disciplinary proceedings under PAMDA of licensees who commit multiple
over a period, and I regard misconduct by a person already under suspension as a
serious indication of unfitness.
for the Chief Executive submitted that there should be either an absolute
disqualification or a lengthy one, accompanied by
a substantial fine.
529 of PAMDA gives the Tribunal power to make both orders. However, the primary
purpose of these proceedings is the protection
of the public, and this should be
achieved by a permanent disqualification. It is true that in some cases a
useful purpose is served
by the additional imposition of a fine which may act as
a deterrent to the respondent and to other likeminded persons, but I consider
that the aspect of deterrence will be sufficiently covered by a permanent
disqualification accompanied by an order for costs of these
proceedings. Of
course if there is any further breach of the PAMD Act she might expect very
severe penalties.
Determination of orders concerning
was fully aware of the Court of Appeal’s decision, and was under a duty to
reassess her business relationship with her
mother, in whose business she had
been working. She obtained her own real estate agents licence on 7 February
2006, only a few months
before the Court of Appeal decision. Obviously both
respondents were fully aware of the need to comply with the court’s order
but did nothing responsible to find out how this should be done.
Counsel submitted that she was probably to some extent dominated by her Mother.
In the absence of oral evidence in
cross-examination, I am not in a position to
know that this is so, but accept that from the given circumstances it is likely
some leading came from Heather and that some degree of influence was
exerted upon Sarah.
for the applicant drew attention to the fact that Sarah told the inspector on 29
May 2008 that Heather did not attend open
houses, stating
“It is me. I
do everything”
. He submitted that this was misleading. I see it as
glib hyperbole. Counsel’s submission is correct, but this is only a minor
detail in the overall picture.
the event Counsel for the applicant, having regard to the fact that this is the
first occasion in which Sarah has come before the
Tribunal on a disciplinary
charge, did not seek any order of disqualification against Sarah. In my view
her conduct was serious
enough to call for serious consideration of an order for
disqualification for a period. However, in the circumstances I will not
disqualification that the Chief Executive does not seek. Counsel’s
submission was that the appropriate order would
be a fine in the range between
$5,000.00 and $7,000.00.
am prepared to accept that submission, and will impose a fine of $6,000.00,
along with an order for the costs of these proceedings.
I also consider that
there should be a reprimand.
will be ordered that –
(a) The first respondent Heather Isobel Fillipini is disqualified
permanently from holding a licence or registration certificate.
(b) The second respondent Sarah Louise Penney also known as Sarah Fillipini
will pay to the Chief Executive a fine in the sum of $6,000.00
by, 4:00pm on 15
December 2009.
(c) The second respondent Sarah Louise Penney also known as Sarah Fillipini
is reprimanded.
(d) The first and second respondents will pay the Chief Executive’s
costs of proceedings fixed at $6,715.00.
_____________________________
MR J THOMAS AM QC
and Consumer Tribunal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (811 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter