URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCAT/2025/423.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:29:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Queensland College of Teachers v Teacher FZH [2025] QCAT 423 (27 October 2025)
QUEENSLAND CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE
Queensland College of Teachers v Teacher FZH
[2025] QCAT 423
QUEENSLAND COLLEGE OF TEACHERS
(applicant)
TEACHER FZH
(respondent)
APPLICATION NO:
MATTER TYPE:
Occupational regulation matters
DELIVERED ON:
27 October 2025
HEARING DATE:
29 August 2025
DECISION OF:
Member Arthur (Presiding)
Member English
Member H. Katter
ground for disciplinary action pursuant to section 92(1)(h) of the
Education (Queensland College of Teachers) Act 2005
established.
teacher is prohibited from re-applying for registration or permission to teach
indefinitely.
than to the parties of this proceeding publication is prohibited of any
information that may identify the Respondent, the former
students or the
relevant school, or another teacher other than to the extent necessary for the
Queensland College of Teachers to
meet its statutory obligations as provided
sections 285
Education (Queensland College
of Teachers) Act 2005
(Qld). The parties may provide a copy of this
decision to any regulatory authority or employer in compliance with any
requirements.
CATCHWORDS:
EDUCATION – EDUCATORS – REGISTRATION – TRAINING AND
REGISTRATION OF TEACHERS – where teacher engaged in inappropriate
with students of the school where the teacher was then teaching – whether
teacher’s conduct satisfies standard
of behaviour generally expected of a
teacher – consideration of appropriate disciplinary action
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW – ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS – QUEENSLAND
CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL – whether non-publication
order should
be made – where order necessary in the interests of protecting vulnerable
young persons
Education (Queensland College of Teachers) Act
s 160(2)(b)
s 160(2)(d)
s 160(2)(j)
s 160(2)(i)
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Queensland College of Teachers v IOP
[2022] QCAT
Queensland College of Teachers v Teacher VK
[2014] QCAT 268
APPEARANCES & REPRESENTATION:
D. Silvester, Manager, Discipline and Appeals, Queensland College of
Respondent:
B. Bezzina, Holding Redlich
REASONS FOR DECISION
Application or referral – disciplinary proceeding
was filed at the
Tribunal on 1 November 2024. In
of that form, as to what legislative
provisions provide grounds for taking the disciplinary action, there is
reference to
sections 92(1)(h)
Education (Queensland College of
Teachers) Act 2005
(Qld) (the “Act”).
of the Act states:
Requirement for college to start practice and conduct proceedings
(1) If the college reasonably believes, other than on the basis of interstate
information, that 1 or more grounds for disciplinary
action against a relevant
teacher exist, the college must refer the matter to the practice and conduct
body stated in subsection
(2) The practice and conduct body to which the matter must be referred
(a) for a general matter—QCAT; or
(b) for a PC&TC matter—the PC&TC committee. ...
(4) If a matter is referred to QCAT—
(a) the college must inform QCAT about the grounds for the practice and conduct
matter and the facts and circumstances forming the
basis for the grounds; and
(b) QCAT must conduct a hearing and make decisions about the practice and
conduct matter referred to QCAT having regard to the information
provided by the
[3] On 25 March
2025 it was directed by the Tribunal that the ‘application or referral
– disciplinary proceeding’
be heard and determined by a panel on the
papers and without an oral hearing, based on the filed material and written
submissions,
not before 4 April 2025. The Tribunal was subsequently constituted
for the hearing on the papers on 29 August 2025.
Section 158
of the Act relevantly states:
Decision about whether ground for disciplinary action is established
(1) As soon as practicable after finishing the hearing, QCAT must decide whether
a ground for disciplinary action against the relevant
teacher has been
established.
(2) In making its decision, QCAT must have regard to any relevant previous
decision by a practice and conduct body of which QCAT
(3) Subsection (2) does not limit the matters QCAT may consider in making
its decision. ...
the Act states that ‘the dictionary in schedule 3 defines
particular words used in this Act’. The phrase “relevant
teacher” as used in
section 158(1)
of the Act is in Schedule 3: “
relevant teacher
for chapter 3,
, division 3,
; or (b) otherwise, means— (i) an approved
teacher; or (ii) a former approved teacher.” At paragraph 2 of the
submissions
of the Applicant filed 27 February 2025 it is submitted that FZH is
a former approved teacher within the meaning of Schedule 3 of
the Act. FZH held
provisional registration until 20 December 2023, when FZH’s registration
ended, as FZH did not apply to
renew FZH’s registration at the end of the
provisional registration period. Schedule 3 defines a ‘
approved teacher
as (a) a former registered teacher; or (b) a
former holder of a permission to teach’. A former registered teacher in
3 is defined: ‘
former registered teacher
relation to a disciplinary matter, means a person who— (a) was a
registered teacher, whether under this Act or a former
Act, when the conduct to
which the disciplinary matter relates happened; and (b) is no longer a
registered teacher.’ FZH is
therefore a former approved teacher and a
relevant teacher according to the definitions in Schedule 3 of the Act.
[6] Section 92
of the Act relevantly states:
Grounds for disciplinary action
(1) Each of the following is a ground for disciplinary action against a relevant
teacher— ...
(h) the person behaves in a way, whether connected with the teaching profession
or otherwise, that does not satisfy the standard
of behaviour generally expected
of a teacher; ...
(2) The ground for disciplinary action mentioned in subsection (1)(h) is taken
to apply to a relevant teacher whose registration
or permission to teach is
suspended under section 48 if any of the following applies—
(a) the teacher has been charged with a serious offence and the charge has been
dealt with;
(b) the teacher has been charged with a serious offence and the teacher is
convicted of an offence other than an indictable offence;
(c) the teacher is or becomes subject to a temporary offender prohibition order
or interim sexual offender order.
(3) The object of subsection (2) is to ensure the circumstances of the change
are examined by a practice and conduct body.
(4) Subsection (2) does not limit the application of subsection (1)(h). ...
affidavit filed with the application form included allegations:
Allegation 1
On various ... dates in 2021 [FZH] engaged in inappropriate and/or overfamiliar
and/or unprofessional and/or sexualised conduct with
... students, including but
not limited to: ...
a. On various dates in 2021 engaged in inappropriate and/or overfamiliar and/or
sexualised communication with student ... , including
but not limited to:
i. Discussed age differences in sexual relationships with student ...
ii. Said to student ... words to the effect of ...
iii. Told student ... about ... sexual history including having a ...
iv. Told student ... that [the student] flirts with [FZH] ...
b. On an unknown date around late 2021, after [FZH] touched student ... on the
buttocks ... said words to the effect of ...
c. Between ... November 2021 ... engaged in inappropriate and/or overfamiliar
and/or sexualised electronic communication with student
... through [social
media] messages, including but not limited to:
i. Words to the effect of ...
ii. Words to the effect of ‘if you weren’t 14, I’d ...
iii. Told student that [FZH] had a sex dream about [student]
iv. Asked student ... to send [FZH] pictures
v. Discussed with student ... [FZH’s] personal Cannabis use
Allegation 2
On various dates in 2021 engaged in inappropriate and/or overfamiliar and/or
unprofessional and/or sexualised communication with
... students including but
not limited to:
a. Discussed with students [FZH’s] personal Cannibis use
b. Discussed losing one’s virginity
c. Discussed lesbians cutting their fingernails so they can finger each other
d. Discussed giving a girl ... and getting a rash ...
e. Discussed students posting sexualised photographs on social media
f. Made sexualised jokes to students
g. Discussed with Year 9 student ... [that student’s] anoxeria, and
referred to porn viewing habits during the discussion
h. Discussed with Year 9 student ... a rumour regarding [that student’s]
sexualised history ...
Allegation 3
On unknown dates in 2021 engaged in inappropriate and/or overfamiliar and/or
unprofessional physical contact with ... students, including:
a. Tapped Year 9 student ... on ... leg to get ... attention
b. Stood next to Year 9 student ... so that ... knew touched [student] leg
submissions of FZH filed 28 March 2025 at paragraph 14 state:
‘Disciplinary Ground ... FZH makes no submissions on
disciplinary grounds
and leaves this in the hands of the Tribunal’.
[9] In making
the decision as to whether a ground for disciplinary action against the relevant
teacher has been established according
to s 158(1) of the Act, the Tribunal
must, according to s 158(2) of the Act, have regard to any relevant previous
decision by a practice
and conduct body of which the Tribunal is aware.
submitted by the Applicant, in
Queensland College of Teachers v Armstrong
[2010] QCAT 709
, the Tribunal stated at [33]: “ ... the standard expected
should be the standard ‘reasonably’ expected by the
community at
large, as the actions of a teacher may impact directly upon the children of the
community; and this in turn should reflect
the standard that those in the
teaching profession would expect of their colleagues and peers.”
“The standard expected
of teachers is fluid and informed by how the
community, including the teaching profession, would expect a teacher to
“Teachers are
bestowed with a special trust by parents and the community to act in the best
interests of students and to protect
them from harm, and with that trust an
expectation that it will not be
Applicant referred particularly to the following previous
Queensland College of Teachers v IOP
[2022] QCAT 241
was a 27 year-old male teacher with around 3 years’ experience who
engaged in inappropriate and sexualised conversations with
two students.
sent sexually explicit photos to students and a video of him masturbating.
The students were in year 12 or former year 12 students
at the time of the
conduct. The Tribunal considered that his behaviour clearly fell below the
standard of behaviour expected of
a teacher. He was prohibited from reapplying
for registration indefinitely.
Queensland College of Teachers v BNU
[2022] QCAT 255
was 32 years old and had around 5 years’ experience at the time the
conduct commenced. The conduct lasted for about two years
and related to one
student who was in grade 11 and 12.
inappropriately hugged the
student, touched the student’s bottom on more than one occasion, said to
the student “I love
showed no insight or
remorse into his conduct. He had been on suspension for 3.5 years at the time
his registration was cancelled,
and he was prohibited from reapplying for
registration for a further 1.5 years.
Queensland College of Teachers v NRR
[2021] QCAT 152
had engaged in communications with three former students that included
references to drug, alcohol and steroid use, intimate and/or
communications and the exchange of intimate and/or sexual images. ... He was
prohibited from applying for registration for
two years and nine months from the
date of his suspension.
[2022] QCAT 406
was a 41-year-old
experienced male teacher who engaged in conduct over a period of approximately 7
months with a 15 year old student.
There was a direct teacher/student
relationship.
had inappropriate and overfamiliar social media
communication with the student including offering to supply drugs.
accepted that the communication was inappropriate and showed remorse. He
was prohibited from reapplying for registration for two
years from the date of
his suspension.
[12] As to the
allegations, the Tribunal is satisfied it is appropriate to find the facts
referred to in allegations 1-3. FZH ‘has
behaved in a way connected with
the teaching profession that does not satisfy the standard of behaviour
generally expected of a teacher’.
The Tribunal decides that a ground for
disciplinary action, being the ground in s 92(1)(h) of the Act, has been
established.
[13] FZH submits
that if the Tribunal finds that a disciplinary ground is established, section
161 of the Act ‘should be applied’:
Decision about disciplinary action against former approved teacher
(1) This section applies if the relevant teacher is a
former approved teacher.
(2) If QCAT decides a ground for disciplinary action against the relevant
teacher has been established, QCAT may do 1 or more of
the following—
(a) decide to take no further action in relation to the matter;
(b) make an order requiring the teacher to pay to the college, by way of costs,
an amount QCAT considers appropriate having regard
(i) any expenses incurred by the college in investigating the matter; and
(ii) the expenses incurred by the college in the proceedings before QCAT;
(c) if QCAT would have made an order cancelling the teacher’s registration
or permission to teach if the teacher had been an
approved teacher—make an
order prohibiting the teacher from reapplying for registration or permission to
teach for a stated
period from the day the order is made or indefinitely;
section 352
(Decision about disciplinary action
against former approved teacher).
(d) make an order that a particular notation or endorsement about the teacher be
entered in the register.
[14] FZH submits
as to sanction, that:
... Teacher IOP
concerns the
following factual matrix: ... Teacher IOP participated in the Tribunal process
and accepted all but one of the allegations,
the final allegation was
substantiated by the Tribunal. ... Teacher IOP provided mitigation material to
the Tribunal in the form
of a report from a psychologist, however in the report
Teacher IOP had downplayed the extent of the allegations. The Tribunal found
this demonstrated that he had a lack of insight into the concerns. ...
The current matter can be compared to and distinguished from Teacher IOP as
follows: ... Teacher IOP had more teaching experience
than the Respondent. ...
The conduct of the Respondent is less serious in that [FZH] has not exchanged
sexually explicit videos and
photos with multiple students. [FZH’s]
conduct in terms of messaging only extended to one student. ... The current
believed she was in a relationship with Teacher IOP. There was no
relationship in the present case. ... The material submitted
in mitigation by
Teacher IOP was concerning as it demonstrated he had failed to take
accountability with his psychologist by downplaying
the allegations. This is a
particularly aggravating feature for a person who is going through disciplinary
proceedings and who provided
the evidence to the Tribunal as a means of
demonstrating insight. This effectively provided a more recent example of a
lack of insight.
... The conduct of the Respondent sits lower on the scale than
Teacher IOP. Indefinite cancellation is the highest sanction available
Tribunal. Such a sanction should only be applied in cases of the most serious
nature. If the Tribunal determines that the
allegations are substantiated, it
is submitted that the conduct taken at its highest is not to such a level that
indefinite cancellation
is warranted. ... The Tribunal can consider that given
the young age and inexperience of the Respondent that the passage of time
having been through the process of these disciplinary proceedings could provide
the opportunity for rehabilitation by the time
any re-application for
registration occurs. ...
The case of teacher NRR
the following factual matrix ... Teacher NRR took responsibility for his conduct
and filed an agreed statement of facts.
... Teacher NRR was prohibited from
reapplying for a period of 2 years and 9 months. ... The current matter can be
compared to and
distinguished from NRR ... The allegations refer to the
Respondent messaging one current student through a social media platform
conduct did not extend to exchanging explicit photographs. ... The Respondent's
conduct involved current students, whereas
Teacher NRR's conduct involved former
students who had graduated. ... The Respondent was significantly less
experienced than Teacher
NRR. ... The relative age gap between the Respondent
and the student is significantly less than the age gap between Teacher NRR.
The alleged conduct of the Respondent is more serious than that of Teacher
The case of teacher BNU
the following factual matrix: ... Teacher BNU had engaged with a psychiatrist
as well as completed courses to demonstrate
insight. ... Teacher BNU was
prohibited from reapplying for a period of 1.5 years from the date of the order
noting he had already
been suspended for 3.5 years. ... The current matter can
be compared to and distinguished from Teacher BNU ... : The ages of the
students in the present case are younger than BNU. ... Teacher BNU had more
teaching experience than the Respondent and was 6 years
older than the
Respondent was at the time of the allegations. ... Teacher BNU's conduct
involved multiple instances of hugging the
student over a period of 6 months,
whereas the alleged Respondent's inappropriate conduct was a once-off. The
alleged contact with
the two other students is on the lower level and could be
characterised as unintentional. ... Teacher BNU was much more familiar
student and the conduct was indicative of a relationship between the teacher and
the student. ... Teacher BNU's registration
was prohibited from reapplying for
registration for a period of 1.5 years having already been suspended for 3.5
years at the date
of decision. ...
The Respondent's alleged conduct is less serious than that of Teacher BNU noting
that persistent intimate physical contact that Teacher
BNU engaged in with the
student that eventually became unwanted. Although the ages of the students in
the present case are lower,
the Tribunal should consider that consistent
unwanted physical intimacy is more concerning than the conduct in the present
... The Respondents conduct sits lower on the scale than that of Teacher
The case of teacher DHN
the following factual matrix: ... Teacher DHN expressed remorse for his actions
and acknowledged that his conduct was improper
... Teacher DHN received a two
year prohibition period from the date of his registration was suspended, not the
date the order was
made. ... The current matter can be compared to Teacher DHN
The Respondent was significantly younger and less experienced than Teacher DHN.
... Both cases involved a direct teacher student
relationship. ... The
Respondent has not accepted or disputed the allegations or provided any
mitigation material. ... The current
matter sits higher on the scale than the
conduct of Teacher DHN.
The case of Teacher BMT
the following factual matrix ... Teacher BMT was registered as a teacher for 5
years and was in her early 20s. ... The
student involved a female student who
was in year 9 - 10. ... Teacher BMT had previously been reprimanded by the
Professional Practice
and Conduct Committee in relation to over-familiar conduct
with students. ... Teacher BMT exchanged inappropriate and over familiar
messages with the student ... Teacher BMT had discussions with the student about
sexual matters and purchased condoms for a male
student facilitating a sexual
relationship between the 15 year old student and the male student. ... Teacher
BMT met up with the
student outside of school on multiple occasions over two
years and allowed her to attend her private residence. ... Teacher BMT
the allegations before the Tribunal. ... Teacher BMT was prohibited from
reapplying for a period of 4 years from the date
of suspension. ... The current
matter can be compared to Teacher BMT ... : ... Teacher BMT was a more
experienced teacher than
the Respondent. ... The students were of a similar age
in both cases and involved inappropriate and overfamiliar messages. ...
BMT's conduct extended to meeting up outside of school and facilitating a sexual
relationship between two students, one of
whom was under the age of consent.
... The Respondent did not go through a disciplinary process with the QCT and
it's alleged that
he was only spoken to by colleagues. ... The Allegations in
respect of the Respondent involve more students than Teacher BMT. ...
conduct of Teacher BMT sits higher on the scale than that of the Respondent
however Teacher BMT did accept the allegations, whereas
the Respondent has not.
The Tribunal should find that Queensland College of Teachers v Teacher BMT is of
the most assistance to
the Tribunal in determining the length noting the
similarities of the student’s ages, previous warnings and inappropriate
It is relevant to note that the Respondent's conduct did not extend
to meeting up with the student outside of school which is a
more significant
departure from the standards reasonably expected of a teacher.
[15] FZH submits
as to sanction in the submissions dated 28 March 2025:
On the material before the Tribunal, it is within the permissible range to
adequately address the issue of sanction as follows:
... the Respondent is
prohibited from re-applying for registration until 6 June 2027.
[16] At part C
of the application form, as to the orders sought, there is reference to an
attachment, which states:
The QCT seeks the following orders under the Act:
ground for disciplinary actions against the respondent under section 92(1)(h) is
established.
cancellation of the respondent’s teacher registration pursuant to section
160(2)(d) of the Act.
respondent is prohibited from reapplying for registration or permission to teach
indefinitely, pursuant to section 160(2)(j) of
Tribunal has previously stated as to
[26] Sanctions in a disciplinary action are not a ‘punishment’ nor
are sanctions punitive action against a teacher or
former teacher. This is a
well established principle in these matters. The purpose of the sanction is to
uphold the objects of
[27] Factors that are relevant to sanction in this matter are as follows:
(a) ... breach of professional boundaries;
(b) vulnerability of the students and risk of harm;
(c) experience as a teacher; and
(d) lack of insight into his behaviour.
findings as to allegations 1-3 are the ‘breach of professional
boundaries’ by FZH.
[19] There is
vulnerability, by reason of the age and year level of the students referred to
in the findings as to allegations 1-3.
[20] FZH had
been registered as a teacher for some 2 years.
[21] There are
no particular submissons made as to insight by FZH, but FZH submits that the
Tribunal should place relevant weight
on FZH’s age (mid-20’s) and
experience (some 2 years).
[22] There are
no mitigating factors identified by FZH.
[23] FZH submits
that there has been a ‘delay’ which is relevant to sanction. FZH
was suspended from employment in November
2021. In June 2023 the Applicant
suspended FZH. In July 2023 the Tribunal continued the suspension of FZH. FZH
submits that ‘there
has been unreasonable delay by the Applicant
concerning the date range of July 2023 (date the report was finalised) and
2024 (date of the Applicant’s disciplinary referral being filed
at the Tribunal). Having regard to the submissions as to the
delay, FZH then
submits that the comparable cases indicate the relevant range of the prohibition
period is from 2 to 5 years.
[24] FZH submits
that ‘indefinite cancellation is the highest sanction available to the
Tribunal and that such a sanction should
only be applied in cases of the most
serious nature. If the Tribunal determines that the allegations are
substantiated, it is submitted
that the conduct taken at its highest is not to
such a level that indefinite cancellation is warranted. The Tribunal may
FZH’s young age and inexperience. The passage of time combined
with experience of these disciplinary proceedings, could provide
an opportunity
for rehabilitation before any re-application for registration’.
[25] The purpose
of the sanction is to uphold the objects of the Act. The section 3 objects of
the Act are to uphold the standards
of the teaching profession, to maintain
public confidence in the teaching profession and to protect the public by
ensuring education
in schools is provided in a professional and competent way by
approved teachers.
Tribunal considers that FZH has not just failed to maintain professional
boundaries, but did so by particularly heinous communications
with students who
were particularly young and impressionable. FZH presumed to raise highly
sexualised topics in a classroom setting
and to make sexualised comments to
adolescent students. FZH appears to have been oblivious to the
inappropriateness of the conduct.
Tribunal would have made an order cancelling the teacher’s registration or
permission to teach if the teacher had been
an approved teacher. The Tribunal
will make an order prohibiting the teacher from reapplying for registration or
permission to teach
indefinitely.
November 2024 the Tribunal ordered that, other than to the parties to this
proceeding, publication is prohibited of any
information which may identify FZH,
the relevant complainant or child, or any relevant school, other than to the
extent necessary
to enable the College to meet its statutory obligations and as
otherwise provided under the Act, particularly under sections 285,
285AA, 285B
and 287. It is considered by the Tribunal that a permanent order should now be
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
Applicant’s submissions
in reply filed 4 April 2025, paragraph 14, referencing
Queensland College of
Teachers v PPK
[2019] QCAT 59
Applicant’s submissions
in reply filed 4 April 2025, paragraph 15, referencing
Queensland College of
Teachers v DGM
[2018] QCAT 194
Queensland College of Teachers v
[2024] QCAT 298
Applicant’s submissions
in reply filed 4 April 2025, paragraph 87.
Queensland College of
Teachers v IOP
[2022] QCAT 241.
Queensland College of
Teachers v NRR
[2021] QCAT 152.
Queensland College of
Teachers v Teacher BNU
[2022] QCAT 255.
Queensland College of
Teachers v DHN
[2022] QCAT 406.
Queensland College of
Teachers v Teacher BMT
[2024] QCAT 94.
Queensland College of
Teachers v IOP
[2022] QCAT 241.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (237 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter