URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCATA/2025/82.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:29:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Blue Water Co Pty Ltd v Castillo & Anor [2025] QCATA 82 (24 September 2025)
QUEENSLAND CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE
Blue Water Co Pty Ltd v Castillo & Anor
[2025] QCATA 82
BLUE WATER CO PTY LTD
(applicant/appellant)
CARLOS CASTILLO
(first respondent)
THE BODY CORPORATE FOR PALM COVE COMMERCIAL
(second respondent)
APPLICATION NO/S:
ORIGINATING APPLICATION NO/S:
MATTER TYPE:
DELIVERED ON:
24 September 2025
HEARING DATE:
12 September 2025
DECISION OF:
Senior Member Traves
appeal is dismissed.
time to comply with order 1 made on 26 February 2024 in application 0562-2023 is
extended to 3 months from the date of this order.
CATCHWORDS:
APPEAL – GENERAL PRINCIPLES – RIGHT OF APPEAL – WHEN
APPEAL LIES – ERROR OF LAW – where
Body Corporate
and Community Management Act 1997
(Qld) allows an appeal from an
Adjudicator’s order on a question of law
REAL PROPERTY – STRATA AND RELATED TITLES – MANAGEMENT AND
CONTROL – BYLAWS – whether a bylaw prohibiting
use of Lot for real
estate agency business is valid – consideration of
s 169(1)(b)
Body Corporate and Community Management Act 1997
whether bylaw was valid ‘regulation’ or invalid prohibition –
whether finding that bylaw oppressive
and unreasonable a finding of fact –
whether conciliation agreement a contract – whether estoppel applies given
of the conciliation agreement – whether adjudicator erred in
making orders that did more than necessary to give effect to the
adjudicator’s reasons.
Body Corporate and Community Management Act 1997
Body Corporate and Community Management (Small Schemes Module)
Regulation 2020
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
Black v Summer Waters Body Corporate CTS 19297
[2022] QCATA 067
Body Corporate for River City Apartments CTS 31622 v McGarvey
Crystal Waters Permaculture Village & Ors
[2020] QCATA 80
Fairway Island GTP v Redman and Murray
[2019] QMC 13
Mineralogy Pty Ltd v The Body Corporate for ‘The Lakes
[2002] QCA 550
NG Enterprises Ltd v Urban Council
[1996] UKPC 30
[1997] AC 168
Swan Hill Corporation v Bradbury
[1937] HCA 15
(1937) 56 CLR 746
Swiatek v The Body Corporate for Euro Residential
[2019] QCATA 158
APPEARANCES & REPRESENTATION:
This matter was heard and determined on the papers pursuant to
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
REASONS FOR DECISION
is an appeal pursuant to
Body Corporate and Community Management
(Qld) (‘BCCMA’) from an order of an adjudicator
concerning a by-law of the Body Corporate for Palm Cove (second respondent).
Body Corporate and Community Management (Small Schemes Module) Regulation
(Qld) applies to the Palm Cove scheme.
[2] Palm Cove
Commercial is a two lot community titles scheme: Lot One is owned by Blue Water
Co Pty Ltd (the applicant), a real estate
agent and Lot Two is owned by the Mr
Castillo (the first respondent). Mr Castillo, who lodged the original
application against the
body corporate (naming Blue Water as an affected party),
contended that by-law 12.3 was invalid and sought an order that by-laws
12.4 be removed.
[3] By-law 12.3
Lot 2 must not be used for the purpose of a real estate agency, without first
obtaining the consent in writing of the owner of lot
1. The owner of lot 1 may
grant or refuse consent in its absolute discretion and may grant its consent
subject to conditions. The
owner of lot 1 may withdraw its consent by notice in
writing to the owner of lot 2 at any time. If the consent is withdrawn, the
of lot 2 as a real estate agency must cease immediately.
[4] The current
by-laws, including by-law 12.3 were the by-laws when the first Community
Management statement was lodged on 8 June
2004. Mr Castillo purchased Lot 2 on
18 October 2006 and was aware at that time of the existence of by-laws 12.3 and
[5] Mr Castillo
brought the application because he had had difficulty leasing the property with
the restriction imposed by by-law
12.3 and that all reasonable requests to lot 1
for Lot 2 to be used as a real estate agency or letting agency had been
[6] Mr Castillo
succeeded before the adjudicator who found that by-law 12.3 and associated
by-law 12.4 should be removed on the basis
they offended
of the BCCMA in
that they went beyond regulating the use and enjoyment of lots in the scheme and
instead amounted to a prohibition.
The adjudicator also found the by-law to be
‘oppressive or unreasonable’ within the meaning of s 180(7) of the
Finally, the adjudicator did not consider Mr Castillo was precluded or
estopped from bringing the application on the basis of an
earlier agreement
reached between Mr Castillo and Blue Water at conciliation.
[7] Blue Water
appeals from that decision.
Grounds of appeal
appeal to the Appeal Tribunal from a decision of an adjudicator may only be
brought on a question of law.
application commencing the appeal sets out three grounds of appeal. In brief,
the grounds are that the adjudicator:
(a) erred in dismissing the estoppel argument because she placed undue weight on
the enforceability of the conciliation agreement
under statute and common law,
when the submission found basis in equity; placed undue weight on the absence of
a consent order in
the terms of the conciliation agreement; and did not give any
or adequate weight on the submissions about estoppel by erring in her
application of equitable principles.
(‘the estoppel
(b) erred in finding that the following component of by-law 12.3 amounted to an
unlawful prohibition: Lot 2 must not be used for
the purpose of a real estate
(‘the regulation
(c) erred in ordering that by-laws 12.3 and 12.4 be removed entirely in
circumstances where the unenforceable part was that which
gave lot 1 unfettered
decision-making authority; did not find the part that said lot 2 must not be
used as a real estate agency to
be an unlawful prohibition, and ought to have
ordered only that the following part of 12.3 be removed:
...without first obtaining the consent in writing of the owner of lot 1. The
owner of lot 1 may grant or refuse consent in its absolute
discretion and may
grant its consent subject to conditions. The owner of lot 1 may withdraw its
consent by notice in writing to the
owner of lot 2 at any time. If the consent
is withdrawn, the use of lot 2 as a real estate agency must cease immediately.
(‘the drafting
Nature of the appeal
appeal is an appeal in the strict sense, that is that the Appeal Tribunal can
only give the decision which should have been
given at first instance on the
facts and law before the Tribunal at first instance. This is made clear by
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
(‘QCAT Act’) which provides that, in an appeal on a question of law,
the appeal tribunal must make its decision
on the basis of the material that was
before the tribunal at first instance and the findings of fact by that tribunal,
and, if further
evidence is required, the appeal tribunal may set aside the
decision and return the matter to the tribunal at first instance for
the hearing
of additional evidence.
Albrecht v Ainsworth &
the Court of Appeal
The appeal to QCATA was limited to a question of law. It
was an appeal in the strict sense, not an appeal by way of re-hearing. It
be determined on the material before the adjudicator. But had QCATA correctly
identified an error of law, I do not accept
the applicant’s contention
that its only course was to remit the matter to the same adjudicator for
determination according
to law. Once an error of law affecting the
adjudicator’s decision was correctly identified, QCATA could exercise the
adjudicator’s
powers and substitute its own decision based on the material
before the adjudicator, consistent with the adjudicator’s undisturbed
factual findings. So much is clear from the terms of s 294 BCCM Act
[12] It follows
that I am empowered to exercise the adjudicator’s powers and substitute my
own decision based on the material
before the adjudicator, consistent with the
adjudicator’s undisturbed factual findings.
The regulation ground
adjudicator decided that a by-law that prohibited a particular use, in this case
use as a real estate agency business, fell
outside the power in s 169 of the
BCCMA to make by-laws to ‘regulate’ the use and enjoyment of lots
included in the scheme.
Was the by-law an invalid prohibition or valid regulation of
use and enjoyment
issue is whether a ban on using one lot in a two lot scheme as a real estate
agency can properly be considered as providing
for ‘regulation’ of
the use of a lot within the meaning of s 169. A related issue raised by the
submissions on appeal,
rather than the grounds of appeal, is whether the by-law
is invalid because it is oppressive and unreasonable within the meaning
The adjudicator’s reasoning
adjudicator referred to the power to make by-laws in s 169 of the BCCMA and to
Mineralogy Pty Ltd v Body Corporate for ‘The Lakes
and reasoned as
(a) It is settled law that prima facie, a power to make by-laws regulating a
subject matter does not extend to prohibiting it altogether.
The underlying
rationale is that a power to regulate an activity implies that the activity
will, despite such regulation, be capable
of continuing, which it would not do
if it were completely
prohibited.
(b) By-law 12.3 prohibits the use of Lot 2 as a real estate business unless
consent is obtained from the owner of Lot 1. Prima facie,
this is a prohibition
that goes beyond the power given under s 169 to regulate the use and enjoyment
of a lot. It not only regulates
but prohibits the activity of real estate
altogether.
, a by-law that prohibited an occupier carrying out any
building works (which was generally accepted as a basic right of a landowner)
their lot without the approval of the body corporate committee went beyond mere
regulation. However, the fact the prohibition
was qualified by supplying an
objective standard by which to judge the character of the proposed works and
that approval must not
be unreasonably withheld, meant the by-law was not
invalid on the ground of its being prohibitory rather than
regulatory.
(d) The same reasoning applied to make the by-law prima facie a prohibition
because it banned lot 2 from being used as a real estate
agency, a normal
commercial activity. Prima facie this appears prohibitive in that it does not
allow the lot owner to use his lot
for a lawful business purpose, which arguably
is a basic right of a commercial land
, there were no objective criteria set out in the
by-law and the safeguard in s 94(2) of the BCCMA (the duty to act reasonably)
applied to decisions made by bodies corporate, not individual lot owners.
By-law 12.3 is a prohibition of a certain use, subject
to the unfettered
authority of the other lot owner in the scheme and, on that basis, is invalid.
The parties’ submissions
the community titles scheme consists of only two lots and each lot owner had
provided submissions, the body corporate was
not directed to provide
submissions.
applicant submitted that the adjudicator erred in finding that the by-law
amounts to an unlawful prohibition, and not a lawful
regulation, of the
respondent’s use of his lot. The applicant conceded that the vesting of
discretion in lot owner 1 is inconsistent
with s 169 of the BCCMA. However, that
the restraint of lot 2’s use as a real estate agency was not an unlawful
prohibition
but rather the regulation of that lot’s commercial use. The
applicant submitted that:
(a) a by-law may prohibit a lot owner from acting in a manner that unreasonably
interferes with another lot owner’s peaceful
enjoyment of the lot
owner’s lot or the common property;
(b) what is unreasonable depends on the circumstances;
(c) in some cases what is reasonable may extend to prohibition in some form
(referring to
Fairway Island GTP v Redman and
(d) while the adjudicator accepted that commercial use may reasonably be
regulated by the prohibition of particular species of commercial
use, she erred
in her assessment of what may infringe peaceful use and enjoyment by implicitly
limiting that category to uses which
involved overt sensory infringement (like a
nightclub) or an abnormal commercial activity;
(e) peace and enjoyment may be infringed by any number of intangible matters,
including where two lot owners in a two lot scheme
are in untenable conflict due
to their competing commercial uses;
(f) although it is not inherently unreasonable to have two competing businesses
in a scheme, it is unreasonable in this case where
there are only two lots in
the scheme, the two lot owners will be operating in conflict to the detriment of
each other and ultimately,
to the scheme;
(g) the adjudicator’s perception that the by-law was to the commercial
benefit of the applicant was determinative, wrongly,
in her finding the by-law
unreasonable, and meant she did not properly consider the by-law’s utility
as a means of obviating
the mutual financial disadvantage of direct competition
between lot owners and in doing so, in ensuring the scheme’s practical
financial viability.
respondent submitted that by-law 12.3 unreasonably interferes with his peaceful
enjoyment of the lot, that it is absolute
and cannot properly be characterised
as regulatory. The respondent referred to
Swan Hill Corporation v
where the High
Court held:
Prima facie a power to make by-laws regulating a subject matter does not extend
to prohibiting it either altogether or subject to
a discretionary licence or
consent. By-laws made under such a power may prescribe time, place, manner
and circumstance and they
may impose conditions, but under the prima facie
meaning of the word they must stop short of preventing or suppressing the thing
or course of conduct to be regulated.
respondent also referred to
Mineralogy Pty Ltd v The Body Corporate for
McPherson JA held:
The underlying rationale is that a power to regulate an activity implies that
the activity will, despite such regulation, be capable
of continuing, which it
would not do if it were completely prohibited.
respondent submitted that:
(a) the decision of
can be distinguished because it was made in
the context of the
Building Units and Group Titles Act 1980
(Qld); dealt
with nuisance created by short term letting in residential property; and where
the example given in the matter related
to a prohibition made in respect of
dangerous animals which is not relevant to a prohibition on a type of use in a
commercial tenancy
building where the issue is not ‘nuisance’ but
perceived commercial market competition;
(b) the applicant has failed to establish how its quiet use and enjoyment would
be infringed by a real estate agency conducting usual
commercial activities from
the other lot and did not refer to any case law which supported its
(c) the conflict referred to is hypothetical and baseless given conflict can
arise between lot owners despite the nature of the business
being conducted from
(d) the respondent disagrees that the real estate agency will interfere with the
applicant’s quiet enjoyment and have a negative
impact on its business.
The respondent submitted that this assertion was not substantiated and that the
dual real estate agencies
may in fact increase foot traffic to the area.
Further, that the applicant had opposed a short stay holiday letting business
is not covered by the applicant’s business and had no way of
competing with their sales and long term rental market business;
(e) protection of the commercial interests of lot 1 is not a proper basis for
upholding an otherwise unreasonable by-law.
Consideration
[21] Section
169 of the BCCMA provides, relevantly:
169 Content and extent of by-laws
(1) The by-laws for a community titles scheme may only provide
for the following—
(a) the administration, management and control of common
property and body corporate assets;
(b) regulation of, including conditions applying to, the use
and enjoyment of—
(i) lots included in the scheme; and
(ii) common property, including utility infrastructure; and
(iii) body corporate assets, including easement areas relevant to common
property; and
(iv) services and amenities supplied by the body corporate;
(c) other matters this Act permits to be included in by-laws.
[22] Section 180
sets out various limitations on by-laws, including that a by-law must not be
oppressive or unreasonable, having regard
to the interests of all owners and
occupiers of lots included in the scheme and the use of common
[23] The issue
is whether the adjudicator erred in finding the by-law was invalid on the basis
that it prohibited a particular use
(as a real estate agency) subject to the
unfettered authority of the other lot owner, which went beyond regulating its
relevant by-law takes the form of a specific prohibition on the use of lot 2 as
a real estate agency without the consent
of the owner of lot 1. The question
turns on the extent of the authority in s 169 of the BCCMA to make by-laws
regulating the use
and enjoyment of lots in the scheme.
Mineralogy Pty Ltd v The Body Corporate for ‘The Lakes
the Queensland
Court of Appeal made the following observations:
(a) Prima facie a power to make by-laws regulating a subject matter does not
extend to prohibiting it either altogether or subject
to a discretionary licence
or consent:
Swan Hill Corporation v Bradbury
[1937] HCA 15
Corporation v Stewart
[1941] HCA 7.
But that proposition cannot be
universally applied:
Brunswick Corporation v Stewart
[1941] HCA 7
Starke J referring to
Slattery v Naylor
[1888] UKLawRpAC 25
(1888) 13 AppCas 446.
(b) The underlying rationale is that a power to regulate an activity implies
that the activity will, despite such regulation, be
capable of continuing, which
it would do if it were completely prohibited:
City of Toronto v Virgo
[1895] UKLawRpAC 46
[1896] AC 88.
(c) Prohibition of an activity in part, in a particular case, or in a particular
way, may however in some circumstances be needed
in order to achieve effective
regulation.
(d) The extent to which such partial prohibition is permissible depends on the
terms of the power to regulate and on the context
in which the power is to be
Ng Enterprises Ltd v Urban Council
[1996] UKPC 30.
should have regard to the body entrusted with the power and the language in
which the power is expressed and the subject
matter with which the body has to
Goldberg v Law Institute of Victoria
[1972] VicRp 69
[1972] VR 605
, for example,
it was held that a prohibition upon exhibiting a sign or nameplate of more than
a specified size on solicitor’s
premises was authorised by a power to make
rules regulating professional duties, practice, conduct and discipline of
practitioners.
There, it was held that the provision relating to exhibiting
signs was no more than a particular prohibition in a solicitor’s
and was valid as a form of regulation.
[26] In the
Tribunal, in
Crystal Waters Permaculture Village & Ors v
it was said by Member
[35] There is now a body of jurisprudence that has accepted that a by‐law
prohibiting an activity without the written consent
of the body corporate, which
sets out an objective standard by which to judge the request and which provides
(directly or indirectly)
that consent cannot be unreasonably withheld, would not
necessarily go beyond regulation. This has as its foundation the River City
Body Corporate for River City Apartments CTS 31622 v McGarvey
[2012] QCATA 47)
, at [38] which in turn applied
Mineralogy Pty Ltd v The Body
Corporate for “The Lakes Coolum
[2002] QCA 550
[2003] 2 Qd R 381.
[36] For this reason, by‐laws allowing pets or companion animals other
than assistance dogs or other assistance animals for
persons with a disability
subject to written approval of the body corporate and conditions (such as limits
on the height or weight
of the animal) are likely to be enforceable and not open
to serious challenge.
Crystal Waters
the issue was whether an absolute prohibition on keeping
particular pets (namely cats and dogs or any other predatory animal) was
regulation.
construing s 169, Member Barlow SC (as he then was) in
Body Corporate for
River City Apartments CTS 31622 v
held that the
particular circumstances of a scheme are not relevant to the general
construction of a section of an Act. Such circumstances
would only be relevant
to whether the by-law was reasonable or oppressive in the sense provided for in
s 180(7), or in considering
whether the body corporate had acted unreasonably in
giving or refusing its consent under a
[29] There it
was held that the relevant context (in the
Ng Enterprises
simply ‘that there may be a number of types of scheme, in which owners and
occupiers may have a number of different
objectives and uses for their lots, and
the very nature of any community titles scheme requires that relationships
between owners
and occupiers must be regulated in some discernible fashion, and
by reference to reasonable criteria unless specifically
, Member Barlow SC determined, applying
in the case of a vacant lot, a basic right of a landowner is to build a dwelling
on the land and that such a basic right could
not be prohibited under a
provision such as s169.
Swiatek v The Body Corporate for Euro
Residential
a by-law which
required a lot owner to get the approval of the body corporate for any changes
to the external appearance of the lot
was held to be valid regulation as opposed
to invalid prohibition. There, the fact the objective standard (to act
reasonably) was
found in the Act rather than the by-law was not
[31] I consider,
consistently with the above authorities, that the prohibition of a specific use
of a range of potential uses by a
particular lot may, in some circumstances,
amount to regulation of the use or enjoyment of lots rather than prohibition. In
context, that of commercial premises comprising two lots, the power to make
by-laws to regulate use would be nugatory unless it involved
a power to prohibit
a particular use.
[32] In my view,
a by-law which regulates use by excluding one use, does not amount to a general
prohibition on using and enjoying.
The lot owner subject to the specific
prohibition can still use the lot for any other use. For those reasons, I do not
find by-law
12.3 invalid. It was within the power given by s 169 to make by-laws
to exclude a use that conflicted with the use of the only other
Was the by-law oppressive or unreasonable
finding that the by-law is oppressive and unreasonable is, in my view, a finding
of fact. It is, perhaps, a finding of mixed
fact and law, although that is not
my preferred view. In either circumstance, the appeal ground does not raise a
question of law.
Accordingly, I have no jurisdiction to consider it.
[34] In the
event I am wrong in that regard, I find as follows. Whether the by-law was
reasonable was relevant to the limitations
set out in s 180, in particular s
180(7) which provides that a by-law must not be ‘oppressive or
unreasonable’. The adjudicator
found, for the same reasons she found the
by-law to be an invalid prohibition, that it was also oppressive and
unreasonable.
The adjudicator
determined that the ordinary meaning of the words ‘oppressive’ and
‘unreasonable’ was to
be applied and that in considering whether a
by-law was either of these things, regard must be had to the facts and
circumstances
of the particular
adjudicator made the following relevant findings:
(a) as there are only 2 lots in the scheme, it seems to make commercial sense
not to have a competing business in close proximity;
(b) however, a real estate agency may conceivably operate from lot 2 without
adverse consequences for lot 1;
(c) the by-law gives the owner of lot 1 unqualified and unlimited discretion
with no requirement to act reasonably or to consider
any objective criteria;
(d) the decision to consent to the use rests on a single lot owner from which
there is no recourse for review rather than being a
reviewable decision made by
the body corporate;
(e) the discretion given to the owner of lot 1 is so wide that it could give
consent for lot 2 to be used as a real estate agency
only to withdraw it the
next day whether for its own commercial interests or for any reason at all;
(f) the effect of the by-law is to give one party excessive exercise of power
with the potential to result in unjustly harsh consequences
on the other, who is
supposed to be an equal lot owner in the scheme;
(g) that lot 2 can be used for a variety of business purposes does not make the
by-law any less oppressive. Palm Cove is a travel
destination known for its
luxurious accommodation. It seems oppressive and unreasonable in this tourism
setting, having regard to
the interests of both owners in the scheme, that the
by-law should prohibit one lot from being used for
real estate
purpose, which pursuant to by-law 12.4, includes the activity of selling,
letting, advertising, or managing real estate;
(h) there may be instances where two real estate agencies may co-exist without
materially impacting each other’s business viability.
For a scheme
situated in a tourism setting like Palm Cove, the by-law should at least allow
for such considerations;
(i) the material submitted evidences that the by-law has had at least some
impact on the owner of lot 2 in that he has lost potential
tenants due to the
restrictions. However, I do not place a great deal of weight on the leaseability
or saleability of the property
as I do not consider these arguments
determinative of the by-law’s validity.
applicant submitted that the by-law was reasonable and did not contravene s
180(7). The applicant contended that the adjudicator
erred, in effect, in
finding that because the by-law was to the commercial benefit of lot 1 that it
was necessarily unreasonable;
that she placed too much weight on the perceived
commercial benefit to lot 1 and failed to consider the implications of the
of direct competition between the only two lot owners in the scheme; and
the benefit to both, and to the financial viability of the
scheme, in avoiding
respondent submitted that the applicant had failed to establish how its use and
enjoyment would be ‘infringed’
by a real estate agency being
conducted from lot 2. That ‘conflict’ may arise between the lot
owners if the by-law is
removed is not a valid reason for imposing it. The
assertion that the commercial interests of the lot owners, and ultimately of the
scheme, would suffer was not substantiated and, in fact, dual real estate
agencies may ‘increase foot traffic’. The by-law
had been used to
oppose short stay holiday letting (on the basis the proposed lessee held a real
estate agents’ licence) which
was an area of real estate not covered by
the applicant’s business and did not compete with the applicant’s
long term market focus.
adjudicator, in my view, has not erred in considering the interests of the two
lot owners. This is a requirement of s 180(7).
The adjudicator considered that
lot 1 would benefit from the by-law and lot 2 would not. She was entitled to
take that into account
if that was the view she had reasonably formed on the
evidence before her. Whether she placed too much weight on the perceived benefit
to lot 1 is not a question of law.
[39] I do not
accept that the adjudicator failed to consider the implications of direct
competition between the lot owners. The adjudicator
acknowledged that,
generally, it ‘seems to make commercial sense not to have a competing
business in close
proximity.’
However, the
adjudicator ultimately found, considering that Palm Cove was a travel
destination known for its luxurious accommodation,
that it was oppressive and
unreasonable for the by-law to prohibit one lot from being used for
real estate purpose.
adjudicator concluded that the applicant had demonstrated that ‘there may
be instances where 2 real estate agencies may
co-exist without materially
impacting each other’s business
viability.’
adjudicator has not erred in law in this respect.
[40] There is
also no error, in my view, in having regard to the absence of any
‘safeguards’ in the by-law in the form
of objective criteria to be
applied by the owner of lot 1 in deciding whether to consent to the otherwise
prohibited use nor a requirement
to act reasonably in doing so.
conclusion, I do not consider the adjudicator erred in considering whether it
was unreasonable in the context of the location
and size of the scheme, for use
as a real estate agency to be prohibited. Nor did she err in arriving at the
conclusion that the
by-law was too wide in that it prohibited categories of real
estate business that would not compete with the business run by the
owner of lot
[42] Insofar as
this ground raises errors of law, it is refused. The ground that the adjudicator
failed to consider the impact to
the lot owners and to the scheme of running two
real estate businesses side-by-side is an error of mixed law or fact and cannot
determined in this appeal, being confined, as it is, to questions of law
completeness I would add that I am satisfied that by-laws regulating the
‘use of lots’ can extend to a by-law
that applies to a single lot by
precluding the owner or occupier of that lot from carrying on a real estate
agency business there.
In this regard, when considering
Strata Titles Act 1973
(NSW) the Court of Appeal of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales in
Sydney Diagnostic Services Pty Ltd v Hamlena Pty
Parliament must have intended bodies corporate to have power to pass
by‐laws regulating ‘the use’ of each lot in
a strata plan and
... [that this power] extended to regulating what trades, avocations and
activities could and could not be conducted
[44] In one
sense a by-law which restricts the user of a lot restricts the right of the lot
owner to deal with the lot. Such a restriction
prima facie offends s 180(4) of
the BCCMA which provides that a by-law can not prevent or restrict a
transmission, transfer, mortgage
or other dealing with a lot. However most
by-laws include restrictions on the use of a lot, for example, those which
restrict pets
without the approval of the body corporate. This by-law restricts
the right of a lot owner to grant a lease permitting the lessee
to carry on a
real estate agency business. This does not make it, on that account, invalid. In
my view, a mere restriction on use
of a lot which might limit the number of
potential transferees or lessees of a lot (as argued by the respondent has
resulted from
the by-law) does not amount to a restriction on dealing in
contravention of s
The estoppel ground
applicant submitted that the adjudicator erred in her consideration of their
estoppel argument by referring to matters that
were immaterial to a finding of
estoppel in equity.
applicant argued before the adjudicator that the respondent was estopped from
resiling from their earlier agreement reached
at conciliation in 2015
(conciliation agreement 0317-2015) whereby it was agreed that:
(a) the respondent would cease trying to change by-law 12 and would withdraw his
motion to remove paragraphs and 12.4 of the by-laws;
(b) that the applicant, as proprietor of lot 2, would vote in favour of the
applicant undertaking certain works for the benefit of
the respondent at the
cost of the body corporate.
applicant submitted to the adjudicator that it had, in reliance on the
respondent’s promises, voted in favour of the
body corporate undertaking
the works addressed in the agreement and effectively funded 60% of the costs
involved through contributions
it made in accordance with the Contribution
Schedule entitlement; and the body corporate undertook the works and did so to
its detriment
by incurring the costs for the works and exposing itself to
liability for payment of those costs.
The adjudicator’s findings in relation to
adjudicator made the following relevant findings:
(a) Conciliation agreements are commonly understood to be good will agreements.
Unlike an adjudicator’s order, there is no
specific provision in the
legislation regarding the enforceability of a conciliation agreement. Where the
parties agree, the agreement
may be referred to an adjudicator for a consent
(b) The relevant conciliation agreement was not the subject of a consent order.
In any event, the ‘promise’ made by the
respondent to cease trying
to change the by-law was not enforceable and could not have been the subject of
a consent order.
(c) An agreement made in conciliation does not preclude the owner of lot 2 from
bringing the application.
(d) The claimed estoppel has not been established and there is nothing in force
(for example a consent order) restraining the owner
of lot 2 from bringing the
application and, as such, nothing to preclude the adjudicator from determining
the application.
(e) Whatever equitable remedy the owner of lot 1 may have arising out of the
claimed estoppel is a separate matter for determination
in the appropriate
(f) In any event, I am unable to see what ‘detriment’ the owner of
lot 1 has suffered as there is no evidence that the
owner of lot 1 or the body
corporate contributed to the works. From a reading of the conciliation
agreement, it was the owner of
lot 2 who bore all the costs associated with the
improvements agreed to his exclusive area.
The parties’ submissions
applicant submitted that:
(a) the adjudicator erred by placing weight on the absence of a statutory or
court ordered restraint, which is not relevant to a
finding of estoppel;
(b) not only was the respondent estopped in equity from trying to change the
by-law, he was precluded by the contract from doing
(c) owing to the applicant entering into and performing its obligations under
the agreement to its detriment, the respondent is estopped
from engaging in
conduct that disregards its corresponding obligations under the agreement.
respondent submitted that:
(a) the agreement, relevantly, provided that ‘the [owner of lot 1] will
vote in favour of the motion ...to approve the improvements
to common property
within [the owner of lot 2’s] exclusive use area subject to conditions
that the [owner of lot 2] bears all
costs associated with the improvements and
[the owner of lot 2] will at his own cost install a water meter ...before lot 2
as a café.’
(b) the applicant did not act to its detriment because the respondent bore all
costs associated with the works and the applicant
made no financial contribution
to any of the works.
(c) if estoppel is found to exist, that the respondent acted under duress in
that he had a tenant ready subject to getting Council
approval to run a
café. The works were to satisfy Council requirements.
Consideration
conciliation agreement entered into on 16 June 2015 and certified by a
Conciliator with the Office of the Commissioner for
Body Corporate and Community
Management provided, relevantly:
Application reference no:
Palm Cove Commercial CTS 33113
Address of scheme:
Carlos Castillo
Respondent:
Bluewater Co Pty Ltd
In the matter of the dispute resolution application made under the
Corporate and Community Management Act 1997
(the Act) made by the applicant
against the respondent, it has been agreed between the parties that:
applicant will cease trying to change by-law 12 and will withdraw his motion to
remove paragraphs 12.3 and 12.4 from the by-laws.
respondent will vote in favour of a motion at the forthcoming general meeting to
approve the following improvements to common
property within the
applicant’s exclusive use area, subject to conditions that the applicant
bears all costs associated with
the improvements, maintains the improvements in
good condition, and promptly remedies any adverse impacts upon lot 1 or the
property that result from the works:
Installation
of 3 gravel car parks;
Landscaping;
Installation
of a new grease trap just outside the Eastern boundary of the applicant’s
Installation
of a small slab with a woof over it for storing lot 2’s bins just outside
the Eastern boundary of the applicant’s
3. The applicant will, at his own cost, install a water meter to separately
measure lot 2’s water consumption before lot 2
commences operation as a
4. The applicant will restore the grease trap in lot 1’s exclusive use
area to the condition it was in prior to the recent
inspection by a plumber.
[52] Section
252I(1) of the BCCMA provides that an agreement reached at the department
conciliation session must be written and signed
by each party to the application
and the department conciliator. Section 252I(4) provides, relevantly, that if
each party consents,
the department conciliator must refer the agreement to the
commissioner for referral to an adjudicator for a consent order. The
conciliation
agreement entered into between the parties on 16 June 2015 was
referred back to the commissioner by the conciliator because an agreement
but no consent orders
were made. Section 252I(5) provides that if an agreement is referred to the
commissioner, the commissioner
must refer it to an adjudicator for a consent
order under s 276(5). It is not clear why no orders were made.
[53] There is an
issue as to whether an agreement such as that reached by the parties is capable
of being enforced in the absence
of consent orders. The legislation does not
expressly deal with the question. That said, s 252I(4) is not mandatory in its
In my view, an agreement otherwise binding is not deprived of being so
if consent orders are not made.
necessary to construe the agreement. In my opinion, its effect is that the
‘applicant’ promises to cease trying
to change by-law 12 by
withdrawing his motion to remove paragraphs 12.3 and 12.4 from the by-laws. That
is the extent of the promise.
The ‘respondent’ agrees to vote in
favour of a motion to approve a number of improvements to common property. The
‘applicant’
agrees to pay for all costs associated with the
improvements.
adjudicator found that there was no evidence that the owner of Lot 1 or the body
corporate contributed to the cost of the
works. That finding is not challenged
and is consistent with the proper construction of the agreement.
applicant in this appeal submits that the agreement reached amounted to a
contract. I agree. Both parties agreed to forbear
from pursuing their legal
rights in order to compromise a dispute. That is consideration sufficient to
support the contract.
[57] However,
the respondent here did not agree by the contract forever to abandon his right
to argue that the by-law was contrary
to law. The contract was more confined in
its effect.
argument that there arose a promissory estoppel is relevant only insofar as
there is no contract. Here, I have found there
is a contract. But in any event,
the effect of the promise sought to be enforced by the estoppel argument falls
short of preventing
the respondent from seeking to have the by-law set aside for
invalidity. Accordingly, even if an estoppel were established, it could
succeed in the appeal.
[59] For the
sake of completeness, and although the point is irrelevant in light of my
finding as to the effect of the promise, when
considering promissory estoppel,
the relevant detriment is that which would be suffered by the promissee if the
promisor was permitted
to depart from his promise. The only potential
‘detriment’ established on the evidence is the applicant voting in
of the motion. In my view, that is not relevant detriment and, in any
event, would not be sufficient to render it unconscionable
for the respondent to
seek to have the by-law determined as invalid.
[60] For the
above reasons, the estoppel ground of appeal is dismissed.
The drafting ground
this ground, the applicant submits that the adjudicator erred in making orders
that did more than was necessary to give effect
to her reasons, that is, by
deleting by-laws 12.3 and 12.4 in their entirety rather than merely deleting the
following component
of by-law 12 .3:
...without first obtaining the consent in writing of the owner of lot 1. The
owner of lot 1 may grant or refuse consent in its absolute
discretion and may
grant its consent subject to conditions. The owner of lot 1 may withdraw its
consent by notice in writing to the
owner of lot 2 at any time. If the consent
is withdrawn, the use of lot 2 as a real estate agency must cease immediately.
applicant submitted that this was the component of the by-law that the
adjudicator found unenforceable because it gave the
applicant ‘unfettered
decision-making authority’.
respondent submits that the proposed amended by-law (without the component
requiring the consent of lot 1) ‘fits squarely
within the bounds of being
a prohibition’.
Consideration
adjudicator determined that the first sentence of by-law 12.3 ‘appear[ed]
prima facie prohibitive’. The component
which added that the owner of lot
1 had absolute discretion meant that, in the adjudicator’s view, the
by-law could not be
saved in the same way it had been in
the inclusion of objective criteria and a reasonableness overlay.
[65] I do not
consider it sufficiently certain that the determinative factor for the
adjudicator was the component which gave lot
1 absolute discretion. In other
words that the by-law would otherwise have been held to be valid.
[66] In my view,
it is not reflective of the adjudicator’s reasons to simply remove that
component dealing with consent by the
owner of lot 1, particularly given the
adjudicator’s comments regarding the inapplicability of the s 94
protection to the decision
by a lot owner.
[67] This appeal
ground is not made out.
[68] Ground
one has been made out. The by-law is not an invalid prohibition under s 169 of
[69] Ground two
has not been made out. The errors sought to be appealed are not errors of law.
Accordingly, the finding that the by-law
is oppressive and unreasonable within
the meaning of s 180(7) of the BCCMA stands. I note, in that respect, that an
assessment of
whether a by-law is oppressive or unreasonable extends beyond the
terms of the by-law on its face.
[70] Ground
three is not made out. Accordingly, the respondent is not prevented from arguing
that the by-law is invalid.
[71] Finally,
ground four is not made out, so the terms of the order of the adjudicator
remain. In the event there has been non-compliance
with the adjudicator’s
order, the time for compliance is extended to three months from the date of this
[72] Accordingly,
the appeal is
BCCMA, s 289(2).
Described this way by the
applicant in the Appeal Submissions filed on 10 September 2024.
[2015] QCA 220.
Ibid, [94].
[2002] QCA 55.
Reasons, [21].
Reasons, [24], [25], [29],
Reasons, [25].
[2019] QMC 13
[1937] HCA 15
[2002] QCA 550.
BCCMA, s 180(7).
[2002] QCA 550
[2020] QCATA 80.
[2012] QCATA 47.
Ibid, [44].
[2019] QCATA 158.
Ibid, [73].
Reasons, [33].
Reasons, [34].
Reasons, [35].
Reasons, [40].
Taubert v Body Corporate
for Grenache CTS 29711
[2025] QCATA 61
, [26] to [28].
(1991) 5 BPR 11, 432. See
Casuarina Rec Club Pty Limited v The Owners‐Strata Plan 77971
[2011] NSWCA 159
Bapson Pty Ltd v Puyeti Pty Ltd
(unreported)
NSWSC 24 May 1990, BC900245 at [8] and
Salerno v Proprietors
of Strata Plan No 42724
(1997) 8 BPR 15,457 15,458–15,459.
Ibid 11, 434.
See cases on similar
Bapson Pty Ltd v Puyeti Pty Ltd
(1990) NSW Title Cases 60,054;
Sydney Diagnostic Services Pty Ltd v Hamlena Pty Ltd; Salerno v Proprietors
of Strata Plan
42724 (1997) 8 BPR 15, 457 15,458–15,459;
Towers Real Estate Pty Ltd v Kin Fung
(2001) NSW Conv R 55–960, [22],
and compare
Regis Towers Real Estate Pty Ltd v CSS Holdings Pty Ltd
[2001] NSWSC 139
BCCMA, s 262(1)(c).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (316 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter