URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBCCMCmr/2025/392.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:27:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Galileo Tower [2025] QBCCMCmr 392 (5 November 2025)
ADJUDICATOR’S ORDER
Office of the
Commissioner
for Body Corporate and Community
Galileo Tower
[2025] QBCCMCmr 392
Marie Dawson (
The Body Corporate for Galileo Tower (
Galileo Tower CTS 14193
Body Corporate and Community Management Act 1997
sections 227(1)(b)
Body Corporate and Community Management (Standard Module) Regulation
Standard Module
APPLICATION NO:
DECISION DATE:
5 November 2025
DECISION OF:
K Davidson, Adjudicator
CATCHWORDS:
COMMON PROPERTY – whether body corporate’s duty to manage and
maintain common property requires it to install a handrail
for safety to a
flight of more than a dozen stairs leading to the common property pool;
REASONABLENESS – whether body corporate
has acted reasonably in making
decisions about installing a handrail.
(2); Standard Module,
30 days of this order, the Body Corporate for Galileo Tower CTS 14193 must
obtain at least one quote for the installation of
a handrail to the common
property stairs leading to the scheme’s pool area and for any related
works to gates and fences that
are necessary to comply with applicable pool
safety regulations (collectively, the
Handrail Works
60 days of this order, the body corporate must call and hold (in accordance with
the legislative requirements) an extraordinary
general meeting of the body
corporate, at which owners must consider and vote on:
a) a motion proposing that the body corporate approve the quote described in
Order 1 and authorise the associated expenditure on
the Handrail Works;
b) any other committee motion proposing an alternative quote for the Handrail
c) any motion, submitted to the committee within 30 days of this order by any
lot owner, including a motion proposing that the body
corporate approve a quote
for and expenditure on the Handrail Works; and
d) any other motions proposed by the committee or proposed by a lot owner and
received by the committee within 30 days of this order.
application is otherwise
REASONS FOR DECISION
application is about whether the body corporate has failed to act reasonably in
making decisions about installing a handrail
to stairs that provide access to
the pool at the scheme.
applicant says health and safety reports have confirmed that the lack of a
handrail poses a safety risk. She says the committee
and the body corporate
have failed to act reasonably in making decisions about installing a handrail.
She seeks an order that the
body corporate be required to accept a quote to
install a handrail and perform other works to ensure the pool complies with
pool safety legislation. She also seeks an order that she be
compensated for her efforts in having this issue resolved.
committee opposes the orders sought. It says the body corporate now has 2
additional quotes for handrail-related works.
It says those quotes and the
applicant’s quote should be considered by the body corporate at its annual
general meeting (
). However, it appears the body corporate did not
decide any handrail motions at its recent AGM.
[4] For the
reasons that follow, I have made orders requiring the body corporate to obtain
at least one quote for the handrail and
related works and that it call and hold
an extraordinary general meeting to consider approving a quote for the handrail
Preliminaries
scheme known as Galileo Tower CTS 14193 (
Galileo Tower
) is located in
Hamilton. Galileo Tower was established in the 1970s by registration of a
building format plan of subdivision (BUP899).
It consists of 12 lots and common
property. The community management statement (
) for Galileo Tower
shows the Standard Module applies.
applicant is the owner of Lot 5.
respondent is the Body Corporate for Galileo Tower.
Procedural matters and jurisdiction
applicant initially applied for an interim order restraining the committee for
the body corporate from making decisions about
the handrail for the staircase to
the pool area. I dismissed the application for interim
applicant made this application for final orders to resolve the dispute. The
application then proceeded according to the
legislation, with the Commissioner
inviting the respondent and all owners to make a submission on the
application.
The committee, acting
on behalf of the respondent, made a submission. No other submissions were
received. The applicant inspected
the submission and provided a reply. A
dispute resolution recommendation was made to refer the application to
department adjudication.
investigated the application by reviewing the submitted materials and by
requiring the body corporate to provide me with additional
information relevant
to the dispute.
The application
applicant explained in the application for interim orders that there is a pool
on the common property which is accessed via
The staircase has no
handrail. The applicant says that in a health and safety report back in 2003,
safety consultants identified
the lack of a handrail as a category 2 risk, with
the report recommending that the issue be rectified within 6 months. The same
consultants confirmed in March 2025 that the lack of a handrail remained a
safety risk.
applicant asserts that the body corporate is responsible for ensuring the common
property is maintained and is safe for owners.
She says the body
corporate’s failure to have a handrail installed is a contravention of the
body corporate legislation as
well as other applicable legislation, including
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Building and other
Legislation Amendment Act (No. 2) 2010
, which requires all pools to be
certified as safe. She also says that the committee and the body corporate are
failing to comply
with their respective duties to act reasonably when making
decisions about common property and the safety of owners and occupiers.
applicant claims further that committee members are bound to comply with the
Code of Conduct for Committee Voting Members,
which includes a duty to act in
the best interests of the body corporate. She says the committee and its
members are not complying
with those duties.
applicant says she has been seeking to have the safety issue resolved for some
time. She notes that any handrail must be
designed and located to comply with
the pool safety laws, including those applying to the non-climbable zone
). Compliance with those regulations may require some of the pool
fencing and/or gates to be changed or relocated.
applicant says her actions to resolve the issue include, writing to the
committee, meeting with contractors familiar with
pool safety legislation,
obtaining designs and quotes, and proposing motions both to the committee and at
general meetings that the
body corporate approve a quote for installation of a
handrail. In February 2024, she submitted a quote to the committee for
but it was not approved. At the next two committee meetings in 2024,
the committee represented it would obtain other quotes, but
did not do so.
applicant also proposed motions at the October 2024 AGM that the body corporate
resolve to install a handrail on the common
property stairs leading to the pool
and approves quotes for purchase and installation of a handrail. Although the
minutes show the
body corporate resolved to install a handrail, the motions to
purchase and install a handrail failed to pass. At an extraordinary
) called for March 2025, the applicant proposed another
motion that the body corporate resolve to engage a contractor to install a
handrail. The motion, however, was ruled out of order when the contractor
withdrew the quote.
further step to resolve the issue, the applicant says she has been working with
a contractor, the principal of which is
a qualified pool safety fence installer,
to arrive at a solution that balances regulatory compliance with site-specific
and aesthetic
considerations. She says the quote from that contractor (QU-2014)
“offers a safe and practical solution that facilitates safe
entry and exit
for owners, residents and visitors to the pool” and is accordance with the
safety report by a pool fencing inspector.
[18] To resolve
her dispute about the handrail and pool fence safety, the applicant seeks two
final orders, specifically, that the
body corporate:
named contractor] to install a handrail to the right-hand side of the staircase
leading to the pool as per their quote QU
0214 - relocating a gate on the
right-hand side to three new fence panels for $5000 within one (1) month
.... compensate the applicant $500 for the endless time, effort, work and
resources required to submit this application for all owners
and their guests
over the last seven (7) months.
The submission
committee, represented by the treasurer, made a submission opposing the
application. He advised that the committee has obtained
2 quotes to install a
handrail that complies with the NCZ aspects of the pool safety regulations. He
says these quotes are “more
economical” options than the
applicant’s proposal. The treasurer proposes that the dispute should be
resolved by the
body corporate considering 3 quotes – 2 sourced by the
committee and the applicant’s quote – at its next AGM.
treasurer also suggested that the dispute may have been resolved if the
applicant had attended a committee meeting held in
February 2025. He contends
“it would never have come to this [application]” if the applicant
had attended that meeting.
The treasurer also suggests that the
applicant’s request for $500 compensation be proposed as a motion to be
considered by
the body corporate at the next AGM.
applicant says the submission continues the committee’s pattern of delay
and obstruction in having the issue resolved.
Since she first submitted a
handrail quote to the committee in February 2024, she says there have been 5
meetings at which the committee
could have addressed and resolved the issue.
She says her efforts to have the handrail issue resolved have been met with
and unreasonable resistance and abuse.
suggests the treasurer has a history of unilateral decision making. The
applicant sees his latest proposal as an attempt
to shift decision making from
the committee to a general meeting because the motions are more likely to fail
at a general meeting.
[23] Ultimately,
the applicant says it is unreasonable for the committee to obstruct and delay on
a matter of safety for so long as
its failure to resolve the issue compromises
the safety of all occupiers and guests.
Investigations
the committee had indicated in its submission that the dispute might be resolved
by the body corporate deciding a motion
at its next AGM and where I considered
that AGM was likely imminent or had been held, I asked the committee to provide
treasurer responded that the AGM was held on 15 October 2025. I understand from
his response that the body corporate did
not resolve at its AGM to install a
handrail and undertake necessary related works to the pool fencing. I also
understand from the
treasurer’s comment that this was because he thought
it was appropriate to wait until the parties had conciliated the dispute.
also notes that all of the quotes obtained by the applicant and by the committee
are expired.
treasurer continues to suggest the dispute could have been resolved if the
applicant had attended and participated in committee
are two issues to be decided. Firstly, whether the body corporate has
contravened the legislation by failing to manage
and maintain common property or
by failing to act reasonably in making decisions about safety and maintenance
issues at the scheme.
Secondly, if the body corporate is contravening the
legislation, what orders would be just and equitable in the circumstances.
[28] Before
determining the answers to those questions, I will briefly review the duties of
the body corporate to manage and maintain
the common property and its duty to
act reasonably in making decisions. I will then assess whether the applicant
has demonstrated
that the committee and/or body corporate has failed in its duty
to maintain or failed to act reasonably in making decisions. Finally,
consider what orders (if any) are just and equitable in the circumstances.
Body corporate duties
body corporate is charged with administering, managing, and controlling the
common property and body corporate assets reasonably
and for the benefit of the
owners of the lots included in the
The body corporate has an
express duty to maintain common property, “in good condition, including,
to the extent that common
property is structural in nature, in a structurally
sound condition.”
District Court of Queensland has found the duty to maintain means a body
corporate is obligated to “remedy any defect
as soon as any of the
building parts covered by the duty fall into disrepair or were not operating
Queensland Courts
and Tribunals have found the duty to maintain, among other things: includes an
obligation to keep something in
proper order by acts of maintenance before it
falls out of condition,
in a state which enables it
to serve the purpose for which it exists; and that the duty may oblige the body
corporate to do things
which may not be for the benefit of the owners as a whole
or even a majority of them.
[31] In addition
to its duties relating to common property, a body corporate has an overarching
statutory duty to act reasonably in
making decisions, including when it makes
decisions about the common
When the committee is
making decisions on behalf of the body corporate, it too has a statutory duty to
act reasonably.
“act” reasonably when making decisions means that when considering
an issue, the body corporate must properly
consider – in a genuine,
evidence-based, and rational way – the factors that are relevant in the
circumstances to the
The handrail
am satisfied, and there is no dispute, that the pool, along with the dozen or so
stairs leading to the pool area, are part
of the common property and that the
body corporate is the party that bears the responsibility for managing and
maintaining that part
of the scheme.
[34] The scheme
was first established in the 1970s and the building codes in force at the time
may not have required a handrail to
be installed for the stairs. Regardless of
the building codes, however, I am satisfied based on the evidence provided that
of a handrail for the stairs was identified by external safety
consultants as a safety risk in 2003. To reduce the risk, the consultants
recommended that the body corporate install a handrail within 6 months.
Evidently, the body corporate did not follow that recommendation.
In 2025, the
same consultants confirmed they continued to hold those views about the safety
risk and handrail.
opinion, as part of its function of managing the common property for the benefit
of owners, on receiving the safety report
the body corporate was obligated to
consider the report and to make decisions about installing a handrail. In my
view, arguably
the report also indicates that the staircase is not in good
condition because it suggests that, without a handrail, the stairs are
serving the purpose for which they are intended, which is to allow occupiers to
safely ascend and descend to and from the pool
area. The applicant also says
the absence of a handrail breaches several health and safety regulations.
satisfied, therefore, that the body corporate has a statutory obligation –
whether as part of managing the common
property (including risks to health and
safety) or as a maintenance obligation – to install a handrail on the
stairs. Although
the lack of a handrail may also be contravening other
legislation, it is unnecessary for me to make findings in that regard.
[37] For the
following reasons, I am also satisfied that the applicant has demonstrated that
the body corporate has failed to act
reasonably in making decisions about
installing a handrail.
[38] Since at
least February 2024, when the applicant raised the issue with the committee and
proposed a quote, the body corporate
was on renewed notice of the handrail
safety issue. To act reasonably, in making decisions about the handrail the
committee was
required to genuinely consider factors that were relevant to the
issue in the particular circumstances of the scheme.
[39] In my view,
this meant the committee and the body corporate are required to consider the
body corporate’s function in managing
and maintaining common property,
that access to the pool was via a flight of more than a dozen steps with no
handrail, the safety
issues this posed to occupiers using the stairs, the safety
report and recommendation, and the possibility that the lack of a handrail
mean the body corporate was breaching other applicable legislation.
satisfied after considering those factors, the only rational and legally
reasonable decision available to the body corporate
was to decide to install a
handrail. Indeed, at its AGM held in October 2024, the body corporate passed
Motion 15A and resolved
to install a handrail to the stairs.
[41] From the
time the issue was raised by the applicant, the committee have had almost 2
years to obtain quotes and either make decisions
that are within its spending
limits or to propose motions at a general meeting for consideration by owners.
Moreover, the committee
is required to implement the lawful decisions of the
body corporate.
It has now been
a year since the body corporate resolved to install a handrail to the stairs.
In that time, neither the committee
nor the body corporate have decided to
approve a quote and authorise works to implement that resolution and fulfil the
duty to manage
and maintain common property.
[42] Having
decided to install a handrail, it is relevant and appropriate for the body
corporate to consider its options and the consequences
of doing so, including
whether installing a handrail might require gates or fences to be moved. The
cost of various solutions is
also a relevant factor to be considered.
acknowledge that designing a handrail to meet the NCZ regulations is not
necessarily straightforward, and that the current
pool related regulations may
require some of the pool fencing and/or gates to be changed or relocated.
However, those difficulties
are not insurmountable. The various quotes obtained
to date show there are several options. In my view, those challenges do not
excuse the body corporate from complying with its duties. Moreover, based on
the evidence presented, I do not consider those issues
explain the significant
delays by the committee in obtaining quotes for the works nor the failure of the
body corporate to make a
decision to approve a quote for works to address this
[44] For the
above reasons, by failing to make decisions to approve a quote for the handrail
works, I am satisfied the body corporate
is not fulfilling its functions and is
contravening its statutory duties to act reasonably in making decisions and
maintain the common
property. Accordingly, I will next consider what orders
would be just and equitable in the circumstances.
Appropriate orders
applicant is asking that the body corporate be ordered to engage, within 30
days, a particular contractor to undertake the
works in a quote to install a
handrail and relocate a gate and fence panels. The treasurer, on behalf of the
committee, opposed
the order sought. He originally submitted that the body
corporate be instead permitted to consider motions to approve alternative
for various options for a handrail and related works at its 2025 AGM.
[46] It appears
there is more than one design and location option for the handrail and related
gate and fence relocation works and
those options come at various costs. In
addition, the quote the applicant proposes I order expired in June 2025. In
those circumstances,
I am not prepared to make the precise order sought by the
persuaded, however, that an order about the handrail works is warranted.
Accordingly, I have made orders that the committee
must obtain a quote for
installation of a handrail and any associated works to the gates and fence that
may be then required to comply
with NCZ regulations. I have also made an order
that the committee must call and hold an EGM to consider motions proposing that
the body corporate accept the quote I have ordered and to consider any other
motions from the committee or lot owners proposing alternative
[48] I note
that, if multiple quotes are submitted, to comply with the regulations it may be
necessary for such motions to be presented
as a group of same-issue
For the avoidance of
doubt, I have also made clear that the committee and lot owners may propose
other motions to be considered
by owners at the EGM.
applicant is also seeking an order requiring the body corporate to pay her $500
as compensation for the “time, effort,
work and resources required to
submit this application for all owners and their guests.”
[50] Regardless
of the merits of that request, an adjudicator has very limited power to make
orders relating to costs.
[51] Where an
adjudicator makes an order dismissing an application under section 270(1)(c) of
the Act, for being frivolous, vexatious,
misconceived or without substance, the
adjudicator may under section 270(3)(a) order the applicant to compensate
another party for
loss resulting from the application up to a maximum of
This section does not
empower me to order a party pay compensation or reimburse an applicant.
[52] Adjudicators
are also given the power to make an order, if asked to do so, that a respondent
pay an applicant the costs of their
application fee for conciliation and
adjudication.
The power to do
so, however, is only available where certain conditions are met. One of the
conditions is that the applicant made
a conciliation application about the same
dispute and the Commissioner ended the application because the respondent
failed, without
reasonable excuse to participate in the
conciliation.
[53] For the
present application, where there is no application for conciliation, I have no
power to make the second order sought
by the applicant and dismiss this part of
the application.
[54] I have made
orders for the reasons given above.
[55] Both the
applicant and the treasurer made various comments about how the other had
conducted themselves. Many of those comments
were not relevant to the issues in
dispute. However, it appears some of the comments were based on two
misconceptions that I consider
warrant some further observations.
[56] Firstly,
the treasurer made several comments about the applicant’s failure to
attend meetings (committee or general) at
which the handrail was to be
discussed. He suggests the handrail issue may have been dealt with by now if
she had attended. The
treasurer also suggests the applicant has wasted the body
corporate’s time and money with the dispute, including by making
continuing with this application.
[57] The body
corporate is the party with the primary duty to manage and maintain common
An owner may draw the
body corporate’s attention to an issue with the maintenance or safety of
common property and is entitled
to propose solutions or quotes. Indeed, that is
what occurred here. The applicant alerted the body corporate to the issue,
quotes, and proposed motions.
[58] The fact
that an issue is raised by an owner, however, does not relieve the body
corporate of its duties. Generally speaking,
once on notice of a genuine issue
and having confirmed it is a body corporate responsibility, the body corporate
must act reasonably
in making decisions to resolve it. The body corporate is
also obligated to manage and maintain the common property even where only
a limited number of owners will benefit.
[59] For these
reasons, the treasurer’s comments implying that the applicant was required
to play a role in resolving the issue
with the pool handrail and fencing, and
his statements that the applicant’s non-attendance at meetings somehow
makes her responsible
for the delays in resolving the issue, are misplaced.
Further, where the body corporate fails to attend to the maintenance of common
property and/or fails to act reasonably in making decisions about the common
property, an owner is entitled to make an application
for dispute resolution.
As is evident from this order, even though the application for interim orders
was dismissed, the application
for final orders was well-founded and I made
orders to resolve the dispute.
[60] Secondly,
the treasure implied in a 30 June 2025 submission that the body corporate would
consider motions about the handrails
at its next AGM. Despite the submission,
when responding to my investigations in October 2025, the treasurer indicated
that he understood
the application was to proceed to conciliation and, in those
circumstances, he (or the committee) believed it was “appropriate
wait” for that process to be concluded before taking any further action.
Indeed, it appears he understood that the body
corporate “cannot proceed
with the intended works” until the conciliation had occurred. Again, this
was misconceived.
[61] The body
corporate was always at liberty to seek renewed quotes and consider motions and,
in my opinion, it should have proceeded
to do so. Even if the application had
been referred to conciliation (and I can see no indication that it has been),
the body corporate
was at all times under a continuous obligation to maintain
and manage the common property, to implement the lawful decision of the
corporate, and to act reasonably in making decisions. In the absence of an
interim order, the fact that there is an application
pending about a dispute
does not relieve a body corporate of its duties. To the contrary, owners and
bodies corporate are encouraged
to continue to attempt to resolve disputes even
when applications are pending.
[62] Finally, as
explained above, I have no power to order the body corporate to compensate the
applicant for her efforts in obtaining
quotes or otherwise seeking to resolve
the handrail safety issue that is a body corporate responsibility. The
treasurer has suggested
the applicant may instead propose a motion that the body
corporate approve such compensation.
[2025] QBCCMCmr 141
Interim Order
Section 243 of the
Section 248 of the
Additional background to the
dispute and the applicant’s efforts to resolve it can be found in the
Interim Order.
Sections 94(1)(a)
and 152(1) of the Act
Section 180(1) of
the Standard Module
Searles DCJ in
& Anor v. Body Corporate for Costa D'Ora Apartments
[2007] QDC 300
Newton DCJ in
Magog (No.15) Pty Ltd v The Body Corporate for The Moroccan
at 82-85, summarising with approval Brereton J in
The Owner’s Strata Plan 35042
[2006] NSWSC
, at [4] and [5];
Osprey Mooloola
[2022] QBCCMCmr
The Cosmopolitan - Surfers Paradise
[2022] QBCCMCmr 285
Section 94(2) of
Section 100(5)
Section 101(2)
Section 89 of
the Standard Module
Section 270(3)
Section 280(2)
Section 280(1)
There are of course some
exceptions, for example, when an owner has made improvements to common property.
None of those exceptions
apply here.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (191 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter